Appletons' Cyclopaedia of American Biography, Vol. 6 (James Grant Wilson and John Fiske, 1889)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/appletonscyclop06wilsrich): the 1889 New York (D. Appleton) first edition, vol. 6 of 6 (Sunderland–Zurita) with general index, ed. Wilson & Fiske — complete through the index.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================


CYCLOPEDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY


VOL.  VI.
SUNDERLAND-ZURITA


^^


STON  *  C


APPLET0N8'


CYCLOPAEDIA  OF  AMERICAN


BIOGRAPHY


EDITED BY

JAMES GRANT WILSON

AND

JOHN FISKE


As  it  is  the  commendation  of  a  good  huntsman  to  find  game  in  a  wide  wood,
so  it  is  no  imputation  if  he  hath  not  caught  all.  Plato.


VOLUME  VI.

STTNDERLAND-ZURITA

WITH  SUPPLEMENT  AND  ANALYTICAL  INDEX


NEW YORK
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

1,  3  and  5  BOND  STKEET
1889


E  I7fc
v,  b


Copyright,  1889,
By  D.  APPLETON  AND  COMPANY.


o  H  5*3.3
Baacxoit  Libr%Jt7


LIST  OF POETEAITS OE" STEEL.


•  '.  "Washington,  George


K


Taylor,  Zachary
Thomas,  George  Henry
Tyler,  John
Van  Buren,  Martin


\ Waite,  Morrison  Remick

t

I Webster,  Daniel

"Whittier,  John  Greenleaf

Winthrop,  John
K Harrison,  Benjamin


^


ARTIST

ENGRAVER

PAGE

Stuart

Girsch

Frontispiece

Unknown

Hall

Face  51

Gutekunst

Hall

79

Unknown

Hall

193

Brady

Hall

230

Bell

Hall

317

Whipple

Jackman

406

Thompson

Gribayedoff

493

Vandyke

Girsch

572

Bogardus

Hall

685

SOME  OF  THE  CHIEF  CONTKIBUTOBS
TO  APPLETONS' CYCLOPAEDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY.


Adams,  Charles  Kendall,

President  of  Cornell  University.
Allibone,  S.  Austin,

Author  "  Dictionary  of  Authors."

Amory,  Thomas  C,

Author  '•  Life  of  General  Sullivan."

Baird,  Henry  Carey,

Economist  and  Publisher.

Bancroft,  George,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States."

Bayard,  Thomas  F.,

Secretary  of  State.

Beehler,  William  H.,

Lieutenant  U.  S.  Navy.

Bradley,  Joseph  P.,

Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.
Brooks,  Phillips,

Author  "  Sermons  in  English  Churches."
Browne,  Junius  Henri,

Journalist  and  Author.

Buckley,  James  Monroe,

Clergyman  and  Author.

Butterfield,  Daniel,

Late  of  the  U.  S.  Army.

Carter,  Franklin,

President  of  Williams  College.
Chandler,  William  E.,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Navy.

Conway,  Moncure  Daniel,

Author  "  Edmund  Randolph."

Cooke,  John  Esten,

Author  "  Life  of  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee."

Coppee,  Henry,

Professor  in  Lehigh  University,  Pa.

Coxe,  Arthur  Cleveland,

P.  E.  Bishop  of  Western  New  York.

Cullum,  Gen.  George  W.,  TJ.  S.  A.,

Author  '•  Register  of  West  Point  Graduates."

Curtis,  George  Ticknor,

Author  '•  Life  of  James  Buchanan."

Curtis,  George  William,

Author  and  Editor.
Custer,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.,

Author  ••  Tenting  on  the  Plains."
Davis,  Jefferson,

Late  President  of  Confederate  States.
Dean,  John  Ward,

Of  New  England  Historic-Genealogical  Society.
Delafield,  Maturin  L.,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

De  Lancey,  Edward  F.,

Ex-President  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Society.
Didier,  Eugene  Lemoine,

Author  "  Life  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe."
Dix,  Morgan,

Rector  of  Trinity  Church,  New  York.


Doane,  William  C,

P.  E.  Bishop  of  Albany.
Draper,  Lyman  C,

Secretary  of  Wisconsin  Historical  Society.
Egle,  William  Henry,

Author  "History  of  Pennsylvania."

Ewell,  Benjamin  Stoddert,

Late  President  of  William  and  Mary  College.

Fiske,  John,

Author  and  Professor.

Fowler,  Joseph  Smith,

Late  U.  S.  Senator.

Fowler,  Robert  Ludlow,

Member  of  New  York  Bar.

Frothingham,  Octavius  Brooks,

Author  "  Life  of  George  Ripley."

Gayarre,  Charles  E.  A.,

Author  "  History  of  Louisiana."

Gerry,  Elbridge  T.,

Member  of  New  York  Bar.

Gilman,  Daniel  C,

President  of  Johns  Hopkins  University.

Gilmore,  James  Roberts,

Author  "Rear-Guard  of  the  Revolution."

Gleig,  George  Robert,

Ex-Chaplain-General  British  Army.

Greely,  Gen.  A.  W.,  TJ.  S.  A.,

Author  "Three  Years'  Arctic  Service."
Green,  William  Mercer,

Late  P.  E.  Bishop  Mississippi.

Greene,  Capt.  Francis  Vinton,

Author  "  The  Vicksburg  Campaign."

Griffis,  William  Elliot,

Author  "  Life  of  Com.  M.  C.  Perry."

Guild,  Reuben  A.,

Librarian  of  Brown  University.

Hale,  Edward  Everett,

Author  "  Franklin  in  France."
Hart,  Charles  Henry,

Member  of  Philadelphia  Bar.

Hay,  John,

Author  "  Life  of  Abraham  Lincoln."

Hayne,  Paul  Hamilton,

Author  and  Poet.

Headley,  Joel  Tyler,

Author  and  Clergyman.

Henry,  William  Wirt,

Of  the  Virginia  Historical  Society.

Higginson,  Col.  Thomas  W.,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States."
Holmes,  Dr.  Oliver  Wendell,

Author  and  Poet.

Howe,  Mrs.  Julia  Ward,

Author  "Later  Lyrics."
Huntington,  William  R.,

Rector  of  Grace  Church,  New  York.


Vlll


SOME  OP  THE  CHIEF  CONTRIBUTORS.


Isaacs,  Abram  S.,

Journalist.

Jay,  John,

Late  Minister  to  Austria.

Johnson,  Bradley  Tyler,

Member  of  Maryland  Bar.
Johnson,  Rossiter,

Author  and  Editor.

Johnston,  William  Preston,

President  of  Tulane  University.
Jones,  Charles  C,

Historian  of  Georgia.

Jones,  Horatio  Gates,

Vice-President  of  Pennsylvania  Historical  Society.
Jones,  William  Alfred,

Author  "  Character  and  Criticisms."
Kendrick,  James  By  land,

Ex-President  Vassar  College.

Lamb,  Mrs.  Martha  J.,

Historian  of  New  York  City.

Lathrop,  George  Parsons,

Author  "  A  Study  of  Hawthorne."
Latrobe,  John  H.  B.,

President  Maryland  Historical  Society.

Leach,  Josiah  Granville,

Member  of  Philadelphia  Bar.

Lincoln,  Robert  T.,

Ex-Secretary  of  War.

Lodge,  Henry  Cabot,

Author  '•  Life  of  Hamilton."
Lowell,  James  Russell,

Late  Minister  to  Great  Britain.

McCormick,  Richard  C,

Late  Governor  of  Arizona.
Mathews,  William,

Author  "  Orators  and  Oratory."
McMaster,  John  Bach,

Author  "  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States."
Mitchell,  Donald  G.,

Author  "  Reveries  of  a  Bachelor."

Mombert,  Jacob  I.,  D.  D.,

Author  "  History  of  Charles  the  Great."
Norton,  Charles  Eliot,

Professor  Harvard  University.

O'Connor,  Joseph,

Editor  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  "  Post-Express."

Parkman,  Francis,

Author  "  Frontenac  "  and  "  French  in  Canada."
Partem,  James,

Author  and  Essayist.
Phelan,  James,

Editor  Memphis,  Tenn.,  "Avalanche."
Phelps,  William  Walter,

Member  of  Congress  from  New  Jersey.
Pierrepont,  Edwards,

Ex-Attorney-Gencral  United  States.

Porter,  David  D.,

Admiral  United  States  Navy.
Porter,  Gen.  Horace,

Formerly  of  Gen.  Grant's  Staff.

Potter,  Henry  Codman,

Bishop  of  Now  York.

Preston,  Mrs.  Margaret  Junkin,

Author  and  Poet.

Read,  John  Meredith,

Late  Minister  to  Greece.


Ricord,  Frederick  W.,

Of  New  Jersey  Historical  Society.
Robinson,  Ezekiel  G.,

President  of  Brown  University.

Rodenbough,  Theophilus  S.,

Late  of  the  U.  S.  Army.

Romero,  Mattias,

Mexican  Minister  to  the  United  States.

Scharf,  John  Thomas,

Historian  of  Maryland.

Schurz,  Carl,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Interior.

Schweinitz,  Edmund  A.  de,

Late  Moravian  Bishop.

Sedgwick,  Arthur  G.,

Member  of  New  York  Bar*
Sherman,  William  T.,

Late  General  of  the  United  States  Army.
Smith,  Charles  Emory,

Editor  Philadelphia  "  Press."

Stedman,  Edmund  C,

Poet  and  Critic.

Stille,  Charles  Janeway,

Author  "  History  of  the  Sanitary  Commission."
Stewart,  George,  Jr.,

President  Quebec  Historical  Society.
Stoddard,  Richard  Henry,

Author  and  Poet.

Stone,  William  L.,

Author  "Life  of  Red  Jacket."
Strong,  William,

Ex-Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.
Stryker,  William  Scudder,

Adjutant-General  of  New  Jersey.

Symington,  Andrew  James,

Author  "Life  of  William  Cullen  Bryant."

Tanner,  Benjamin  T.,

Editor  "African  Methodist  Episcopal  Review."

Tenner,  WiUiam  Christian,

Graduate  of  the  University  of  Paris.
Tucker,  J.  Randolph,

Member  of  Congress  from  Virginia.

Vinton,  Arthur  Dudley,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

Wadleigh,  Bainbridge,

Ex-United  States  Senator.

Warner,  Charles  Dudley,

Author  and  Journalist.

Welling,  James  C,

President  of  Columbian  University.
Whittier,  John  Greenleaf,

Author  and  Poet.

Wilson,  James  Grant,

President  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Society.
Wilson,  James  Harrison,

Author  "  Life  of  Ulysses  S.  Grant."
Winslow,  WiUiam  C,

Author  and  Clergyman.

Winter,  William,

Poet  and  Theatrical  Critic.
Winthrop,  Robert  C,

Ex-United  States  Senator.

Wright,  Marcus  Joseph,

Late  of  the  Confederate  Army.

Young,  John  Russell,

Author  and  Journalist.


Among  the  Contributors  to  the  sixth  volume  of  this  work  are  the  following .


Samuel  Austin  Allibone,  LL.  D.
Ticknor,  George.

Henry  Carey  Baird.

Walbach,  John  de  Barth,
Washington,  William.

Lieut.  William  H.  Beehler,  U.  S.  N.

Articles  on  Officers  of  the  U.  S.  Navy.

Marcus  Benjamin,  F.  C.  S.
Wyman,  -Jeffries,
Harrison,  Benjamin. (In  Supplement.)

Arthur  Elmore  Eostwick,  Ph.  D.
Winthrop,  Theodore,
Fuller,  Melville  W. (In  Supplement.)

James  C.  Brogan.
Thorfinn  the  Dane,
Warren,  John  Collins.

Junius  Henri  Browne.
Thompson,  Maurice,
Watterson,  Henry.

James  Monroe  Buckley,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.

Articles  on  Methodist  Episcopal  Bishops.

Mrs.  Isa  Carrington  Cabell.
The  Van  Rensselaer  Family,
Washington,  Martha.

Jefferson  Davis.
Taylor,  Zachary.

John  Ward  Dean.
Ward,  Nathaniel,

WlGGLESWORTH,  MlCHAEL.

Edward  Floyd  De  Lancey.
The  Van  Cortlandt  Family.

Eugene  Lemoine  Didier.
Thompson,  Robert  Ellis,
Tiernan,  Luke.

Capt.  James  W.  Dixon.

Terry,  Alfred  Howe,
Wright,  Horatio  Governeur.

William  Henry  Egle,  M.  D.
Watts,  Frederick,

WlCKERSHAM,  JAMES  PyLE.

Col.  Benjamin  Stoddert  Ewell.
Stoddert,  Benjamin,
Tucker,  Judge  St.  George.

Prof.  John  Fiske.

Tyler,  John,
Webster,  Daniel.

Octavius  Brooks  Frothingham.
Thoreau,  Henry  David.


Albert  H.  Gallatin,  M.  D.
Voce,  George  Leonard,
Woodhouse,  James.

James  Roberts  Gilmore.
Wayne,  Anthony,
Wilkinson,  James.

Daniel  Goodwin.

Blodgett,  Henry  W. (In  Supplement.)
Lawrence,  Charles  B. (In  Supplement.)

Andrew  H.  Green.

Tilden,  Samuel  Jones.

William  Elliot  Griffis,  D.  D.
Van  Curler,  Arendt,
Yung  Wing.

Albert  David  Hager.
Trumbull,  Lyman,
Yates,  Richard.

Jacob  Henry  Hager.
Vallandigham,  Clement  Laird,
Wigfall,  Louis  Trezevant.

Miss  Emma  Polk  Harris.
Torbert,  Alfred  Thomas  A.,
Wesley,  John.

Charles  Henry  Hart.

Willis,  William.
Prof.  Samuel  Hart.

Wheaton,  Nathaniel  Sheldon,

Williams,  Bishop  John.

Rev.  Horace  E.  Hayden.
The  Van  Dyke  Family,
Wood,  James.

George  Morgan  Hills,  D.  D.
Talbot,  John,
Wharton,  Charles  Henry.

Prof.  James  Kendall  Hosmer.

Vane,  Sir  Henry.

Cecil  H.  C.  Howard.

The  Waldron  Family.

Frank  Huntington.
Taney,  Roger  Brooke,
Whitefield,  George.

Abram  S.  Isaacs,  Ph.  D.

Articles  on  Jewish  Clergymen.

Gen.  Bradley  Tyler  Johnson.

Tilghman,  Matthew  and  Lloyd,
Trimble,  Isaac  Ridgeway.

Rossiter  Johnson,  Ph.  D.

Webster,  Noah,
Worcester,  Joseph  Emerson.


CONTRIBUTORS  TO  THE  SIXTH VOLUME.


Col.  William  Preston  Johnson.
Tulane,  Paul.

Col.  Charles  Colcock  Jones.
Ware,  Nicholas.

John  "Woolf  Jordan.

Articles  on  Moravian  Clergymen.
Gen.  Thomas  Jordan.
Vogdes,  Israel.

William  Linn  Keese.
Tuckerman,  Henry  Theodore.

James  Ryland  Kendrick,  D.  D.
The  Vassar  Family,
The  Wayland  Family.

Rufus  King.
Woodhull,  Maxwell.

Prof.  Samuel  Archer  King.
Wise,  John.

Mrs.  Martha  J.  Lamb.

Waite,  Morrison  Remick.

John  H.  B.  Latrobe.

Wilson,  Thomas.

Col.  Josiah  Granville  Leach.
Articles  on  Pennsylvanians.

James  Russell  Lowell,  LL.  D.
Whittier,  John  Greenleaf.

Richard  Cunningham  McCormick.
Thurman,  Allen  Granbery.

William  Mathews,  LL.  D.
Wirt,  William.
Whipple,  Edwin  Percy.

Gen.  George  A.  Porterfleld.
Terrill,  William  Rufus.

Mrs.  Margaret  Junkin  Preston.

Thompson,  John  Reuben,
Timrod,  Henry.

Frederick  W.  Ricord.
White,  Anthony  Walton,
Winds,  William.

Herman  Bitter.
Articles  on  South  and  Central  Americans.

Gen.  Theophilus  F.  Rodenbough.

Tyi.er,  Daniel,
Upton,  Emory.

Eugene  Coleman  Savidge.
V.u  x.  Roberts  and  Richard,
Weight,  Charles  Barstow.

Col.  John  Thomas  Scharf.
Tatnall,  Henry  Lea,
Tucker,  John  Randolph.

Bishop  Edmund  de  Schweinitz.
Articles  on  Moravian  Clergymen.

Prof.  Nathaniel  Southgate  Shaler.
Winturop,  Prof.  John.


Charles  W.  Shields,  D.  D.

Welling,  James  Clarke.

Miss  Esther  Singleton.
Walters,  William  T..
The  Wentworth  Family.

Jesse  Ames  Spencer,  D.  D.
Articles  on  Protestant  Episcopal  Clergymen.

Edmund  Clarence  Stedman.
Taylor,  Bayard.

George  Stewart,  Jr.

U^her,  Brandram  Boileau,
Young,  Sir  Charles.

Col.  Henry  Stone.
Thomas,  George  Henry,
Willich,  August.

William  Leete  Stone.
The  Walworth  Family,
Wisner,  Henry.

Andrew  James  Symington,  F.  S.  A.
Whitman,  Walter,
Wilson,  Alexander.

Bishop  Benjamin  T.  Tanner.
Articles  on  African  Clergymen.

William  Christian  Tenner.

The  Vaudreuil  Family,
volney,  constantine  francois.

Bayard  Tuckerman.
The  Tuckerman  Family.

John  WiUiam  Weidemeyer.
Wallace,  James  William  and  Lester,
Woodford,  Stewart  Lyndon.

Frank  Weitenkampf.

Articles  on  Artists  and  Musicians.

James  Clarke  Welling,  LL.  D.
Van  Buren,  Martin.

John  Greenleaf  Whittier.
Wilson,  Henry.

Gen.  James  Grant  Wilson.
Warner.  Susan  and  Anna  Bartlett,
Willis,  Nathaniel  Parker.

Walter  Sibbald  Wilson.
Wilson,  William,
Clark,  Emmons. (In  Supplement.)

Rev.  William  C.  Winslow.
Weed,  Stephen  Hinsdale,
The  Winslow  Family.

Robert  Charles  Winthrop,  LL.  D.
Winthrop,  John.
Washington,  George.

Robert  C.  Winthrop,  Jr.
The  Winthrop  Family.

Gen.  Marcus  Joseph  Wright.
Van  Dorn,  Earl,
Watterson,  Harvey  McGee.


APPLETONS'

CYCLOPEDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY.


SUNDERLAND

SUNDERLAND,  Le  Roy,  author,  b.  in  Exeter,
R.  I.,  18  May,  1802 ;  d.  in  Quincy,  Mass.,  15  May,

1885.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  shoemaker  at  East
Greenwich,  R.  I.,  was  converted  to  Methodism,  be-
came a  preacher  at  Walpole,  Mass.,  in  1823,  and  was
soon  known  as  an  orator  of  great  power.  He  was
prominent  in  the  temperance  and  anti-slavery
movements,  presided  at  the  meeting  in  New  York
city  in  October,  1834,  when  the  first  Methodist  anti-
slavery  society  was  organized,  and  in  December
wrote  the  "  Appeal "  to  Methodists  against  slavery,
which  was  signed  by  ministers  of  the  church  in
New  England.  He  was  appointed  a  delegate  to  the
first  anti-slavery  convention  in  the  west,  at  Cincin-
nati, in  1841,  and  to  the  World's  convention  in
1843,  in  London.  His  preaching  was  attended  by
strange  phenomena.  Under  his  first  sermon  the
entire  audience  was  "  struck  down  by  the  power  of
God,"  as  it  was  then  called ;  and  ever  afterward
when  he  preached  with  reference  to  the  awakening
of  sinners  such  manifestations  appeared  to  a  greater
or  less  extent.  His  study  of  such  phenomena  had
doubtless  a  determinative  effect  in  his  subsequent
denial  of  Christianity,  which  he  opposed  during
forty  years  preceding  his  death.  He  edited  "  The
Watchman"  in  New  York  in  1836-'43;  "The
Magnet "  in  1842-'3 ;  "  The  Spirit  World,"  at  Bos-
ton, in  1850-2;  and  was  a  large  contributor  to
various  religious  periodicals.  He  published  "  Bib-
lical Institutes "  (New  York,  1834) ;  "  Appeal  on
the  Subject  of  Slavery  "  (Boston,  1834) ;  "  History
of  the  United  States  "  (New  York,  1834) ;  "  History
of  South  America  "  (1834) ;  "  Testimony  of  God
against  Slavery "  (Boston,  1834) ;  "  Anti-Slavery
Manual"  (New  York,  1837);  "Mormonism  Ex-
posed "  (1842) ;  "  Pathetism,  with  Practical  Instruc-
tions "  (1843) ;  "  Book  of  Health  "  (1847) ;  "  Pathet-
ism :  Man  considered  in  Respect  to  his  Soul,  Mind,
Spirit"  (1847);  "Pathetism:  Statement  of  its
Philosophy,  and  its  Discovery  Defended"  (1850);
"  Book  of  Psychology  "  (1852) ;  "  Theory  of  Nutri-
tion and  Philosophy  of  Healing  without  Medicine  " ;
"Book  of  Human  Nature"  (1853);  and  "The
Trance,  and  how  Introduced  "  (Boston,  1860).

SUNDERLAND,  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  Terre
Haute,  Ind.,  in  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  9  Oct.,

1886.  He  studied  law  early  in  life,  and  went  to
California  during  the  gold  excitement  of  1849.
After  securing  a  large  fortune,  he  engaged  in  the
practice  of  his  profession,  and  became  chief  justice
of  the  supreme  court  of  California.  He  resided  in
Nevada  for  some  time,  and  was  urged  ineffectually

vol.  vi. — 1


SUTHERLAND

to  become  Democratic  candidate  for  U.  S.  senator
from  that  state.  He  served  for  many  years  in  the
California  legislature,  and  was  an  active  member
of  the  Scientific  society  of  San  Francisco.

SUPLEE,  Thomas  Danly  (su-play),  educator,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  17  April,  1846.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1870,  and  studied  at  Union
and  Princeton  theological  seminaries  and  at  the
Protestant  Episcopal  divinity-school  in  Philadel-
phia. He  became  professor  of  Latin  in  Shattuck
school,  Faribault,  Minn.,  in  1876,  vice-rector  of  St.
Augustine  college,  Benicia,  Cal.,  in  1877,  head-
master of  Trinity  school,  Tivoli-on-Hudson,  N.  Y.,
in  1879,  head-master  of  Harcourt  place  school,
Gambier,  Ohio,  in  1882,  and  rector  of  Courtlandt
place  school,  Lakewood,  N.  J.,  in  1885,  which  post
he  still  holds.  He  has  published  "Frank  Muller,
or  Labor  and  its  Fruits"  (Philadelphia,  1869);
"  Pebbles  from  the  Fountain  of  Castalia,"  poems
(1870) ;  "  Riverside :  a  Romance  "  (Princeton,  1871) ;
"  Plain  Talks  "  (Trenton,  1872) ;  "  Life  of  Ephraim
Dod  Saunders,  D.  D.,  Founder  of  the  Presbyterian
Hospital  in  Philadelphia  "  (Philadelphia,  1873) ;  and
has  edited  "  Trench  on  the  Studv  of  Words  "  (New
York,  1878) ;  "  Life  of  Theodore  Bland  Pryor,  First
Mathematical  Fellow  of  Princeton  College  "  (San
Francisco,  1879) ;  and  "  Hand-Book  of  Civil  Govern-
ment under  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  "
(Philadelphia,  1883).  Mr.  Suplee  is  preparing  a
life  of  Richard  Realf  (q.  v.),  and  editing  his  poems.

SUTCLIFFE,  Thomas,  British  soldier.  He
rose  to  be  a  colonel  in  the  army,  and  was  for  some
time  governor  of  the  island  of  Juan  Fernandez.
He  published  "  Sixteen  Years  in  Chili  and  Peru,
1822-'39  "  (London,  1841),  and  "  Crusoniana,  or  the
History  of  the  Island  of  Juan  Fernandez  "  (1843).

SUTHERLAND,  Alexander,  Canadian  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Guelph,  Ont.,  17  Sept.,  1833.  He  was
the  son  of  a  Scottish  farmer,  but,  his  father  dying,
he  received  few  educational  advantages.  He  learned
the  printing  trade,  but,  uniting  with  the  Methodist
church,  studied  for  the  ministry,  and  was  licensed
as  a  preacher  in  1859.  He  was  afterward  stationed
at  Niagara,  but  in  1861  removed  to  Thorold,  and.
till  1874  was  settled  at  Drummondville,  Hamilton,
Yorkville,  Toronto,  and  Montreal.  He  was  secre-
tary of  the  conference  in  1870-1,  delegate  to  the
general  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  at  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  in  .1874,  when  the
union  of  the  Methodist  churches  in  Canada  was
consummated,  he  was  appointed  secretary  and
treasurer  of  Methodist  missions. In  connection


SUTHERLAND


SUTTER


with  this  office  it  has  been  his  duty  to  visit  the
greater  part  of  the  Dominion,  and  he  has  won
everywhere  a  reputation  for  eloquence.  In  1879
he  made  a  vigorous  effort  to  clear  the  church  mis-
sions department  of  a  debt  of  $75,000,  which  re-
sulted in  the  collection  of  $116,000.  He  was  sec-
retary to  the  conference  again  in  1878.  and  in  1879
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Victoria  college.
He  has  published  "  A  Summer  in  Prairie  Land  "
(Toronto,  1882).

SUTHERLAND,  Joel  B.,  jurist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  1791 ;  d.  there,  15  Nov.,  1861.  He
was  graduated  as  a  physician  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1812,  served  in  the  war  with  Great
Britain  in  1813,  and  subsequently  was  a  member
of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1827-'37,  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  commerce  in  1835-'7,  and  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  in  Philadelphia.  He  pub-
lished "  Manual  of  Legislative  Practice  and  Order
of  Business  in  Deliberative  Bodies  "  (Philadelphia,
1830),  and  "  A  Congressional  Manual "  (1839).

SUTLIFFE,  Albert,  poet,  b.  in  Meriden,  Conn.,
about  1830.  After  teaching  in  a  private  school  in
Kentucky,  he  removed  in  1855  to  Minnesota,  where
he  has  since  resided.  He  first  became  known  as  a
writer  of  verse  for  the  "  National  Era,"  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  and  in  1854  was  a  contributor  to  the
"  Genius  of  the  West,"  at  Cincinnati.  He  pub-
lished a  volume  of  poems  (Boston,  1859).

SUTRO,  Adolph  Heinrich  Joseph,  mining
engineer,  b.  in  Aix-la-Chapelle,  Rhenish  Prussia,
29  April,  1830.  He  was  educated  in  his  native
place.  His  father  was  a  cloth-manufacturer,  and
Adolph  learned  the  details  of  the  business  and
travelled  for  the  factory,  but  the  elder  Sutro  died
before  the  son  was  old  enough  to  continue  the
business,  and  the  family,  consisting  of  seven  sons
and  four  daughters,  came  to  New  York  in  1850.
During  the  voyage  Adolph  had  learned  of  the  gold
fever  in  California,  and,  soon  after  establishing  the
family  in  Baltimore,  he  set  out  for  the  Pacific  coast.
Having  studied  mineralogy  in  the  best  polytechnic
schools  in  Germany,  he  was  much  better  prepared
for  mining  operations  than  the  majority  who  at
that  time  were  flocking  to  the  gold-flelds.  He  vis-
ited Nevada  in  1860,  and,  after  a  careful  inspection
of  the  mining  region  there,  he  planned  the  now
famous  Sutro  tunnel  through  the  heart  of  the
mountain  where  lay  the  Comstock  lode.  Having
interested  capitalists  in  the  project,  he  obtained  a
charter  from  the  Nevada  legislature  on  4  Feb.,

1865,  and  the  authorization  of  congress  on  25  July,

1866.  The  mining  companies  agreed  to  pay  a  toll
of  $2  for  each  ton  of  ore,  from  the  time  when  the
tunnel  should  reach  and  benefit  their  mines.  The
work  was  begun  on  19  Oct.,  1869.  It  proceeded  as
rapidly  as  its  character  would  permit,  and  before
the  close  of  1871  four  vertical  shafts  were  opened
along  the  line  of  the  tunnel,  one  of  which  was  552
feet  deep.  The  distance  from  the  mouth  of  the
tunnel  to  the  Savage  mine,  where,  at  a  depth  of
1,650  feet  from  the  surface,  it  formed  the  first  con-
nection with  the  Comstock  lode,  is  20,000  feet.
Lateral  tunnels  connect  it  with  the  mines  on  either
side  of  the  main  bore.  In  1879  the  great  tunnel
was  finished,  and  its  projector  became  a  millionaire
many  times  over.  Some  of  the  mines  at  the  level
of  the  tunnel  were  flooded  with  water  to  the  depth
of  one  hundred  feet  or  more,  and  had  long  been
abandoned ;  others  were  unworkable  on  account  of
the  heat  and  noxious  gases.  The  tunnel  with  its
shafts  effectually  ventilated  them,  and  within  a
few  days  they  were  rid  of  the  accumulated  water,
which  "had  a  temperature  in  some  mines  of  160°


Fahrenheit.  Mr.  Sutro  has  devoted  a  part  of  his
fortune  to  the  collection  of  a  fine  library  and  art
gallery  in  San  Francisco.  In  1887  he  presented
that  city  with  a  copy  of  Frederic  A.  Bartholdi's
statue  of  "  Liberty  enlightening  the  World."

SUTTER,  John  Augustus,  pioneer,  b.  in  Ran-
dom, Baden,  15  Feb.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
17  June,  1880.  He  was  of  Swiss  parentage,  aud
his  familv  name  was  originally  Suter.  He  was
graduated  at  the  military  college  at  Berne  in  1823,
entered  the  French  service  as  an  officer  of  the
Swiss  guard,  and  served  in  1823-'4  through  the
Spanish  campaign.  In  1834  he  emigrated  to  this
country  and  settled  in  St.  Louis.  Afterward  he
carried  on  at  Santa  Fe  a  profitable  trade  with  In-
dians and  trappers,  whose  accounts  of  California
induced  him  m  1838  to  cross  the  Rocky  moun-
tains. He  first  went  to  Oregon,  descended  Colum-
bia river  to  Foil  Vancouver,  and  thence  sailed  to
the  Sandwich  islands,  where  he  purchased  a  vessel
and  went  to  Sitka,  Alaska.  After  disposing  of  his
cargo  to  advantage  there,  he  sailed  along  the  Pa-
cific coast,  and  on  2  July,  1839,  was  stranded  in  the
Bay  of  Yerba  Buena  (now  San  Francisco).  Pene-
trating into  the  interior  amid  great  difficulties,
he  founded  in  the  same  year  the  earliest  white  set-
tlement on  the  site  of  Sacramento,  received  a  con-
siderable grant  of  land  from  the  Mexican  gov-


ernment, and  in  1841  built  a  fort,  calling  it  New
Helvetia,  which  was  afterward  the  first  settlement
that  was  reached  by  overland  emigrants  to  Cali-
fornia. The  Mexican  government  appointed  him
governor  of  the  northern  frontier  country,  but.  as
he  favored  the  annexation  of  California  to  the
United  States,  the  Mexicans  regarded  him  with
suspicion.  When  Capt.  Charles  Wilkes's  explor-
ing expedition  reached  San  Francisco,  Sutter  gave
him  aid  and  information,  and  he  extended  a  simi-
lar welcome  to  John  C.  Fremont  and  his  party.
When  California  was  ceded  to  the  United  States  in
February,  1848,  Sutter  was  the  owner  of  a  large
tract  of  land,  many  thousands  of  cattle,  and  other
property,  but  the  discovery  of  gold  on  his  estate
near  Coloma.  El  Dorado  co.,  at  the  same  time  (see
Marshall,  James  Wilson),  proved  his  financial
ruin.  His  laborers  deserted  him.  his  lands  were
overrun  by  gold-diggers,  and  the  claim  he  had  filed
for  thirty-three  square  leagues,  which  had  been
allowed  by  the  commissioners,  was  decided  against
him  on  appeal  to  the  supreme  court.  Despoiled  of
his  property  and  reduced  to  want,  he  was  granted
by  the  California  legislature  a  pension  of  $ 250  a
month.  In  1864  his  homestead  was  burned,  and
in  1873  he  removed  to  Litiz,  Lancaster  co..  Pa.
After  California  had  been  annexed  to  this  country
Sutter  was  elected  first  alcalde  of  his  district,  and
a  delegate  to  the  convention  to  form  a  state  con-
stitution, and  he  was  also  an  Indian  commissioner.
The  illustration  shows  the  mill  on  Sutter's  prop-
erty, near  which  gold  was  first  discovered.


SUYDAM


SWAN


SUYDAM,  James  Augustus  (si'-dam),  artist,  b.
in  New  York,  27  March,  1819 ;  d.  in  North  Conway,
N.  H.,  15  Sept.,  1865.  His  first  instructor  was  Miner
K.  Kellogg,  with  whom  he  travelled  through  Greece
and  Turkey.  Later,  after  his  return  to  the  United
States,  he  studied  also  with  Asher  B.  Durand  and
John  P.  Kensett.  He  was  elected  an  honorary
member  of  the  National  academy  in  1858,  and  an
academician  in  1861.  When  the  building  of  the
academy  was  projected  he  took  an  active  part  in
its  construction.  He  held  office  in  the  academy
until  his  death,  and  bequeathed  to  it  the  "  Suydam
Collection "  of  pictures,  besides  a  large  sum  of
money.  He  was  quite  successful  in  his  coast  views.
Among  his  works  are  "  View  on  Long  Island  "  and
"  Hook  Mountain  on  the  Hudson  "  (1863).

SUYDAM,  John  Howard,  clergyman,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  1  Oct.,  1832.  He  was  graduated
at  Rutgers  in  1854,  and  at  the  Theological  seminary
of  the  Reformed  church  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,
in  1857,  and  was  ordained  by  the  classis  of  Pough-
keepsie.  He  was  settled  as  pastor  at  Pishkill  in
1857-'62,  and  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1862-'9,  and
since  1869  has  been  in  Jersey  City.  He  has  been
president  of  the  board  of  superintendents  of  the
New  Brunswick  theological  seminary  and  of  the
general  synod  of  the  Reformed  church.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Rutgers  in  1882.
In  addition  to  sermons,  he  has  published  "  The
Cruger  Family  "  (Philadelphia,  1864) ;  "  Cruel  Jim  "
(1870);  and"  The  Wreckmaster"  (1871).

SUZOR,  Louis  T.,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  Low-
er Canada  in  1834 ;  d.  in  Quebec,  18  Aug.,  1866.
He  was  a  lieutenant-colonel,  and  had  been  deputy
assistant  adjutant-general  of  militia  in  Canada  at
the  time  of  his  death.  He  published  "Aide-memoire
du  carabinier  volontaire  "  (Quebec,  1862) ;  "  Ta-
bleaux synoptique  des  mouvements  d'une  com-
pagnie"  (1863);  "Tableaux  synoptic  des  evolu-
tions de  bataillon "  (1863) ;  "  Exercices  et  evolu-
tions d'inf anterie  "  (1863) ;  "  Code  militaire  "  (1864) ;
Maximes,  conseils  et  instructions  sur  l'art  de  la
guerre  "  (1865) ;  "  Guide  theorique  et  pratique  des
manoeuvres  de  l'infanterie  "  (1865) ;  and  "  Traite
d'art  et  d'histoire  militaires  "  (1865).

SWAIM,  David  Gaskill,  soldier,  b.  in  Salem,
Columbiana  co.,  Ohio,  22  Dec,  1834.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Salem  academy,  studied  law,  and  after
admission  to  the  bar  in  1858  began  practice  in  Sa-
lem. At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  left  a
prosperous  law-practice  and  entered  the  National
service,  being  commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in  1861,
and  1st  lieutenant,  4  Nov.,  1861,  in  the  65th  Ohio
regiment.  He  was  promoted  to  captain  and  as-
sistant adjutant-general,  16  May,  1862,  and  en-
gaged in  the  battles  of  Shiloh,  Murfreesboro',
and  Perryville.  He  was  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
till  December,  1862,  was  assistant  adjutant-gen-
eral on  the  staff  of  Gen.  William  S.  Rosecrans  and
Gen.  George  Thomas  till  November,  1863,  and  was
present  at  Chickamauga,  where  he  was  wounded,
and  at  Missionary  Ridge.  From  January  till  Octo-
ber, 1864,  he  was  on  mustering  duty  at  Wilming-
ton, Del.,  and  afterward,  till  September,  1866,  was
assistant  adjutant-general,  Department  of  Missouri.
He  was  brevetted  major,  lieutenant-colonel,  and
colonel  for  faithful  and  meritorious  services  during
the  war,  and  appointed  2d  lieutenant  in  the  34th
U.  S.  infantry,  28  July,  1866,  was  promoted  major
and  judge-advocate,  9  Dec,  1869,  and  became
judge-advocate-general  of  the  army  with  the  rank
of  brigadier-general,  18  Feb.,  1881.  In  1884  he
was  court-martialed  on  various  charges  and  sus-
pended for  ten  years.  He  was  the  intimate  friend
iind  companion  of  President  Garfield.


SWAIN,  David  Lowry,  governor  of  North
Carolina,  b.  in  Asheville,  Buncombe  co.,  N.  C,  4
Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Chapel  Hill,  N.  C,  3  Sept.,  1868.
After  receiving  his  education  at  the  University  of
North  Carolina  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1823,  and  practised  in  Raleigh.  In  1824
he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  in  1831  he
was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court.
From  1832  till  1835  he  was  governor  of  North
Carolina,  being  the  youngest  man  to  fill  that  office.
He  was  elected  president  of  the  University  of  North
Carolina  in  1835  and  filled  this  post  until  his  death,
contributing  effectively  to  the  improvement  of  the
institution.  In  1865  he  was  invited  by  President
Andrew  Johnson  to  advise  with  him  regarding  the
reconstruction  of  the  Union.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  Princeton  in  1841,  and
by  Yale  in  1842.  He  wrote  many  valuable  histori-
cal papers,  and  published  "  The  British  Invasion
of  North  Carolina  in  1776  "  in  the  "  North  Carolina
University  Magazine,"  for  May,  1853,  which  was
afterward  included  in  a  volume  of  lectures,  en-
titled "  Revolutionary  History  of  North  Carolina  "
(New  York,  1853).

SWAIN,  James  Barrett,  editor,  b.  in  New
York  city,  30  July,  1820.  He  learned  the  printing
business  with  Horace  Greeley,  with  whom  he  was  a
partner  in  the  publication  of  the  "  Log  Cabin  "  in
1840,  and  in  1838-'9  was  private  secretary  to  Henry
Clay.  In  1843-'9  he  was  editor  of  the  "  Hudson
River  Chronicle  "  in  Sing-Sing,  serving  also  as  clerk
of  the  state-prison  there  in  1848-'9.  He  was  city
editor  of  the  New  York  "  Tribune "  in  1850,  of
the  "  Times"  in  1851-2,  editor  of  the  "American
Agriculturist  "  in  1852,  a  political  contributor  to
the  " Times "  in  1853-9,  and  its  Washington  cor-
respondent in  1860-1.  He  was  also  editor  of  the
"Free  State  Advocate"  (a  campaign  paper  pub-
lished in  New  York  in  1856  by  the  National  Repub-
lican committee),  of  the  Albany  "  Daily  Statesman  "
from  1857  till  1861,  and  again  of  the  "  Hudson  River
Chronicle"  from  1876  till  1885.  He  was  a  railroad
commissioner  for  New  York  state  in  1855-'7,  1st
lieutenant  in  the  1st  U.  S.  cavalry  and  also  colo-
nel of  the  1st  U.  S.  volunteer  cavalry  in  1861-'4,
engineer-in-chief  of  the  National  guard  of  New
York  in  1865-'6,  U.  S.  weigher  in  1867-'70,  and
post-office  inspector  in  1881-5.  Mr.  Swain  is  the
author  of  "  Life  and  Speeches  of  Henry  Clay  "  (2
vols.,  New  York,  1842 ;  3d  ed.,  1848) ;  "  Historical
Notes  to  a  Collection  of  the  Speeches  of  Henry
Clay"  (2  vols.,  1843);  and  "Military  History  of
the  State  of  New  York  "  (3  vols.,  1861-'5).

SWAINSON,  William,  English  naturalist,  b.
in  Liverpool,  England,  8  Oct.,  1789;  d.  in  New
Zealand  in  1855.  He  served  in  the  commissary
department  of  the  British  army  in  1807-15,  trav-
elled in  South  America  in  the  latter  year,  and,  re-
turning to  London,  devoted  himself  to  the  study
of  natural  history.  In  1841  he  emigrated  to  New
Zealand,  where  he  published  works  on  the  natural
history  and  social  and  political  condition  of  that
country  and  Tasmania.  He  published  numerous
works,  including  "  Ornithologipal  Drawings  of
Birds  from  Mexico  and  Brazil"  (1831-41),  and  as-
sisted Sir  John  Richardson  in  the  account  of  North
American  birds  in  his  "  Fauna  Boreali  Americana  "
(4  vols.,  London,  1829-'37).

SWAN,  Caleb,  soldier,  b.  in  Maine;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  20  Nov.,  1809.  He  became  an  ensign
in  the  4th  Massachusetts  Continental  infantry,  26
Nov.,  1779,  and  was  afterward  transferred  to  the
8th  infantry,  which  in  1784  became  part  of  the  1st
American  regiment  of  infantry.  On  8  May,  1792,
he  was  appointed  paymaster-general  of  the  U.  S.


SWAN


SWANN


army,  which  post  he  held  until  his  resignation  on
30  June,  1808.  He  wrote  "  Some  Account  of  the
Northwestern  Lakes  of  America"  (1798).

SWAN,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Fifeshire,  Scotland,
in  1754;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  18  March,  1831.  He
came  to  Boston  at  an  early  age,  was  a  clerk  there,
and,  espousing  the  patriot  cause,  was  one  of  the
"  Boston  tea-party."  He  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
Joseph  Warren  at  Bunker  Hill,  where  he  was
wounded,  acted  as  treasurer  and  receiver-general,
became  captain  in  Ebenezer  Crafts's  regiment  of
artillery,  and  participated  in  the  expedition  that
drove  the  British  fleet  out  of  Boston  harbor.
He  was  also  secretary  to  the  Massachusetts  board
of  war,  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1778,  and
afterward  adjutant-general  of  the  state.  Being
involved  in  debt,  he  went  to  Paris  in  1787,  and  be-
came known  there  by  the  publication  of  "  Causes
qui  sont  opposees  au  progres  du  commerce  entre
la  France  et  les  Etats-Unis  de  l'Amerique"  (1790).
After  acquiring  a  fortune  he  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1795  and  was  noted  for  his  charity
and  munificence.  In  1798  he  went  to  Europe
again  and  engaged  in  large  commercial  operations
until  1815,  when,  upon  the  suit  of  a  German  with
whom  he  had  transactions,  he  was  arrested  and
thrown  into  the  prison  of  St.  Pelagie  in  Paris,
where  he  remained  until  July,  1830,  living  in
luxury  and  maintaining  an  unceasing  litigation
in  the  French  courts.  He  published  "  Dissuasion
from  the  Slave-Trade  "  (Boston,  1773) ;  "  On  the
Fisheries  "  (1784) ;  "  Fisheries  of  Massachusetts  "
(1786) ;  and  "  Address  on  Agriculture,  Manu-
factures, and  Commerce  "  (1817).

SWAN,  Joseph  Rockwell,  jurist,  b.  in  Western-
ville,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  28  Dec,  1802 ;  d.  in  Co-
lumbus, Ohio,  18  Dec,  1884.  He  was  educated  in
Aurora,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1824  removed  to  Columbus,
Ohio,  where  he  studied  law  in  the  office  of  his
uncle,  Judge  Gustavus  Swan,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  practised  in  Franklin  and  the  adjoining
counties.  In  1830  he  was  made  prosecuting  attor-
ney, and  in  1834  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas,  but  he  resigned  this  post  in  1845,
and  practised  his  profession  until  1854.  In  that
year  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  supreme  court,
serving  until  1859,  when  his  most  important  de-
cision was  delivered.  The  supreme  court  of  the
state,  under  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus,  sought  to
override  the  judgment  of  the  U.  S.  district  court
in  Ohio  in  attempting  to  discharge  from  jail  a
prisoner  that  had  been  sentenced  by  that  court  for
violation  of  the  fugitive-slave  law.  Judge  Swan
decided  that  the  state  could  not  interfere  with  the
action  of  the  U.  S.  courts,  and  the  discharge  of
the  prisoner  was  refused.  At  the  same  time  he
said  that  if  he  were  appealed  to  personally  he
would  protect  any  slave  from  his  pursuers.  He
was  the  author  of  important  statutes  that  were
passed  by  the  legislature  and  a  delegate  to  the
Constitutional  convention  of  Ohio  in  1850.  In
1860  he  became  president  of  the  Columbus  and
Xenia  railroad,  and  from  that  time  till  1876  he
acted  as  solicitor,  for  several  railroads.  He  pub-
lished "  Treatise  on  Justices  of  the  Peace  and  Con-
stables in  Ohio"  (Columbus,  1836;  12th  ed.,  1885);
"  Statutes  of  Ohio  "  (1841) ;  "  Manual  for  Execu-
tors and  Administrators  "  (1843) ;  "  Practice  in
Civil  Actions  and  Proceedings  at  Law  in  Ohio  and
Preeerlents  in  Pleading"  (2  vols.,  1845);  "Swan's
Pleading  and  Practice  (2  vols.,  1851) :  "  Commen-
taries on  Pleadings  under  the  Ohio  Code"  (Cin-
cinnati, 1860);  and  "Supplement  to  the  Revised
Statutes  of  Ohio,  etc.,  in  Force  August,  1868,"  with
notes  by  Milton  Sayler  (1869).


SWAN,  Timothy,  musician,  b.  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  23  July,  1758;  d.  in  Northfield,  Mass.,  23
July,  1842.  He  began  to  teach  music  at  the  age  of
seventeen,  and  in  1785  published  "  Federal  Har-
mony." He  resided  for  some  time  at  Sheffield,  and
while  there  published. in  1801,  "The  New  England
Harmony."  After  this  he  removed  to  Vermont,
but  finally  settled  at  Northfield,  Mass.,  where  he
resided  until  his  death.  Some  of  his  psalm-tunes,
among  them  "  China,"  "  Pownal,"  and  "  Poland,"
became  very  popular,  and  are  still  to  be  found  in
collections  of  church  music

SWAN,  William  Draper,  educator,  b.  in  Dor-
chester, Mass.,  17  Nov.,  1809;  d.  there,  2  Nov.,
1864.  He  was  principal  for  many  years  of  the
Mayhew  grammar-school  in  Boston,  Mass.,  and
afterward  a  bookseller  in  that  city.  In  1862  he
served  in  the  Massachusetts  senate.  He  published
a  series  of  readers  for  schools,  and  with  his  brother,
Robert,  principal  of  Winthrop  school  in  Boston,
and  Daniel  Leach,  superintendent  of  schools  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  he  was  the  author  of  a  series  of
arithmetics,  and  also  of  "The  Critic  Criticised  and
Worcester  Vindicated  "  (Boston,  1860).

SWANK,  James  Moore,  statistician,  b.  in  Loyal-
hanna,  Westmoreland  co.,  Pa.,  12  July,  1832.  He
was  educated  at  Eldesridge  academy  and  at  the  pre-
paratory department  of  Jefferson  college,  Pa.  In
1852  he  published  a  weekly  Whig  newspaper  at
Johnstown,  Pa.,  where,  in  1853,  he  established  the
"Tribune,"  with  which  he  was  connected  until
1870.  He  was  superintendent  of  public  schools  in
Cambria  county,  Pa.,  in  1861,  and  in  1871-'2  was
chief  clerk  of  the  department  of  agriculture  in
Washington.  Since  1873  he  has  been  secretary  of
the  American  iron  and  steel  association,  and  in
1885  he  was  appointed  its  general  manager,  which
office  he  now  (1888)  holds.  He  is  the  editor  of  its
weekly  "  Bulletin,"  compiles  its.  annual  statistical
reports,  is  the  author  of  its  tariff  tracts,  and  has
edited  nearly  all  its  statistical  and  miscellaneous
publications.  In  1880  he  was  appointed  agent  of
the  U.  S.  census,  to  collect  the  iron  and  steel  statis-
tics, his  report  appearing  in  1881.  He  has  pub-
lished a  "  History  of  the  Department  of  Agricul-
ture "  (Washington,  1871) ;  "  Centennial  Report  of
the  American  Iron  and  Steel  Association  on  the
American  Iron  Trade  "  (Philadelphia,  1876) ;  "  His-
torical Account  of  Iron-Making  and  Coal-Mining
in  Pennsylvania"  (1878):  and  "  History  of  the
Manufacture  of  Iron  in  all  Ages  "  (1884).

SWANN,  Thomas,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.
in  Alexandria,  Va.,  in  1805 ;  d.  near  Leesburg,
Va.,  24  July,  1883.
His  father  was
U.  S.  district  at-
torney for  the  Dis-
trict of  Columbia.
After  receiving
his  education  at
Columbian  col-
lege and  at  the
University  of  Vir-
ginia the  son  stud-
ied law  with  his  fa-
ther,  and  was  made
secretary  to  the
Neapolitan  com-
mission. He  set-
tled in  Baltimore
in  1834,  and  be-
came a  director  of
the  Baltimore  and
Ohio  railroad  in  1836,  of  which  he  was  president
from  1847  till  1853,  and  he  was  also  president  of


cWo:  Ji


vyc^/vv/w*


SWARTWOUT


SWAYNE


the  Northwestern  Virginia  railroad.  After  his  re-
turn from  Europe  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Balti-
more in  1856,  and  re-elected  in  1858.  Before  the
civil  war  he  emancipated  his  slaves,  and  he  was
an  earnest  supporter  of  the  Union  throughout  the
contest.  He  was  elected  governor  of  Maryland  in
1864,  and  served  from  1  Jan.,  1865,  until  1  Jan.,
1869,  refusing  to  leave  the  executive  chair  when
he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  in  1866.  He  was
afterward  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  for
five  successive  terms,  serving  from  4  March,  1869,
till  3  March,  1879.

SWARTWOUT,  Robert  (swart'-out),  soldier,  b.
in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  in  1778  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  19  July,  1838.  He  was  the  son  of  Abraham,
a  Revolutionary  soldier,  and  became  a  colonel  of
New  York  militia.  After  serving  from  August  till
November,  1812,  in  his  native  state,  he  was  ap-
pointed quartermaster-general,  with  the  rank  of
brigadier,  21  March,  1813,  and  had  charge  of  the
4th  brigade  in  the  campaign  of  1813  on  St.  Law-
rence river,  succeeding  to  the  command  on  the  fall
of  Gen.  Leonard  Covington  at  the  battle  of  Chrys-
ler's Field.  After  the  war  he  resided  in  New  York
city,  where  he  was  a  merchant  and  also  agent  of
the  navy.  As  the  result  of  a  political  quarrel  he
fought  a  duel  with  Richard  Riker,  recorder  of  New
York,  in  which  the  latter  was  wounded.  —  His
brother,  Samuel,  b.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  in
1783  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  21  Nov.,  1856,  accom-
panied Aaron  Burr  in  his  expedition  in  1805,
fought  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  afterward  became  a
merchant  in  New  York.  He  was  captain  of  a  city
troop  called  the  Iron  Grays,  celebrated  by  the  poet
Halleck,  and  was  appointed  collector  of  the  port
of  New  York  by  President  Jackson,  between  whom
and  himself  a  strong  personal  attachment  existed.
Together  with  his  brothers  he  owned  all  the
meadows  that  lie  between  Hoboken  and  Weehaw-
ken  and  all  the  tract  between  Hackensack  river
and  the  approach  to  Newark.  Fitz-Greene  Hal-
leck, in  the  concluding  stanza  of  one  of  the
"  Croakers,"  says :
"  Sam  Swartwout !  where  are  now  thy  Grays?

Oh,  bid  again  their  banner  blaze
O'er  hearts  and  ranks  unbroken  !

Let  drum  and  fife  your  slumbers  break,

And  bid  the  devil  freely  take
Your  meadows  at  Hoboken."
— His  nephew,  Samuel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  10  May,  1804 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  5
Feb.,  1867,  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  10
May,  1820,  became  passed  midshipman,  4  June,
1831,  and  in  1834-'5  cruised  in  the  schooner
"  Grampus,"  suppressing  piracy  in  the  West  In-
dies, and  in  1836-'7  in  the  "  St.  Louis "  on  the
same  duty.  He  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  9
Feb.,  1837,  was  inspector  of  provisions  and  cloth-
ing at  the  New  York  navy-yard  in  1841-'5,  and
cruised  in  the  sloop  "  Vincennes"  in  the  East  In-
dies in  1845-'7,  after  which  he  was  stationed  at  the
New  York  navy-yard  until  1850.  In  1851  he  served
on  the  coast  survey.  He  was  promoted  to  com-
mander, 14  Sept.,  1855,  and  had  the  steamer  "  Mas-
sachusetts," of  the  Pacific  squadron,  in  1855-'7,
during  which  time  he  had  several  engagements
with  Indians  in  Puget  sound.  In  1861-'3  he  com-
manded the  sloop  "  Portsmouth,"  of  the  Western
Gulf  blockading  squadron,  in  which  he  took  part
in  the  engagements  with  Forts  Jackson  and  St.
Philip,  on  the  lower  Mississippi  river,  and  the
consequent  capture  of  New  Orleans.  He  was  then
placed  on  waiting  orders,  his  health  failed,  and
he  was  retired,  10  May.  1866.  His  sister,  Frances,
married  Admiral  Charles  II.  Bell.


SWARTZ,  Joel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Shenandoah
county,  Va..  18  Aug.,  1827.  He  received  his  classi-
cal and  theological  education  in  Capitol  university,
Columbus,  Ohio,  being  graduated  in  the  theological
department  in  1854.  In  1855  he  was  ordained  to
the  ministry,  and  in  1868  he  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Wittenberg  college,  Springfield,
Ohio.  He  has  held  various  pastorates  in  Virginia,
Maryland,  Ohio,  and  Pennsylvania,  was  professor
of  church  history,  pastoral  theology,  and  homi-
letics  in  the  theological  department  of  Wittenberg
college,  Springfield,  Ohio,  in  1865-'8,  and  has  been
pastor  at  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  since  1881.  Dr.  Swartz
has  been  a  regular  correspondent  for  the  "  Lutheran
Observer  "  for  sixteen  years,  and  has  published  two
volumes  of  poetry,  "  Dreamings  of  the  Waking
Heart"  (Philadelphia,  1877)  and  "  Lyra  Lutherana"
(1883).  He  was  chairman  of  the  committee  that
edited  the  "  Book  of  Worship  "  with  tunes.

SWARTZ,  Olaus,  Swedish  botanist,  b.  in
Norrkjoping,  Sweden,  in  1760;  d.  in  Stockholm,
18  Sept.,  1817.  After  receiving  his  education  at
Upsala,  he  travelled  in  Finland,  Lapland,  and  the
West  Indies,  and  explored  the  coasts  of  South
America  in  1783,  returning  with  a  collection  of
rare  plants.  He  was  appointed  professor  of  natu-
ral history  in  the  Medico-chirurgical  institute  in
Stockholm,  and  became  one  of  the  most  celebrated
botanists  of  his  time.  The  genus  Swartzia,  of
the  order  Leguminosas,  was  named  in  his  honor.
Among  his  works  are  "  Icones  Plantarum  Incog-
nitarium,"  illustrating  the  rare  plants  of  the  West
Indies  (Upsala,  1794-1800);  "Flora  Indite  Occi-
dental"  (3  vols.,  1797-1806);  and  "  Lichenes
Americani "  (Nuremberg,  1811).

SWATANE,  or  SHIKELLIMY,  Oneida  chief,
d.  in  Shamokin,  Pa..  17  Dec,  1748.  In  1728  he  was
acting  representa-
tive of  the  Five
Nations  in  busi-
ness affairs  with
the proprietary

fowrnment  of
ennsylvania.  He
was  appointed  its
viceroy,  and  in
this  capacity  ad-
ministered its  trib-
utaries within  the
province,  with
Shamokin  as  his
seat.  Scarcely  a
treaty  was  made
between  1728  and
1748  respecting
the  purchases  of
land  but  Shikelli-
my  was  present.
At  his  solicitation
the  Moravians  in
1747  began  a  mis-
sion, and  erected  a  smithy  in  the  town.  He  died  a
few  days  after  his  baptism  by  the  missionaries. —
His  eldest  son,  Tachnachdoarus  (spreading  oak),
or  John  Shikellimy,  succeeded  him  as  viceroy.
His  second  son,  James  Logan,  was  named  for  Sec.
James  Logan,  and  his  third  son,  John  Petty,  for
a  trader. Two  sons  were  killed  in  battle.

SWAYNE,  Noah  Haynes,  jurist,  b.  in  Culpeper
county,  Va.,  7  Dec,  1804;  d.  in  New  York  city,  8
June,  1884.  His  ancestor,  Francis  Swayne.  came
to  this  country  with  William  Penn,  and  the  farm
on  which  he  settled  near  Philadelphia  is  still  in

Jossession of his descendants. Noah's father,
oshua,  removed  to  Virginia,  and  the  son,  after


SWAYNE


SWEENY


(^^fagZ^nb


receiving  a  good  education  in  Waterford,  Va.,
studied  Taw  in  Warrenton,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1823,  removed  to  Ohio,  and  in  1825  opened  an
office  in  Coshocton.  In  1826-'9  he  was  prosecuting
attorney  of  the  county,  and  he  then  entered  the
Ohio  legislature,  to  which  he  was  elected  as  a
Jefferson  Democrat.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  dis-
trict attorney  for  Ohio  in  1831,  removed  to  Colum-
bus, and  served  un-
til 1841.  In  1833
he  declined  the  of-
fice of  presiding
judge  of  the  com-
mon pleas.  Subse-
quently he  prac-
tised law  until  he
was  appointed,  with
Alfred  Kelly  and
Gustavus  Swan,  a
fund  commissioner
to  restore  the  cred-
it of  the  state.  He
also  served  on  the
commission  that
was  sent  by  the
governor  to  Wash-
ington to  effect  a
settlement  of  the
boundary  -  line  be-
tween Ohio  and  Michigan,  and  in  1840  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  committee  to  inquire  into  the  condition
of  the  blind.  The  trial  of  William  Rossane  and
others  in  the  U.  S.  circuit  court  at  Columbus  in
1853  for  burning  the  steamboat "  Martha  Washing-
ton," to  obtain  the  insurance,  was  one  of  his  most
celebrated  cases.  He  also  appeared  as  counsel  in
fugitive-slave  cases,  and,  owing  to  his  anti-slavery
opinions,  joined  the  Republican  party  on  its  forma-
tion, liberating  at  an  early  date  the  slaves  that  he
received  through  his  marriage  in  1832.  In  1862  he
was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln  a  justice  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  United  States,  and  he  served
until  1881,  when  he  resigned  on  account  of  advanced
age.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Dartmouth  and  Marietta  in  1863,  and  by  Yale  in
1865. — His  son,  Wager,  lawyer,  b.  in  Columbus,
Ohio,  10  Nov.,  1834,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1856,
and  at  the  Cincinnati  law-school  in  1859.  On  his
admission  to  the  bar  he  practised  in  Columbus.  He
was  appointed  major  of  the  43d  Ohio  volunteers
on  31  Aug.,  1861,  became  lieutenant-colonel  on  14
Dec,  1861,  colonel  on  18  Oct.,  1862,  served  in  all  the
marches  and  battles  of  the  Atlanta  campaign,  lost  a
leg  at  Salkahatchie,  S.  C,  and  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general, U.  S.  volunteers,  on  5  Feb.,  1865,  be-
coming full  brigadier-general  on  8  March,  1865,  and
major-general  on  20  June,  1865.  He  was  made  colo-
nel of  the  45th  regular  infantry  on  28  July,  1866,
and  on  2  March,  1867,  was  brevetted  brigadier-gen-
eral, U.  S.  army,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services
in  the  action  of  Rivers  Bridges,  S.  C,  and  major-
general  for  services  during  the  war.  He  was  mus-
tered out  of  the  volunteer  service  on  1  Sept.,  1867.
Gen.  Swayne  was  a  commissioner  of  the  freedmen's
bureau  in  Alabama,  where  he  commanded  the  U.  S.
forces,  and  was  also  intrusted  with  the  administra-
tion of  the  reconstruction  acts  of  congress,  organ-
izing an  extensive  system  of  common  schools  for
colored  children,  who  had  none,  and  establishing
at  Montgomery,  Sol  ma.  and  Mobile  important  high-
schools,  which  still  remain,  and  also  Talladega
college.  He  retired  on  1  July,  1870.  and  practised
law  in  Toledo,  Ohio,  but  in  1880  he  removed  to
New  York  city,  where  he  is  counsel  for  railroad
and  telegraph  corporations.


SWEAT,  Margaret  Jane  Mussey,  author,  b.
in  Portland,  Me.,  28  Nov.,  1823.  She  is  the  daugh-
ter of  John  Mussey,  was  educated  in  Portland  and
Roxbury,  and  in  1849  married  Lorenzo  D.  M.
Sweat,  who  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat
from  Maine  and  served  from  7  Dec.,  1863,  till  3
March,  1865.  Since  1866  she  has  been  vice-regent
for  Maine  of  the  Mount  Vernon  ladies'  association.
She  has  contributed  to  the  "  North  American  Re-
view," her  first  paper  appearing  in  1856,  and  is  the
author  of  "  Ethers  Love-Life?'  (New  York,  1859),
and  "Highways  of  Travel,  or  a  Summer  in  Eu-
rope "  (Boston,  1859).

SWEATMAN,  Arthur,  Canadian  Anglican
bishop,  b.  in  London,  England,  19  Nov.,  1834.  He
was  educated  at  London  university,  graduated  at
Cambridge  in  1859,  and  ordained  priest  in  1860.
In  1862  he  became  curate  of  St.  Stephen's,  Canon-
bury,  and  master  of  the  modern  department  of  the
Islington  proprietary  school ;  and  in  1865,  on  the
invitation  of  Dr.  Hellmuth,  the  bishop  of  Huron,
he  accepted  the  head-mastership  of  Hellmuth  boys'
college,  London,  Ont.  In  1872  he  resigned  this
post  to  become  rector  of  Grace- church,  Brantford,
where  he  ministered  two  years,  and  in  1874  he
resumed  the  mastership  of  Hellmuth  college,  which
he  held  till  1876.  He  was  chaplain  to  the  bishop
of  Huron,  and  secretary  to  the  synod  of  the  diocese
of  Huron  in  1872-'9,  secretary  to  the  house  of
bishops  of  the  province  of  Canada  in  1873-9,  canon
of  London  (Ont.)  cathedral  in  1875,  and  soon  after-
ward archdeacon  of  Brant.  He  was  also  acting
rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Woodstock,  in  1876-'9.
In  March,  1879,  he  was  appointed  bishop  of  Toronto
in  succession  to  Alexander  Neil  Bethune.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Cambridge  in
1879,  and  in  1885  was  appointed  president  of  the
London  society  for  the  promotion  of  Christianity
among  the  Jews.

SWEENY,  John,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Clones,  Ireland,  in  May,  1821.  When  a  boy  he
emigrated  with  his  father  to  St.  John,  New  Bruns-
wick. He  was  educated  at  St.  Dunstan's  college,
Prince  Edward  island,  and  at  Quebec  college,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1844.  and  ordained  a
priest  the  same  year.  He  was  afterward  stationed
at  St.  John,  Sussex,  Chatham,  and  Barachois,  was
appointed  vicar-general,  and  in  1860  was  conse-
crated bishop  of  the  southern  diocese  of  New  Bruns-
wick, with  the  seat  of  his  see  at  St.  John.  Bishop
Sweeny  visited  Rome  in  1866,  in  1870  (when  he
attended  the  Vatican  council),  and  again  in  1881.
During  his  episcopate  St.  John's  cathedral  has
been  completed,  and  the  bishop's  palace  and  St.
Malachi's  and  St.  Joseph's  school  buildings  have
been  erected.  He  also  established  the  charity  hos-
pital and  St.  Patrick's  industrial  school,  -and  was
one  of  the  projectors  and  founders  of  St.  Joseph's
college,  St.  John.

SWEENY,  Thomas  William,  soldier,  b.  in
Cork,  Ireland,  25  Dec,  1820.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  1832,  and  at  an  early  age  was  ap-
prenticed to  the  printing  business.  When  a  young
man  he  joined  the  Baxter  blues,  a  military  organi-
zation in  New  York  city,  and  in  1846,  at  the  be-
f inning  of  the  war  with  Mexico,  he  became  2d
ieutenant  in  Ward  B.  Burnett's  1st  New  York  vol-
unteers. He  participated  in  the  campaign  under
Gen.  Winfield  Scott  from  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz
to  the  storming  of  Churubusco,  where  he  received
wounds  that  necessitated  the  amputation  of  his
right  arm.  On  his  return  to  New  York  city  he
was  given  a  reception  ball  at  Castle  Garden  by  the
printers  of  the  city,  and  he  received  the  brevet  of
captain  from  the  governor  of  the  state  and  a  silver


SWEENY


SWEET


medal  from  the  city  of  New  York.  He  was  given
the  commission  of  2d  lieutenant  in  the  2d  U.  S.
infantry,  and  served  in  California,  in  charge  of
Fort  Yuma,  and  elsewhere  in  the  west,  being  en-
gaged in  frequent  actions  with  hostile  Indians.
While  stationed  at  Port  Yuma,  the  command  under
Maj.  Samuel  P.  Heintzelman  was  compelled  to  fall
back  on  San  Diego  for  want  of  supplies,  and
Sweeny  was  ordered  to  remain  with  ten  men.  The
Indians  besieged  his  camp  from  5  June  until  6
Dec,  1851,  but  he  was  finally  extricated  by  a  gov-
ernment exploring  expedition  under  Capt.  Lorenzo
Sitgreaves.  After  other  duties  at  various  posts  he
was  promoted  captain,  19  Jan.,  1861.  Soon  after
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  ordered  to
St.  Louis  and  given  command  of  the  arsenal,  which
contained  immense  quantities  of  munitions  of  war
of  all  kinds,  sufficient  fully  to  arm  and  equip
60,000  men,  together  with  over  forty  tons  of  pow-
der. Capt.  Sweeny  had  but  forty  unassigned  re-
cruits under  him,  while  in  St.  Louis  there  were
nearly  3,000  hostile  minute-men,  fully  equipped.
Advances  were  made  to  induce  him  to  surrender
the  arsenal ;  but  the  reply,  that  if  a  serious  attempt
should  be  made  to  capture  the  arsenal  he  would
blow  it  to  atoms,  prevented  any  action  on  the  part
of  the  Confederate  sympathizers.  He  was  second
in  command  of  the  Union  troops  at  the  surrender
of  the  state  forces  at  Camp  Jackson,  and  conducted
the  final  negotiations,  in  consequence  of  Gen.  Na-
thaniel Lyon's  having  been  disabled.  Subsequently
he  was  instrumental  in  the  organization  of  the
Missouri  three-months'  volunteers,  and  he  was  ap-
pointed brigadier-general  on  20  May,  1861.  In  the
campaign  that  followed  he  took  an  active  part
with  Gen.  Lyon,  and  was  severely  wounded  at  the
battle  of  Wilson's  Creek,  and  later  he  was  acting
assistant  adjutant  -  general  under  Gen.  John  C.
Fremont.  He  then  accepted  the  command  of  the
52d  Illinois  volunteers,  and  was  attached  to  the
army  under  Gen.  Grant,  participating  in  the  capture
of  Fort  Donelson,  after  which  he  took  6,000  pris-
oners to  Alton,  111.  At  a  critical  moment  toward
the  close  of  the  first  day  of  the  battle  of  Shiloh  a
gap  existed  between  the  right  flank  of  Sweeny's
brigade  and  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman's  left.  The
defence  of  this  position,  which  was  the  key  of  the
situation,  was  intrusted  to  him  by  Sherman,  who
has  since  said :  "  I  attach  more  importance  to  that
event  than  to  any  of  the  hundred  achievements
which  I  have  since  heard  saved  the  day."  His
commission  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  dates
from  29  Nov.,  1862,  and  thereafter  he  commanded
a  division  of  the  16th  army  corps  and  was  en-
gaged in  protecting  the  Memphis  and  Charleston
railroad.  He  was  promoted  major  of  the  16th  in-
fantry, 20  Oct.,  1863,  and  in  the  Atlanta  campaign
had  the  2d  division  of  the  16th  corps  in  the  Army
of  the  Tennessee.  At  Snake  Creek  gap  his  com-
mand took  possession  of  the  gap  twenty-four  hours
in  advance  of  the  cavalry,  and  held  it  in  spite  of
every  effort  of  the  enemy.  He  took  part  in  the
battle  of  Resaca  and  forced  a  passage  across  Ooste-
naula  river  at  Lay's  Ferry,  where  he  fought  a
successful  battle,  which  action  resulted  in  Gen.
Joseph  E.  Johnston's  retreat  southward.  He  also
participated  in  the  battles  of  Dallas  and  Kenesaw
Mountain,  and  at  the  battle  before  Atlanta  on  22
July,  1864,  his  division  drove  the  enemy  back  with
great  slaughter,  capturing  four  battle-flags  and
900  prisoners.  Subsequently  he  had  command  of
the  post  of  Nashville  until  July,  1865,  and  he  was
mustered  out  of  volunteer  service  on  24  Aug.  of
that  year.  He  participated  in  the  Fenian  invasion
of  Canada  in  1866,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of


Limestone  Ridge.  During  this  period  he  was  out
of  the  National  service,  but  was  reinstated  by  the
president  soon  afterward  and  given  posts  in  the
southern  states.  Gen.  Sweeny  was  presented  with
a  sword  by  the  city  of  Brooklyn  for  services  ren-
dered in  the  civil  war.  He  was  retired  on  11  May,
1870,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.

SWEET,  Alexander  Edwin,  editor,  b.  in  St.
John,  New  Brunswick,  28  March,  1841.  His
father,  James,  removed  to  San  Antonio,  Tex.,  in
1849,  and  was  afterward  mayor  of  that  town.  He
also  served  in  the  Confederate  army  as  a  lieutenant-
colonel.  The  son  was  sent  to  school  in  Pough-
keepsie,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1859  went  to  Europe  and
entered  the  Polytechnic  institute,  in  Carlsruhe.
Returning  to  Texas  in  1863,  he  served  in  the  Con-
federate army  in  the  33d  Texas  cavalry.  After
the  war  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  practised  in  San  Antonio  for  several  years.  In
1879  he  became  editor  of  the  San  Antonio  "  Ex-
press," and,  still  practising  law,  became  city  at-
torney. Afterward  he  was  editor  of  the  San
Antonio  "  Herald,"  and  a  contributor  of  humorous

Earagraphs  to  the  Galveston  "News."  In  May,  1881,
e  removed  to  Austin,  Texas,  and  formed  there  a
partnership  for  the  publication  of  a  weekly  journal
entitled  "Texas  Siftings,"  which  was  removed  to
New  York  in  1884.  With  J.  Amory  Knox  he  has
published  "  On  a  Mexican  Mustang  through  Texas
from  the  Gulf  to  the  Rio  Grande"  (Hartford,  1883).
SWEET,  Benjamin  Jeffrey,  soldier,  b.  in
Kirkland,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  April,  1832  ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  1  Jan.,  1874.  His  father  was
a  clergyman  in  poor  health,  and  at  nine  years  of
age  the  boy  was  set  at  work  in  a  cotton-mill.
When  he  was  sixteen  his  father  removed  to  Stock-
bridge,  Wis.,  and  settled  upon  a  piece  of  wild
forest  land,  where  the  son  spent  a  year  in  clearing
a  homestead  for  the  family.  At  the  age  of  seven-
teen he  entered  Appleton  college,  but  remained
only  a  year,  and  then  returned  home,  where  he
alternately  taught  and  worked  on  his  father's
farm.  His  spare  hours  he  devoted  to  the  study  of
the  law.  Before  he  was  twenty-seven  he  was
elected  to  the  senate  of  Wisconsin,  but  at  the  open-
ing of  the  civil  war  he  was  commissioned  major
of  the  6th  Wisconsin  regiment.  Soon  afterward
he  resigned  and  raised  two  fresh  regiments,  the
21st  and  22d  Wisconsin,  of  the  first  of  which  he
became  colonel.  In  the  battle  of  Perry  ville,  where
it  formed  a  part  of  one  corps  that  during  all  of
one  day  sustained  an  attack  from  the  whole  of
Bragg's  army,  it  lost  300  in  killed  and  wounded.
Col.  Sweet  had  been  for  several  days  confined  to
an  ambulance  by  malarial  fever,  but  when  the
battle  began  he  mounted  his  horse  and  took  com-
mand of  his  regiment.  During  the  battle  he  re-
ceived a  wound  that  was  supposed  to  be  mortal.
His  life  was  saved  by  the  careful  tending  of  his
wife,  but  his  health  was  permanently  shattered.
He  was  given  a  colonelcy  in  the  Veteran  reserve
corps,  and  stationed  at  Gallatin,  Tenn.,  building  a
fort  there  in  the  winter  of  1862-3.  In  May,  1864,
he  was  ordered  to  take  command  of  the  prison  at
Camp  Douglas,  Chicago,  where  about  10,000  Con-
federate soldiers  were  confined.  In  June  he  dis-
covered that  an  outbreak  had  been  planned  for
the  4th  of  July  which  should  liberate  and  arm
the  prisoners,  and  result  in  the  sacking  and  burn-
ing of  Chicago.  He  quickly  strengthened  his  de-
fences and  re-enforced  his  garrison,  and  the  attempt
was  thus  rendered  hopeless.  Early  in  November,
Col.  Sweet  received  positive  information  that  the
post  was  to  be  attacked  on  election  night,  only
three  days  following ;  5,000  armed  men  under  com-


8


SWEET


SWEETSER


petent  leaders  were  then  in  Chicago,  ready  for  the
assault  on  the  camp,  and  muskets  were  there  in
abundance  to  arm  the  9,000  prisoners.  Chicago
was  to  be  burned,  and  its  flames  were  to  be  the
signal  for  a  general  uprising  of  500,000  well-armed
men  throughout  the  western  country.  Every  avail-
able soldier  had  been  sent  to  the  front  by  the  gov-
ernment, and  Sweet  had  in  the  garrison  but  796
men,  most  of  whom  were  unfit  for  active  duty.
Moreover,  it  was  too  late  to  receive  re-enforcements.
His  only  hope  of  safety  lay  in  the  speedy  arrest  of
the  Confederate  leaders  who  were  then  in  Chicago.
In  this  emergency  he  called  to  his  aid  one  of  his
prisoners,  a  Texas  ranger  named  John  T.  Shanks,
who  was  well  acquainted  with  the  Confederate
officers,  and  engaged  him  to  ferret  them  out.  To
gain  him  confidence  with  the  Confederates,  he  al-
lowed Shanks  to  escape  from  the  prison,  and  made
great  efforts  for  his  recapture.  Col.  Sweet  thought
he  could  trust  the  man ;  but  he  had  him  constantly
shadowed  by  detectives  pledged  to  take  his  life  in
case  of  his  treachery.  Shanks  did  his  work  so  well
that  within  thirty-six  hours  the  leaders  of  the  in-
tended assault  were  in  irons,  and  a  large  quantity
of  contraband  arms  was  in  the  possession  of  the
government.  When  Chicago  awoke  to  the  danger
it  had  escaped,  its  citizens  collected  at  a  mass-
meeting  and  publicly  thanked  Col.  Sweet  for  the
service  he  had  rendered.  For  it  also  the  govern-
ment promoted  him  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers.  When  he  was  mustered  out  of
service  at  the  close  of  the  war  he  resumed  the

Eractice  of  his  profession  in  Wisconsin,  but  in  1869
e  was  appointed  IT.  S.  pension-agent  at  Chicago.
He  held  this  position  till  April,  1870,  when  he  was
made  supervisor  of  internal  revenue  for  Illinois.
This  office  he  held  till  January,  1872,  when  he  was
called  to  Washington  to  be  1st  deputy  commis-
sioner of  internal  revenue.

SWEET,  Elnathan,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Chesh-
ire, Mass.,  20  Nov.,  1837.  He  was  graduated  in
the  scientific  course  at  Union  college  in  1859,  and
became  a  civil  engineer,  making  a  specialty  of  con-
structing bridges  and  other  engineering  work  by
contract.  In  1876-'80  he  was  division  engineer
of  New  York  state  canals,  and  he  was  elected  state
engineer  in  1883,  which  office  he  held  for  four
years  from  1  Jan.,  1884.  Mr.  Sweet's  principal  con-
tribution to  engineering  science  consists  in. the  de-
termination of  the  laws  that  govern  the  propulsion
of  vessels  in  narrow  channels,  an  account  of  which
he  published  in  1880  in  the  "  Transactions  "  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers,  of  which  or-
ganization he  was  elected  a  member  in  1878.  His
writings  include  annual  reports  that  he  issued
from  Albany  during  the  years  he  held  office,  and
various  technical  papers.

SWEET,  Homer  De  Lois,  engineer,  b.  in  Pom-
pey,  Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Jan.,  1826.  He  worked
on  his  father's  farm,  attended  the  district  schools,
and,  becoming  a  civil  engineer,  built  the  reservoir  of
the  Syracuse  water  company  at  Onondaga  hill  in
1862-4,  and  in  1865  designed  and  superintended
the  erection  of  the  large  stone  bridge  in  Syracuse.
For  three  years  he  was  employed  on  "  French's  Map
of  New  York  State,"  for  which  he  surveyed  Onon-
daga county,  and  he  also  made  a  map  of  the  "great
wilderness  "  in  northern  New  York  in  1867.  From
1864  till  1873  he  was  secretary  of  the  New  York
state  sheep  breeders'  and  wool  growers'  association,
and  secretary  of  the  Onondaga  historical  associa-
tion for  nidie  than  twenty  years.  At  an  early  age
he  contributed  songs,  poems,  and  later  essays  on
art,  agriculture,  and  engineering  to  newspapers  un-
der the  pen-name  of  "  Parmenus  Smartweed." He


has  also  published  "Twilight  Hours  in  the  Adi-
rondacks  (Syracuse,  1870).  and  has  now  (1888)
ready  for  the  press  "The  Philosophy  of  English
Versification." — His  brother,  John  Edson,  inven-
tor, b.  in  Pompey,  Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  21  Oct.,
1832,  was  educated  in  a  district  school,  and  in
1873-'9  was  professor  of  practical  mechanics  at
Cornell  university.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  Ameri-
can society  of  mechanical  engineers,  of  which  he
was  president  in  1883-'4.  He  is  believed  to  be  the
first  to  suggest  the  use  of  pipe-lines  for  transport-
ing oil  from  the  oil-wells,  and  is  the  inventor  of  the
straight-line  high-speed  engine,  and  one  of  the  first
to  construct  a  composing-machine  to  form  a  matrix
for  casting  stereotype-plates  directly  without  the
use  of  movable  type.  He  is  a  contributor  to  the  Lon-
don "  Engineering  "  and  "  American  Machinist."

SWEETSER,  Henry  Edward,  journalist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  19  Feb.,  1837;  d.  there,  17  Feb.,
1870.  After  graduation  at  Yale  in  1858  he  devoted
himself  to  mercantile  pursuits,  and  then  became  a
reporter  for  the  New  York  "Times."  In  1860  he
was  made  night  editor  of  the  "  World,"  and  in
1863  he  founded,  with  his  brother,  Charles  H.  Sweet-
ser,  the  "  Round  Table,"  from  which  he  withdrew
in  1866,  and,  after  a  short  visit  to  Europe,  returned
to  New  York  and  engaged  in  editorial  work  until
his  death. — His  brother,  Charles  Humphreys,
journalist,  b.  in  Athol,  Mass.,  25  Aug.,  1841 ;  d.  in
Palatka,  Fla.,  1  Jan.,  1871,  after  graduation  at  Am-
herst in  1862  engaged  in  journalistic  work,  aided
in  founding  the  "  Round  Table,"  and  became  con-
nected with  the  New  York  "Evening  Gazette."
He  was  an  originator  of  the  "  Evening  Mail "  in
1867,  and  the  "  City  "  in  1869.  After  the  failure
of  the  latter  enterprise  he  removed  to  Minnesota,
and  subsequently  to  Chicago,  where  he  became  lit-
erary editor  of  the  "  Times,  but,  owing  to  impaired
health,  he  went  to  Florida.  He  published  "  Songs
of  Amherst"  (Amherst,  1860);  "History  of  Am-
herst College  "  (1860);  and  "Tourist's  and  Invalid's
Guide  to  the  Northwest "  (New  York,  1867).

SWEETSER,  Moses  Foster,  author,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  22  Sept.,  1848.  His  uncle.
Andrew  J.  Sweetser,  was  a  pioneer  of  Dakota,  and
another  uncle,  Henry,  served  under  Gen.  William
Walker  in  Nicaragua.  He  studied  at  Beloit  and
Columbian  colleges,  and  travelled  in  Europe  and
the  East.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Artist  Biogra-
phies "  (15  vols.,  Boston,  1877-8) ;  "  Europe  for
$2.00  a  Day  "  (Boston,  1875) ;  "  Summer  Davs  Down
East  "  (Portland,  1883) ;  several  guide-books  to  the
White  mountains,  and  Osgood's  (now  Cassell's)
"  Pocket  Guide  to  Europe  "  (Boston,  1883).

SWEETSER,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1797 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14
Oct.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1815,
received  his  medical  degree  there  in  1818,  and  prac-
tised in  Boston,  Burlington,  Vt.,  and  New  York
city.  From  1825  till  1832  he  was  professor  of  medi-
cine in  the  University  of  Vermont,  and  from  1845
till  1861  he  held  the  same  chair  in  Bowdoin.  He
also  lectured  in  Jefferson  medical  college,  Phila-
delphia, and  in  the  medical  schools  of  Castleton,
Vt.,  and  was  professor  of  medicine  in  Hobart  col-
lege, Geneva,  from  1848  till  1855.  Dr.  Sweetser
published  "Dissertation  on  Cynanche  Trachealis
or  Croup  "  and  "  Dissertation  on  the  Functions  of
the  Extreme  Capillary  Vessels  in  Health  and  Dis-
ease," to  which  were  awarded  the  Bovlston  premi-
ums for  1820  and  1823  (Boston,  1823);  "Disserta-
tion on  Intemperance,"  to  which  was  awarded  a
premium  bv  the  Massachusetts  medical  society
(1829);  "Treatise  on  Consumption"  (1823-'6)  ;
"Treatise  on  Digestion  mid  its  Disorders"  (1837);


SWENBY


SWETT


9


"  Mental  Hygiene "  (New  York.  1843  ;  London,
1844) ;  and  "  Human  Life  "  (1867).

SWENEY,  John  Robson,  musician,  b.  in  West
Chester,  Pa.,  31  Dec,  1837.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  gave  early  evidences  of  mu-
sical talent.  He  was  leader  of  a  band  during  the
civil  war,  and  upon  the  cessation  of  hostilities  re-
sumed  instruction  in  music  at  his  native  place,
shortly  thereafter  essaying  his  first  attempt  at  the
composition  of  Sunday-school  music.  His  songs
were  first  brought  before  the  public  by  his  teach-
ing them  to  the  Sunday-school  under  his  leader-
ship. The  local  reputation  that  he  thus  acquired
enabled  him  to  find  a  publisher  to  issue  them  in
pamphlet-form.  A  demand  for  his  music  was
created  almost  immediately,  and  each  year  in-
creased his  hold  upon  public  favor.  In  1874  the
degree  of  M.  B.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  the
Pennsylvania  military  academy,  where  he  has  been
professor  of  vocal  and  instrumental  music  for  eigh-
teen years.  In  1884  he  received  the  degree  of
Mus.  D.  His  Sunday-school  songs  are  used  not
only  everywhere  in  the  United  States,  but  in  the
missions  in  China,  Japan,  India,  and  Africa,  and
his  name  as  a  composer  of  this  kind  of  music  is
widely  known.  He  now  (1888)  has  charge  of  the
music  in  Bethany  Presbyterian  church,  Philadel-
phia. His  publications  are  "  Gems  of  Praise "
(Philadelphia,  1877);  "The  Garner"  (1878);  "Joy
to  the  World  "  (Cincinnati,  1878) ;  "  The  Quiver  "
(Philadelphia,  1880);  "The  Wells  of  Salvation"
(1881) ;  "Anthems  and  Voluntaries  "  (1881) ;  "  Songs
of  Redeeming  Love  "  (2  vols.,  1882-7) ;  "  Songs  of
Triumph"  (1882);  "Our  Sabbath  Home"  (1884);
"Melodious  Sonnets"  (1885);  "Songs  of  Jov  and
Gladness"  (Boston,  1885);  "Joyful  Wing"  (Phila-
delphia, 1886) ;  "  Infant  Praises  "  (1887) ;  "  Banner
Anthem  Book  "  (1887) ;  "  Glad  Hallelujahs  "  (1887) ;
and  "  Showers  of  Blessing  "  (1888).

SWENSSON,  Carl  Aaron,  clergyman,  b.  in
Sugar  Grove,  Warren  co.,  Pa.,  25  June,  1857.  His
father  was  one  of  the  pioneers  of  the  Swedish  Lu-
theran church  in  the  United  States,  and  labored
successfully  among  the  widely  scattered  Swedes,
gathering  them  into  congregations  and  organizing
them.  At  his  death  in  1873  he  was  president  of
the  Swedish  Augustana  synod.  The  son  received
his  classical  and  theological  training  in  the  Augus-
tana institutions  at  Rock  Island,  111.,  being  gradu-
ated at  the  collegiate  department  in  1877  and  at
the  seminary  in  1879.  In  the  same  year  he  was
ordained  to  the  ministry,  and  at  once  assumed
charge  of  the  Bethany  Lutheran  congregation,
Lindsborg,  Kan.  He  was  the  founder  of  Bethany
college  and  normal  institute  in  that  town  in  1880,
and  is  its  president.  He  was  English  secretary  of
the  general  council  in  1886,  secretary  of  the  synodi-
cal  council  of  Swedish  Augustana  synod  in  1886-'7,
and  a  member  of  the  board  of  home  missions  for
Kansas  in  1884-'7.  He  has  been  editor  of  "  Ung-
doms  Vaennen  "  in  Chicago,  111.,  for  six  years ;  of
"  Framat,"  Lindsborg,  Kan.,  which  he  founded  in
1885 :  "  Korsbaneret,"  an  annual  (Rock  Island,  111.,
1880-'6) ;  and  "  Sondagsskolboken,"  a  Sunday-
school  book  (Chicago,  1885).  He  has  published
"  Minnen  fran  Kyrkan  "  (Lindsborg,  1888).

SWETT,  John  Appleton,  phvsician,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  3  Dec,  1808 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  18
Sept.,  1854.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1828,  received  his  medical  degree  there  in  1831,
and  after  serving  in  the  New  York  dispensary
studied  in  Paris  and  visited  hospitals  in  Europe.
From  1842  until  his  death  he  was  one  of  the  physi-
cians to  the  New  York  hospital,  and  delivered
courses  of  lectures  there  on  diseases  of  the  chest


and  kidneys.  In  1853  he  was  appointed  professor
of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  the
University  of  the  city  of  New  York.  Several
years  before  his  death  he  gave  particular  study  to
Bright's  disease.  About  1840  he  became  associated
with  Dr.  John  Watson  as  editor  of  the  "  New  York
Journal  of  Medicine."  His  lectures  were  published
in  the  New  York  "Lancet,"  and  afterward  ap-
peared in  book-form,  under  the  title  "  Treatise  on
Diseases  of  the  Chest "  (New  York,  1852).

SWETT,  Josiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Claremont,
N.  H.,  4  Aug.,  1814.  He  was  graduated  at  Nor-
wich university,  Vt.,  in  1837,  where  he  was  a  pro-
fessor in  1840-'5,  studied  theology,  took  orders  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1847,  and  has
been  rector  of  churches  in  Bethel,  Jericho,  Fair-
fax, and  Highgate,  Vt.  He  was  professor  of
systematic  theology  in  the  Vermont  Episcopal  in-
stitute in  1865-'7,  president  of  Norwich  univer-
sity in  1875-'6,  and  since  1866  has  been  presi-
dent of  the  standing  committee  of  the  diocese  of
Vermont.  Trinity  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.
in  1856,  and  Norwich  that  of  D.  D.  in  1864.
Dr.  Swett  has  published  "Citizen  Soldier "  (Nor-
wich, 1841) ;  "  English  Grammar  "  (Windsor,  1842 ;
revised  ed.,  Claremont,  1844) ;  "  Thomson's  '  Sea-
sons '  and  Pope's  '  Essav  on  Man,'  with  Grammati-
cal Notes"  (1844);  "Primary  Grammar"  (1845);
"  Pastoral  Visiting "  (1852) ;  "  Let  us  Pray,  or
Prayers  and  Hymns  for  Family  Devotion  "  (1861);
"The  Firmament  in  the  Midst  of  the  Waters"
(1862) ;  and  various  sermons.

SWETT,  Leonard,  lawyer,  b.  near  Turner,  Me.,
11  Aug.,  1825.  He  was  educated  at  North  Yar-
mouth academy  and  at  Waterville  (now  Colby  uni-
versity), but  was  not  graduated.  He  read  law  in
Portland,  enlisted  as  a  soldier  in  the  Mexican  war,
and  at  its  close  in  1848  settled  in  Bloomihgton,
111.  He  travelled  the  circuit  in  fourteen  counties,
and  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Abraham  Lincoln
and  David  Davis.  In  1865  he  removed  to  Chicago.
In  1852-:61  he  took  an  active  part  in  politics,  can-
vassing the  state  several  times,  and  in  1858,  at  the
special  request  of  Mr.  Lincoln,  was  a  candidate  for
the  legislature  on  the  Republican  ticket,  and  was
elected  by  a  large  majority.  This  is  the  only
official  place  he  has  ever  held.  When  Mr.  Lincoln
became  president  Mr.  Swett  was  employed  in  the
trial  of  government  cases,  one  of  the  most  noted  of
which  was  that  for  the  acquisition  of  the  Califor-
nia quicksilver-mines  in  1863.  In  the  course  of  his
practice  Mr.  Swett  has  defended  twentv  men  in-
dicted for  murder,  securing  the  acquittal  of  nine-
teen, and  a  light  punishment  for  the  other  one.  He
has  also  been  retained  in  criminal  cases  in  nearly
every  part  of  the  country,  though  his  professional
work  has  been  mainly  devoted  to  civil  suits.  His
success  is  attributed  to  his  careful  personal  atten-
tion to  details  and  his  eloquence  as  an  advocate.
He  has  rendered  much  gratuitous  service  to  work-
ingmen,  servants,  and  other  poor  clients.  He  deliv-
ered the  oration  at  the  unveiling  of  the  statue  of
Abraham  Lincoln  in  Chicago,  111.,  22  Oct.,  1887,  and
at  the  Chicago  Republican  convention  in  June,  1888,
in  an  eloquent  speech,  proposed  Walter  Q.  Gres-
ham,  of  Illinois,  as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency.

SWETT,  Samuel,  author,  b.  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  9  June,  1782 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  28  Oct.,
1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1800,
studied  and  practised  law,  and  afterward  became
a  merchant.  During  the  war  of  1812  he  served  on
the  northern  frontier  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  George
Izard,  with  the  rank  of  major.  He  sat  for  some
time  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  and  also  de-
voted himself  to  the  study  of  military  history. His


10


SWETT


SWIFT


Sublications  are  "  Abstract  of  the  Baron  Joseph  de
loguiat's  Considerations  on  the  Art  of  War,  with
notes  (Boston,  1817) ;  "  Sketch  of  the  Bunker  Hill
Battle  "  (1818 ;  3d  ed.,  1827) ;  "  Sketches  of  a  Few
Distinguished  Men  of  Newbury  and  Newburyport "

SB46) ;  "  Who  was  the  Commander  at  Bunker
ill  ?  with  Remarks  on  Frothingham's  '  History  of
the  Battle,' "  with  an  appendix  (1850) ;  "  Defence
of  Col.  Timothy  Pickering  against  Bancroft's  His-
tory" (1859);  "Original  Planning  and  Construc-
tion of  Bunker  Hill  Monument,"  with  engravings
(Albany,  1863) ;  and  fugitive  poems.

SWETT,  William,  educator,  b.  in  Henniker,
N.  H.,  13  Aug.,  1825 ;  d.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  25
March,  1884.  He  was  a  deaf-mute,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  the  institution  for  deaf-mutes  at  Hartford,
Conn.,  in  1842,  after  which  he  became  president  of
the  Gallaudet  association  of  deaf-mutes.  From
1879  till  his  death  he  was  superintendent  of  the
New  England  industrial  school  for  deaf-mutes,
which  he  founded  in  Beverly.  He  edited  the
"  Deaf-Mute's  Friend,"  and  was  the  author  of  "  The
Adventures  of  a  Deaf-Mute  in  the  White  Moun-
tains "  (Henniker,  1874).

SWIFT,  Benjamin,  senator,  b.  in  Amenia,  N.Y.,
5  April,  1781 ;  d.  in  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  11  Nov.,  1847.
He  received  an  academical  education,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1806,  and  began  to
practise  at  Bennington,  Vt.  He  removed  subse-
quently to  Manchester,  and  then  to  St.  Albans,
where  he  also  engaged  in  farming.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  house  of  representatives  in  1813-'14
and  1825-'6,  served  in  congress  from  Vermont  for
two  terms  in  1827-'31,  and  was  elected  a  U.  S.  sena-
tor from  the  same  state,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1833,
till  3  March,  1839.

SWIFT,  Ebenezer,  surgeon,  b.  in  Wareham,
Mass.,  8  Oct.,  1819 ;  d.  in  Hamilton,  Bermuda,  24
Sept.,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York  in  1842,  and  in  March,  1847,  became  acting
assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army.  His  first
service  was  with  the  army  of  invasion  and  occupa-
tion of  Mexico,  and  he  was  on  duty  at  Gen.  Win-
field  Scott's  headquarters  until  July,  1848.  Sub-
sequently he  served  at  various  posts  in  the  east,  in
Texas,  and  on  expeditions  against  hostile  Indians
until  June,  1856.  Meanwhile  he  had  been  made
captain  and  assistant  surgeon  on  30  Aug.,  1852.
He  had  command  of  Fort  Chad  bourne,  Tex.,  was
on  temporary  duty  at  Fort  Columbus  in  New  York
harbor  during  the  prevalence  of  the  cholera,  and
accompanied  the  troops  under  Gen.  Albert  S.  John-
ston to  Utah  in  May,  1859.  After  serving' at  vari-
ous stations  in  Missouri,  Kansas,  and  Dakota,  he
was  made  full  surgeon  on  21  May,  1861,  and  ap-
pointed medical  director  of  Gen.  Ormsby  M.  Mit-
chel's  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.  In
December,  1862,  he  became  medical  director  of  that
army,  and  early  in  1863  he  was  transferred  to  Phila-
delphia, where  he  was  chief  medical  officer  and
superintendent  of  hospitals  in  and  around  Phila-
delphia, and  from  November,  1863,  till  June,  1864,
medical  director  of  the  Department  of  the  South.
He  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel
on  13  March,  1865,  and  from  February  till  June,
1865,  held  the  office  of  medical  director  with  the
ranks  of  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel.  On  20
June,  1869,  he  received  the  additional  brevet  of
brigadier-general  for  meritorious  services  volun-
tarily rendered  during  the  prevalence  of  cholera
at  Fort  Harker,  Kan.  In  1874  he  became  medical
director  of  the  Department  of  the  South,  and  there-
after, until  his  retirement  on  8  Oct.,  1883,  he  was
assistant  medical  purveyor  in  New  York  city.


SWIFT,  Kl  Mia  Pope,  clergyman,  b.  in  Will-
iamstown,  Mass.,  12  Aug.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Alleghany,
Pa.,  3  April,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1813,  studied  two  years  at  Princeton  theological
seminary,  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  presbytery
of  New  Brunswick  in  April,  1816,  and  ordained  as
a  Congregationalism  3  Sept.,  1817.  After  preach-
ing in  Dover  and  Milford,  Del.,  he  became  pastor
of  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  at  Pittsburg  in
1819,  and  remained  there  thirteen  years.  He  was
secretary  of  the  Western  foreign  missionary  society
in  1831-'5,  and  pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian
church,  Alleghany,  in  1835-'65.  He  was  a  member
of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Western  theologi-
cal seminary  from  its  organization,  and  president
of  the  board  from  1861  till  his  death.  He  estab-
lished the  "  Western  Foreign  Missionary  Chronicle  "
in  1833,  and  continued  it  three  years.  He  pub-
lished "  The  Sacred  Manual "  (Pittsburg,  1821),  and
sermons  and  addresses.

SWIFT,  John  White,  merchant,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa.,  30  Jan.,  1750 ;  d.  in  Bucks  county.  Pa.r
in  1819.  His  father,  John,  was  a  merchant,  a
common  councilman  in  1757-'76,  and  then  collector
of  the  port  of  Philadelphia  from  1762  till  1772.
John  White  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  Phila-
delphia in  1767,  and  became  a  merchant  at  Quebec.
On  the  approach  of  Gen.  Richard  Montgomery  he
joined  his  command,  serving  as  captain,  and  was
wounded  in  the  assault  on  that  place.  On  his  re-
covery, Gen.  Wooster  appointed  him  inspector  of
accounts  and  works  at  Montreal,  which  post  he  re-
signed on  the  adoption  of  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence. He  was  purser  of  the  ship  "  Empress
of  China,"  the  first  vessel  to  enter  Canton,  China,
under  the  American  flag. — His  son,  John,  lawver.
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  June,  1790;  d.  there,  9
June,  1873,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811.  He
was  a  leader  of  the  Whigs  of  Philadelphia,  and
was  mayor  in  1832-'8,  1839-'41,  and  1845-'9,  win-
ning applause  by  the  courage  with  which  he  quelled
several  riots,  leading  the  police  in  person.

SWIFT,  Jonathan  Williams,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Taunton,  Mass.,  30  March,  1808 ;  d.  in  Geneva,
N.  Y.,  30  July,  1877.  He  entered  the  navy  as  mid-
shipman, 25  Aug.,  1823,  and  cruised  in  the  sloop
"  Cyane,"  of  the  Mediterranean  station,  in  1823-'5,
and  the  frigate  "  Brandywine,"  of  the  Pacific  sta-
tion, in  1826-'9.  He  became  passed  midshipman,
23  March,  1829,  and  was  then  on  leave  for  four
years.  He  was  commissioned  a  lieutenant,  3  March,
1831,  and  the  next  year  made  a  short  cruise  in  the
sloop  "  John  Adams  "  in  the  Mediterranean.  After
this  he  was  on  leave  and  waiting  orders  until  his
death,  except  for  a  short  cruise  in  the  steamer
"  Fulton  "  on  the  Home  station  in  1840,  and  was
placed  on  the  reserved  list  by  the  action  of  the
board  of  retirement,  14  Sept.,  1855.  He  was  pro-
moted to  commodore  on  the  retired  list,  4  April,
1867,  and  resided  at  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  until  his  death.

SWIFT,  Joseph  Gardner,  soldier,  b.  in  Nan-
tucket, Mass.,  31  Dec,  1783;  d.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,
23  July,  1865.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Thomas
Swift,  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Dorchester,  Mass.,
in  1630,  and  his  father,  Dr.  Foster  Swift,  was  a
surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army.  Joseph  was  educated
at  Bristol  academy,  Taunton,  Mass.,  and  was  the
first  graduate  of  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  12
Oct.,  1802.  He  entered  the  army  as  2d  lieutenant
of  engineers,  and  was  promoted  captain  in  October,
1806,  and  major,  23  Feb.,  1808.  He  was  aide  to
Gen.  William  Pinckney  in  1812,  became  lieutenant-
colonel,  6  Julv,  1812,  and  colonel  and  principal  en-
gineer, 31  July,  1812.  He  was  chief  engineer  in
planning  the  defences  of  New York harbor  in


SWIFT


SWIFT


11


1812-13,  and  of  the  army  during  the  campaign  of
1813  on  St.  Lawrence  river.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general,  19  Feb.,  1814,  for  meritorious
services,  and  was  superintendent  of  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  from
November,  1816,  till
January,  1817,  but  re-
signed in  November,
1818,  with  other  offi-
cers, on  the  appoint-
ment of  the  French
general,  Simon  Ber-
nard, to  the  charge
of  investigating  and
modifying  the  coast
defences.  He  was
U.  S.  surveyor  of  the
port  of  New  York  in
1818-27,  then  a  civil
engineer  in  the  U.  S.
service,  and  superin-
tendent of  harbor  im-
provements on  the
lakes  in  1829-'45.  In
the  winter  of  1830-1
he  constructed  the  rail-
way from  New  Orleans  to  Lake  Pontchartrain
over  an  almost  impassable  swamp,  in  1839  he
was  chief  engineer  of  the  Harlem  railroad  in  New
York,  and  in  1841  he  was  appointed  by  President
Harrison  on  an  embassy  of  peace  to  the  govern-
ors of  Canada,  Nova  Scotia,  and  New  Brunswick.
In  1851-'2,  with  his  son.  McRae,  he  made  the  tour
of  Europe,  and  recorded  his  observations  in  a
diary,  in  which  is  also  a  complete  history  of  West
Point  academy.  He  contributed  valuable  articles
to  the  scientific  journals.  See  Charles  B.  Stuart's
"  Lives  and  Works  of  Civil  and  Military  Engineers
of  America"  (New  York,  1871). — His  brother,
William  Henry,  engineer,  b.  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  6
Nov.,  1800;  d.  in  New  York  city,  7  April,  1879,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1819.
He  had  previously  been  ordered,  as  a  cadet,  in  1818,
to  join  Maj.  Stephen  H.  Long's  Rocky  mountain
expedition,  with  which  he  served  till  1821.  He  was
employed  in  the  early  surveys  for  the  Chesapeake
and  Ohio  canal,  and  for  various  railroads,  and  in
constructing  a  map  of  post-offices  and  post-roads,
and  in  1832  became  brevet  captain  and  assistant
topographical  engineer.  For  the  next,  ten  years  he-
was  employed  on  the  geodetic  survey  of  the  Atlan-
tic coast,  being  in  charge  of  river  and  harbor  im-
provements in  New  England  in  1837-'42.  and  resi-
dent and  constructing  engineer  of  the  Massachu-
setts Western  railroad  (now  part  of  the  Boston  and
Albanv)  in  1836-'40,  and  becoming  full  captain  in
1838.  From  1844  till  1849  he  was  assistant  to  the
chief  of  topographical  engineers,  and' during  this
period,  with  Gov.  John  Davis,  of  Massachusetts,  he
made  an  examination  of  the  Illinois  and  Michigan
canal,  of  whose  board  of  trustees  he  was  president
from  1845  till  1871,  and  which  he  assisted  to  com-
plete. In  1847-'9  he  was  engaged  in  designing  and
constructing  the  first  Minot's  ledge  light-house,
which  was  swept  away  in  a  gale  in  April,  1851.  This
was  the  first  iron-pile  light-house  in  the  United
States.  In  1849  Capt.  Swift  resigned  from  the  army,
and  he  was  afterward  successively  president  of  the
Philadelphia,  Wilmington,  and  Baltimore,  the
Massachusetts  Western,  and  the  Hannibal  and  St.
Joseph  railroads.  During  his  last  fifteen  years  he
resided  in  New  York  city. — Another  brother,  John,
became  brigadier-general  of  New  York  militia,  and
was  killed,  12  July,  1814,  after  cutting  off  a  picket
of  the  enemy  near  Fort  George,  Canada.


SWIFT,  Lewis,  astronomer,  b.  in  Clarkson,
N.  Y,  29  Feb.,  1820.  He  was  educated  at  Clarkson
academy,  where  he  completed  his  course  in  1838,
and  then  turned  his  attention  to  farm  work.  His
father  died  in  1846,  and,  thrown  upon  his  own  re-
sources, he  studied  magnetism  and  electricity,  and
for  four  years  lectured  on  these  subjects  in  Cana-
da and  the  western  states.  He  returned  to  farm-
ing in  1850,  but  soon  began  again  to  lecture  on  the
wonders  of  the  microscopic  world,  which  he  illus-
trated by  means  of  a  calcium  light.  All  of  his  ap-
paratus was  constructed  by  himself  and  parts  of  it
were  of  his  own  invention/  In  1854  he  established
a  hardware-store  in  Cortland  county,  N.  Y.,  which
in  1872  he  moved  to  Rochester,  where  he  has  since
resided.  Meanwhile,  he  became  interested  in  as-
tronomy, and,  building  his  own  telescope,  he  began
to  make  observations.  His  first  work  was  in  1858,
on  Donati's  comet,  and  his  first  astronomical  paper
was  on  this  subject.  For  years  he  eagerly  scanned
the  heavens  for  new  comets,  and  in  1862  the  great
comet  of  that  year  was  discovered  by  him.  In
1869  he  observed  at  Mattoon,  111.,  a  total  solar
eclipse,  and,  making  particular  study  of  the  pro-
tuberances and  corona,  secured  some  valuable  re-
sults. Two  years  later  he  found  another  comet,
but  it  had  been  seen  earlier  in  Europe.  Three
times  since  he  has  caught  brief  glimpses  of  comets
that  no  other  observer  has  ever  seen.  After  his
removal  to  Rochester  he  discovered  comets  in
1877-'9,  for  which  he  thrice  received  the  comet
prize,  a  gold  medal  valued  at  sixty  dollars,  from
the  Imperial  academy  of  sciences  in  Vienna.  Hul-
bert  H.  Warner  of  Rochester,  knowing  under  what
disadvantages  Dr.  Swift  was  laboring  in  pursuing
his  astronomical  studies,  offered  to  build  for  his
use  an  observatory,  provided  the  people  of  the  city
would  raise  a  sum  sufficient  to  get  him  a  refractor
of  sixteen-inch  aperture.  Nearly  $12,000  were
contributed,  and  the  telescope  is  doing  service  in
the  great  dome  of  the
observatory,  which,  to-
gether with  the  at-
tached residence  for
the  family  of  the  di-
rector, cost,  exclusive
of  the  instrument,
nearly  $100,000.  In
1880  Dr.  Swift  found
a  comet  with  a  period
of  five  and  a  half
years,  and  in  1881  he
discovered  two  others.
For  the  former  he  re-
ceived a  special  prize
of  $500  from  Mr.  War-
ner, which  is  the  larg-
est sum  ever  awarded
for  the  discovery  of
any  heavenly  body,
and  for  the  latter  in
1882  he  received  the  Lalande  prize  of  540  francs
from  the  French  academy  of  sciences.  Besides  the
foregoing,  he  independently  discovered  Winnecke's
comet  in  1871,  Coggia's  in  1874,  and  the  Brooks-
Swift  comet  in  1883,  there  being  in  the  latter  case
a  difference  of  fifteen  minutes  in  favor  of  William
R.  Brooks.  In  1878  he  observed  the  total  eclipse
of  the  sun  at  Denver,  Col.,  and  he  saw  at  that  time
what  he  thinks  were  two  intra-mercurial  planets.
His  report  of  this  discovery  excited  great  interest
and  much  controversy  on  both  continents.  Since
he  assumed  in  1882  'the  directorship  of  the  War-
ner observatory,  he  has  found  about  700  new
nebula?,  which  entitles  him  to  third  place  as  dis-


12


SWIFT


SWINTON


coverer  of  these  bodies,  the  two  Hersehels  alone
exceeding  him.  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  him  by  the  Ij  niversity  of  Rochester  in
1879.  He  has  invented  a  horse  hay-rake  (1842) ;  an
oxyhydrogen  microscope  (1858) ;  an  improvement
in  the  construction  of  domes  (1881) ;  and  an  auto-
matic right-ascension  circle  (1887).  Dr.  Swift  has
been  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  astronomical
society  of  Great  Britain,  and  he  is  a  member  of
various-  societies  in  this  country.  His  writings
have  been  confined  to  cyclopaedia  articles  and
papers  that  have  appeared  in  various  astronomical
journals  or  as  popular  articles  in  the  press.

SWIFT,  Robert,  conchologist,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1799 ;  d.  in  St.  Thomas,  W.  I.,  6  May,
1872.  He  went  to  South  America,  but  in  1831  es-
tablished himself  as  a  merchant  at  St.  Thomas,
W.  I.  In  1866  he  retired  to  Philadelphia,  but  he
returned  to  St.  Thomas  the  following  year.  His
collection  of  shells,  said  to  be  the  finest  in  the
West  Indies,  was  arranged  in  Denmark,  and  pre-
sented to  the  Smithsonian  institution  at  Washing-
ton, D.  C.  The  collection  was  valued  at  $30,000.
He  was  a  man  of  fine  culture  and  great  fondness
for  scientific  pursuits,  and  was  in  constant  corre-
spondence with  the  ablest  conchologists  in  this
•country  in  regard  to  his  favorite  study.

SWIFT,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Amenia,  N.  Y„  3
Aug.,  1782;  d.  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,  in  1875.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1800,  and  was  a
tutor  in  Middlebury  college  from  1800  till  1802.
He  studied  and  practised  law,  was  secretary  of
state  of  Vermont,  judge  of  probate  of  Addison
county  from  1819  till  1841,  and  a  judge  of  the
county  court  in  1855-'7.  Middlebury  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1860.  During  1812-'13  he
edited  a  political  paper.  He  published  "  History
of  the  Town  of  Middlebury  "  (Middlebury,  1859) ;
"  Statistical  and  Historical  Account  of  the  County
of  Addison,  Vermont "  (1859) ;  and  addresses.

SWIFT,  Zephaniah,  jurist,  b.  in  Wareham,
Mass.,  in  February,  1759 ;  d.  in  Warren,  Ohio,  27
Sept.,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1778,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
practice  at  Windham,  Conn.  He  was  elected  to
congress,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1793,  till  3  March,
1797,  and  was  appointed  in  1800  secretary  to  Oliver
Ellsworth,  minister  to  France.  In  1801  he  was
Appointed  a  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,  and
he  was  its  chief  justice  in  1806-'19.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Hartford  convention  of  New  Eng-
land Federalists,  sat  in  the  state  house  of  repre-
sentatives, and  was  a  member  of  a  commission  to
revise  the  laws  of  Connecticut.  He  published
"  Oration  on  Domestic  Slavery  "  (Hartford,  1791) ;
u  System  of  the  Laws  of  Connecticut "  (2  vols.,
Windham,  1795-6) ;  " Digest  of  the  Laws  of  Evi-
dence in  Civil  and  Criminal  Cases,  and  a  Treatise
on  Bills  of  Exchange  and  Promissory  Notes"
(Hartford,  1810) ;  and  "  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  Con-
necticut" (2  vols.,  New  Haven,  1822-'3).  —  His
daughter,  Mary  A.,  published  about  1833  "  First
Lessons  on  Natural  Philosophy,"  which  was  a  popu-
lar text-book  for  many  years,  and  was  translated
into  Karen  (1846)  and  into  Burmese  (1848).

SWINBURNE,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Deer
River,  Lewis  co„  N.  Y.,  30  May,  1820.  He  was
graduated  at  Albany  medical  college  in  1846.  and
began  to  practise  in  that  city.  In  1861  he  was  ap-
pointed chief  medical  officer  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
John  F.  Rathbone,  and  placed  in  charge  of  the
depot  for  recruits  at  Albany.  In  May,  1862,  he
was  appointed  by  Gov.  Edwin  D.  Morgan  auxiliary
volunteer  surgeon  at  the  front  with  the  rank  of
medical  superintendent,  and  was  reappointed  by


Gov.  Horatio  Seymour  on  13  June.  He  was  sub-
sequently made  a  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  service,  and
assigned  to  duty  at  Savage's  station.  He  was  tak-
en prisoner,  29  June,  1862,  and  offered  his  liberty
by  his  captors,  but  preferred  to  remain  with  his
patients.  He  was  appointed  by  Gov.  Seymour  in
1864  health  officer  of  the  port  of  New  York,  re-
appointed by  Gov.  Reuben  E.  Fenton  in  1866,  and
held  the  post  six  years.  He  was  surgeon-in-chief
of  the  American  ambulance  corps  in  Paris  during
the  siege  of  that  city  by  the  German  army  in
1870-'l.  In  1882  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Albany,
and  in  1884  he  was  chosen  to  congress  and  served
for  one  term.  He  has  been  surgeon-in-chief  to  the
Child's  hospital  and  Homoeopathic  hospital  at  Al-
bany, and  has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
medical  journals  and  reviews.  See  "A  Typical
American,  or  Incidents  in  the  Life  of  Dr.  John
Swinburne"  (Albany,  1888).— His  son,  Louis  Jud-
son,  author,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  24  Aug.,  1855 ;
d.  in  Colorado  Springs,  Col.,  9  Dec,  1887,  went
abroad  with  his  family  in  1870,  and  resided  in
Paris  during  the  siege,  his  observations  during
that  period  being  embodied  in  his  "  Paris  Sketch-
es "  (Albany,  1875).  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1879,  and  afterward  resided  almost  entirely  in
Denver  and  at  Colorado  Springs  in  consequence  of
delicate  health.  He  contributed  to  magazines,  and
had  in  press  at  his  death  a  volume  of  essays  en-
titled "  English  Romanticism."

SWING,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  23  Aug.,  1830.  His  father  died  in  1832,  and
his  boyhood  was  mostly  spent  upon  a  farm.  He
was  graduated  at  Miami  university,  Oxford,  Ohio,
in  1852,  and  soon  began  the  study  of  theology,  but
before  a  year  elapsed  he  was  made  professor  of
languages  at  Miami,  where  he  remained  twelve
years,  preaching  occasionally  in  addition  to  his
regular  duties.  In  1866  he  accepted  a  call  to  be-
come pastor  of  the  4th  Presbyterian  church  in  Chi-
cago. In  the  great  fire  of  1871  his  church  edifice
and  the  homes  of  most  of  his  parishioners  were
swept  away,  but  arrangements  were  at  once  made
for  him  to  preach  in  Standard  hall  and  McVicker's
theatre  till  a  new  building  could  be  erected  for  his
congregation.  This  was  done  in  1874.  His  au-
diences were  large  and  appreciative,  and  his  ser-
mons and  essays  appeared  nearly  every  week  in  the
public  press ;  but  his  doctrines  were  regarded  by
many  as  heterodox,  and  Prof.  Francis  L.  Patton
preferred  the  charge  of  heresy  against  Prof.  Swing
in  twenty-eight  specifications  before  the  Chicago
presbytery,  15  April,  1874.  A  trial  of  several
weeks'  duration  was  held,  and  resulted  in  an  ac-
quittal, but  Prof.  Swing  withdrew  from  the  Pres-
byterian church,  and  his  congregation  has  since
been  independent.  McVicker's  theatre  proving  too
small,  Central  music  hall,  the  largest  in  the  city,
was  built  in  1878,  where  Prof.  Swing  has  since
continued  to  preach  to  large  audiences.

SWINTON,  John,  journalist,  b.  in  Salton,  Had-
dingtonshire, Scotland,  12  Dec,  1830.  He  received
his  early  education  from  his  uncle,  the  Rev.  Robert
Currie,  emigrated  in  1843  to  Canada,  and  after-
ward to  the  United  States,  with  his  family,  learned
the  printer's  trade  in  Illinois,  and  practised  it  for
some  time  in  New  York  city.  He  then  received  a
course  of  classical  instruction  at  Williston  semi-
nary, Mass.,  and  afterward  travelled  extensively
through  the  United  StateSi  Feeling  an  abhorrence
for  slavery,  he  left  Charleston,  S.  C.,  where  he  re-
sided at  the  time,  in  order  to  take  an  active  part
in  the  free-state  contest  in  Kansas.  He  returned
to  New  York  city  in  1857,  and  began  the  study  of
medicine. While  thus  engaged  he  contributed  arti-


SWINTON


SWORDS


13


cles  to  the  "  Times,"  afterward  accepted  an  edito-
rial place  on  that  paper,  and  soon  became  manag-
ing editor.  During  the  absences  of  Henry  J.  Ray-
mond he  had  the  sole  control,  and  wrote  a  large
number  of  the  leading  articles.  He  resigned  the
post  of  managing  editor  at  the  close  of  the  war,
on  account  of  impaired  health,  but  continued  his
connection  with  the  journal  as  an  editorial  writer
till  the  death  of  Mr.  Raymond.  Subsequently  he
was  managing  editor  of  the  New  York  "  Sun."  He
became  a  leader  in  the  movement  for  labor-re-
forms, and  in  1883  severed  his  connection  with  the
"Sun "in  order  to  expound  his  political  and  social
views  in  a  weekly  journal  that  he  called  "John
Swinton's  Paper,"  which  he  ceased  to  publish  in
1887.  Besides  other  pamphlets,  he  has  published
"New  Issue:  the  Chinese  -  American  Question"
(New  York,  1870),  and  also  a  "  Eulogy  on  Henry
J.  Raymond"  (1870);  "John  Swinton's  Travels"
(1880) ;  and  an  "  Oration  on  John  Brown  "  (1881).
— His  brother,  William,  author,  b.  in  Salton,  Scot-
land, 23  April,  1833,  was  educated  at  Knox  college,
Toronto,  and  at  Amherst,  with  the  intention  of  be-
coming a  Presbyterian  minister,  and  in  1853  began
to  preach,  but  adopted  the  profession  of  teaching.
He  was  professor  of  ancient  and  modern  languages
at  the  Edgeworth  female  seminary,  Greensborough,
N.  C,  in  1853-4,  and  afterward  went  to  New  York
city  to  take  a  professorship  in  Mt.  Washington  col-
legiate institute.  While  in  the  south  he  contrib-
uted to  "Putnam's  Monthly"  some  critical  and
philosophical  articles,  and  a  series  of  etymological
studies  that  were  afterward  published  under  the
title  of  "  Rambles  among  Words :  their  Poetry  and
Wisdom  "  (New  York,  1859 ;  London,  1861).  Hav-
ing previously  contributed  articles  to  the  New  York
"  Times,"  he  was  taken  on  the  staff  of  that  journal
in  1858,  and  in  1862  went  to  the  seat  of  war  as  a
correspondent.  He  was  equipped  for  this  work  by
close  study  of  military  art,  and  he  discussed  tacti-
cal movements  with  such  freedom  that  in  1864  Gen.
Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  whom  he  had  criticised  in  his
letters,  procured  an  order  for  his  exclusion  from  the
camps  of  the  army.  He  also,  at  a  later  date,  in-
curred the  displeasure  of  Gen.  Grant.  In  1867  he
travelled  through  the  southern  states  and  collected
material  for  a  history  of  the  war  from  the  military
and  civil  leaders  of  the  Confederacy.  Returning
to  the  office  of  the  "  Times,"  he  resumed  the  work
of  literary  criticism,  in  which  province  he  had
gained  a  reputation  before  he  became  a  war-cor-
respondent. Before  abandoning  journalism,  he
published  in  newspaper  articles  and  in  a  pamphlet
an  exposure  of  the  machinations  of  railroad  finan-
ciers to  procure  subsidies.  In  1869  he  became  pro-
fessor of  belles-lettres  in  the  University  of  Cali-
fornia, where  he  remained  for  five  years.  Subse-
quently he  made  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  his  residence,
devoting  himself  to  the  composition  of  educational
works,  most  of  which  were  widely  adopted  in  pub-
lic and  private  schools.  For  a  series  of  these,  which
cover  most  of  the  studies  pursued  in  schools,  he  re-
ceived a  gold  medal  at  the  Paris  exposition  of  1867
"  for  educational  works  of  remarkable  originality
and  value."  His  principal  military  works  are  "  The
'  Times's '  Review  of  McClellan  :  his  Military  Ca-
reer Reviewed  and  Exposed"  (1864);  "Campaigns
of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac :  a  Critical  History
of  Operations  in  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  Penn-
sylvania" (1866;  revised  ed.,  1886) ;  "The  Twelve
Decisive  Battles  of  the  War :  a  History  of  the  East-
ern and  Western  Campaigns  in  Relation  to  the
Actions  that  Decided  their  Issue"  (1867);  and
"  History  of  the  New  York  Seventh  Regiment  dur-
ing the  War  of  the  Rebellion  "  (Boston,  1870).


SWISSHELM,  Jane  Grey,  b.  near  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  6  Sept.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Swissvale,  Pa.,  22  July,
1884.  When  she  was  eight  years  of  age  her  father,
James  Cannon,  died,  leaving  a  family  in  straitened
circumstances.  The  daughter  worked  at  manual
labor  and  teaching  till  she  was  twenty-one,  when
she  married  James  Swisshelm,  who  several  years
afterward  obtained  a  divorce  on  the  ground  of  de-
sertion. Two  years  later  she  removed  with  her
husband  to  Louisville,  Ky.  In  this  city  she  be-
came an  outspoken  opponent  of  slavery,  and  her
first  written  attack  upon  the  system  appeared  in
the  Louisville  "  Journal  "  in  1842.  She  also  wrote
articles  favoring  abolition  and  woman's  rights  in
the  "Spirit  of  Liberty,"  of  Pittsburg,  for  about
four  years.  In  1848  she  established  the  Pittsburg
"  Saturday  Visitor,"  a  strong  abolition  and  woman's
rights  paper,  which,  in  1856,  was  merged  with  the
weekly  edition  of  the  Pittsburg  "Journal."  In
1857  she  went  to  St.  Cloud,  Minn.,  and  established
the  St.  Cloud  "  Visitor."  Her  bold  utterances
caused  a  mob  to  destroy  her  office  and  its  con-
tents, and  to  throw  her  printing-press  into  the
river.  But  she  soon  began  to  publish  the  St.
Cloud  "  Democrat."  When  Abraham  Lincoln  was
nominated  for  the  presidency,  she  spoke  and  wrote
in  his  behalf  and  for  the  principles  of  which  he
was  the  representative.  When  the  civil  war  began
and  nurses  were  wanted  at  the  front,  she  was  one
of  the  first  to  respond.  After  the  battle  of  the
Wilderness  she  had  charge  of  182  badly  wounded
men  at  Fredericksburg  for  five  days,  without  sur-
geon or  assistant,  and  saved  them  all.  She  was  a
prolific  writer  for  newspapers  and  magazines,  and
published  "  Letters  to  Country  Girls  "  (New  York,
1853),  and  an  autobiography  entitled  "  Half  of  a
Century  "  (1881).

SWORD,  James  Brade,  painter,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  11  Oct.,  1839.  His  early  life  was  spent
in  China,  and  he  subsequently  travelled  extensive-
ly in  the  United  States,  sketching,  and  also  in  the
service  of  the  government  surveys.  During  1861-'2
he  studied  under  Christian  Schussele  at  the  Penn-
sylvania academy.  He  has  been  president  of  the
Philadelphia  society  of  artists  since  1878,  and  di-
rector of  the  art  club  since  1887.  His  works  in-
clude "  Quail  Shooting,"  "  Peep  into  Lake  George,"
"  Trenton  Falls,"  "  Silver-Thread  Falls,"  "  Mystery
of  the  Sea,"  and  "  Something  in  the  Wind."

SWORDS,  Robert  Smith,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  12  July,  1816 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  15
Jan.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1834,  and  after  studying  law  for  three  years  with
Daniel  Lord  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  Soon  after
this  he  formed  a  partnership  with  Sylvester  Ward
which  lasted  ten  years,  when  he  retired  from  the
practice  of  his  profession,  in  the  mean  time  serving
during  several  years  as  judge-advocate  for  the  city
of  New  York.  In  1849  he  settled  on  Passaic  river,
opposite  Belleville,  N.  J.,  and  while  living  there
was  for  twelve  years  a  magistrate  for  Union  town-
ship. Although  an  earnest  Democrat  and  an  op-
ponent of  the  administration  of  President  Lincoln,
he  placed  his  services  at  the  disposal  of  the  govern-
ment, in  August,  1862,  was  commissioned  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  13th  New  Jersey  volunteers,  and
was  with  his  regiment  in  the  battles  of  Antietam
and  South  Mountain,  being  wounded  in  the  former
engagement.  He  resigned  in  1863  and  removed  to
Newark,  N.  J.,  where  he  afterward  resided.  For
many  years  he  was  secretary  of  the  Board  of  trade
of  Newark,  and  he  was  corresponding  secretary  of
the  New  Jersey  state  agricultural  society,  treasurer
of  the  New  Jersey  society  for  the  prevention  of
cruelty  to  animals,  and  treasurer  of  the  Board  of


14


SWORDS


SYKES


proprietors  of  East  New  Jersey.  In  1867  he  be-
came treasurer  of  the  New  Jersey  historical  society,
to  whose  "  Proceedings  "  he  contributed  a  "  Memoir
of  the  Life  and  Character  of  John  Rutherford "
(1872) ;  •'  The  Bones  of  Columbus  "  (1879) ;  "  The
Cathedral  Church  of  San  Domingo "  (1879) ;  and
other  similar  papers.

SWORDS,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city,
1  Nov.,  1806 ;  d.  there,  20  March,  1886.  He  was  a
grandson  of  Capt.  Thomas  Swords,  a  British  offi-
cer, who  died  in  New  York  in  1780,  and  his  father
was  the  senior  member  of  the  publishing-house  of
T.  and  J.  Swords,  of  New  York  city.  The  son  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1829,
assigned  to  the  4th  infantry,  and  served  in  various
parts  of  the  southern  states  for  four  years,  when
he  was  appointed  1st  lieutenant  in  the  1st  dragoons.
He  was  promoted  captain,  3  March,  1837,  and  dur-
ing nearly  the  whole  of  the  succeeding  twelve  years
was  engaged  on  frontier  duty,  serving  with  Gen.
Henry  Leavenworth  against  the  Indians  in  the
southwest,  and  with  Gen.  Stephen  Kearny  in  the
conquest  of  New  Mexico  and  California,  and  raised
the  first  American  flag  over  Santa  Fe.  When  Gen.
Kearny's  force  reached  San  Diego  on  the  Pacific
coast  in  January,*  1847,  Swords,  who  was  the  quar-
termaster, went  to  the  Sandwich  islands  and  ob-
tained clothing  and  supplies  for  the  soldiers.  He
became  captain  and  assistant  quartermaster,  7  July,
1838,  major,  21  April,  1846,  and  lieutenant-colonel
and  deputy  quartermaster-general,  3  Aug.,  1861.  He
was  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Army  of  the  West
in  1846-'7,  was  engaged  at  San  Pasqual,  Cal.,  6  Dec,
1846,  and  at  Vera  Cruz,  and  was  bre vetted  lieuten-
ant-colonel, 30  May,  1848,  for  meritorious  services
in  the  enemy's  country.  He  was  chief  quarter-
master of  the  Departments  of  the  Cumberland  and
the  Ohio  in  1861-5.  was  engaged  in  the  battle  of
Chickamauga,  and  brevetted  brigadier-general  and
major-general,  U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865.  He
was  retired  from  active  service,  22  Feb.,  1869.

SYDENHAM,  Charles  Edward  Poulett
Thomson,  Baron,  governor-general  of  Canada,  b.
at  Waverley  Abbey,  Surrey,  England,  13  Sept.,
1799 ;  d.  in  Kingston,  Canada,  19  Sept.,  1841.  He
was  the  eldest  son  of  a  wealthy  merchant,  who  was
engaged  in  trading  with  Russia.  In  1819  he  be-
came a  clerk  in  his  father's  St.  Petersburg  house,
where  he  was  afterward  a  partner,  and  subsequent-
ly he  was  a  partner  in  the  London  firm,  and  sus-
tained losses  in  1825  by  investing  in  Mexican  mines.
He  represented  Dover  in  parliament  from  1826  till
1830,  when,  being  elected  for  that  constituency
and  Manchester,  he  decided  to  sit  for  the  latter.
In  parliament  he  was  an  early  and  resolute  advo-
cate of  the  principles  of  free-trade.  In  1830  he
was  appointed  vice-president  of  the  board  of  trade
and  treasurer  of  the  navy,  and  he  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  privy  council  on  23  Nov.  of  that  year.
In  July,  1834,  he  was  made  president  of  the  board
of  trade,  but  he  resigned  in  the  following  Novem-
ber, with  the  rest  of  Lord  Melbourne's  ministry,
and  in  April,  1835,  when  Viscount  Melbourne
formed  a  new  cabinet,  he  resumed  the  same  port-
folio, with  a  seat  in  the  cabinet,  which  he  hela  till
his  appointment  as  governor-general  of  Canada  in
August,  1839.  He  arrived  in  Canada  on  19  Oct.,
and  soon  afterward  visited  Montreal  and  other
parts  of  the  country,  and  held  sessions  of  the  legis-
latures of  Upper  and  of  Lower  Canada.  He  took
energetic  measures  to  suppress  the  insurrections  of
Louis  J.  Papineau  and  vV  illiam  L.  Mackenzie,  but
sought  to  remedy  the  causes  of  discontent.  With
diplomatic  tact  he  obtained  the  acquiescence  of
both  provinces  in  the  legislative  union,  which  was


consummated  when  he  took  the  oath  of  office  on
10  Feb.,  1841,  as  governor  of  Canada  under  the  act
of  union  that  was  passed  by  the  British  parliament
in  July,  1840.  He  also  exerted  himself  to  complete
public  works.  He  was  raised  to  the  peerage,  10
Aug.,  1840,  by  the  title  of  Baron  Sydenham  of  To-
ronto, as  a  mark  of  appreciation  of  the  successful
manner  in  which  he  had  administered  the  govern-
ment of  Canada.  While  riding  near  Kingston,  5
Sept.,  1841,  he  fell  from  his  horse  and  sustained  in-
juries that,  though  not  in  themselves  fatal,  re-
sulted in  death.  He  was  appointed  knight  grand
cross  of  the  Order  of  the  Bath,  19  Aug.,  1841.  His
"  Memoirs  "  were  published  by  his  brother,  George
Poulett  Scrope  (London,  1843).

SYKES,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Dover,  Del.,  9
Oct.,  1822;  d.  in  Brownsville,  Tex.,  9  Feb.,  1880.
He  was  appointed  from  Maryland  to  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  and  on  his  graduation  in  1842
was  assigned  to
the  3d  infantry,
with  which  be
served  in  the  latter
part  of  the  Flori-
da war,  and  then
in  the  west  and  in
Texas.  He  was
promoted  1st  lieu-
tenant, 21  Sept.,
1846,  and  during
the  Mexican  war
was  engaged  at
Monterey,  Vera
Cruz,  Cerro  Gor-
do (where  he  was
brevetted  captain
for  gallantry),
Contreras,  Churu-
busco,  and  the
capture  of  the  city
of  Mexico.  He  was
commissary  of  Gen.  Twiggs's  division  in  Mexico  in
1847-'8,  and  was  then  on  frontier  and  garrison  duty
till  the  civil  war,  taking  part  in  skirmishes  with  the
Apaches  in  1854,  and  in  the  Navajo  expedition  of
1859,  and  reaching  the  rank  of  captain  on  30  Sept.,
1855.  He  became  major  of  the  14th  infantry,  14
May,  1861,  was  at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and
then  commanded  the  regular  infantry  in  Washing-
ton till  March,  1862,  and  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  28  Sept.,  1861.  He  took
part  in  the  peninsula  campaign  at  the  head  of
the  division  of  regulars  in  Fitz-John  Porter's
corps,  receiving  the  brevet  of  colonel  for  gallantry
at  Gaines's  Mills,  and  in  the  succeeding  operations
of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  becoming  major-
general  of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  and  com-
manding the  5th  corps  after  the  battle  of  Chancel-
lorsville.  He  was  at  the  head  of  this  corps  at
Gettysburg,  and  so  continued  till  20  April,  1864,
when  he  was  ordered  to  Kansas.  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general,
U.  S.  army,  for  services  at  Gettysburg,  and  major-
general  for  "  gallant  and  meritorious  services  in
the  field  "  during  the  war.  He  had  reached  the
regular  army  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  on  16  Oct.,
1863,  and  on  12  Jan.,  1868,  he  became  colonel  of
the  20th  infantry.  From  this  time  till  his  death
he  commanded  various  posts,  and  after  1877  he
was  in  charge  of  Fort  Brown,  Tex.  On  motion
of  Senator  Burnside,  congress  appropriated  $1,000
for  the  removal  of  his  remains  to  the  cemetery  at
West  Point,  where  he  now  lies  buried,  and  where
a  fine  monument  has  been  erected  to  his  memory
by  his  many  friends.


/-^O Z^^-4


O*/


SYKES


SYMINGTON


15


SYKES,  James,  physician,  b.  near  Dover,  Del.,
27  March,  1761 ;  d.  there,  18  Oct.,  1822.  His
father,  James,  held  several  offices  in  the  state
during  and  after  the  Revolution,  and  was  a  dele-
gate to  congress  in  1777-8.  The  son  studied  at
Williams  college,  and  afterward  attended  medical
lectures  at  Philadelphia.  After  four  years'  prac-
tice at  Cambridge,  Md.,  he  returned  to  Dover,
where  he  became  renowned  as  a  surgeon.  Prom
1814  till  1820  he  resided  in  New  York.  He  was
often  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  over  which  he
presided  for  nearly  fifteen  years,  and  he  was  acting
governor  of  Delaware  in  1801-'2.

SYLVESTER,  Herbert  Milton,  author  b.  in
Lowell,  Mass.,  20  Feb.,  1849.  He  was  fitted  to  en-
ter college  at  Bridgeton  academy,  Bridgeton,  Me.,
but  entered  the  law-office  of  William  Pitt  Fessen-
den  in  Portland,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
April,  1872,  and  settled  in  Boston,  Mass.  He  has
the  reputation  of  being  a  good  landscape  artist.
He  has  published  "  Prose  Pastorals  "  (Boston,  1887)
And  "  Homestead  Highways "  (1888),  and  is  now
(1888)  engaged  upon  a  novel  descriptive  of  New
England  country  life.  He  has  in  press  "  Purpoo-
dack,"  dealing  with  the  early  settlement  of  Casco
bay,  a  nature-book  entitled  "  Fallow  Fields,"  and
a  boy's  book  of  adventure.

SYLVESTER,  James  Joseph,  English  author,
b.  in  London,  England,  3  Sept.,  1814.  He  was
graduated  at  Cambridge,  became  a  professor  of
natural  philosophy  at  University  college,  London,
and  was  made  a  member  of  the  Royal  society  in
1839.  He  came  to  this  country  and  held  the
chair  of  mathematics  in  the  University  of  Virginia
in  1841-'2,  and  was  appointed  to  a  similar  profes-
sorship at  the  Royal  military  academy,  Woolwich,
in  1855.  He  was  professor  of  mathematics  at
Johns  Hopkins  university,  Baltimore,  in  1876-'83,
and  in  December,  1883,  was  elected  Savilian  pro-
fessor of  geometry  at  Oxford.  He  is  a  member  of
many  learned  societies  both  in  Europe  and  this
country,  received  the  medal  of  the  Royal  socie-
ty in  1860,  and  the  Copley  medal  in  1880,  and
has  been  the  recipient  of  honorary  degrees  from
various  colleges.  He  was  the  founder  and  the
first  editor  of  the  "  American  Journal  of  Mathe-
matics," is  the  author  of  a  large  number  of  im-
portant scientific  memoirs,  112  of  which,  published
previous  to  1863,  are  in  the  Royal  society's  index
of  scientific  papers.  He  has  given  a  theory  of
versification  in  a  volume  entitled  "  Laws  of  Verse  "
(London,  1870) ;  has  invented  the  plagrograph,  an
instrument  which,  in  addition  to  altering  the  mag-
nitude of  an  object,  possesses  the  property  of  rotat-
ing its  image  through  any  desired  angle ;  the  geo-
metrical fan,  which  has  been  applied  to  the  con-
struction of  a  cheap  astronomical  spectroscope;
and  other  geometrico-mechanical  instruments.  He
has  developed  a  method  of  transferring  circular
into  rectilinear  or  parallel  motion,  based  upon  the
discovery  of  a  French  engineer,  thereby  adding
immensely  to  the  resources  of  the  mechanician.  In
December,  1885,  Prof.  Sylvester  made  known  his
theory  of  reciprocants,  which,  it  is  claimed,  more
than  doubles  the  resources  of  algebra.

SYLVESTER,  Nathaniel  Bartlett,  author,  b.
in  Denmark,  Lewis  co.,  N.  Y.,  22  Feb.,  1825.  Both
his  grandfathers  were  soldiers  of  the  Revolution.
He  received  his  early  education  at  the  Denmark
academy,  studied  law  at  Lowville,  N.  Y.,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  at  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  5  April,  1852.
He  founded  in  1856  and  edited  for  two  years  a
newspaper  at  Lowville,  N.  Y.,  which  is  still  pub-
lished there  as  the  "  Lewis  County  Democrat,"  and
in  1866,  having  been  appointed  a  commissioner  of


the  U.  S.  circuit  court,  he  removed  to  Troy,  N.  Y.,
where  he  now  (1888)  resides.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Historical  Sketches  of  Northern  New  York  and
the  Adirondack  Wilderness  "  (Troy,  1877) ;  "  His-
tory of  Saratoga  County,  N.  Y."  (Philadelphia,
1878) ;  "  History  of  Rensselaer  County,  N.  Y."
(1879);  "History  of  the  Connecticut  Vallev  in
Massachusetts"  (Troy,  1879);  "History  of  Ulster
County,  N.  Y."  (Philadelphia,  1880);  "Indian  Le-
gends of  Saratoga  and  the  Upper  Hudson  Valley  "
(1884) ;  and  "  Historical  Narratives  of  the  Upper
Hudson,  Lake  George,  and  Lake  Champlain "
(Philadelphia,  ,1888).

SYLVIE,  Edouard  (sil-vee),  French  naturalist,
b.  in  Riom,  Auvergne,  in  1670;  d.  in  Lyons  in
1739.  He  studied  in  the  College  Louis  le  Grand
at  Paris,  entered  the  church,  and  was  appointed  by
the  king  to  a  rich  abbey  in  Lyons.  Devoting  his
leisure  time  to  the  study  of  mathematics  and  natu-
ral history,  he  presented  several  valuable  memoirs
to  the  Academy  of  sciences,  which  induced  that
body  to  propose  him  to  the  king  for  a  mission  to
South  America.  Louis  XIV.  placed  a  man-of-war
at  Sylvie's  disposal  in  order  to  facilitate  his  work,
and  from  1701  till  1703  he  visited  Santo  Domingo
and  several  ports  of  the  Caribbean  sea,  prepared
a  chart  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  made  valuable
observations.  In  the  following  year  he  visited
Guiana,  Brazil,  Montevideo,  and  Buenos  Ayres,
landed  on  Staten  island,  and  made  the  ascent  of  its
snowy  range  of  mountains.  Doubling  Cape  Horn,
he  coasted  Chili  and  Peru  to  Callao,  and,  penetrat-
ing into  the  interior,  explored  the  Andes.  Sylvie
afterward  returned  to  the  West  Indies,  and  so-
journed several  months  in  Santo  Domingo,  occu-
pied in  drawing  a  map  of  the  French  part  of  the
island.  His  vessel  arrived  at  La  Roche!  le,  15  Oct.,
1710,  and  Sylvie's  valuable  collections  were  pre-
sented to  the  Academy  of  sciences,  which  elected
him  a  corresponding  member.  His  works  include
"Explications  de  l'herbier  et  des  collections  rap-
portees  d'Amerique  par  l'Abbe  Edouard  Sylvie  "  (3
vols.,  Paris,  1711-13) ;  "  Relation  d'un  voyage  de
la  mer  du  Sud  aux  cotes  de  la  Guiane,  du  Bresil,
de  la  Terre  des  Etats,  du  Chili  et  du  Perou,  avec
une  description  de  la  cote  septentrionale  du  detroit
de  Le  Maire  "  (3  vols.,  1714-'16) ;  "  Voyage  a  travers
le  Golfe  du  Mexique,  suivi  d'une  description  des
lies  Antilles  de  l'Amerique,  et  en  particulier  de
l'ile  de  Saint  Domingue''  (2  vols.,  1720-'l);  and
"  Journal  des  observations  d'un  voyage  au  Perou
et  au  Chili "  (5  vols.,  1726-'8).

SYMINGTON,  Andrew  James,  Scottish  au-
thor, b.  in  Paisley,  Scotland,  27  July,  1825.  He
was  educated  at  the  grammar-school  of  his  native
place,  began  his  literary  career  at  an  early  age,  and
in  1844  contributed  translations  of  German  poetry
and  original  verses  to  Tait's  "Edinburgh  Maga-
zine." In  1859  he  accompanied  President  Paul  A.
Chadbourne,  of  Williams  college,  on  a  visit  to  Ice-
land, and  gave  the  results  of  his  journey  in  "  Pen
and  Pencil  Sketches  of  Faroe  and  Iceland  "  (Lon-
don, 1861).  In  1874-'5  Mr.  Symington  spent  a  year
in  this  country,  and  contributed  to  several  Ameri-
can journals.  As  author  of  Blackie  and  Sons'  series
of  "  Men  of  Light  and  Leading  "  in  1880,  he  wrote,
among  other  lives,  "  William  Cullen  Bryant,  with
Selections  from  his  Poems  and  other  Writings,"  and
"  William  Wordsworth :  a  Biographical  Sketch,  with
Selections  from  his  Writings  in  Poetry  and  Prose  "
(2  vols.,  Glasgow,  1881).  In  1881  he  prepared  selec-
tions from  the  speeches  of  President  Garfield  for  a
series  of  works  entitled  "  Talks  with  the  People  by
Men  of  Mark."  He  has  been  an  extensive  traveller,
in  1863  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society  of


16


SYMMES


SZKOLNY


northern  antiquaries,  Copenhagen,  and  in  1882  a
corresponding  member  of  the  New  York  genealogi-
cal and  biographical  society.  Among  other  works
he  has  published  "Harebell  Chimes,  or  Summer
Memories  and  Musings"  (1848):  "The  Beautiful
in  Nature,  Art.  and  Life  "  (1857) ;  "  The  Reason-
ableness of  Faith"  (1870) ;  "  Thomas  Chalmers:  the
Man,  his  Time  and  Work"  (1878):  and  "Capital
Hints  to  Boys  "  (1884).  Several  of  Mr.  Symington's
books  have  been  republished  in  this  country.

SYMMES,  John  Cleves,  jurist,  b.  on  Long
Island,  N.  Y.,  21  July,  1742 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  26  Feb.,  1814.  He  was  a  delegate  from  Dela-
ware to  the  Continental  congress  in  1785  and
1786,  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  New  Jersey,
and  afterward  chief  justice  of  the  same  state.  In
1787  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  Northwest  ter-
ritory. In  1788  he  obtained  from  the  government
a  grant  of  1,000,000  acres,  bounded  south  by  the
Ohio,  and  west  by  the  Miami,  and  was  the  founder
of  the  settlements  of  North  Bend,  and  Cincinnati
thereon.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Gov.  William
Livingston,  and  his  daughter  Anna  became  the
wife  of  William  H.  Harrison. — His  nephew,  John
Cleves,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Jersey  in  1780;  d.  in
Hamilton,  Ohio,  28  May,  1829,  entered  the  army  as
an  ensign  in  the  1st  infantry,  26  March,  1802,  was
a  captain  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  served  with
credit  at  the  battle  of  Niagara  and  in  the  sortie
from  Fort  Erie.  He  subsequently  resided  at  New-
port, Ky.,  and  devoted  himself  to  philosophical
pursuits.  In  1818  he  promulgated  his  theory  that
the  earth  is  a  hollow  sphere,  habitable  within,  and
open  at  the  poles  for  the  admission  of  light,  and
containing  within  it  six  or  seven  concentric  hollow
spheres,  also  open  at  the  poles.  He  wrote  and
spoke  on  the  subject  of  his  singular  hypothesis,
and  petitioned  congress  in  1822  and  1823  to  fit  out
an  expedition  to  test  the  truth  of  his  theory.  Dur-
ing the  winters  of  1826-'7  he  lectured  on  it  before
the  students  and  faculty  of  Union  college ;  but  it
was  received  with  general  ridicule,  and  the  sup-
posed aperture  at  the  north  pole  was  popularly
called  "Symmes's  hole."  He  published  "Theory
of  Concentric  Spheres  "  (Cincinnati,  1826).  An  ab-
stract of  Symmes's  theory  and  arguments  appeared
in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly  "  for  April,  1873.  In  1876
Symmes's  son,  Americus  Vespucius,  revived  his
theory. — Another  nephew  of  the  first  John  Cleves,
Peyton  Short,  poet,  b.  in  Sussex  county,  N.  J.,  in
1793 ;  d.  in  Mount  Auburn,  near  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
27  July,  1861,  went  to  Ohio  in  his  childhood  as  a
pioneer,  became  registrar  of  the  land-office  at  Cin-
cinnati in  1827,  and  in  1830-50  was  a  member  of
the  board  of  health  of  that  city.  He  was  one  of  the
trustees  of  the  old  Cincinnati  college,  and  a  sup-
porter of  the  Western  college  of  teachers  which
met  annually  at  Cincinnati  from  1833  till  1845.
He  wrote  a  life  of  his  uncle,  not  yet  published.

SYMMES,  Zechariah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Canter-
bury, England,  5  April,  1599 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  4  Feb.,  1671.  He  came  from  England  in
1634,  and  was  ordained  as  teacher  in  the  church  at
Charlestown,  Mass.,  on  22  Dec.  of  that  year,  suc-
ceeding Thomas  James  as  pastor  when  the  latter
was  dismissed  on  11  March,  1636.  During  his  min-
istry the  Antinomian  controversy  culminated  in
the  banishment  of  John  Wheelwright  and  the  dis-
missal of  his  adherents  from  the  church.  See
"  The  Symmes  Memorial,"  containing  a  sketch  of
his  life  and  a  genealogy,  by  John  Adams  Vinton
(Boston,  1873). — His  grandson,  Thomas,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Bradford,  Mass.,  1  Feb.,  1678 ;  d.  6  Oct.,
1725,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1698,  and
was  minister  of  Boxford  from  December,  1702,  till


1708,  when  he  succeeded  his  father,  Zechariah,  as
second  minister  at  Bradford.  He  possessed  a  strong
mind  and  much  learning,  and,  besides  occasional
sermons,  published  "  Joco-Serious  Dialogue  on
Singing"  (1723);  and  "  Historical  Memoirs  of  the
Fight  at  Piggwacket,  9  May,  1725,"  with  a  sermon
on  the  death  of  Capt.  John  Lovewell  (1725 ;  repub-
lished with  notes  by  Nathaniel  Bouton,  Concord,
N.  H.,  1861).  See  an  account  of  his  life  by  Rev.
John  Brown,  to  which  is  appended  his  advice  to  his
children  and  to  the  members  of  his  church  (1726).

SYMONDS,  William  Law,  author,  b.  in  Ray-
mond, Cumberland  co..  Me.,  in  April,  1833 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  18  Jan.,  1862.  He  was  graduated
at  Bowdoin  in  1854,  studied  theology  at  Cambridge
divinity-school  for  two  years,  and  occupied  the.
pulpit  of  a  Unitarian  church  in  Chicopee,  Mass.,
for  several  months.  He  then  went  to  New  York
city  and  engaged  in  literary  pursuits,  contributing
to  magazines  and  newspapers,  and  producing  many
hundred  cyclopaedic  articles  on  philosophical,  his-
torical, and  biographical  subjects.  He  also  took
charge  temporarily  of  the  Astor  librarv.

SYNGE,  Millfngton  Henry,  British  author,
b.  in  England  about  1820.  He  was  a  captain  of
roval  engineers,  and  was  employed  on  the  works  at
Ottawa  in  1848.  He  published  "  Canada  in  1848  "
(London,  1848);  "Great  Britain  One  Empire"
(1852);  "The  Country  vs.  The  Company"  (1861);
and  "  The  Colony  of  Rupert's  Land  "  (1863).

SYPHER,  Josiah  Rhinehart,  journalist,  b.  in
Liverpool,  Perry  co.,  Pa.,  12  April,  1832.  He  was
graduated  at  Union  college  in  1858,  and,  after  mak-
ing a  tour  of  the  United  States,  studied  law  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  in  1862.
While  he  was  travelling  he  contributed  to  the  Lan-
caster "  Express,"  and  he  was  its  associate  editor
while  studying  law.  In  1862  he  was  engaged  as
war-correspondent  of  the  New  York  "  Tribune,"
and  he  was  afterward  in  charge  of  the  correspond-
ence in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  In  the  winter
of  1865  he  became  associate  editor  of  the  "  Trib-
une," and  in  1870  he  established  the  "Pennsylva-
nia State  Journal "  at  Harrisburg,  but  at  the  end
of  six  months  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in
Philadelphia.  He  has  advocated  public  education
and  temperance  reform,  and,  in  addition  to  articles
for  the  press  and  several  school-books,  has  pub-
lished "  History  of  the  Pennsylvania  Reserve
Corps "  (Lancaster,  1865),  and  "  School  History
of  Pennsylvania  "  (Philadelphia,  1868).

SZABAD,  Emeric,  author,  b.  in  Hungary  about
1822.  He  was  secretary  under  the  Hungarian  na-
tional government  in  1849,  was  a  friend  of  Louis
Kossuth,  and  gained  his  first  experience  as  a  sol-
dier in  his  native  country.  He  subsequently  served
in  Italy  under  Garibaldi,  and  at  the  opening  of  the
civil  war  came  to  this  country  and  was  appointed
on  the  staff  of  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont.  He  served
through  the  war,  being  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Daniel
E.  Sickles  at  Gettysburg,  and  afterward  on  that  of
Gen.  Gouverneur  K.  Warren.  He  wrote  a  series
of  letters  on  the  United  States  army  and  its  man-
agement for  the  New  York  "  Tribune,"  and  has
published  "  Hungary,  Past  and  Present "  (London,
1854) ;  "  State  Policy  of  Modern  Europe  from  the
Beginning  of  the  Sixteenth  Century  to  the  Present
Time  "  (2  vols.,  1857) ;  and  "  Modern  War :  its  The-
ory and  Practice  "  (New  York,  1863).

SZKOLNY,  John,  Polish  navigator  of  the  15th
century.  His  name  was  also  variously  written
Scolve,  Skolnus,  and  Kolno.  He  was  commander
of  a  Danish  vessel  on  which,  according  to  different
accounts,  he  reached  the  northwestern  coast  of
Greenland,  or  the  coast  of  Labrador,  in  1476.


TABARET


TACHE


17


TABARET,  Joseph  Henry,  Canadian  educa-
tor, b.  in  Saint-Marcellin,  department  of  L'Isere,
France,  10  April,  1828  ;  d.  in  Ottawa,  28  Feb.,
1886.  He  studied  theology,  was  ordained  a  priest
at  Marseilles,  came  to  Canada  as  a  missionary  of
the  Oblates  in  1851,  and  in  1853  established  a  school
at  Ottawa,  which,  under  his  superintendence,  has
developed  into  the  University  of  Ottawa.  He  was
president  of  this  institution  at  his  death,  and  had
been  at  its  head,  both  as  a  school  and  college,  since
its  foundation,  except  in  1866-'7,  when,  as  provin-
cial of  Oblates  of  North  America,  he  visited  the
Oblate  missions  in  Canada  and  the  United  States.
In  1854  the  governor-general  nominated  him  a
member  of  the  senate  of  Toronto  university.  He
was  a  member  of  the  council  of  public  instruction
of  Ontario.  In  1862  he  was  made  vicar-general  of
Ottawa,  and  in  1879  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  the  pope.  He  introduced  a  comprehensive
system  of  study  into  Ottawa  university.

TABOADA,  Antonio  (tah-bo'-ah-dah),  Argen-
tine soldier,  b.  in  the  province  of  Santiago  del  Es-
tero,  31  Aug.,  1815.  He  began  life  as  a  journalist,
and,  being  persecuted  for  his  liberal  tendencies
by  the  dictator  Rosas,  emigrated  to  Montevideo.
He  served  later  under  Gen.  Lavalle,  took  part  in
the  campaign  in  the  province  of  Entre-Rios,  was
captured  after  the  defeat  at  Quebracho-Herrado,
and  imprisoned  in  Buenos  Ayres,  but  escaped  in
disguise  to  Chili.  Later  he  returned  secretly  to
his  province,  where  he  lived  quietly  till  Rosas's
downfall,  and  in  1852  became  its  governor.  He
put  down  an  insurrection  at  Tucuman,  and  defeat-
ed with  a  few  hundred  men  a  division  of  5,000
under  Gen.  Gutierrez.  In  1856  he  escorted  through
the  Chaco  desert  the  U.  S.  exploring  expedition
under  Lieut.  Thomas  J.  Page,  and  they  explored
the  Salado  river  as  far  as  Santa  Fe,  Taboada  con-
cluding also  in  the  course  of  the  voyage  arrange-
ments with  the  principal  caciques  that  assured
Seace  along  the  borders.  In  1861  he  supported
»r.  Derqui  and  contributed  to  terminate  the  strife
between  the  governors  of  the  provinces  and  the
central  government.  He  was  elected  senator  in
1865,  and  commanded  the  army  in  1867  against
the  insurgents  in  the  northern  provinces,  defeat-
ing Felipe  Varela  at  Pozo  de  Vargas.  In  1868  he
was  a  candidate  for  president,  but  was  defeated.

TABOR,  Horace  Austin  Warner,  senator,  b.
in  Holland,  Orleans  co.,  Vt.,  30  Nov.,  1830.  He
received  a  common-school  education,  and  learned
the  trade  of  a  stone-cutter  in  Massachusetts,  but  in
1855  he  removed  to  Kansas  and  engaged  in  farm-
ing, and  was  an  active  member  of  the  Free-soil
f tarty.  In  1856  he  was  a  member  of  the  Topeka
egislature  that  was  dispersed  at  the  point  of  the
bayonet  by  order  of  President  Pierce.  In  1859  he
removed  to  Colorado,  and  the  following  spring  he
settled  in  California  Gulch  (now  Leadville).  There
he  worked  in  the  mines  until  1865,  when  he  en-
gaged in  business,  and  combined  both  occupations
till  May,  1878.  During  the  latter  month  August
Rische  and  George  F.  Hook,  to  whom  he  had  ad-
vanced money,  discovered  what  was  afterward
known  as  the  "  Little  Pittsburg "  mine.  By  the
terms  of  his  agreement,  Mr.  Tabor  was  entitled  to
a  one-third  interest,  which  he  sold  the  following
year  for  $1,000,000.  This  capital  he  invested  in
mines,  banking  stock,  and  other  remunerative
property,  which  greatly  increased  his  wealth.  In
October,  1878,  he  was  elected  the  first  lieutenant-


fovernor  of  Colorado,  and  he  held  the  office  until
anuary,  1884.  He  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  to
fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Henry  M.  Teller,  re-
signed, and  served  from  2  Feb.  till  4  March.  Be-
sides the  investments  mentioned  above,  Senator
Tabor  has  purchased  175,000  acres  of  copper  lands
in  Texas,  and  4,600,000  acres  of  grazing  lands  in
southern  Colorado,  and  is  interested  in  irrigating
canals  and  other  enterprises  that  give  employment
to  a  large  number  of  laborers.  He  has  also  ob-
tained from  the  republic  of  Honduras  a  grant  of
every  alternate  section  of  land  for  400  miles  bor-
dering on  the  Patook  river.  On  this  tract  are
immense  groves  of  mahogany,  ebony,  and  similar
valuable  woods,  orchards  of  bananas  and  other
tropical  fruits,  together  with  deposits  of  gold,  sil-
ver, and  coal.  In  addition  to  the  section-grant,  he
has  secured  a  mineral  grant  of  150  square  miles  in
the  interior.  Altogether  Mr.  Tabor  is  probably
one  of  the  largest  owners  of  land  in  the  world.

TAC,  Sixtus  Le,  French  missionary,  b.  in
France  in  1649 ;  d.  in  Canada,  6  July,  1699.  He
belonged  to  the  Recollet  Franciscan  order,  came  to
Canada  on  9  July,  1676,  and  had  charge  of  Charles-
bourg,  near  Quebec,  till  1678.  He  then  went  to
Three  Rivers,  where  he  remained  till  13  May,  1683.
During  this  time  he  kept  a  register  of  all  baptisms,
marriages,  etc.,  in  Three  Rivers,  as  well  as  of  those
that  occurred  in  settlements  that  extended  over
a  wide  tract  of  country.  This  register  has  often
been  found  useful  in  connection  with  local  and
general  Canadian  history.  In  1684  he  was  ap-
pointed director  of  the  third  order  of  St.  Francis
and  master  of  novices  in  the  Convent  of  Notre
Dame  des  Anges  near  Quebec.  In  1689  he  took
part  in  founding  missions  at  Placentia  and  other
places  in  Newfoundland.  He  complained  that  the
governor  of  that  colony  threw  every  kind  of  diffi-
culty in  his  way,  and  sailed  for  France  the  same
year  to  obtain  redress,  but  returned  to  Canada  in
1690  or  1691.  He  wrote  a  history  of  Canada  which
long  remained  in  manuscript,  but  it  was  edited
and  published  by  Eugene  Reveilland  with  notes
and  appendix.  The  appendix  consists  of  original
documents  heretofore  unpublished,  some  of  which
are  very  valuable.  The  work  is  entitled  "His-
toire  de  la  Nouvelle  France,  ou  Canada,  depuis  sa
decouverte  (mil  cinq  cents  quatre)  jusqu'en  l'an
mil  six  cents  trente  deux  "  (Paris,  1888).

TACHE,  Sir  Etienne  Paschal  (tah-shay),  Ca-
nadian statesman,  b.  in  St.  Thomas,  Lower  Canada,
5  Sept.,  1795;  d.  there,  29  July,  1865.  He  served
during  the  war  of  1812,  and  afterward  studied
medicine  and  practised  successfully  till  1841,  when
he  entered  parliament.  He  was  deputy  adjutant-
general  in  1847-'8,  commissioner  of  public  works
in  1848-'9,  and  on  21  April,  1856,  was  made  speaker
of  the  legislative  council,  which  post  he  resigned  in
November,  1857.  In  November,  1858,  in  recog-
nition of  his  services  he  was  knighted  by  the  queen
at  Windsor  castle,  and  was  appointed  jointly  with
Sir  Allan  N.  MacNab  to  the  honorary  rank  of
colonel  in  the  British  army,  and  aide-de-camp  to
the  queen.  He  published  "  Du  developpement  de
la  force  physique  chez  1'homme  "  (Montreal,  1829),
"  Reflexions  sur  l'organisation  des  volontaires
(Quebec,  1863),  and  "  Bataille  navale  du  Lac  Cham-
plain  en  1814."— His  nephew,  Joseph  Charles,
Canadian  author,  b.  in  Kamouraska,  Quebec,  24
Dec,  1820,  studied  at  the  Seminary  of  Quebec,  was
graduated  as  a  physician  in  1844,  and  was  for  some


18


TACHE


TAC6N


time  attached  to  the  Marine  hospital  at  Rimouski.
He  sat  in  the  legislative  assembly  from  1847  till
1857,  and  represented  Canada  at  the  Paris  ex-
hibition of  1855,  and  at  that  of  London  in  1867.  He
was  a  member  of  the  board  of  prison-inspectors
and  deputy  minister  of  agriculture  and  statistics,
contributed  largely  to  the  Canadian  press,  and  was
editor  of  the  "  Courrier  du  Canada  "  from  1857  till
1859.  Mr.  Tache  was  British  delegate  from  Canada
at  the  International  sanitary  conference  of  1881  at
Washington,  and  has  been  on  several  important
commissions  in  Canada.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  L.  from  Laval  universitv  in  1883,  and  the  con-
federation medal  in  1886.  lie  has  taken  an  active
part  in  charitable  and  religious  movements  in  Can-
ada. While  Canadian  commissioner  at  the  Paris
exhibition  in  1855,  he  published  "  Esquisse  sur  le
Canada,"  a  work  that  deals  with  the  past  and  present
condition  of  the  country.  Its  object  was  to  make
Canada  better  known  in  France,  especially  as  a  field
of  emigration,  and  in  this  respect  it  was  very  suc-
cessful. His  other  works  are  "  Notice  historio-
graphique  sur  la  fete  celebree  a  Quebec  le  16  juin,
1859,  jour  du  200me  anniversaire  de  Farrivee
de  Mgr.  de  Laval  en  Canada"  (Quebec,  1859);
"  L'Canada  et  l'exposition  universelle  "  (1856) ;  "  La
pleiade  rouge,"  a  political  satire  (1854) ;  "  Le  de-
fricheur  de  langue,"  a  burlesque  tragedy  in  verse  ;
"  Tenure  seigneuriale  en  Canada,  et  projet  de  com-
mutation, suivi  de  tableaux  relatifs  aux  fiefs  et
seigneuries  du  Bas-Canada "  (1854)  ;  and  "  Des
provinces  de  l'Amerique  du  Nord  et  d'une  union
federale  "  (1858).  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  "  Soirees  Canadiennes,"  in  which  he  published
two  purely  literary  works  entitled  "  Trois  legendes
de  mon  pays,  ou  l'evangile  ignore,  l'evangile  preche,
l'evangile  accepte,"  and  "  Forestiers  et  voyageurs."
— Joseph  Charles's  brother,  Alexander  A htonine,
Canadian  R.  C.  archbishop,  b.  in  Riviere-du-Loup,
Canada,  23  July,  1823,  was  graduated  at  the  Col-
lege of  St.  Hyacinth,  and  studied  theology  in  the
Seminary  of  Montreal.  He  returned  to  St.  Hya-
cinth as  professor  of  mathematics,  but,  after  teach-
ing a  few  months,  went  to  Montreal  and  became  a
monk  of  the  Oblate  order.  He  volunteered  at  once
for  missionary  service  among  the  Indians  of  the
Red  river,  and,  after  a  journey  of  sixty-two  days,
during  which  he  encountered  sufferings  and  priva-
tions of  every  kind,  reached  St.  Boniface  on  25  Aug.,
1845.  He  was  raised  to  the  priesthood  on  12  Oct.
following,  being  the  first  priest  ordained  on  the
banks  of  the  Red  river.  In  July,  1846,  he  set  out  for
lle-a-la-Crosse,  and,  after  spending  a  few  months  at
this  mission,  he  went  to  labor  among  the  Indians
that  lived  around  the  lakes,  several  hundred  miles
to  the  northwest.  On  one  of  his  journeys  he  slept
for  sixty  nights  in  the  open  air  in  winter,  and  he
often  travelled  thirty  or  forty  leagues  with  the
temperature  twenty-five  or  thirty  degrees  below
zero,  in  the  hope  of  converting  a  single  Indian.
His  zeal  and  talents  became  known  throughout
Canada,  and,  although  only  twenty-six  years  old,
he  was  recommended  for.  the  post  of  coadjutor
bishop  of  St.  Boniface  in  1850.  lie  was  summoned
to  France  by  the  superior  of  the  Oblate  Fathers,
and  consecrated  bishop  of  Arath  in  partibus  in
the  cathedral  of  Viviers  on  23  Nov.,  1851.  After
a  visit  to  Rome  he  returned  to  Canada  in  February,
1852,  and  on  10  Sept.  reached  Ile-a-la-Crosse,  which
he  had  determined  to  make  the  centre  of  his  labors
in  the  northwest.  He  set  about  founding  new
missions,  obtained  missionaries,  male  and  female,
to  aid  him,  and  many  schools,  colleges,  convents,
and  chapels  were  built.  Bishop  Taehe's  efforts
were  directed  also  to  the  establishment  of  a  French-


Canadian  population  in  the  northwest,  and  he  has
done  much  to  develop  and  strengthen  the  feel-
ing of  French-Canadian  nationality  among  the  in-
habitants of the
Red  river  country.
He  became  bishop
of  St.  Boniface,  7
June, 1853. In
1869 he  laid the
grievances of the
Metis before the
Canadian govern-
ment, and  endeav-
ored, without  sue- -  "*
cess, to persuade
the latter not to

make  any  changes  W^  i

in  the  political  sit-  HE  !

uation  of  the  in-  j }

habitants of the  *

Red  river  without -fL  ^&:  c^&A.c&l
consulting them.
He  then  sailed  for

Italy  in order to  <yd

take  part  in  the
council  of  the  Vatican  at  Rome.  Meanwhile  the
troubles  came  to  acrisis,  and  the  Canadian  ministry,
alarmed  at  the  attitude  of  the  Metis,  and  regretting
too  late  that  they  had  not  followed  his  advice,  begged
him  to  come  to  their  assistance.  He  at  once  returned
to  Canada,  and  reached  the  Red  river  on  9  March.
1870,  empowered,  in  the  name  of  the  imperial  and
Dominion  governments,  to  offer  a  full  pardon  for
all  political  offences  committed  during  the  insur-
rection. St.  Boniface  was  erected  into  a  metro-
politan see  on  22  Sept.,  1871,  and  Bishop  Tache  was
appointed  archbishop.  He  has  written  "  Vingt  an-
nees  de  missions  dans  le  nord-ouest  de  l'Amerique  "
(Montreal,  1866),  and  "  Esquisse  sur  le  nord-ouest
de  l'Amerique"  (Montreal,  1869).  The  latter  has
been  translated  into  English  by  Capt.  D.  R.  Cam-
eron, and  is  considered  the  most  complete  work  on
the  resources  of  the  Red  river,  the  nature  of  its
products,  and  the  different  races  of  men  and  ani-
mals that  inhabit  the  country.  Archbishop  Tache  is
a  contributor  to  the  "  Annales  de  la  propagation  de
la  foi,"  published  by  the  Oblate  Fathers  in  France.
TACON,  Miguel  (tan-cone'),  Spanish  sold le r,  b.
in  Cartagena,  Colombia,  in  1777 ;  d.  in  Madrid,
Spain,  in  1855.  He  first  served  in  the  navy,  but
in  1806  he  entered  the  army  with  the  commission
of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  appointed  in  1809
governor  of  Popayan.  When  the  Spanish  posses-
sions in  South  America  began  to  rise  against  the
home  government,  Tacon  took  the  field  against  the
patriots,  and,  having  been  defeated  in  Palace,  5
April,  1811,  he  fled  to  Peru,  where  he  remained
until  1819.  He  was  then  made  brigadier  and  sent
to  Spain  by  the  viceroy  of  Peru  to  inform  the
Madrid  government  of  the  bad  condition  of  the
struggle  against  the  patriot  forces. He  was  ap-

F»ointed  governor  of  Malaga,  and  in  1834  was  made
ieutenant-general  and  appointed  governor-general
of  Cuba.  During  his  administration,  from  7  June,
1834,  to  23  April,  1838,  he  did  much  that  was  good
together  with  many  acts  of  despotism.  He  re-
pressed the  criminal  classes,  reformed  the  morals
of  the  island  greatly,  and  suppressed  corruption
among  public  officers  and  servants  of  the  govern-
ment. He  caused  the  construction  of  sewers  in
Havana,  paved  the  streets  of  the  city,  built  a  great
prison,  encouraged  the  construction  of  a  theatre,
which  was  named  for  him,  established  several  pub-
lic markets,  lighted  the  streets,  and  erected  many
public  buildings. But  during  his  administration


TAFEL


TAGLIABUE


19


the  slave-trade  increased  greatly,  and  more  slaves
weie  introduced  into  Cuba  in  the  four  years  of  his
rule  than  in  any  other  equal  period.  He  afterward
returned  to  Spain,  and  was  appointed  senator  for
Cadiz  in  1852,  but  his  failing  health  did  not  per-
mit him  to  accept  office.

TAFEL,  Johann  Friedrich  Leonhard,  educa-
tor, b.  in  Sulzbach,  WUrtemberg,  Germany,  6  Feb.,
1800.  He  was  graduated  at  Tubingen  in  1820,  and
was  professor  for  many  years  at  the  gymnasia  of
Stuttgart,  Ulm,  and  Schorndorf,  introducing  the
Hamiltonian  interlinear  method  of  teaching  lan-
guages, and  editing  several  periodicals,  among
which  was  the  "  Beobachter,"  a  daily  paper  devoted
to  the  interests  of  the  Liberal  party  (1849-'53).  He
came  to  this  country  in  1853,  was  for  three  years
professor  in  Urbana  university,  Ohio,  and  then  re-
moved to  St.  Louis,  Mo.  He  is  the  author  of  sev-
eral text-books  of  ancient  and  modern  languages,
translated  into  German  the  works  of  Xenophon
and  Dion  Cassius,  and  select  novels  of  Charles  Dick-
ens, William  M.  Thackeray,  and  James  Fenimore
Cooper,  and  published  "  Staat  und  Christenthum  "
(Tubingen,  1851) ;  "  Der  Christ  und  der  Atheist  "
(Philadelphia,  1856)  ;  and  with  his  son,  Ludwig  H.
Tafel.  a  "  German-English  and  English-German
Pocket  Dictionary"  (1870). — His  son,  Rudolph
Leonhard,  educator,  b.  in  Ulm,  Germany,  24  Nov.,
1831,  came  to  the  United  States  in  1847,  and  in
1860-1  was  teacher  of  French  and  German  in
Washington  university,  St.  Louis.  Mo.  He  held
the  chair  of  modern  languages  and  comparative
philology  there  from  1862  till  1868,  and  since  the
last-named  year  has  been  a  Swedenborgian  minis-
ter in  London,  England.  He  has  published  "  Latin
Pronunciation  and  the  Latin  Alphabet"  with  his
father  (New  York,  1860) ;  "  Investigation  into  the
Laws  of  English  Pronunciation  and  Orthography  "
(1862);  and  "Emanuel  Swedenborg  as  a  Philoso-
pher and  Man  of  Science  "  (Chicago,  1867).

TAFT,  Alphonso,  jurist,  b.  in  Townshend,  Vt.,  5
Nov.,  1810.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1833,
was  tutor  there  in  1835-7,  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1838,  and  after  1840  practised  in

Cincinnati,  Ohio,
where  he  won  rep-
utation in  his  pro-
fession. He  was
early  a  member  of
the  city  council,
and  also  for  many
years  of  the  Union
board  of  high-
schools.  He  was
a  delegate  to  the
Republican  na-
tional convention
in  1856,  and  in  the
same  year  a  candi-
date for  congress,
but  was  defeated
by  George  H.  Pen-
dleton. He  was
judge  of  the  su-
perior court  of  Cincinnati  from  1866  till  1872,
when  he  resigned,  to  associate  himself  in  practice
■with  two  of  his  sons.  In  1875  he  was  a  candidate
for  the  Republican  nomination  for  the  governor-
ship, biit  a  dissenting  opinion  that  he  had  delivered
on  the  question  of  the  Bible  in  the  public  schools
was  the  cause  of  much  opposition  to  him.  The
opinion  that  defeated  his  nomination  was  unani-
mously affirmed  by  the  supreme  court  of  Ohio,  and
is  now  the  law  of  the  state.  He  became  secretary
of  war,  on  8  March,  1876,  on  the  resignation  of


^£^4«r^^ S^f


Gen.  William  W.  Belknap,  and  on  22  May  follow-
ing was  transferred  to  the  attorney-generalship,
serving  till  the  close  of  President  Grant's  admin-
istration. Judge  Taft  was  appointed  U.  S.  min-
ister to  Austria,  26  April,  1882,  and  in  1884  was
transferred  to  Russia,  where  he  served  until  1  Aug.,
1885.  He  has  been  a  trustee  of  the  University  of
Cincinnati  since  its  foundation,  and  in  1872-82
served  on  the  corporation  of  Yale,  which  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1867.

TAFT,  Lorado,  sculptor,  b.  in  Elmwood,  Peo-
ria co.,  111.,  29  April.  1860.  He  was  graduated  at
Illinois  state  university,  Champaign,  111.,  in  1879,
studied  at  the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts,  Paris,  during
1880-'3,  and  afterward  with  Marius  Jean  Antoine
Mercie  and  others  for  two  years.  He  hfes  exe-
cuted several  busts  and  medallions,  a  statue  of
Schuyler  Colfax,  which  was  unveiled  in  Indian-
apolis in  1888,  and  reliefs  for  Michigan  regiment-
al monuments  on  the  Gettysburg  battle-field.  He
is  engaged  on  a  statue  of  Gen.  Grant  for  Fort
Leavenworth,  Kansas.  Mr.  Taft  is  instructor  in
sculpture  at  the  Chicago  art  institute.

TAGGART,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  London-
derry, N.  H.,  24  March,  1754  ;  d.  in  Colerain,  Mass.,
25  April,  1825.  His  father,  James,  came  from  Ire-
land to  this  country  when  he  was  eleven  years  old.
The  son  entered  the  junior  class  in  Dartmouth,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1774,  was  licensed  to
preach  in  the  Presbyterian  church  in  1776,  and  on
19  Feb.,  1777,  was  ordained  and  installed  as  pastor
of  a  church  in  Colerain,  Mass.  In  1802  he  per-
formed in  western  New  York  a  missionary  journey
of  about  three  months,  his  manuscript  journal  of
which  is  still  preserved.  In  1802  he  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  and  served,  by  repeated
re-election,  from  1803  till  1817.  His  protracted  ab-
sences from  his  charge  caused  dissatisfaction,  and
in  1818  he  resigned  his  pastorate,  though  he  after-
ward preached  occasionally.  When  he  entered
congress,  John  Randolph  of  Roanoke,  on  learning
that  Mr.  Taggart  was  a  clergyman,  instantly  quoted
to  him  from  I.  Samuel,  xvii.,  28 :  "  With  whom  hast
thou  left  those  few  sheep  in  the  wilderness?"  Mr.
Taggart  was  absent-minded  and  eccentric,  but  pos-
sessed a  very  retentive  and  accurate  memory.
While  he  was  in  college  he  was  reprimanded  for
inattention  by  a  professor,  who  had  seen  him  catch-
ing flies  during  a  lecture,  but  in  his  vindication  the
boy  immediately  repeated  a  great  part  of  what  his
instructor  had  said.  He  published  an  oration  on
the  death  of  Washington  (1800);  a  Fourth-of-July
oration  at  Conway  (1804) ;  "  Scriptural  Vindication
of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Final  Perseverance  of  all
True  Believers"  (1801);  a  "Treatise  on  the  Evi-
dences of  Christianity  "  (1811);  an  address  to  his
constituents  on  the  subject  of  impressments  (1813) ;
and  sermons  and  speeches.

TAGLIABUE,  Giuseppe,  instrument  -  maker,
b.  near  Como,  Italy,  10  Aug.,  1812  ;  d.  in  Mount
Vernon,  N.  Y.,  7  May,  1878.  He  was  educated  at
the  village  school,  and  was  sent  to  Como  to  learn
cabinet-making.  In  1826  he  went  to  London,  where
he  was  apprenticed  to  a  firm  of  meteorological  and
philosophical  instrument-makers.  He  settled  in
New  York  in  1833,  and  soon  acquired  the  reputa-
tion of  being  one  of  the  most  competent  instru-
ment-makers in  this  country.  His  hydrometer  for
the  proving  of  whiskey  was  adopted  by  the  U.  S.
internal  revenue  department  in  preference  to  all
others,  and  he  made  instruments  for  the  U.  S.  coast
survey.  He  made  a  great  variety  of  hydrometers,
including  original  forms  and  new  adaptations  to
meet  the  requirements  of  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence and  manufacture. Several  of  the  self-record-


TAILFER


TALBOT


ing  instruments  in  use  in  the  Central  park  meteor-
ological observatory  are  of  his  construction.

TAILFER,  Patrick,  colonist,  lived  in  the  18th
century.  He  was  a  physician  and  emigrated  to  the
new  colony  of  Georgia,  but  became  dissatisfied
with  the  conduct  of  affairs  there,  and  in  September,
1740,  left  the  province  and  went  to  Charleston,  S.  C.
Here,  with  Hugh  Anderson,  David  Douglass,  and
others,  he  printed  "  A  True  and  Historical  Narra-
tive of  the  Colony  of  Georgia  in  America  from  the
first  Settlement  thereof  until  the  Present  Period  "
(Charles-Town,  1741 ;  reprinted,  London,  1741).  In
this  he  accuses  Gen.  James  Oglethorpe  of  selfish-
ness, greed,  and  despotism.  Prof.  Moses  Coit  Ty-
ler says :  "  As  a  polemic  it  is  one  of  the  most  expert
pieces  of  writing  to  be  met  with  in  our  early  litera-
ture. It  never  blusters  or  scolds.  It  is  always  cool,
poised,  polite,  and  merciless."  But  many  authori-
ties call  it  spiteful  and  scurrilous,  and  speak  of
Tailfer  as  "  chief  of  a  club  of  malcontents.

TAIT,  Arthur  Fitzwilliam,  painter,  b.  at  Live-
sey  Hall,  near  Liverpool,  England,  5  Aug.,  1819.
He  studied  at  the  Royal  institution,  Manchester,
but  is  mainly  self-taught.  In  1850  he  came  to  the
United  States,  where  he  soon  attracted  attention
by  his  pictures  of  animal  life.  He  was  elected  an
associate  of  the  National  academy  in  1853,  and  an
academician  in  1858.  Mr.  Tait  has  studied  and
sketched  much  among  the  Adirondack  mountains,
and  several  of  his  hunting  scenes  are  laid  in  that  re-
gion. His  pieces  include  "'A  Duck  and  her  Young  "
(1868) ;  "  Ruffled  Grouse  "  (1869) ; "  Woodcock  Shoot-
ing," "  Snowed  in,"  and  "  Halt  on  the  Carry "
(1871) ;  "  Racquette  Lake  "  (1873) ;  «  There's  a  Good
Time  coming A  (1876);  "The  Portage";  "Jack  in
Office"  (1885);  "Thoroughbreds"  and  " Startled "
(1887) ;  and  "  A  Mother's  Solicitude"  (1888).  His
"  Quail  and  Young  "  (1856)  is  in  the  Corcoran  gal-
lery at  Washington.  Many  of  his  works  have  been
lithographed  or  engraved.

TAIT,  Charles,  senator,  b.  in  Louisa  county,
Va.,  in  1768;  d.  in  Wilcox  county,  Ala.,  7  Oct.,
1835.  He  removed  at  an  early  age  to  Georgia,
was  associated  with  William  H.  Crawford  in  the
management  of  Richmond  academy,  and  then,  hav-
ing been  admitted  to  the  bar,  practised  law  with
success.  He  was  judge  of  the  western  circuit  of
Georgia  from  1803  till  1809,  and  in  the  latter  year
was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat  in
place  of  John  Milledge,  who  had  resigned.  He
served  from  28  Dec,  1809,  till  3  March,  1819,  when
he  removed  to  Wilcox  county,  Ala.,  having  been
appointed  a  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  for
that  state.  He  resigned  this  office  in  1826.  Judge
Tait  was  an  able  supporter  of  the  administrations
of  Madison  and  Monroe.

TAIT,  John  Robinson,  artist,  b.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  14  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at  Bethany
college,  Va.,  in  1852,  after  which  he  went  to  Eu-
rope, remaining  for  three  years.  At  this  time  he
devoted  himself  mainly  to  literature,  sketching  and

Sainting  as  an  amateur.  He  published  "  Dolce  Far
fiente"  (Philadelphia,  1859),  and  "  European  Life,
Legend,  and  Landscape"  (1860).  In  1859  he  went
abroad  again,  and  studied  at  Dilsseldorf  under  Au-
gust Weber  and  Andreas  Achenbach  until  about
1871.  ■  He  received  the  first-class  medals  at  the
Cincinnati  industrial  exhibition  in  1871  and  1872.
In  1873  he  made  a  third  visit  to  Europe,  working
for  several  years  in  the  Tyrol  and  in  Munich,  un-
der Adolf  Lier  and  Hermann  Baisch.  In  1871  he
returned  to  the  United  States,  and  since  1876  he
has  resided  in  Baltimore.  As  a  member  of  the  com-
mittee of  the  second  Cincinnati  exposition,  he  de-
signed the  art  hall. His  works  include  "  Siebenge-


birge  "  (1865) ;  "  Lake  of  Wallenstadt  "  and  "  Mey-
ringen  "  (1866) ;  "  Lake  of  Four  Cantons  "  (1866),  in
the  Cincinnati  art  museum ;  "  Norwegian  Waterfall "
(1869) ;  "  Solitude  "  (1871) ;  "  A  Rainy  Day  "  (1874) ;
"  Under  the  Willows";  "  Vesper  Hour"  and  "  Tyro-
lean Cottage,"  both  exhibited  at  the  salon  (1876) ;
and  "  Noon  "  (1877).  His  "  Crossing  the  Brook  "
and  "  Landscape  and  Cattle  "  were  at  the  Centen-
nial exhibition,  Philadelphia.  He  has  contributed
to  magazines,  and  has  written  a  comedy  in  German,
"  Ein  aufrichtiger  Heirathsgesuch."

TAL  AM  ANTES,  Melchor  (tah-lah-man'-tays),
Peruvian  geographer,  b.  in  Lima  about  1750;  d.
in  Vera  Cruz,  Mexico,  in  1809.  He  studied  theol-
ogy in  the  University  of  San  Marcos,  Lima,  and,
after  receiving  the  degree  of  D.  D.,  entered  the
military  religious  order  of  Merced,  in  which  he
soon  rose  to  the  rank  of  superior  of  his  province.
His  favorite  study  was  geography,  in  which  he
soon  became  an  acknowledged  authority,  and  on
his  way  to  Spain  in  1806  he  stopped  in  Mexico,  to
study  documents  regarding  the  colonization  of  the
northern  provinces.  He  was  commissioned  by  the
viceroy,  Iturrigaray,  to  determine  the  boundary  of
the  viceroyalty  with  the  former  French  possession
of  Louisiana,  and  between  the  latter  and  Florida.
While  occupied  in  this  work,  he  was  implicated  in
Iturrigaray  s  plans  of  secession,  and  on  the  latter's
deposition,  15  Sept.,  1808,  Talamantes  was  arrest-
ed and  transported  to  Vera  Cruz,  where  he  died  of
yellow  fever.  His  manuscript,  "  Apuntamientos
para  deslindar  los  justos  limites  de  las  posesiones
Espanales  de  la  America  septentrional  con  las
Francesas,"  came  into  the  possession  of  his  col-
laborator, Jose  Pichardo,  who  used  the  notes  and
completed  the  work.

TALAVERA  Y  GARCES,  Mariano  (tah-lah-
vay'-rah),  Venezuelan  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Coro,  22
Dec,  1777;  d.  in  Caracas,  23  Dec,  1861.  In  1791
he  was  sent  to  the  University  of  Caracas,  where  he
studied  theology,  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.,  and
was  ordained  in  1797.  In  1806  he  became  secre-
tary of  the  bishop  of  Merida,  who  sent  him  as
vicar  to  Barinas,  and  in  1808  he  was  appointed
rector  of  the  seminary  of  Merida.  When  the  war
for  independence  opened  in  1810,  he  took  part  in
it,  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the  supreme  junta
of  Merida,  but  in  1812,  when  the  armies  of  the  re-

Sublic  were  defeated,  he  was  forced  to  emigrate  to
few  Granada.  In  1815  he  was  imprisoned  by  the
Spanish  authorities,  but  pardoned  and  retired  to
Coro,  whence,  after  the  liberation  of  New  Granada,
he  went  to  Bogota,  and  in  1822  Gen.  Santander  ap-
pointed him  dean  of  the  cathedral.  In  1826  he
was  elected  to  congress  for  Coro,  and  in  1828  con-
firmed by  the  pope  as  bishop  of  Tricala  and  vicar
of  Guayana.  From  1830  till  1832  he  was  exiled,
having  refused  to  take  the  unconditional  oath  to
support  the  constitution.  In  1842  he  resigned  the
bishopric  and  was  appointed  councillor  of  state,
which  place  he  also  resigned,  after  the  attack  on
congress  of  24  Jan.,  1848,  and  retired  to  private
life.  He  was  considered  the  greatest  pulpit  orator
of  Colombia,  and  one  of  the  most  learned  men  in
the  church  of  South  America.

TALBOT,  Ethelbert,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Fay-
ette, Mo.,  9  Oct.,  1848.  His  early  education  was
received  in  the  schools  of  his  native  town.  He  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1870,  and  at  the  General
theological  seminary,  New  York,  in  1873,  was  or-
dered deacon  in  the  Church  of  the  Transfiguration,
New  York,  29  June,  1873,  and  ordained  priest  in
St.  Mary's  church,  Fayette,  Mo.,  4  Nov.,  1873,  both
by  Bishop  Robertson.  He  was  at  once  made  rector
of  St.  James's  church,  Macon,  Mo.,  which  post  he


TALBOT


TALBOT


21


held  until  his  election  to  the  episcopate.  He  opened
a  parish  school  in  Macon  in  September,  1875,  which
afterward  became  St.  James's  military  academy,  a
diocesan  school  for  boys.  He  twice  represented
the  diocese  of  Missouri  in  general  convention,  and
was  rural  dean  and  a  member  of  the  standing  com-
mittee of  the  diocese.  He  was  consecrated,  27  May,
1887,  missionary  bishop  of  Wyoming  and  Idaho.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Univer-
sity of  Missouri  in  1887,  that  of  S.  T.  D.  from  the
General  theological  seminary,  New  York  city,  in
1887,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1888.

TALBOT,  1  sli a  in .  senator,  b.  in  Bedford  county,
Va.,  in  1773 ;  d.  near  Frankfort,  Ky.,  25  Sept.,
1837.  He  removed  with  his  father  to  Kentucky  in
his  youth,  and  settled  near  Harrodsburg,  where  he
obtained  his  early  education.  He  studied  law  with
George  Nicholas,  and  began  to  practise  in  Versailles,
Woodford  co.,  but  soon  removed  to  Frankfort,
where  he  advanced  to  the  front  rank  of  his  profes-
sion. He  was  chosen  to  the  state  senate  in  1812,
and  served  there  till  1815,  when  he  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Jesse
Bledsoe,  resigned.  He  retained  his  seat  from  2
Feb.,  1815,  till  3  March,  1819,  and  was  chosen  again
on  the  resignation  of  William  Logan,  serving  from
27  Nov.,  1820,  till  4  March,  1825.

TALBOT,  John,  colonial  Anglican  bishop,  b.
in  Wymondham,  England,  in  1645 ;  d.  in  Burling-
ton, N.  J.,  29  Nov.,  1727.  He  was  graduated  at
Cambridge  in  1663,  became  a  fellow  of  Peter  house
in  1664,  held  the  rec-
tory of  Freetherne  in
the  diocese  of  Glou-
cester, and  in  1702
became  chaplain  of
the  ship  "  Centurion,"
which  brought  to  this
country  Keith  and
Gordon,  the  first  mis-
sionaries of  the  Socie-
ty for  propagating  the.
gospel  in  foreign  parts.
He  was  appointed  a
missionary  of  that  society  in  September  of  the
same  year,  and  was  associated  with  Keith  as  long
as  the  latter  remained  in  this  country.  He  con-
tinued to  labor  zealously  for  twenty  years,  being  in
charge  of  St.  Mary's,  Burlington,  N.  J.,  from  1703,
and  its  rector  after  1709,  during  all  which  period  he
had  been  importunate  to  have  a  bishop  appointed
for  America.  Despairing  of  this,  he  went  to  Eng-
land and  was  induced  to  receive  consecration  clan-
destinely from  Dr.  Ralph  Taylor  and  Robert  Wel-
ton,  non-juring  bishops,  and  returned  to  this  coun-
try in  1722.  For  two  years  he  was  unmolested,  but
at  the  end  of  that  period,  being  exposed,  he  was
discharged  from  the  service  of  the  society,  and
ordered  by  the  governor  to  "  surcease  officiating,"
because  he  refused  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance
or  use  the  prayers  for  the  royal  family.  Affixed  to
his  widow's  will  in  the  registrar's  office  in  Philadel-
phia was  discovered,  in  September,  1875,  his  episco-
pal seal,  a  mitre,  with  flowing  ribbons,  and  beneath
it,  in  large  script  letters,  ingeniously  wrought  into
a  monogram,  the  full  name — John  Talbot.  Anfen-
larged  photograph  of  this  seal  (see  illustration)  was
copied  in  brass,  placed  on  a  mural  tablet  with  a
suitable  inscription,  and  unveiled  with  religious
ceremonies  by  the  Rev.  George  Morgan  Hills,  D.  D.,
in  old  St.  Mary's  church,  Burlington,  N.  J.,  on  the
151st  anniversary  of  Talbot's  death.

TALBOT,  John  Gunnel,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Danville,  Ky.,  16  Aug.,  1844;  d.  near  Kilihikai,
Sandwich  islands,  19  Dec,  1870. He  entered  the


navy  as  a  midshipman,  15  April,  1862,  and  was
graduated  at  the  naval  academy,  2  June,  1866.  He
was  promoted  to  ensign,  12  March,  1868.  to  mas-
ter, 26  March,  1869,  and  to  lieutenant,  21  March,
1870.  Lieut.  Talbot  was  the  executive  officer  of  the
"  Saginaw  "  when  she  was  wrecked  on  Ocean  island,
French  Frigate  shoals,  on  29  Oct.,  1870.  There  was
a  heavy  surf,  and  the  vessel  was  a  total  loss.  All
the  officers  and  crew,  numbering  ninety,  escaped
without  loss  of  life,  but  the  surf  prevented  them
from  saving  sufficient  provisions,  so  that  it  was
necessary  to  put  them  on  quarter  rations.  The
strictest  discipline  was  maintained,  and  fish  and
the  eggs  of  sea-birds  contributed  to  their  supplies.
The  captain's  gig  was  fitted  out  to  send  to  Hono-
lulu, the  nearest  port,  1,200  miles  distant,  for  relief,
since  the  island  is  in  such  an  unfrequented  part  of
the  ocean  that  there  was  no  hope  of  rescue  by  a
passing  vessel.  Lieut.  Talbot  and  four  men — Peter
Francis,  James  Muir,  John  Andrew,  and  William
Halford — volunteered  to  go  in  the  boat.  They  left
the  island  at  noon  on  18  Nov.,  and  sighted  Kauai,
the  most  northwesterly  of  the  Sandwich  islands,  on
16  Dec,  but,  owing  to  unfavorable  winds  and  bad
weather,  they  did  not  reach  the  shore  until  the
morning  of  the  19th.  They  were  all  so  exhausted
by  the  prolonged  privations  and  sufferings  that
Lieut.  Talbot  and  two  of  the  crew  were  drowned  in
the  surf.  James  Muir  became  insane  after  he  had
been  assisted  to  the  shore  by  the  sole  survivor,  and
he  died  while  the  latter,  William  Halford,  went  to
get  assistance  from  the  natives.  Halford  met  some
missionaries,  and  sailed  to  Honolulu,  where  he
communicated  with  the  American  minister,  who
promptly  sent  a  chartered  steamer  to  the  relief  of
the  shipwrecked  crew.  Talbot's  ability  in  handling
and  navigating  his  boat  has  been  greatly  admired.
A  tablet  has  been  placed  in  the  chapel  of  the  naval
academy  to  commemorate  his  heroic  service.

TALBOT,  Joseph  Cruikshank,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  5  Sept.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Indianapo-
lis. Ind.,  15  Jan.,  1883.  He  was  of  Quaker  parent-
age and  was  educated  at  Pierpont  academy,  Alex-
andria. In  1835  he  removed  to  Louisville,  Ky.,
where  he  engaged  in  business  for  several  years.
His  religious  convictions  then  became  so  changed
that  he  abandoned  Quakerism  and  united  with  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  being  baptized  in
1837.  In  1841  he
became  a  candidate
for  holy  orders,
studying  under  the
direction  of  the
bishop.  He  was
made  deacon  in
Christ  church,  Lou-
isville, 5  Sept.,  1846,
by  Bishop  Smith,
and  ordained  priest
in  St.  John's  church,
Louisville.  6  Sept.,
1848,  by  the  same
bishop.  During  his
diaconate  he  or-
ganized St.  John's
church,  and  upon
his  ordination  to
the priesthood he

became  its  rector.  After  a  service  of  seven  years
he  removed,  in  1853.  to  Indiana,  and  became  rec-
tor of  Christ  church,  Indianapolis,  which  post  he
held  until  he  was  elected  to  the  episcopate.  The
honorary  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him
by  the  Western  university  of  Pennsylvania  at  Al-
legheny City  in  1854,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  the


cJ^^-J^^^-


22


TALBOT


TALBOT


<L//i^  Jl/<!?V/-


University  of  Cambridge,  England,  in  1867.  In
1859  he  was  elected  by  the  house  of  bishops  mis-
sionary bishop  of  the  northwest,  a  newly  organized
jurisdiction,  covering  nearly  900,000  square  miles.
He  was  consecrated  to  that  office  in  Christ  church,
Indianapolis,  15  Feb.,  1860.  In  1865  he  was  elected
assistant  bishop  of  Indiana,  and  was  translated
to  that  diocese  in  October  of  that  year.  Upon
the  death  of  Bishop  Upfold  in  1872  he  became
bishop  of  Indiana.  His  writings  include  sermons,
addresses  to  the  convention,  pastoral  letters,  and  a
few  articles  in  periodicals.

TALBOT,  Silas,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Dighton,
Bristol  co.,  Mass.,  in  1751 :  d.  in  New  York  city,
30  June,  1813.  As  a  boy  he  served  in  coasting
vessels,  and  during  the  excitement  before  the  Revo-
lutionary war  he  raised  a  small  company.  When
the  news  of  the  battle
of  Lexington  reached
Rhode  Island  he  was
commissioned  by  that
state  as  a  captain,  and
joined  the  patriot  ar-
my in  the  siege  of  Bos-
ton. After  the  British
army  had  evacuated
the  town,  he  accom-
panied the  expedition
to  Rhode  Island,  after
which  he  joined  the
army  under  General
Washington  in  1776.
He  then  planned  an
attack  by  fire-ship  on
the  British  fleet  in
New  York  harbor.  For
this  purpose  he  went
up  Hudson  river  above
Fort  Washington,  where  he  waited  three  days  for
a  favorable  opportunity  to  drift  down  with  the  fire-
ship,  which  was  filled  with  combustibles  and  be-
smeared with  turpentine.  Talbot  and  his  crew  suc-
ceeded in  setting  fire  to  the  British  ship  "  Asia,"
and  all  escaped  to  the  Jersey  shore,  though  he  was
severely  burned.  The  "  Asia  "  was  saved  from  de-
struction by  the  assistance  of  the  other  vessels.
On  10  Oct..  1777,  the  Continental  congress  gave
him  a  vote  of  thanks,  and  he  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  major.  He  was  wounded  in  the  hip  dur-
ing an  engagement  with  the  British  vessels  in
Delaware  river  below  Philadelphia,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  participated  in  the  operations  against
the  British  at  Newport.  On  27  Oct.,  1778,  he  fitted
out  a  small  sloop  and  captured  the  British  block-
ading schooner  "  Pigot,"  with  eight  guns  and  forty-
five  men.  off  Newport,  R.  I.,  for  which  he  received
the  thanks  of  congress  and  was  promoted  to  lieu-
tenant-colonel. Subsequently  he  planned  similar
operations  against  British  vessels  on  the  coast,  and
was  associated  with  Gen.  Lafayette  in  one  of  these
hazardous  attacks.  Congress  passed  a  resolution
promoting  him  to  the  grade  of  captain  in  the  navy,
17  Sept.,  1779,  and  issued  specific  orders  for  him  to
arm  a  naval  force  to  protect  the  coast  of  Long
Island  sound,  and  to  keep  open  the  communica-
tions for  supplies  for  Gen.  Horatio  Gates's  army.
He  fitted  out  his  former  prize,  the  "  Pigot,"  and
the  sloop  "  Argo,"  and  sailed  in  command,  under
orders  from  Gen.  Gates,  in  May,  1779,  from  Provi-
dence, R.  I.  Soon  after  clearing  the  coast  he
captured  the  British  schooner  "  Lively  "  and  two
British  privateers,  which  he  took  to  Boston.  On
5  Aug.  he  captured  a  schooner  of  four  guns,  and
on  7  Aug.  he  had  a  desperate  fight  with  the  brig
"King  George,"  twelve  guns,  which  he  won  by


boarding.  On  24  Aug.  he  captured  the  sloop
"  Adventure,"  and  the  next  day  the  brig  "  El-
liot." He  subsequently  captured  the  British  ship
"  Dragon  "  after  a  severe  fight,  in  which  his  speak-
ing-trumpet was  pierced  by  bullets  and  the  skirts
of  his  coat  were  shot  off.  Congress  again  recognized
his  brilliant  services,  and  urged  that  he  be  placed
in  command  of  a  naval  vessel :  but  none  such  was
available,  and,  as  the  owners  of  the  "  Argo  "  claimed
their  ship,  he  took  command  of  the  private  armed
ship  '•  George  Washington,"  in  which  he  was  cap-
tured by  a  British  fleet  when  he  was  becalmed.
He  was  confined  in  the  prison-ship  at  New  York,
and  also  in  the  "  Old  Sugar-house  "  prison  in  New
York  city.  In  November,  1780,  he  was  put  on
board  the  "  Yarmouth,"  where  he  was  kept  in  the
hold,  unable  to  stand  upright.  In  this  vessel,  sub-
jected to  great  cruelties,  he  made  a  winter  voyage
of  seven  weeks  to  England.  Here  he  made  three
attempts  to  escape,  and  after  each  attempt  was
confined  for  forty  days  in  a  dungeon  on  half  ra-
tions. Benjamin  Franklin  and  John  Jay  effected
his  exchange  for  a  British  officer  in  France,  and
he  landed  at  Cherbourg  in  December,  1781.  He
sailed  from  France  in  a  French  brig  which  was
captured  by  the  British  privateer  "  Jupiter  "  when
fifteen  days  out;  but  the  British  captain  trans-
ferred him  to  an  English  brig  on  her  way  from
Lisbon  to  New  York.  Owing  to  litigation  con-
nected with  one.  of  his  prizes,  he  removed  to
Philadelphia,  and  soon  afterward  he  went  to  New
York,  where  he  bought  an  estate  northwest  of  Al-
bany and  engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits.  He
served  as  a  representative  of  this  district  in  con-
gress in  1793-'4.  He  was  commissioned  captain  in
the  navy,  11  May,  1798,  and  took  command  of  one
of  the  squadrons  in  the  West  Indies  during  the  war
with  France.  He  commanded  the  "Constitution  "
as  his  flag-ship,  and  from  her  planned  the  expedi-
tion of  the  "Sally,"  manned  by  men  from  the
"  Constitution,"  under  Lieut.  Isaac  Hull,  to  cut  out
the  French  privateer  "  Sandwich,"  at  Port  Platte,
Santo  Domingo.  After  the  war  with  France  he
had  a  dispute  with  Com.  Truxtun  in  regard  to  sen-
iority, which  he  settled  by  resigning  his  commis-
sion, 21  Sept.,  1801.  It  is  said  that  he  was  wounded
thirteen  times,  and  carried  five  bullets  in  his  body.
He  was  buried  in  Trinity  churchyard,  New  York
city.  See  a  "Historical  Sketch"  of  his  life  (New
York,  1803),  and  "  Life  of  Silas  Talbot,"  by  Henry
T.  Tuckerman  (1850).

TALBOT,  Thomas,  governor  of  Massachusetts,
b.  in  Cambridge,  Washington  eo.,  N.  Y.,  7  Sept.,
1818 ;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  6  Oct.,  1886.  He  was
a  lineal  descendant  of  John  Talbot,  first  Earl  of
Shrewsbury.  His  grandfather  came  to  this  coun-
try from  Ireland  in  1807.  He  was  left  an  orphan
at  the  age  of  six,  and  in  1825  went  to  Northampton,
Mass.,  with  his  mother,  where  after  1830  he  worked
in  a  woollen-factory.  In  1835  he  entered  the  broad-
cloth-factory of  his  brother  Charles,  in  Williams-
burg, and  in  1838  became  an  overseer.  In  that  year
and  1839  he  attended  school  during  the  winter
terms.  In  1840  he  entered  into  partnership  with
his  brother,  in  Billerica,  Mass.,  where  he  afterward
resided.  The  business  rapidly  increased,  and  the
brothers  accumulated  a  fortune.  Mr.  Talbot  was
for  many  years  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature,
sat  in  the  governor's  council  in  1864-'9,  and  in
1872  was  chosen  lieutenant-governor,  as  a  Repub-
lican. On  the  election  of  Gov.  William  B.  Wash-
burne  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1873  he  became  gov-
ernor. He  vetoed  the  bill  to  repeal  the  prohibitory
law,  and  approved  that  to  enact  the  ten-hour  law,
thus  arousing prejudices  that  deprived him  of


TALCOTT


TALCOTT


23


his  election  in  1874,  but  in  1878  he  was  chosen,  by
a  majority  of  15,000,  over  Benjamin  F.  Butler  and
Josiah  G.  Abbott,  candidates  of  the  two  wings  of
the  Democratic  party,  and  served  till  1880.  Gov.
Talbot  did  much  to  promote  the  interests  of  the
town  of  Billerica,  and  gave  liberally  to  churches
of  all  denominations,  building  a  fine  edifice  for  the
Baptist  society.

TALCOTT,  John,  colonist,  b.  in  Braintree,  Es-
sex co.,  England,  about  1600 ;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  in  March,  1660.  He  came  to  this  country
with  the  Rev.  Thomas  Hooker's  company  in  the
"  Lyon,"  which  arrived  in  Boston  on  16  Sept.,
1632,  was  admitted  a  freeman  by  the  general  court
in  Boston  on  6  Nov.,  1632,  and  in  1634  was  a  rep-
resentative in  that  body  for  Newtown.  He  owned
four  houses  in  the  "  west  end  "  of  the  town,  which
he  sold  to  Nicholas  Danforth  on  1  May,  1636,  to
remove  with  Mr.  Hooker's  colony  to  Connecticut.
His  was  the  first  house  that  was  erected  in  Hart-
ford. He  was  active  in  all  the  affairs  of  the  town,
was  one  of  the  committee  that  was  appointed  on  1
May,  1637,  to  consider  the  propriety  of  a  war  with
the  Pequot  Indians,  and  was  a  chief  magistrate
of  the  colony  until  his  death.  His  name  is  in-
scribed on  the  monument  that  has  been  erected  by
the  citizens  of  Hartford  to  perpetuate  the  memory
of  the  colonists  of  Connecticut. — His  son,  John,
soldier,  b.  in  Braintree,  England,  about  1630 ;  d.
in  Hartford,  Conn.,  23  July,  1688,  came  to  Boston
with  his  father,  and  removed  with  him  to  Hart-
ford. He  was  made  ensign  of  colonial  troops  in
1650,  and  became  captain  in  1660,  was  elected
a  deputy,  or  assistant  magistrate,  of  the  colony
of  Connecticut  before  it  was  joined  to  New
Haven,  and  was  made  treasurer  to  succeed  his
father,  holding  this  office  from  1660  till  1676.  He
was  one  of  the  patentees  named  in  the  charter
granted  to  Connecticut  on  20  April,  1662,  by
Charles  I.,  and  the  document  was  intrusted  to  him
with  Hezekiah  Wyllis  and  John  Allyn  for  safe-
keeping. At  the  opening  of  the  Indian  war  of
1676  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  army
with  the  rank  of  major,  and  in  June  of  that  year
went  into  the  field  at  the  head  of  the  "standing
army  "  of  Connecticut  accompanied  by  200  Mohi-
cans and  Pequots.  He  scoured  the  country  as  far
as  the  falls  above  Deerfield,  inflicted  severe  blows
upon  the  hostile  tribes,  and  saved  Hadley  from
the  attack  of  700  Indians.  He  also  performed
good  service  among  the  Narragansetts,  and  fought
a  successful  battle  at  the  Houssatonnuc,  killing
the  sachem  of  Quabaug.  Early  in  the  war  he  was
promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  and  he  was  known
as  the  "  Indian  fighter."  In  March,  1662,  the  gen-
eral court  granted  to  him  and  John  Allyn  600
acres  of  upland  and  100  acres  of  meadow-land,  to
be  laid  out  in  Hammonaset  (now  Killingsworth).
Many  of  his  official  papers  are  preserved  among
the  state  records  in  Hartford,  and  contain  inter-
esting notes  regarding  the  war  with  King  Philip.
— Another  son,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Newtown
(now  Cambridge).  Mass.,  about  1634 ;  d.  in  Weth-
ersfield,  Conn.,  10  Nov.,  1691,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1658,  and  made  a  freeman  in  1662.
His  father  settled  him  upon  land  that  he  owned
in  Wethersfield,  of  which  town  the  son  was  com-
missioner from  1669  till  1684.  From  1670  till
1684  he  was  deputy  to  the  general  court,  of  which
he  was  secretary  in  October,  1684,  during  the  ab-
sence of  Col.  John  Allyn.  On  16  May,  1676,  he
was  appointed  "one  of  a  standing  committee  to  or-
der measures  and  dispose  of  such  affairs  as  shall
be  necessary  to  attend  to  in  the  intervals  of  gen-
eral court." He  was  made  lieutenant  of  the  Weth-


ersfield trained  band  on  12  May,  1677,  lieutenant  of
the  troop,  14  Oct.,  1679,  and  afterward  captain  of
the  troop  of  Hartford  county.  He  was  an  original
proprietor  of  the  town  of  Glastonbury,  and  the
lot  that  he  purchased  in  1643  is  still  owned  by
his  descendants. — The  second  John's  son,  Joseph,
governor  of  Connecticut,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  16
Nov.,  1669;  d.  there,  11  Oct.,  1741,  became  assist-
ant in  1711,  and  in  that  year  was  appointed  one
of  a  committee  to  lay  out  "the  town  of  Coventry.
In  1724  he  was  made  governor  of  Connecticut,
serving  until  his  death,  and  he  was  the  first  native
of  Connecticut  to  hold  this  office. — Samuel's  great-
great-grandson,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Glaston-
bury, Conn.,  6  Dec,  1786 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
25  April,  1862,  entered  the  25th  infantry,  10
July,  1813,  and  became  deputy  commissioner  of
ordnance,  with  rank  of  captain,  5  Aug.,  1813.
He  was  made  1st  lieutenant,  14  March.  1814,
transferred  to  the  2d  artillery,  1  June,  1821,  be-
came lieutenant-colonel  of  ordnance,  30  May,  1832,
and  colonel  and  chief  of  ordnance  on  25  March,
1848.  He  was  brevetted  major  on  5  Aug.,  1823,
for  ten  years'  faithful  service  in  one  grade,  and
brigadier-general  on  30  May,  1848,  for  meritorious
conduct,  particularly  in  performing  his  duties  in
prosecuting  the  war  with  Mexico.  On  6  Nov.,
1850,  he  wrote  a  letter,  without  the  sanction  of  the
secretary  of  war,  containing  instructions  to  Col.
Benjamin  Huger,  commandant  of  the  arsenal  at
Fort  Monroe,  regarding  the  purchase  of  ammuni-
tion. Upon  this  authority  Col.  Huger  entered  into
a  contract  with  Dr.  Edward  Carmichael  for  the
purchase  of  a  large  amount  of  shot  and  shells.
For  this  offence  Gen.  Talcott  was  tried  by  court-
martial,  found  guilty,  and  dismissed  from  the
army,  to  date  from  8  July,  1851.  The  sentence
was  pronounced  illegal  and  unjust  by  many  well-
known  persons,  who  endeavored  unsuccessfully  to
reinstate  him  in  the  army.  After  the  decision  of
the  court  a  "  Review "  to  show  the  error  of  the
judgment  was  written  by  Hon.  John  C.  Spencer
(Albany,  1851).  This  review  contains  the  follow-
ing facts,  elicited  from  the  evidence  given  before
the  court :  That  the  letter  from  Gen.  Talcott  to
Col.  Huger,  of  6
Nov.,  1850,  referred
to  above,  appears  to
have  been  the  mov-
ing cause  of  the  dif-
ficulty between  the
secretary  and  Gen.
Talcott.  That  this
letter  was  not  in-
tended by  the  gen-
eral to  authorize
Col.  Huger  to  make
a  contract  with  Dr.
Carmichael,  or  any
other  person,  but  to
direct  Col.  Huger  to
procure,  by  "  open
purchase  " — a  sys-
tem known  to  hav
been in use for

many  years  in  all  the  departments  —  such  an
amount  of  shot  and  shells  as  he  might  from  time
to  time  require  for  the  public  service.  Huger.  mis-
understanding the  authority  given  in  the  letter,
made  a  contract  with  Carmichael  for  a  large
amount  of  these  articles,  but  did  not  immediate-
ly advise  the  general  of  what  he  had  done.  In
the  mean  time  the  secretary  of  war,  Charles  M.
Conrad,  had  been  informed  that  a  contract  had
been  made  with  Carmichael,  who  had  tried  to  dis-


•to


24


TALCOTT


TALCOTT


pose  of  it  to  the  Tredegar  iron-works  for  a  large
amount,  and  asked  the  general  in  a  casual  way  if
"  there  were  any  contracts  out  for  shot  and  shells,"
to  which  the  general  answered  in  the  negative.
This  was  before  Col.  Huger's  report  had  reached
the  ordnance  department.  The  question  was  re-
peated at  a  second  interview,  still  before  the  recep-
tion of  the  report,  and  was  answered  in  the  same
manner.  As  soon  as  Gen.  Talcott  received  the
report  he  called  upon  the  secretary,  and  to  the
question  again  he  answered :  "  No,  sir,  none  recog-
nized by  the  department."  Before  this  last  inter-
view the  general  had  written  to  Col.  Huger,  disap-
proving of  what  he  had  done,  that  he,  Huger,  had
misunderstood  his  instructions.  He  repudiated
the  transaction  and  disallowed  the  contract.  Gen.
Talcott's  honesty  was  not  impeached,  his  faithful
disbursement  of  many  millions  of  government
funds  during  his  long  official  life  of  thirty-eight
years,  and  his  eminent  services  during  the  war  with
Mexico,  could  not  be  denied,  but  had  no  weight  in
the  finding  of  the  court.  The  question  probably
arose  from  a  misunderstanding  which  might  have
been  amicably  settled  without  loss  of  honor  to
either  party. — George's  brother,  Andrew,  engineer,
b.  in  Glastonbury,  Conn.,  20  April,  1797 ;  d.  in  Rich-
mond, Va.,  22  April,  1883,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1818,  became  2d  lieutenant  in
the  engineer  corps,  and  after  serving  a  year  on  con-
struction duty  accompanied  Gen.  Henry  Atkinson
as  engineer  on  an  expedition  to  establish  military

g>sts  on  upper  Missouri  and  Yellowstone  rivers,
e  was  appointed  1st  lieutenant  on  1  Oct.,  1820,
and  in  1821-'4  engaged  in  constructing  the  de-
fences of  Hampton  Roads,  Va.  Pie  was  also  su-
perintending engineer  of  operations  preliminary  to
fortifying  Brenton's  Point  (now  Fort  Adams,  R.
I.)  and  New  Utrecht  (now  Fort  Hamilton,  N.  Y.),
and  engaged  in  the  construction  of  Fort  Dela-
ware in  1825-'6.  In  1826-'8  he  was  engineer  of
canals  through  the  Dismal  Swamp,  Va.,  and  from
1828  till  1835  he  was  superintending  engineer  on
the  forts  at  Hampton  Roads,  Va.,  also  acting  as
astronomer  in  determining  the  boundary-line  be-
tween Ohio  and  Michigan.  He  became  captain  on
22  Dec,  1830,  and  in  1834-'6  was  in  charge  of  the

improvement  of
Hudson  river.  On
21  Sept.,  1836,  he
resigned  his  com-
mission to  become
a  civil  engineer,
and  surveyed  and
constructed  vari-
ous railroads,  ex-
aminednavy-yards,
and  marked,  the
northern  boundary
of  Iowa.  In  1857
he  became  engineer
for  a  railroad  across
Mexico,  which  was
s? ip .  organized under

caudon,  and  sur-
veyed the  line  from  Vera  Cruz  to  the  city  of
Mexico ;  but,  owing  to  political  events,  the  opera-
tions of  this  company  were  suspended,  and  Col.
Talcott  returned  to  the  United  States.  In  1861
he  was  appointed  chief  engineer  of  Virginia,
but  in  1862  he  returned  to  Mexico  and  resumed
his  office  as  chief  engineer  of  the  railroad  from
Mexico  to  the  Gulf.  A  new  company  was  formed
with  the  aid  of  British  capital  and  under  the  im-


perial government  of  Mexico,  and  the  work  of  the
railroad  was  prosecuted  in  1865-'6,  but  on  the
change  of  government  in  1867  his  direction  of  the
work  ceased.  Needing  some  supplies  for  the  work,
he  came  with  the  president  to  New  York,  where
he  was  seized  by  the  government  officials  and
confined  in  Fort  Lafayette  as  a  spy,  and  accused
of  planning  and  constructing  the  fortifications
around  Richmond.  He  was  transferred  to  Fort
Adams,  in  Boston  harbor,  and  kept  there  by  the
order  of  Gen.  John  E.  Wool  until  Gen.  John  A.
Dix  was  put  in  command  of  the  Eastern  military
department.  Gen.  Dix,  who  knew  him  well  and
believed  in  his  loyalty  to  the  U.  S.  government,
had  him  brought  to  New  York,  listened  to  his
statement,  and  released  him.  After  a  visit  to  Eu-
rope he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  retire-
ment in  Baltimore  and  Richmond.  He  was  a  fine
mathematician,  and  in  1833  devised  ''Talcott's
method  "  for  determining  territorial  latitudes  by
the  observation  of  stars  near  the  zenith,  contriv-
ing a  suitable  modification  of  the  zenith  instru-
ment for  the  purpose. — George's  son,  George
Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city,  16  July,
1811;  d.  in  Indian  Springs,  near  Augusta,  Ga.,  8
June,  1854,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1831,  assigned  to  the  3d  artillery,  and
was  brevetted  1st  lieutenant,  1  Dec,  1835,  for
gallant  conduct  in  the  war  against  the  Florida
Indians.  He  was  then  transferred  to  the  ord-
nance corps,  in  which  he  was  made  1st  lieutenant
on  9  July,  1838.  He  was  appointed  captain  of  in-
fantry and  major  of  voltigeurs  on  9  April,  1847,
and  served  at  Vera  Cruz  and  Molino  del  Rev.  re-
ceiving the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  gallant
and  meritorious  conduct  in  the  latter  battle,  where
he  received  severe  wounds,  which  hastened  his
death. — Another  son  of  George,  Sebastian  Vis-
scher,  engineer,  b.  in  New  York  citv,  24  Nov.,
1812,  entered  Yale  in  1829,  but  left  college  in  his
sophomore  year,  and,  becoming  a  civil  engineer,
was  employed  by  the  U.  S.  government  on  the  sur-
vey of  the  boundary  between  the  United  States  and
Canada,  and  on  the  improvement  of  Hudson  river
at  Albany.  He  was  also  engaged  in  the  primary
surveys  of  the  Erie  railroad  near  its  western  ter-
minus at  Dunkirk,  and  also  on  the  survey  of  the
northeastern  boundary,  the  improvement  of  the
mouth  of  the  Mississippi  river,  and  the  coast  sur-
vey. On  the  election  of  Horatio  Seymour  as  gov-
ernor of  New  York  in  1862,  Talcott  was  appointed
by  him  quartermaster-general  of  the  state,  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-general,  and  served  through  the
administration.  He  compiled  and  published  "  The
Talcott  Pedigree"  (Albany,  1876);  and  "Genea-
logical Notes  of  New  York  and  New  England
Families"  (1883).

TALCOTT,  Mancel,  merchant,  b.  in  Rome,
N.  Y.,  12  Oct.,  1817 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  4  June,
1878.  He  attended  the  common  schools  till  he
was  seventeen  years  old,  when  he  set  out  for  the
west,  travelling  on  foot  from  Detroit  to  Chicago
and  thence  to  Park  Ridge,  111.,  where  he  worked  at
farming  till  1850.  The  discovery  of  gold  took  him
to  California,  where  he  remained  till  he  had  ac-
cumulated enough  to  establish  himself  in  business,
when  he  returned  and  formed  a  life-long  partner-
ship with  Horace  M.  Singer,  of  Chicago,  in  the  stone
business.  Mr.  Talcott  contributed  freely  toward
public  charities  and  the  relief  of  humanity. — His
wife,  Mary  H.  (Otis),  b.  in  Watertown,  N.  Y.,
about  1820;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  17  April.  1888,
married  Mr.  Talcott.  25  Oct.,  1841.  She  was  in
full  sympathy  with  her  husband,  and  after  his
decease  carried  on  his  charitable  work. Neither


TALIAFERRO


TALLMADGE


25


of  them  desired  to  make  known  what  they  had
done  in  the  way  of  charity,  and  were  careful  never
to  allude  to  favors  they  had  bestowed  on  those  in
need.  During  the  last  ten  years  of  her  life  she
distributed  at  least  $300,000  in  charity  and  for
the  support  of  the  Universalist  society,  of  which
she  and  her  husband  were  members.  During  the
last  two  years  of  her  life  she  founded  and  sup-

f)orted  two  homes  or  day-nurseries  where  poor
aboring  women  could  leave  their  children  in  care-
ful hands  while  they  were  at  work.  In  making
her  will  Mrs.  Talcott,  after  bequeathing  a  liberal
part  of  her  estate  of  $450,000  to  her  relatives,  di-
rected that  the  residue  be  equally  divided  into
three  parts  and  placed  in  trust  with  her  three
nieces  to  distribute  as  each  might  think  best  for
religious,  educational,  or  charitable  purposes.

TALIAFERRO,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia in  1750;  d.  in  Wilkes  county,  Ga.,  3  Sept.,

1821.  He  served  in  the  Revolutionary  army  in  the
rifle  corps  commanded  by  Gen.  Daniel  Morgan,  and
participated  in  the  battles  of  Saratoga  and  Mon-
mouth and  in  the  siege  of  Savannah,  and  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  British  at  the  surrender  of  Charles-
ton, 12  May,  1780.  Afterward  he  settled  in  Geor-
gia, was  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  and  a  dele-

fate  to  the  Constitutional  convention  of  1798.
Uected  to  congress,  he  served  from  2  Dec,  1799,
till  his  resignation  in  1802.  Subsequently  he  was
judge  of  the  superior  court.

TALIAFERRO,  John,  member  of  congress,  b.
in  Spottsylvania  county,  Va.,  in  1768 ;  d.  at  u  Hag-
ley,"  King  George  co.,  Va.,  12  Aug.,  1853.  He  was
•elected  to  congress  from  Virginia  as  a  Democrat,
serving  from  1801  till  1803,  and  from  1811  till
1813.  He  was  again  chosen  to  fill  a  vacancy  in
1824,  and  served  from  8  April  of  that  year  till  3
March,  1831,  and  again  from  1835  till  1843.  He
was  a  presidential  elector  in  1805  on  the  Jefferson
ticket  and  in  1821  on  the  Monroe  ticket,  and
served  as  librarian  of  the  treasury  department  in
Washington  in  1850-3.

TALIAFERRO,  William  Booth  (tol-li-ver),
soldier,  b.  in  Belleville,  Gloucester  co.,  Va.,  28  Dec,

1822.  He  was  educated  at  Harvard  and  at  William
and  Mary  college,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1841.
He  became  captain  in  the  11th  U.  S.  infantry,  9
April,  1847,  major  of  the  9th  infantry,  12  Aug.,
1847,  and  was  mustered  out,  26  Aug.,  1848.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  made  colonel  in
the  provisional  army  of  Virgina,  1  May,  1861,
and  he  rose  to  be  brigadier-general  in  the  Confed-
erate service,  4  March,  1862,  and  major-general,  1
Jan.,  1865.  He  commanded  the  Confederate  troops
in  1861  at  Gloucester  point,  Va.,  took  part  in
the  engagements  at  Carrick's  Ford,  Va.,  13  July,
and  in  most  of  the  battles  of  the  Army  of  Northern
Virginia  to  March,  1863,  when  he  was  placed  in
•charge  of  the  district  of  Savannah,  Ga.  In  July
of  the  same  year  he  commanded  the  troops  anil
defences  on  Morris  island,  S.  C,  and  in  August
following  the  forces  on  James  island.  In  February,
1864,  he  led  a  division  in  Florida,  consisting  of
four  brigades.  In  May,  1864,  he  was  put  in  com-
mand of  the  7th  military  district  of  South  Carolina,
and  in  December  following  he  was  assigned  to  the
■command  of  the  district  of  South  Carolina.  In
January,  1865,  he  led  a  division  composed  of  the
brigades  of  Elliott,  Rhett,  and  Anderson.  Gen.  Tal-
iaferro was  a  member  of  the  general  assembly  of
Virginia  for  ten  years  and  Democratic  presidential
•elector  in  1856.  He  was  grand-master  of  Masons
in  Virginia  in  1876-'7,  and  member  of  the  boards
■of  'visitors  of  Virginia  military  institute,  of  the
Mechanical  and  agricultural  college  of  the  state,  of


u


*jL~^^as&^t~JpjL


William  and  Mary  college,  and  of  the  State  normal
school  for  the  education  of  women.

TALLMADGE,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Brook-
haven,  N.  Y.,  25  Feb.,  1754 ;  d.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,
7  March,  1835.  His  father,  Benjamin,  was  a  clergy-
man. After  graduation  at  Yale  in  1773  the  son  had
charge  of  a  high-
school  in  Wethers-
field  until20  June,
1776,  when  he  was
appointed  lieuten-
ant and  adjutant
in  a  Connecti-
cut regiment  and
served  through-
out the  Revolu-
tionary war.  On
15  Dec,  1776,  he
was  appointed  by
Gen.  Washington
captain  in  the  2d
light  dragoons,
and  he  was  pro-
moted major  on  7
April,  1777.  A
separate  detach-
ment for  special
services  was  com-
mitted to  him
several  times  during  the  war,  and  he  then  received
his  orders  directly  from  the  commander-in-chief.
He  participated  in  the  battles  of  Short  Hills  and
Brandywine,  and  at  Germantown  his  detachment
was  at  the  head  of  Gen.  John  Sullivan's  division.
By  order  of  Gen.  Washington,  Maj.  Tallmadge
repeatedly  threw  his  dragoons  across  the  principal
thoroughfare  to  check  the  retreat  of  the  infant-
ry. He  was  stationed  with  his  troops  at  Valley
Forge  in  1777,  reconnoitred  the  country  between
Schuylkill  and  Delaware  rivers,  and  served  at
Monmouth.  On  5  Sept.,  1779,  he  became  colonel,
and  performed  a  brilliant  exploit  in  crossing  Long
Island  sound  to  Lloyd's  Neck,  L.  I.,  where  he  sur-
prised and  captured  500  Tory  marauders  without
the  loss  of  a  man.  In  1780  he  planned  and  con-
ducted the  expedition  that  resulted  in  the  taking
of  Fort  George  at  Oyster  Bay,  L.  I.,  and  the  de-
struction of  the  British  stores  on  the  island,  for
which  service  he  received  the  thanks  of  congress.
He  was  for  some  time  a  member  of  Washington's
military  family  and  carried  on  with  him  an  im-
portant confidential  correspondence  in  1778-'83.
Col.  Tallmadge  had  the  custody  of  Maj.  John
Andre  until  his  execution,  and  walked  with  him
to  the  scaffold,  where  they  bade  an  affectionate
farewell.  Years  afterward  Tallmadge  wrote :  "  I
became  so  deeply  attached  to  Major  Andre  that
I  can  remember  no  instance  where  my  affections
were  so  fully  absorbed  in  any  man.  When  I  saw
him  swinging  under  the  gibbet  it  seemed  for  a
time  as  if  I  could  not  support  it."  After  the  war
he  returned  to  Litchfield,  where  he  engaged  suc-
cessfully in  mercantile  pursuits.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Federalist  and  served  from
7  Dec,  1801,  till  3  March,  1817.  Col.  Tallmadge
was  made  the  first  treasurer  and  subsequently
president  of  the  Connecticut  Society  of  the  Cin-
cinnati, and  was  much  esteemed  for  his  social
qualities  and  numerous  gifts  to  public  and  pri-
vate charities.  In  1782  he  bought  the  property
in  Litchfield  that  is  still  known  as  the  Tallmadge
Place,  and  is  now  the  summer  residence  of  his
granddaughter,  Mrs.  William  Curtis  Noyes.  Yale
gave  him  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1778. He  pre-

Dared his '*  lW"**mr»i»K2 of f Vm RpmiAet r\f hie flVnl-


Memoirs  at  the  Request  of  his  Chil-


26


TALLMADGE


TALMAGE


dren,"  which  were  printed  privately  by  his  son,
Frederick  Augustus  Tallmadge  (New  York,  1859).
Col.  Tallmadge  married  the  daughter  of  Gen.
William  Floyd,  a  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  In-
dependence. —  His  son,  Frederick  Augustus,
lawyer,  b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  29  Aug.,  1792 ;  d.
there,  17  Sept.,  1869,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1811,  studied  law  at  the  Litchfield  law-school,  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  and  began  practice  in  New
York.  During  the  closing  months  of  the  war  with
Great  Britain  he  commanded  a  troop  of  volunteer
cavalry  on  Long  Island.  He  was  made  an  alder-
man of  New  York  in  1834,  a  common  councilman
in  1836.  and  was  a  state  senator  from  1837  till  1840,
serving  as  president  of  that  body  and  at  the  same
time  as  ex-officio  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
errors.  In  1841-'6  he  was  recorder  of  New  York,
and  he  held  this  office  again  from  1848  till  1851.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig  and  served
from  6  Dec,  1847,  till  3  March,  1849.  From  1857
till  1862  he  was  general  superintendent  of  the  Met-
ropolitan board  of  police,  and  in  1862-'5  he  was
clerk  of  the  court  of  appeals.  Afterward  he
practised  law  in  New  York  city.  He  became  best
known  for  the  energy  that  he  displayed  while  he
was  recorder  in  suppressing  the  Astor  place  riot
of  May,  1849.  (See  Forrest,  Edwin.)— Another
son,  William  Smith,  served  as  a  colonel  in  the
war  of  1812.

TALLMADGE,  James,  lawver,  b.  in  Stanford,
Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  28  Jan.,  1778  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  29  Sept.,  1853.  His  father,  Col.  James  (1744
to  1821),  led  a  company  of  volunteers  at  the  cap-
ture of  Gen.  John  Burgoyne.  After  graduation  at
Brown  in  1798  the  son  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  practised  several  years  in  Pough-
keepsie  and  New  York,  and  also  gave  attention  to
agriculture,  owning  a  farm  in  Dutchess  county.
For  some  time  he  was  private  secretary  to  Gov.
George  Clinton,  and  during  the  war  of  1812-'15
he  commanded  a  company  of  home-guards  in  the
defence  of  New  York.  He  was  elected  a  repre-
sentative to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  served
from  1  Dec,  1817,  till  3  March,  1819,  but  declined
a  re-election.  In  that  body  he  defended  Gen.  An-
drew Jackson's  course  in  the  Seminole  war,  and  in-
troduced, as  an  amendment  to  the  bill  authorizing
the  people  of  Missouri  to  form  a  state  organiza-
tion, a  proposition  to  exclude  slavery  from  that
state  when  admitted  to  the  Union.  In  support  of
this  amendment  Gen.  Tallmadge  delivered  a  pow-
erful speech,  15  Feb.,  1819,  in  opposition  to  the
extension  of  slavery.  This  was  widely  circulated,
and  was  translated  into  German.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  New  York  constitutional  conventions
of  1821  and  1846,  a  member  of  the  state  assembly
in  1824,  and  delivered  a  speech  on  5  Aug.,  1824,  on
the  bill  to  provide  for  the  choice  by  the  people  of
presidential  electors.  In  1825-'6  he  was  lieuten-
ant-governor of  New  York,  and  while  holding  this
office  he  delivered  a  speech  at  the  reception  of
Lafayette  in  New  York  on  4  July,  1825.  In  1836
he  visited  Russia,  and  aided  in  introducing  into
that  country  several  American  mechanical  inven-
tions, especially  cotton-spinning  machinery.  From
1831  till  1850  he  was  president  of  the  American
institute,  of  which  he  was  a  founder.  He  also
aided  in  establishing  the  University  of  the  city  of
New  York,  which  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
in  1838.  and  he  was  president  of  its  council  for
many  years.  Gen.  Tallmadge  was  a  leading  expo-
nent of  the  Whig  doctrine  of  protection  to  Ameri-
can industry,  and  published  numerous  speeches
and  addresses  which  were  directed  to  the  encour-
agement of  domestic  production. He  also  deliv-


ered a  eulogium  at  the  memorial  ceremonies  of
Lafayette  by  the  corporation  and  citizens  of  New
York,  26  June,  1834.  Gen.  Tallmadge  was  an
eloquent  orator  and  vigorous  writer.  His  only
daughter  was  one  of  the  most  beautiful  women  in
the  country,  and  after  her  return  from  Russia,  to
which  court  she  accompanied  her  father,  married
Philip  S.  Van  Rensselaer,  of  Albany,  third  son  of
the  patroon.  Their  only  surviving  son,  James
Tallmadge  Van  Rensselaer,  is  a  well-known  lawyer
of  New  York  citv.

TALLMADGE,  Nathaniel  Pitcher,  senator,
b.  in  Chatham,  N.  Y,  8  Feb.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Battle
Creek,  Mich.,  2  Nov.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1815,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1818,  and  served  in  the  lower  house  of  the
legislature  in  1828,  and  in  the  state  senate  in
1830-'3.  He  was  then  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
and  served  from  2  Dec,  1833,  till  17  June.  1844,
when  he  resigned.  In  1844  he  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  Wisconsin  territory,  changing  his  resi-
dence from  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  to  Fond  du  Lac,
but  he  was  removed  in  1846.  Mr.  Tallmadge  be-
came a  convert  to  spiritualism.  He  published  sev-
eral speeches  and  contributed  an  introduction  and
appendix  to  Charles  Linton's  "  Healing  of  the  Na-
tions "  (New  York,  1855). — His  son,  Grier,  soldier,
b.  in  Dutchess  county,  N.  Y,  in  1826;  d.  in  Fort
Monroe,  Va.,  11  Oct.,  1862,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1848,  assigned  to  the  1st
artillery,  and  served  on  garrison  duty  in  the  west.
In  1861  he  was  made  captain  in  the  quartermas-
ter's department  at  Fort  Monroe,  discharging  also
the  duties  of  assistant  adjutant-general.  The  "  con-
traband "  idea  put  into  practice  by  Gen.  Benjamin
F.  Butler  is  said  to  have  originated  with  him.

TALLMAN,  Peleg,  merchant,  b.  in  Tiverton,
R.  I.,  24  July,  1764 ;  d.  in  Bath,  Me.,  12  March,
1840.  He  received  a  public-school  education,  and
at  the  age  of  fourteen  entered  the  privateer  service
against  Great  Britain.  He  served  on  the  "  Trum-
bull," lost  an  arm  in  the  engagement  between  this
vessel  and  the  "  Watt "  in  1780,  and  was  captured
and  imprisoned  in  England  and  Ireland  in  1781-'3.
Subsequently  he  became  master  of  a  vessel  and
afterward  a  merchant  at  Bath,  where  he  acquired
a  fortune.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, served  from  4  Nov.,  1811.  till  3  Match,  1813,
but  declined  a  re-election  and  refused  to  support
the  war  with  England.

TALMADGE,  Matthias  Burnet,  lawyer,  b.  in
Stamford,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  1  March,  1774;  d.  in
Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y,  7  Oct.,  1819.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1795,  studied  law  with  Chief-Justice
Spencer  at  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  and  began  the  practice
of  his  profession  at  Herkimer.  While  residing
there  he  represented  his  county  in  the  legislature,
and  the  western  district  of  New  York  in  the  state
senate.  Having  been  appointed  judge  of  the  U.  S.
district  court  for  New  York,  he  removed  to  New
York  city,  where  he  won  distinction  as  a  jurist.  In
1811  he  united  with  the  Baptist  church  in  Pough-
keepsie, and  thenceforth  became  active  in  the  en-
terprises of  that  denomination.  He  married  Eliza-
beth, daughter  of  Gov.  George  Clinton.

TALMAGE,  John  Van  Nest,  missionary,  b.  in
Somerville,  N.  J.,  18  Aug.,  1819.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Rutgers  in  1842  and  at  New  Brunswick
seminary  in  1845,  in  which  year  he  was  licensed
by  the  classis  of  Philadelphia.  Since  1846  he  has
been  a  missionary  of  the  Reformed  church  in
China.  Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1867.  He  has  translated  several  books  of  the
Bible  into  the  Amoy  colloquial  dialect,  and  is  the
author  of  a  "  Chinese-English  Dictionary  "  (1888).


TALMAGE


TALON


27


/T'^e  fottr  /^/w.^


— His  brother,  Thomas  De  Witt,  clergyman,  b.
in  Bound  Brook,  N.  J.,  7  Jan.,  1832,  was  educated
at  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  the
class  of  1853,  but  was  not  graduated.  After  gradu-
ation at  New  Brunswick  theological  seminary  in

1856,  he  was  or-
dained pastor  of  the
Reformed  Dutch
church  in  Belle-
ville, N.  J.  He
had  charge  of  the
church  in  Syracuse,
N.  Y.,  from  1859
till  1862,  and  of
one  in  Philadelphia
in  1862-9.  During
the  civil  war  he  was
chaplain  of  a  Penn-
sylvania regiment,
and  he  is  now  chap-
lain of  the  13th
9^r  New  York  regi-
ment. In  1869  he
was  made  pastor  of  the  Central  Presbyterian  church
in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  which  post  he  still  holds.  In
1870  his  congregation  erected  a  new  semicircular
church  of  wood  and  iron  capable  of  seating  3,400

Persons.  This  building,  known  as  the  Brooklyn
'abernacle,  was  enlarged  in  1871  so  as  to  seat  500
more,  but  it  was  destroyed  by  fire  on  22  Dec,  1872.
On  22  Feb.,  1874,  a  new  Tabernacle  was  dedicated.
It  is  in  the  Gothic  style,  with  seats  for  5,000  per-
sons, and  is  the  largest  Protestant  church  in  this
country.  In  1872  he  organized  in  the  building  that
was  formerly  occupied  by  his  congregation  a  lay
college  for  religious  training.  He  is  a  popular  lec-
turer, and  appears  once  a  week  in  this  capacity.
He  attracts  large  audiences  and  his  sermons  are
published  weekly  in  nearly  600  religious  and  secu-
lar journals  in  this  country  and  in  Europe,  being
translated  into  various  languages.  The  University
of  the  city  of  New  York  gave  him  the  degree  of
A.  M.  in  1862,  and  he  received  that  of  D.  D.  from
the  University  of  Tennessee  in  1884.  In  addition
to  numerous  lectures  and  addresses  and  sketches
and  light  essays  on  moral  subjects,  which  have
been  printed  in  magazines  and  weekly  papers,  he
has  edited  "  The  Christian  at  Work  "  (New  York,
1873-'6);  "The  Advance,"  of  Chicago  (1877-8);
and  he  now  conducts  "  Frank  Leslie's  Sunday  Maga-
zine." Dr.  Talmage  has  published  "  The  Almond-
Tree  in  Blossom  "  (Philadelphia,  1870) ;  "  Crumbs
swept  Up  "  (1870) ;  "  Sermons  "  (4  vols.,  New  York,
1872-'5) ;  "  Abominations  of  Modern  Society  "  (New
York.  1872 ;  2d  ed.,  1876) ;  "  One  Thousand  Gems,
or  Brilliant  Passages  and  Anecdotes  "  (1873) ;  "  Old
Wells  dug  Out"  (1874);  "Around  the  Tea-Table"
(Philadelphia,  1874);  "Sports  that  Kill"  (New
York,  1875) ;  "  Every-Day  Religion  "  (1875) ;  "  Night
Sides  of  Citv  Life"  (1878);  "Masque  torn  Off"
(1879) ;  "  The  Brooklyn  Tabernacle,  a  Collection  of
104  Sermons"  (1884);  and  "The  Marriage  Ring"
(1886).  Two  other  brothers  are  ministers  —  the
Rev.  Dr.  James  R.  of  the  Congregational,  and  the
Rev.  Goyn  of  the  Reformed  Dutch  church.

TALMAGE,  Samuel  Kennedy,  educator,  b.  in
Somerville,  N.  J.,  in  1798;  d.  in  Midway,  Ga.,  2
Oct.,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1820  and  was  tutor  there  in  1822-5.  From  1838
till  1841  he  was  professor  of  ancient  languages  at
Oglethorpe  university,  of  which  he  was  president
from  1841  until  his  death.  Princeton  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1845.  He  contributed  to
the  "Southern  Presbyterian  Review,"  and  pub-
lished several  sermons  and  addresses.


TALON,  Indian  chief,  b.  about  1675.  He  was
also  called  Jeax  le  Blanc  and  Outoutaga,  the
latter  being  probably  his  real  name.  He  was  chief
of  the  Ottawas  du  Sable,  and  an  able  orator.  His
eloquence  gave  him  great  influence,  and  he  was
spokesman  for  the  Indian  allies  of  the  French  in
their  conference  with  Oallieres,  the  French  gov-
ernor of  Canada  in  1701.  In  1706  the  Ottawas
made  an  attack  on  Detroit,  and  having  seized  the
Recollet  chaplain  of  the  fort,  Father  Constantin,
were  about  to  slay  him,  when  Talon  saved  him
from  death  and  begged  him  to  ask  the  comman-
dant to  stop  firing  on  them,  as  they  had  no  designs
on  the  fort,  but  only  on  the  Miamis,  who  were  pro-
tected by  it.  He  retired  shortly  afterward  with
his  tribe  to  Mackinaw.  In  June,  1707,  he  set  out
for  Montreal,  as  the  spokesman  of  the  Ottawa
chiefs.  He  made  a  long  harangue  to  Vaudreuil,
the  governor,  in  which  he  stated  that  the  trouble
at  Detroit  had  been  occasioned  by  the  comman-
dant, Bourgmont,  who  refused  him  an  audience  no
less  than  seven  times.  Vaudreuil  refused  to  make
peace  until  the  surrender  of  Le  Pesant,  a  chief
who  was  supposed  to  have  been  principally  instru-
mental in  urging  the  Ottawas  to  attack  the  Miamis.
Le  Pesant  gave  himself  up,  but,  on  the  entreaty  of
Talon  and  other  chiefs,  was  pardoned.

TALON,  Edouard  (tah-long),  Flemish  adminis-
trator, b.  in  Ghent  in  1759;  d.  in  Bruges  in  1819.
He  early  entered  the  Portuguese  service  and  held
for  twenty  years  important  offices  under  the  gov-
ernment of  Brazil.  In  1810  he  was  secretary  of
the  commission  to  mark  the  boundary  between  the
Portuguese  and  Spanish  possessions  in  South
America,  and  from  1812  till  1815  he  was  chief  of
the  local  administration  of  French  Guiana,  which
had  been  surrendered  to  the  Portuguese.  He  re-
turned to  Europe  in  1817.  and  died  suddenly  at
Bruges  during  a  journey.  His  works  include  "  Me-
morial sobre  a  administracao  das  provincias  de
Minas-Geraes  e  Rio  Grande  do  Sul "  (Lisbon,  1804) ;
"  Estatistica  politica  e  commercial  do  Brazil "  (2
vols.,  1805) ;  "  Historia  de  Gomez  Freire  de  Andra-
da  eda  guerra  das  sete  Missoes"  (2  vols.,  1808);
"Expose  de  l'etat  present  de  la  Guiane"  (1817);
and  "Memoire  sur  l'administration  du  eapitaine
general  Victor  Hugues"  (1817).

TALON,  Jean-Baptiste,  French  administrator,
b.  in  Picardy  in  1625 ;  d.  in  Versailles  in  1691.
He  held  offices  in  the  intendancies  of  Bordeaux
and  Lyons,  was  intendant  of  Hainaut  in  1661-'3,
and  was  appointed  on
23  March,  1663,  in-
tendant of  justice,
police,  and  finance
of  Canada,  Acadia
(Newfoundland),  and
other  possessions  of
the  crown  in  North
America.  He  was
the  second  intendant
of  New  France,  which
greatly  improved  and
prospered  under  his
administration.  Af-
ter compelling  the
company  of  New
France  to  abandon
its  monopoly  of
trade  in  Canada,  he
endeavored  to  de-
velop the  resources
of  the  country,  was

the  first  to  build  ships  in  the  colony,  established  a
trade  between  Canada  and  the  West  Indies,  cod-


TALON


TANEY


fisheries  along  the  river  St.  Lawrence,  built  the  first
brewery  in  North  America,  and  tried  to  open  a  road
across  the  country  to  Acadia.  Under  his  auspices
Saint-Simon  and  Albanel  penetrated  to  Hudson
bay,  and  Daumont  de  Saint-Lusson  took  possession
in  the  king's  name  of  the  country  of  the  upper
lakes,  and  he  prepared  the  way  for  the  remarkable
series  of  explorations  that  led  to  the  discovery  of  the
whole  of  the  great  northwest.  He  urged  upon  the
king  a  measure  from  which,  according  to  Francis
Parkraan,  had  it  taken  effect,  momentous  conse-
quences must  have  sprung.  This  was  the  purchase
or  seizure  of  New  York,  involving  the  isolation  of
New  England,  the  subjection  of  the  Iroquois,  and
the  undisputed  control  for  France  of  half  the
American  continent.  He  also  established  a  military
aristocracy  in  Canada,  promoted  immigration,  and
took  special  care  to  provide  for  the  increase  of  the
population,  laying  restrictions  and  taxes  upon  the
unmarried  of"  both  sexes.  His  health  failing  in
1668,  he  asked  for  his  recall,  which  Louis  XIV.
granted  with  strong  expressions  of  regret ;  but  two
years  later  he  resumed  the  intendancy  till  1672,
when  he  returned  to  France  and  obtained  a  high
post  in  the  king's  household.  In  1671  the  seigniory
that  he  had  founded  at  Des  Islets  in  Canada  was
erected  into  a  barony :  in  1675  his  two  other  seignio-
ries of  Ormale  and  Orsainville  were  likewise  made
baronies,  and  he  afterward  took  the  title  of  Count
d'Orsainville.  In  1666  he  addressed  to  the  king  a
memoir  upon  the  Indian  company,  and  his  "  Me-
moire  a  Sa  Majeste  sur  l'etat  present  du  Canada  "
(1667),  which  is  preserved  in  the  National  library
at  Paris,  has  always  been  consulted  by  the  Canadian
historians,  and  is  greatly  praised  by  Francis  Park-
man  in  his  "  Old  Regime  in  Canada."  Talon's  por-
trait is  preserved  in  the  Hotel -Dieu  of  Quebec.

TALON,  Pierre,  explorer,  b.  in  Canada  in  the
second  half  of  the  17th  century;  d.  after  1700.
His  father,  Lucien,  accompanied  by  the  entire
family,  joined  La  Salle's  expedition  in  1684.  He
was  also,  with  a  younger  brother,  a  member  of  the
party  that  entered  the  country  of  the  Illinois  in
1687.  After  the  assassination  of  La  Salle,  Pierre
took  refuge  among  the  Cenis  Indians,  by  whom  he
was  well  treated.  On  the  arrival  of  a  Spanish
force  at  the  village,  he  was  arrested,  but  was  soon
released  and  asked  to  remain,  as  interpreter,  with
Franciscan  missionaries  who  accompanied  the  sol-
diers. He  then  told  the  Spaniards  that  his  three
brothers  and  a  sister  were  slaves  among  the  Clam-
coets  or  Carancaguaces.  and,  at  his  request,  a  de-
tachment was  sent  for  them.  Two  of  his  brothers
and  his  sister  were  rescued,  but  the  other  brother
remained  with  the  Indians  until  1691.  They  all
went  to  Mexico  after  some  time,  and  were  taken
into  the  service  of  the  viceroy.  Talon  wrote  an
account  of  the  death  of  La  Salle,  which  is  pre-
served in  the  French  depot  de  la  marine,  and  is
entitled  "  Interrogations  faites  a  Pierre  et  Jean  Ta-
lon, par  ordre  de  Mr.  le  Comte  de  Pontchartrain,  a
leur  arrivee  de  la  Vera  Cruz,  le  14  Septembre,  1698."
Charlevoix  made  use  of  this  document  in  his  ac-
count of  the  death  of  La  Salle.  He  says  that  the
author,  who  seems  strongly  prejudiced  against  La
Salle,  agrees  with  Joutel  as  to  the  manner  of  the
murder,  but  not  as  to  the  names  of  the  assassins
and  the  attendant  circumstances.

TALTON,  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ralls
county,  Mo.,  in  1854.  He  is  the  first  colored  Ro-
man Catholic  priest  in  the  United  States.  He
was  born  in  slavery  and  suffered  many  hardships
in  his  childhood,  but  at  length  escaped  with  his

Earents,  reaching  Quincy,  111.,  in  1861. In  childhood
e  showed  an  aptitude  for  learning,  and  in his


days  of  bondage  it  was  no  unusual  thing  for  him
to  sit  up  half  the  night  painfully  spelling  his  way
through  such  books  as  came  within  his  reach.  He
was  employed  in  a  tobacco-factory  in  Quincy,  but
still  continued  his  night  studies  under  the  aus-
pices of  the  professors  in  St.  Francis's  college.  In
1873,  when  he  left  the  tobacco-factory,  by  doing
odd  jobs,  he  was  able  to  spend  part  of  the  day  in
the  college.  He  set  out  for  Rome  on  15  Feb.,  1880,
and,  entering  one  of  the  colleges  of  the  Propagan-
da on  12  March,  spent  two  years  in  studying  phi-
losophy and  four  in  going  through  the  theological
curriculum,  and  attracted  the  favorable  notice  of
his  superiors.  He  was  ordained  priest  on  24  April,
1886,  and  returned  to  Quincy,  111.,  where  he  was
appointed  pastor  of  a  white  congregation.

TAMMANY,  Indian  chief,  lived  in  the  17th
century.  He  was  chief  of  the  Delawares,  and  was
variously  called  Temane,  Tamenand,  Taminent,
Tameny,  and  Tammany.  According  to  one  ac-
count, he  was  the  first  Indian  to  welcome  William
Penn  to  this  country,  and  was  a  party  to  Penn's
famous  treaty.  Another  story  places  his  wigwam
on  the  present  site  of  Princeton  college,  and  an-
other says  that  he  lived  in  the  hills  of  northeastern
Pennsylvania,  and  that  he  died  at  an  advanced
age  near  a  spring  in  Bucks  county,  Pa.  He  was  a
sagamore,  and  belonged  to  the  Lenni  Lennape
confederacy  of  New  York  and  Pennsylvania,
which  warred  perpetually  against  the  Six  "Nations
and  the  Manhattan  Indians.  The  tradition  is  that
the  evil  spirit  sought  to  gain  a  share  in  the  ad-
ministration of  his  kingdom,  but  Tammany  re-
fused to  hold  intercourse  with  him.  The  enemy
then  resorted  to  strategy,  and  attempted  to  enter
his  country,  but  was  foiled  by  the  chief,  and  at
length  determined  to  destroy  him.  A  duel  was
waged  for  many  moons,  during  which  forests  were
trampled  under  foot,  which  have  since  remained
prairie  lands.  Finally  Tammany  tripped  his  ad-
versary, threw  him  to  the  ground,  and  would  have
scalped  him,  but  the  evil  spirit  extricated  himself
and  escaped  to  Manhattan,  where  he  was  wel-
comed by  the  natives,  and  afterward  made  his
home  with  them.  Tammany  appears  to  have  been
a  brave  and  influential  chieftain,  and  his  nation
reverenced  his  memory  by  bestowing  his  name
upon  those  that  deserved  that  honor.  He  is  now
chiefly  known  as  the  patron  of  a  Democratic  po-
litical organization  in  New  York  city  called  the
Tammany  society.

TANEY,  Roger  Brooke  (taw'-ny),  jurist,  b.  in
Calvert  county,  Md.,  17  March,  1777;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  12  Oct.,  1864.  He  was  the  son  of  a
Roman  Catholic  planter,  of  a  family  that  came  to
Maryland  in  the  early  emigration  from  England,
who  had  been  educated  in  St.  Omer,  France,  and
Bruges,  United  Netherlands,  in  the  Jesuit  college,
and  was  frequently  elected  to  the  house  of  dele-
gates. The  son  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  col-
lege in  1795.  He  read  law  in  Annapolis  with  Jere-
miah Chase,  then  a  judge  of  the  general  court,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1799.  His  father,  who
was  ambitious  of  political  honors  for  his  son,  per-
suaded him  to  begin  practice  in  his  native  county,
where,  in  the  autumn  of  the  same  year,  he  was
elected  to  the  house  of  delegates.  He  was  the
youngest  member  in  that  body,  yet  was  distin-
guished for  the  maturity  of  his  opinions  and  his
dialectic  powers.  He  was  defeated  at  the  next
election  by  a  Republican,  and  in  March,  1801,  re-
moved to  Frederick.  Although  he  was  unknown
in  that  part  of  the  state,  his  acuteness,  thorough-
ness, and  eloquence  brought  him  a  lucrative  prac-
tice, and  before  many  years  passed  he  was  retained


TANEY


TANEY


29


4.


sJ>.  yyas2*Lje^s,


in  important  and  intricate  cases,  and  confronted
the  leaders  of  the  Maryland  bar.  He  was  a  candi-
date for  the  house  of  delegates  on  the  Federalist
ticket  in  1803,  but  was  defeated.  On  7  Jan.,  1806,
he  married  Anne  Phebe  Charlton  Key,  sister  of
Francis  Scott  Key,  who  had  been  his  fellow  law-
student.  In  1811  he  defended  Gen.  James  Wilkin-
son on  his  trial  be-
fore a  court-mar-
tial, thereby  shar-
ing the  odium  that
then  attached  to
that  officer,  yet  re-
fusing to  take  a  fee
for  his  services.
During  the  war
with  Great  Britain
he  led  the  wing  of
the  Federal  party
that  upheld  the
policy  of  the  gov-
ernment, and  was  a
candidate  for  con-
gress, failing  of
election  by  a  few
votes.  He  was  sent
to  the  state  senate
in  1816,  and  drew
up  many  of  the  bills
that  were  passed
during  his  term  of  service.  He  endured  the  dis-
approbation of  his  neighbors  by  courageously  ap-
S earing  in  1819  in  defence  of  Jacob  Gruber,  a
[ethodist  minister  from  Pennsylvania,  who- in  a
camp-meeting  had  condemned  slavery  in  bitter
language,  and  who  was  indicted  as  an  inciter  of
insurrection  among  the  negroes.  In  his  opening
argument  Taney  declared  of  slavery  that  "  while
it  continues,  it  is  a  blot  on  our  national  charac-
ter." In  1821  he  was  counsel  in  the  important
case  of  Brown  vs.  Kennedy,  which  involved  the
question  of  the  original  proprietary  title  to  lands
that  had  been  reclaimed  from  the  navigable  waters
of  Maryland,  and  in  the  following  year  in  one
connected  with  the  law  of  charitable  trusts.  He
removed  in  1823  to  Baltimore,  where  the  death
of  William  Pinkney,  the  retirement  of  Luther
Martin,  and  the  decease  of  other  eminent  lawyers
left  him  at  the  head  of  the  bar  until  William
Wirt  came  in  1829  to  divide  with  him  that  distinc-
tion. With  many  other  Federals  of  the  south,
Taney  passed  over  into  the  Democratic  party,  and
supported  the  candidacy  of  Andrew  Jackson  for
the  presidency  in  1824.  In  1826  he  argued  the
case  of  Ringgold  vs.  Ringgold,  in  which  the  doc-
trine of  trusts  was  discussed,  and,  with  Wirt,  rep-
resented the  state  of  Maryland  in  the  Lord  Balti-
more case  before  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  In  1827
he  was  appointed  attorney-general  of  Maryland,
and  on  27  Dec,  1831,  he  succeeded  John  M.  Ber-
rien as  attorney-general  of  the  United  States.  He
became  President  Jackson's  most  trusted  counsel-
lor, and  encouraged  and  sustained  him  in  his  deter-
mination to  remove  the  government  deposits  from
the  United  States  bank.  There  were  only  two  mem-
bers of  the  cabinet  that  approved  this  action,  and
when  William  J.  Duane  hesitated  to  carry  out  the
president's  decree  he  was  removed  and  Taney  was
appointed  secretary  of  the  treasury.  He  entered
upon  the  duties  of  the  office  on  24  Sept.,  1833,  and
two  days  afterward  issued  the  order  for  the  re-
moval of  the  deposits  on  1  Oct.  The  bank  there-
fore called  in  its  loans  and  refused  accommodation,
locking  up  a  large  part  of  the  currency,  and  pro-
ducing a  financial stringency that  affected all


classes,  for  which  the  president  was  held  respon-
sible by  the  opposition.  Sec.  Taney  was  a  special
object  of  vituperation  and  scorn,  because  he  was
supposed  to  have  been  the  "  pliant  instrument "  of
the  president  in  his  arbitrary  purpose  from  mo-
tives of  selfish  ambition.  His  nomination  to  the
office  was  sent  to  the  senate  for  confirmation  on  23
June,  1834,  having  been  withheld  till  near  the
close  of  the  session,  which,  owing  to  the  subject
most  prominently  brought  up  in  debate,  has  been
known  as  the  "panic  session."  On  24  June  the
hostile  majority  rejected  the  appointment,  it  being
the  first  time  that  a  president's  selection  of  a  cabi-
net officer  had  not  been  confirmed.  On  the  fol-
lowing day  Mr.  Taney  sent  in  his  resignation,
which  was  accepted  by  President  Jackson  in  a  let-
ter expressing  gratitude  for  his  patriotic  and  dis-
interested aid  during  the  crisis.  In  January,  1835,
on  the  retirement  of  Gabriel  Duval,  associate  jus-
tice of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  President  Jackson
named  Mr.  Taney  for  the  vacant  judgeship ;  but  the
senate  refused  to  ratify  the  nomination.  During
the  ensuing  year  the  political  complexion  of  the
senate  was  changed,  and  when,  after  the  death  of
John  Marshall,  the  president,  on  26  Dec,  1835r
nominated  Mr.  Taney  to  be  chief  justice  of  the
United  States,  he  was  confirmed  on  15  March,
1836,  by  29  votes  against  15,  notwithstanding  the
denunciations  of  Henry  Clay  and  other  political
opponents.  He  took  his  seat  on  the  bench  as  cir-
cuit judge  at  Baltimore  in  April,  beginning  his
functions  by  abolishing  the  custom  of  giving  pre-
liminary instructions  to  the  grand  jury.  In  Janu-
ary, 1837.  he  presided  over  the  full  bench.

His  first  decisions  showed  divergence  between
his  view  of  the  constitution  and  that  of  his  pred-
ecessor, who  had  been  more  and  more  drawn  to
allow  a  wide  scope  to  the  powers  of  congress  and
to  limit  the  sphere  of  state  sovereignty.  In  the
case  of  the  City  of  New  York  vs.  Miln,  Chief-Jus-
tice Taney  and  the  majority  of  the  court  decided
that  an  act  of  the  legislature  of  New  York  requir-
ing masters  of  vessels  to  make  reports  of  passen-
gers on  arriving  was  a  police  regulation  that  did  not
interfere  with  the  power  of  congress  to  regulate  for-
eign commerce.  In  the  case  of  Briscoe  vs.  the  Bank
of  the  Commonwealth  of  Kentucky,  the  court  re-
versed the  decision  of  Marshall,  who  held  that  the
act  establishing  the  bank  was  a  violation  of  the  pro-
vision of  the  constitution  that  restrains  states  from
emitting  bills  of  credit.  In  the  Charles-river-bridge
suit  he  delivered  a  judgment  under  which  state
legislatures  were  free  to  authorize  bridges,  railroads,
and  similar  improvements  without  regard  to  im-
plied contracts  in  former  grants  and  monopolies.
These  decisions  almost  impelled  Justice  Joseph
Story  to  resign,  and  caused  Chancellor  James  Kent
to  say  that  he  had  lost  confidence  in  the  constitu-
tional guardianship  of  the  supreme  court.  In  the
case  of  disputed  boundaries  between  Massachusetts
and  Rhode  Island,  the  chief  justice,  dissenting  from
the  judgment  of  the  court,  held  that  the  Federal
tribunal  had  no  power  to  decide  questions  of  politi-
cal jurisdiction  between  sovereign  states.  In  1839  he
delivered  the  opinion  in  the  case  of  the  Bank  of  Au-
gusta vs.  Earle,  in  which  he  laid  down  the  principle
that  corporations  chartered  in  one  state  may  make
contracts  in  others  by  the  comity  of  nations.  The
claim  of  the  proprietors  of  East  Jersey  to  the  oys-
ter-fisheries in  Raritan  river  was  disallowed  on  the
ground  that  fishery  rights  had  passed  with  the
powers  of  government  into  the  hands  of  the  state.
In  the  case  of  Prigg  vs.  the  Commonwealth  of
Pennsylvania,  the  chief  justice  for  the  first  time
pronounced  a  state  law  unconstitutional. Prigg,  as


30


TANEY


TANEY


agent  for  a  Maryland  slave-holder,  had  seized  and
carried  back  to  her  master  an  escaped  female  slave,
for  which  he  was  indicted  under  a  state  law,  which
made  it  a  penal  act  to  carry  a  negro  or  mulatto  by
force  out  of  the  state.  Justice  Story  delivered  the
opinion,  which  declared  the  law  unconstitutional
because  the  remedy  for  fugitives  from  labor  is
vested  exclusively  in  congress.  Chief  -  Justice
Taney  held,  however,  that  states  could  pass  laws
for  the  rendition  of  escaped  servants,  but  not  to
impair  the  right  of  the  master  to  seize  his  fugitive
slave,  which  he  declared  to  be  the  law  of  each
state.  He  concurred  with  Justice  Story  and  Jus-
tice John  McLean,  and  protected  the  rights  of  the
Federal  government  in  the  Holmes  habeas  corpus
case,  in  which  he  denied  the  authority  of  the  gov-
ernor of  Vermont  to  extradite  a  fugitive  from  jus-
tice, because  all  foreign  intercourse  belongs  to  the
Federal  government.  In  1847  the  court  decided,
in  the  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  and  New
Hampshire  license  cases,  that  a  state  can  regulate
or  prohibit  the  retail  sale  of  wines  or  spirits  that
congress  has  authorized  to  be  imported.  In  the
Massachusetts  and  New  York  passenger  cases  the
chief  justice  delivered  an  opinion  that  the  state
authorities  could  impose  a  head-tax  on  immigrants,
on  the  grounds  that  the  power  of  congress  to  regu-
late commerce  is  not  exclusive,  and  that  persons
are  not  subjects  of  commerce.  In  1849  he  declined
to  pronounce  judgment  as  to  which  of  the  con-
tending governments  of  Rhode  Island  was  the
legitimate  one,  as  it  belonged  to  the  political  and
not  to  the  judicial  department  of  the  government
to  determine  that  question.  In  1845  he  upheld
the  constitutionality  of  the  law  of  congress  that
extended  admiralty  jurisdiction  over  the  lakes  and
connecting  navigable  waters,  although  English
precedents  limited  it  to  tide-water.

In  the  midst  of  the  excitement  that  attended  the
passage  of  the  Kansas- Nebraska  bill  (30  May,  1854),
and  the  strife  of  free-soilers  and  slave-holders,  the
Dred  Scott  case,  to  which  President  Buchanan
alluded  in  his  inaugural  message,  came  before  the
supreme  court  for  decision.  It  involved  the  ques-
tion whether  congress  had  the  power  to  exclude  sla-
very from  the  territories.  The  case  was  presented
in  1854,  and,  after  being  twice  argued,  was  final-
ly decided  in  1857.  The  opinion  of  the  court  was
written  by  Chief-Justice  laney,  who  entered  into
an  elaborate  historical  exposition  of  the  status  of
the  negro,  the  other  five  judges  who  concurred  in
the  decision  delivering  separate  opinions.  He  held
that  the  plaintiff  in  error,  Dred  Scott,  was  debarred
from  seelring  a  remedy  in  the  U.  S.  circuit  court
for  Missouri,  on  the  ground  that  he  was  not  a  citi-
zen of  that  state,  and  enunciated  the  general  prin-
ciple that  negroes  could  not  become  citizens  by  the
act  of  any  state  or  of  the  United  States,  since,  be-
fore the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  the  colonies
had  special  laws  for  colored  people,  whether  slave
or  free,  and  congress  had  not  authorized  their
naturalization  or  enrolled  them  in  the  militia.
"  They  had  for  more  than  a  century  before  been
regarded  as  beings  of  an  inferior  order,  and  alto-
gether unfit  to  associate  with  the  white  race,  either
in  social  or  political  relations,  and  so  far  inferior
that  they  had  no  rights  which  the  white  man  was
bound  to  respect,  and  that  the  negro  might  justly
and  lawfully  be  reduced  to  slavery  for  his  benefit.5'
He  held,  further,  that  the  Missouri  compromise
and  other  laws  of  congress  inhibiting  slavery  in
the  territories  of  the  United  States  were  unconsti-
tutional, and  that  whatever  measure  of  freedom
Dred  Scott  may  have  acquired  by  his  residence  in
Illinois,  he  lost  by  being  subsequently  removed  into


the  territory  of  Wisconsin,  and  by  his  return
thence  to  Missouri.  This  deliverance,  made  two
days  after  the  inauguration  of  President  Buchanan,
produced  intense  excitement  throughout  the  coun-
try and  a  strong  reaction  in  favor  of  the  anti-sla-
very party.  The  chief  justice  replied  to  the  strict-
ures that  it  provoked,  and  especially  to  a  direct
attack  on  the  supreme  court  made  by  William  H.
Seward  in  the  senate,  in  a  supplementary  opinion
explaining  and  justifying  his  legal  deductions.  In
the  following  year  a  case  that  arose  under  the  fugi-
tive-slave law  of  1850  came  before  Chief-Justice
Taney.  Sherman  M.  Booth,  who  had  been  sen-
tenced by  the  U.  S.  district  court  for  aiding  in  the
escape  of  a  negro  from  slavery,  was  released  on
habeas  corpus  proceedings  by  the  supreme  court  of
Wisconsin,  which  refused  to  take  cognizance  of
the  subsequent  mandates  of  the  supreme  court  of
the  United  States  in  the  matter.  In  reviewing  the
case  Chief-Justice  Taney  affirmed  the  constitution-
ality of  the  fugitive-slave  law,  and  declared  that
"so  long  as  this  constitution  shall  endure,  this
tribunal  must  exist  with  it,  deciding  in  the  peace-
ful forms  of  judicial  procedure  the  angry  and  irri-
tating controversies  between  sovereignties  which  in
other  countries  have  been  decided  by  the  arbitrament
of  force."  The  reversal  of  the  judgment  of  the  state
court  called  forth  a  declaration  of  the  legislature  of
Wisconsin  that  the  government  of  the  United  States
was  not  the  final  judge  of  the  extent  of  its  powers,
but  that  the  states,  as  parties  to  the  compact,  have
an  equal  right  to  determine  infractions  of  their
rights  and  the  mode  of  their  redress,  and  that  the
judgment  of  the  Federal  court  was  "  void  and  of
no  force."  The  chief  question  at  issue  in  the  presi-
dential election  of  1860  was  whether  the  Dred
Scott  decision,  throwing  all  the  territories  of  the
United  States  open  to  slavery  and  denying  to  col-
ored persons  any  standing  in  courts  of  law,  should
be  maintained  as  the  true  construction  of  the  con-
stitution. On  13  March,  1861,  Chief-Justice  Taney
delivered  the  opinion  of  the  court  in  mandamus
proceedings  brought  by  the  state  of  Kentucky
against  the  governor  of  Ohio  to  compel  him  to
cause  the  arrest  and  delivery  of  Willis  Lago,  a  free
man  of  color  who,  while  under  indictment  for  as-
sisting a  slave  to  escape,  had  fled  from  Kentucky.
He  affirmed  the  right  of  Kentucky  to  demand  the
person  of  the  fugitive,  and  the  obligation  of  Ohio
to  render  him  up,  yet  denied  the  jurisdiction  of
the  U.  S.  court  in  the  ease.

When,  after  the  secession  of  the  southern  states,
martial  law  was  proclaimed  in  Maryland,  Chief-
Justice  Taney,  on  application  of  John  Merryman,
arrested  by  order  of  Gen.  George  Cadwalader,  or-
dered the  release  of  the  prisoner,  issued  an  at-
tachment against  the  officer,  and  filed  an  opinion,
to  be  laid  before  President  Lincoln,  in  which  he
denied  the  right  of  the  president  to  suspend  the
writ  of  habeas  corpus,  affirming  that  such  power  is
vested  in  congress  alone.  When  congress  passed
an  act  to  withhold  three  per  cent,  of  the  salaries  of

fovernment  officers,  Chief-Justice  Taney,  on  16
'eb.,  1863,  sent  a  letter  to  the  secretary  of  the
treasury,  Salmon  P.  Chase,  pointing  out  the  un-
constitutionality of  this  law  so  far  as  it  affected
the  judges  of  the  U.  S.  courts.  In  the  matter  of  a
seizure  of  contraband  goods,  he  delivered  on  3
June,  1863,  an  opinion  at  nisi  prius,  in  which  he
censured  the  duplicity  of  the  government  detecti  vas,
ordered  the  price  of  the  goods  to  be  restored  to  the
smugglers,  and  mulcted  the  provost-marshal  and
his  assistants  in  damages  and  costs.  Chief-Justice
Taney  died  on  the  same  day  on  which  the  state  of
Maryland  abolished  slavery. His  judicial  opinions


TANGUAY


TANNER


31


and  decisions  are  contained  in  the  "  Supreme  Court
Reports "  of  Benjamin  R.  Curtis,  Benjamin  C.
Howard,  and  Jeremiah  S.  Black.  His  opinions  as
a  circuit  judge  from  1836  till  1861  were  reported
by  his  son-in-law,  James  Mason  Campbell.  He
wrote  Andrew  Jackson's  farewell  address  on  retir-
ing from  the  presidency.  At  the  age  of  seventy-
seven  he  began  an  autobiography,  which  he  brought
down  to  1801,  and  which  forms  the  introduction  to
a  "  Memoir  "  by  Samuel  Tyler  (Baltimore,  1872).

TANGUAY,  Ciprian,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.
in  Quebec,  Canada,  15  Sept.,  1819.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Seminary  of  Quebec  on  15  Aug.,  1839,
ordained  priest  in  the  Roman  Catholic  church  on
14  May,  1843,  and  appointed  vicar  of  Rimouski
the  same  year.  He  was  made  cure  of  St.  Ray-
mond in  1846  and  of  Rimouski  in  1850,  in  1859
was  transferred  to  St.  Michel,  and  in  1862  ap-
pointed cure  of  St.  Henedine.  Since  1864  he  has
been  attached  to  the  department  of  agriculture  at
Ottawa.  He  was  raised  to  the  rank  of  domestic
prelate  of  the  papal  household  by  Leo  XIII.  in
1888.  He  has  published  "  Journal  d'un  voyage  de
Boston  a  l'Oregon  "  (Quebec,  1842) ;  "  Repertoire
du  clerge  Canadien  depuis  la  fondation  du  Canada  "
(1868) ;  '•  A  travers  les  registres "  (Montreal,
1886) ;  "  Monseigneur  Pourroy  de  P  Auberiviere,
5'*me  eveque  de  Quebec  "  (1886) ;  and  "  Dictionnaire
genealogique  des  families  Canadiennes"  (Mon-
treal). When  it  is  completed  this  last  work  will
form  seven  volumes :  four  have  already  appeared,
and  the  fifth  is  now  in  press.  It  is  considered  a
work  of  national  importance  in  Canada,  and  the
author  not  only  has  examined  the  registers  of
every  parish  in  the  country,  family  records,  etc.,
but  went  to  Europe  in  order  to  make  himself  ac-
quainted with  the  archives  of  the  ministry  of
marine  at  Paris  and  those  of  other  institutions.

TANNEHILL,  Adamson,  soldier,  b.  in  Freder-
ick county,  Md.,  in  1752;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  7
July,  1817.  He  received  a  public-school  education,
served  in  the  Revolutionary  war  as  captain  of
riflemen,  removed  to  Pennsylvania,  and  cultivated
a  small  farm  near  Pittsburg,  where  he  served  as
justice  of  the  peace.  He  opposed  the  whiskey  in-
surrection. From  25  Sept.  till  31  Dec,  1812,  he
was  brigadier-general  of  Pennsylvania  volunteers.
He  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
and  served  from  24  Mav,  1813,  till  3  March.  1815.

TANNEHILL,  Wilkins,  journalist,  b.  in  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  4  March,  1787 ;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,
2  June,  1858.  His  father,  Gen.  John,  served  in
the  Continental  army  during  the  Revolution.
The  son  removed  to  Lexington,  Ky.,  at  an  early
age,  and  soon  afterward  to  Nashville,  Tenn.,  where
he  became  an  editor  of  the  "  Whig,"  and  also  of
the  "  Herald,"  the  first  Henry  Clay  organ  in  Ten-
nessee. Subsequently  he  edited  "The  Orthopoli-
tan,"  a  new  literary  and  independent  paper,  and
in  1848-'9  the  "  Portfolio,"  a  journal  of  Free-
masonry. He  was  forced  to  discontinue  this,  owing
to  the  failure  of  his  eyesight,  and  in  later  years  be-
came blind.  He  was  the  author  of  a  "  Freemason's
Manual,"  containing  a  history  of  the  progress  of
the  order ;  "  Sketches  of  the  History  of  Literature  "
(Nashville,  1827);  and  "Sketches  of  the  History  of
Roman  Literature  "  (1846).

TANNER,  Benjamin,  engraver,  b.  in  New
York  city,  27  March,  1775 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
14  Nov..  1848.  At  an  early  age  he  manifested  a
talent  for  drawing  and  designing,  and  after  re-
ceiving his  education  he  began  to  learn  the  art  of
engraving.  In  December,  1799,  he  went  to  Phila-
delphia, where  he  established  his  business,  and
aided  his  brother  Henry  in  publishing  maps. In


1816  he  formed  a  bank-note  engraving  establish-
ment, under  the  name  of  Tanner,  Vallance,  Kear-
ny and  Co.,  which  he  afterward  discontinued,  and
in  1835  established  a  blank  check  note  and  draft
publishing  office,  which  he  abandoned  in  1845.
His  engravings  include  portraits  of  Washington,
after  Savage;  Benjamin  Franklin,  after  Charles  N.
Cochin  (1822);  "Apotheosis  of  Washington,"  after  J.
J.  Barralet  (1802) ;  "  Perry's  Victory  on  Lake  Erie,
10  Sept.,  1813,"  and  "  The  Launch  of  the  Steam
Frigate  Fulton,"  after  the  same  artist  (1815);
"  Macdonough's  Victory  on  Lake  Cham  plain,  and
Defeat  of  the  British  Army  at  Plattsburg  by  Gen.
McComb,  11  Sept.,  1814,"  after  Hugh  Reinagle
(1816);  "The  Surrender  of  Cornwallis  at  York-
town,"  after  J.  F.  Renaulty;  and  "America
Guided  by  Wisdom,"  after  J.  J.  Barralet. — His
brother,  Henry  S.,  geographer,  b.  in  New  York  in
1786;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1858.  In  early  life
he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  resided  un-
til 1850,  when  he  returned  to  New  York  city.  He
engraved  and  published  many  atlases  and  separate
maps,  contributed  geographical  and  statistical  arti-
cles to  various  periodicals,  and  was  a  member  of
the  geographical  societies  of  London  and  Paris.
He  collected  a  fine  cabinet  of  shells.  His  maps  in-
clude the  "New  American  Atlas,"  with  letter-
press descriptions  (Philadelphia,  1817-'23) ;  "  The
World,"  on  a  globular  projection  (4  sheets,  1825) ;
"Map  of  the  United  States  of  Mexico"  (1825);
"  Map  of  Philadelphia  "  (1826) ;  and  "  Map  of  the
United  States  of  America "  (1829).  He  also-  pub-
lished "Memoir  on  the  Recent  Surveys  in  the
United  States  "  (2d  ed.,  1830) ;  "  View  of  the  Val-
ley of  the  Mississippi "  (1832) ;  "  American  Travel-
ler "  (1836) ;  "  Central  Traveller  "  (New  York,  1840) ;
"  New  Picture  of  Philadelphia "  (Philadelphia,
1840) ;  and  "  Description  of  the  Canals  and  Rail-
roads of  the  United  States  "  (New  York,  1840).

TANNER,  Benjamin  Tucker,  A.  M.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  25  Dec,  1835.  He  is  of  Afri-
can descent.  After  studying  at  Avery  institute
and  Western  theological  seminary,  Alleghany  City,
Pa.,  he  officiated  at  the  15th  street  Presbyterian
church  in  Washington,  D.  C,  also  organizing  the
first  school  for  freedmen  in  the  U.  S.  navy-yard,
by  permission  of  Admiral  Dahlgren.  At  the  end
of  eighteen  months  he  returned  to  his  own  church,
the  African  Methodist  Episcopal,  entering  the
Baltimore  conference  in  April,  1862.  He  labored
as  a  missionary  in  Alexandria,  where  he  organized
the  first  society  of  his  church  on  Virginia  soil.
He  was  stationed  in  1863  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  in
1864  in  Frederick,  Md.,  and  in  1866  in  Baltimore,
but  resigned  to  organize  a  proposed  conference
school  in  Frederick,  Md.,  as  well  as  to  take  charge
of  the  schools  of  the  Freedmen's  bureau  in  Fred-
erick county.  He  was  elected  secretary  of  the
general  conference  of  1868,  and  by  this  body  was
chosen  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Recorder,"  being
continued  in  this  post  by  three  subsequent  general
conferences  of  1872,  1876,  and  1880.  In  1884  he
was  elected  managing  editor  of  a  new  church  pub-
lication, the  "A.  M.  E.  Church  Review."  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Avery  college  in
1870,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from  Wilberforce  univer-
sity in  1878,  and  on  19  May,  1888,  was  elected  a
bishop.  Dr.  Tanner  has  written  prose  and  poetry
for  periodicals,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Paul  versus
Pius  Ninth"  (Baltimore,  1865);  "Apology  for
African  Methodism"  (1867);  "The  Negro's  Origin,
and  Is  the  Negro  Cursed?"  (Philadelphia,  1869);
and  "  Outline  of  the  History  and  Government  of
the  A.  M.  E.  Church  "  (1883).  He  has  ready  for
publication  "  The  Negro,  African  and  American."


32


TANNER


TAPPAN


TANNER,  Henry  S..  physician,  b.  about  1830.
Early  in  1880  much  interest  was  manifested  in  the
fasting  power  of  Mollie  Fancher,  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
who  claimed  to  have  lived  fourteen  years  with-
out food.  Dr.  William  A.  Hammond  offered  her
$1,000  if  she  would  allow  herself  to  be  watched  for
one  month  by  relays  of  members  of  the  New  York
neurological  society,  provided  she  did  not  take  any
food  voluntarily  during  that  period.  Dr.  Tanner,  at
that  time  a  practising  physician  in  Minneapolis,
Minn.,  saw  the  challenge  in  print  and  offered  to  per-
form the  experiment  under  the  conditions.  To  this
Dr.  Hammond  agreed,  saying :  "  If  he  succeeds  he
will  get  $1,000,  and  if  he  dies  I  will  give  him  a  decent
burial."  Dr.  Tanner  then  came  to  New  York  city,
and  after  some  difficulty  secured  the  co-operation
of  the  Neurological  society  in  conducting  the  fast.
It  began  at  noon  on  28  June,  1880,  and  continued
until  its  successful  termination  on  7  Aug.  Dur-
ing the  fast  his  eyes  became  slightly  dimmed,  the
top  of  his  head,  which  was  thinly  covered  with  gray
hair,  became  as  white  as  milk,  and  he  lost  ten  and
a  half  pounds  in  weight.  The  outline  of  his  feat-
ures stood  out  more  clearly,  and  his  lips  closed  more
tightly.  Dr.  Tanner  drank  eighty  ounces  of  water
during  the  first  two  days,  in  doses  ranging  from
six  to  eight  ounces  each,  after  which,  in  lieu  of
drinking,  he  simply  gargled  his  mouth  about  once
an  hour.  He  spent  the  time  reclining  on  his  cot
or  sitting  in  a  chair.  At  bedtime  he  took  a  sponge-
bath  and  was  rubbed  down  with  coarse  towels,
after  which  he  retired.  Before  he  dressed  in  the
morning  his  clothes  were  examined  to  ascertain
that  no  food  was  concealed  in  them.  His  pulse  and
temperature  were  frequently  taken,  and  his  weight
every  day.  Subsequently  he  lectured  on  fasting.
Several  persons  have  since  fasted  for  long  periods,
and  exhibitions  of  fasting  have  taken  place  both
in  this  country  and  abroad.  In  1888  John  Zachar,
residing  near  Racine,  Wis.,  went  without  food  for
fifty-three  days,  which  is  the  longest  fast  known.
His  weight  was  reduced  from  160  to  90  pounds.

TANNER,  John,  captive,  b.  in  Kentucky  about
1780 ;  d.  in  1847.  His  father  removed  from  Ken-
tucky to  the  mouth  of  Big  Miami  river,  Ohio,  and
settled  there  as  a  farmer.  At  the  age  of  six  years
the  son  was  captured  in  the  fields  by  an  Indian,
who  wished  to  adopt  a  son  in  place  of  his  own,
who  had  recently  died.  Tanner  was  compelled  to
labor  for  the  Indians,  and  thought  to  be  "good
for  nothing  "  by  his  captor,  who  tomahawked  him
and  left  him  to  die  in  the  woods,  but  he  was  found
by  his  adopted  mother,  who  treated  him  with
kindness  and  affection,  and  he  recovered.  After
two  years  he  was  sold  to  Net-no-kwa,  an  Ottawa
Indian,  and  he  remained  in  captivity  for  thirty
years.  He  became  thoroughly  accustomed  to  In-
dian life,  participated  in  many  hunting  warlike
excursions  in  the  region  of  the  great  lakes,  and
married  Mis-kwa-bun-o-kwa,  "  the  red  sky  of  the
morning."  He  afterward  fell  in  with  the  Hud-
son bay  company,  and  went  to  Detroit,  where  he
was  interviewed  by  Gov.  Lewis  Cass,  and  met  his
brother,  with  whom  he  was  unable  to  speak  except
through  an  interpreter.  After  visiting  his  family
he  returned  to  the  Indian  settlement  for  his  chil-
dren, and  was  then  employed  as  interpreter  for
the  Indian  agent  at  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Mich.  He
wrote  a  "Narrative  of  the  Captivity  and  Adven-
tures of  John  Tanner  during  Thirty  Years'  Resi-
dence among  the  Indians,"  edited  by  Edwin  James,
M.  D.  (New  York,  1830).  His  son,  James,  became
a  Unitarian  missionary.

TAPIN,  Richard  (tah-pang),  Flemish  physi-
cian, b.  in  the  duchy  of  Luxembourg  about  1515 ;  d.


there  in  1590.  He  received  his  education  in  Flan-
ders, and  early  entered  the  Portuguese  service,
being  employed  as  surgeon  on  board  ships  that
sailed  to  the  Indies.  At  the  time  of  the  invasion
of  Admiral  Villegaignon,  he  was  in  Brazil  as  sur-
geon of  the  king,  and  he  practised  his  profession
afterward  with  great  success,  holding  several  im-

Eortant  offices  in  the  colony.  After  his  return  to
lurope  he  published  a  curious  work,  "  Colloquios
dos  simples  e  drogas  do  Brazil "  (Coimbra,  1566),
which  enjoyed  a  great  reputation  for  about  a  cen-
tury in  a  revised  and  completed  French  version,
"  Histoire  des  drogues,  espiceries,  et  de  certains
medicaments  et  simples  qui  croissent  es  Bresil,
province  de  l'Amerique  "  (Paris,  1590).

TAPPAN,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Manchester,
Mass.,  21  April,  1752;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  27
April,  1803.  The  name  was  originally  Topham.
His  ancestor,  Abraham,  came  to  this  country
from  Yarmouth,  England,  in  1637,  and  his  father,
Benjamin,  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Manchester
in  1720-'90.  After  graduation  at  Harvard  in
1771,  David  studied  divinity,  and  was  pastor  of
a  Congregational  church  in  Newbury,  Mass.,  from
1774  till  1792,  when  he  was  chosen  Hollis  professor
of  divinity  at  Harvard,  serving  there  until  his
death.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Harvard  in  1794.  Dr.  Tappan  published  many
sermons  and  addresses.  After  his  death  appeared
"  Sermons  on  Important  Subjects,  with  a  Bio-
graphical Sketch  of  the  Author,"  by  Rev.  Abiel
Holmes  (Boston,  1807),  and  "  Lectures  on  Jewish
Antiquities  delivered  at  Harvard  in  1802-'3"
(1807).  —  His  son,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in
Newbury,  Mass.,  7  Nov.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Augusta,
Me.,  23  Dec,  1863,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1805,  and  was  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in
Augusta,  Me.,  from  16  Oct.,  1811,  until  his  death.
Bowdoin  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1845. —
David's  nephew,  Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  in  North-
ampton, Mass.,  25  May,  1773;  d.  in  Steubenville,
Ohio,  12  April,  1857,  was  the  son  of  Benjamin
Tappan,  who,  sacrificing  his  opportunity  of  study
at  Harvard  for  his
younger  brother,
David,  went  to
Boston,  became  a
gold-  and  silver-
smith, and  in  1770
married  Sarah
Homes,  the  great-
niece  of  Benjamin
Franklin.  After
receiving  a  public-
school  education,
the  son  was  ap-
prenticed to  learn
copper  -  plate  en-
graving  and  print-
ing, and  devoted
some  attention  to
portrait-  painting.
Subsequently  he
studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in  Steu-
benville, Ohio,  in  1799.  In  1803  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature,  and  after  the  war  of  1812,  in
which  he  served  as  aide  to  Gen.  William  Wads-
worth,  he  was  appointed  judge  in  one  of  the  county
courts,  and  for  seven  years  was  president  judge
of  the  5th  Ohio  circuit.  In  1833  he  was  appoint-
ed by  President  Jackson  U.  S.  judjje  for  the  dis-
trict of  Ohio.  Being  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
as  a  Democrat,  he  served  from  2  Dec,  1839,  till  3
March,  1845. He  was  an  active  leader  of  his  party,


TAPPAN


TAPPAN


33


but  afterward  joined  in  the  free-soil  movement  at
its  inception.  He  was  widely  known  for  his  droll-
ery and  wit  and  for  his  anti-slavery  sentiments.
Judge  Tappan  published  "  Cases  decided  in  the
Court  of  Common  Pleas,"  with  an  appendix  (Steu-
benville,  1831). — The  second  Benjamin's  brother,
John,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,
in  December,  1781 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  25  March,
1871,  entered  mercantile  life  in  Boston  in  1799,  be-
came a  partner  in  his  employer's  firm  in  1803,  and
in  1807  was  sole  manager  of  the  large  house  that
was  known  by  his  name,  but  withdrew  in  1825.
He  was  president  and  treasurer  of  the  American
tract  society,  and  was  actively  interested  in  mis-
sions and  in  many  benevolent  associations  of  Boston.
— Another  brother,  Arthur,  b.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  22  May,  1786 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  23
July,  1865,  was  locked  up  while  an  infant  in  a
folding  bedstead.  When  he  was  discovered  life
was  almost  extinct,  and  headaches,  to  which  he
was  subject  daily  through  life,  were  ascribed  to
this  accident.  He  received  a  common-school  edu-
cation, and  served  a  seven  years'  apprenticeship  in
the  hardware  business  in  Boston,  after  which  he
established  himself  in  Portland,  Me.,  and  subse-
quently in  Montreal,  Canada,  where  he  remained
until  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1812.  In  1814
he  engaged  with  his  brother  Lewis  in  importing
British  dry-goods  into  New  York  city,  and  after
the  partnership  was  dissolved  he  successfully  con-
tinued the  business  alone.  Mr.  Tappan  was  known
for  his  public  spirit  and  philanthropy.  He  was  a
founder  of  the  American  tract  society,  the  largest
donor  for  the  erection  of  its  first  building,  and
was  identified  with  many  charitable  and  religious
bodies.  He  was  a  founder  of  Oberlin  college,  also
erecting  Tappan  hall  there,  and  endowed  Lane
seminary  in  Cincinnati,  and  a  professorship  at
Auburn  theological  seminary.  With  his  brother
Lewis  he  founded  the  New  York  "Journal  of
Commerce  "  in  1828,  and  established  "  The  Eman-
cipator" in  1833,  paying  the  salary  of  the  editor
and  all  the  expenses  of  its  publication.  He  was
an  ardent  Abolitionist,  and  as  the  interest  in  the
anti-slavery  cause  deepened  he  formed,  at  his  own
rooms,  the  nucleus  of  the  New  York  city  anti-
slavery  society,  which  was  publicly  organized  un-
der his  presidency  at  Clinton  hall  on  2  Oct.,  1833.
Mr.  Tappan  was  also  president  of  the  American
anti-slavery  society,  to  which  he  contributed  $1,000
a  month  for  several  years,  but  he  withdrew  in
1840  on  account  of  the  aggressive  spirit  that  many
members  manifested  toward  the  churches  and  the
Union.  During  the  crisis  of  1837  he  was  forced
to  suspend  payments,  and  he  became  bankrupt  in
1842.  During  his  late  years  he  was  connected  with
the  mercantile  agency  that  his  brother  Lewis  es-
tablished. He  incurred  the  hatred  of  the  southern
slave-holders  by  his  frequent  aid  to  fugitives,  and
by  his  rescuing  William  Lloyd  Garrison  from  im-
prisonment at  Baltimore.  See  his  "  Life,"  by  Lewis
Tappan  (New  York,  1871).  —  Another  brother,
Lewis,  merchant,  b.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  23
May,  1788;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  21  June,  1873,
received  a  good  education,  and  at  the  age  of  six-
teen became  clerk  in  a  dry-goods  house  in  Boston.
His  employers  subsequently  aided  him  in  establish-
ing himself  in  business,  and  he  became  interested
in  calico-print  works  and  in  the  manufacture  of
cotton.  In  1827  he  removed  to  New  York  and  be-
came a  member  of  the  firm  of  Arthur  Tappan  and
Co.,  and  his  subsequent  career  was  closely  identi-
fied with  that  of  his  brother  Arthur.  With  the
latter  he  established  in  1828  the"  Journal  of  Com-
merce," of  which  he  became  sole  owner  in  1829.
vol.  vi. — 3


In  1833  he  entered  with  vigor  into  the  anti-slavery
movement,  in  consequence  of  which  his  house  was
sacked  and  his  furniture  was  destroyed  by  a  mob
in  July,  1834,  and  at  other  times  he  and  his  brother
suffered  personal  violence.  He  was  also  involved
in  the  crisis  of  1837,  and  afterward  withdrew  from
the  firm  and  established  the  first  mercantile  agency
in  the  country,  which  he  conducted  with  success.
He  was  chief  founder  of  the  American  missionary
association,  of  which  he  was  treasurer  and  after-
ward president,  and  was  an  early  member  of
Plymouth  church,  Brooklyn.  He  published  the
life  of  his  brother  mentioned  above.

TAPPAN,  Henry  Philip,  clergyman,  b.  in
Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.,  23  April,  1805;  d.  in  Vevay,
Switzerland,  15  Nov.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1825,  and  at  Auburn  theological
seminary  in  1827,  and  after  serving  for  a  year  as
associate  pastor  of  a  Dutch  Reformed  church  in
Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  became  pastor  of  a  Congrega-
tional church  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  but  resigned,
owing  to  impaired  health,  and  visited  the  West
Indies.  In  1832  he  became  professor  of  moral  phi-
losophy in  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York,
which  post  he  resigned  in  1838,  and  opened  a  pri-
vate school.  In  1852  he  was  elected  first  chancel-
lor of  the  University  of  Michigan,  and  secured
valuable  additions  to  the  literary  and  scientific  re-
sources of  the  university,  among  which  were  sev-
eral fine  instruments  for  the  observatory.  He  re-
tired in  1863,  and  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  Europe.
In  1859  he  was  elected  corresponding  member  of
the  French  imperial  institute,  and  president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  edu-
cation. He  devoted  much  attention  to  the  subject
of  university  education,  and  studied  the  systems  of
England  and  Germany.  Union  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1845,  and  Columbia  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1853.  Dr.  Tappan  published  a  "  Review  of  Ed-
wards's '  Inquiry  into  the  Freedom  of  the  Will ' "
(New  York,  1839) ;  "  The  Doctrine  of  the  Will  de-
termined by  an  Appeal  to  Consciousness  "  (1840) ;
"  The  Doctrine  of  the  Will  applied  to  Moral  Agency
and  Responsibility  "  (1841 ;  with  additions,  Glas-
gow, 1857) ;  "  Elements  of  Logic,  together  with  an
Introductory  View  of  Philosophy  in  General  and  a
Preliminary  View  of  the  Reason  "  (1844) ;  "  Trea-
tise on  University  Education"  (1851);  "A  Step
from  the  New  World  to  the  Old,  and  Back  Again
(1852) ;  and  an  "  Introduction  to  Illustrious  Per-
sonages of  the  Nineteenth  Century  "  (1853).

TAPPAN,  Mason  Weare,  lawyer,  b.  in  New-
port, N.  H.,  20  Oct.,  1817;  d.  in  Bradford,  N.  H.,
24  Oct.,  1886.  His  father,  a  well-known  lawyer,
settled  in  Bradford  in  1818,  and  was  a  pioneer  in
the  anti-slavery  movement.  The  son  was  educated
at  Kimball  union  academy,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1841,  and  acquired  a  large
practice.  He  was  early  identified  with  the  Whig
party,  and  afterward  was  a  Free-soiler  and  served
in  the  legislature  in  1853-'5.  He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Free-soiler,  by  a  combination  of  the
Whigs,  Free-soilers,  Independent  Democrats,  and
Americans,  at  the  time  of  the  breaking  up  of  the
two  great  parties,  Whigs  and  Democrats.  He
served  from  3  Dec,  1855,  till  3  March,  1861,  and
was  a  member  of  the  special  committee  of  thirty-
three  on  the  rebellious  states.  On  5  Feb.,  1861,
when  a  report  was  submitted  recommending  that
the  provisions  of  the  constitution  should  be  obeyed
rather  than  amended,  he  made  a  patriotic  speech  in
support  of  the  government.  Mr.  Tappan  was  one
of  the  earliest  to  enlist  in  the  volunteer  army  and
was  colonel  of  the  1st  New  Hampshire  regiment
from  May  till  August,  1861. Afterward  he  re-


34


TAPPAN


TARLETON


sumed  the  practice  of  law,  and  held  the  office  of
attorney-general  of  the  state  for  ten  years  preceding
his  death.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia
Loyalists'  convention  of  1866,  and  presided  over
the  New  Hampshire  Republican  convention  on  14
Sept.,  1886.  In  the  presidential  election  of  1872
he  supported  his  life-long  friend,  Horace  Greeley.

TAPPAN,  William  Bingham,  poet,  b.  in  Bev-
erly, Mass.,  29  Oct.,  1794 ;  d.  in  West  Needham,
Mass.,  18  June,  1849.  His  early  advantages  were
limited,  but  he  acquired  a  good  education  and  for
six  years  taught  in  Philadelphia.  In  1826  he  re-
moved to  Boston,  where  he  became  general  agent
of  the  American  Sunday-school  union,  and  was  en-
gaged in  the  same  work  in  Cincinnati  and  Phila-
delphia. He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1840.  His
publications  are  "  New  England,  and  other  Poems"
(Philadelphia,  1819) ;  "  Songs  of  Judah,  and  other
Melodies"  (1820);  "  Lyrics"  (1822);  "Poems"
(1834);  "Memoir  of  Capt.  James  Wilson "  (1842) ;
"Poetry  of  the  Heart "  (Boston,  1845);  "Sacred
and  Miscellaneous  Poems "  (1846) ;  "  Poetry  of
Life"  (1847);  "The  Sunday-School,  and  other
Poems  "  (1848) ;  and  "  Late'  and  Early  Poems  "
(Worcester.  Mass.,  1849).

TARAVAL,  Sigismond,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lodi,
Italy,  26  Oct.,  1700 ;  d.  probably  in  Italy.  He  en-
tered the  Jesuit  novitiate  on  31  Oct.,  1718,  went  to
Mexico,  and  thence  to  California,  where  he  founded
the  mission  of  Santa  Rosa.  He  discovered  the
islands  of  Afagua  and  Amalgua  on  the  Pacific
coast,  afterward  known  as  Los  Dolores,  and  col-
lected a  large  number  of  documents  for  a  history
of  California.  His  manuscript  work,  entitled  "  Re-
lacion  del  Martirio  de  los  PP.  Tomas  Tello  y  En-
rique Ruhen,  muertos  por  los  Indios  Seris,"  is  in
the  Library  of  Mexico.

TARBELL,  John  Adams,  physician,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  31  March,  1810;  d.  there,  21  Jan.,  1864.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1832,  and  studied
medicine  in  Paris  for  three  years,  receiving  his  de-
gree from  Bowdoin  in  1836.  He  began  practice  in
Boston,  and  in  1843  became  a  homoeopathist.  He
was  associate  editor  of  the  "  Quarterly  Homoeopath-
ic Review "  (Boston,  1853-'4),  edited  John  Epos's
"  Domestic  Homoeopathy  "  and  "  The  Pocket  Ho-
moeopathist "  (Boston,  1849) ;  and  was  the  author
of  "  Sources  of  Health  "  (1850)  and  "  Homoeopathy
Simplified  "  (1856-'62).

TARBELL,  Joseph,  naval  officer,  b.  about  1780 ;
d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  24  Nov.,  1815.  He  entered  the
navy  as  a  midshipman,  5  Dec,  1798,  was  promoted
to  lieutenant,  25  Aug.,  1800,  and  served  in  Preble's
squadron  during  the  Tripolitan  war.  He  was  in-
cluded in  the  vote  of  thanks  to  Preble  and  his
officers  by  act  of  congress,  3  March,  1805,  was  pro-
moted to  master-commandant,  25  April,  1808,  and
commanded  the  frigate  "  John  Adams  "  in  1811— '14.
He  was  commissioned  a  captain,  24  July,  1813,  and
rendered  good  service  in  the  defence  of  Craney
island  and  James  river  in  June,  1813,  capturing
three  barges  and  forty  prisoners  when  the  British
were  repelled  in  this  attack.  He  was  then  stationed
at  Norfolk,  Va.,  where  he  died.

TARBOX,  Increase  Niles,  author,  b.  in  East
Windsor,  Conn.,  11  Feb.,  1815;  d.  in  West  New-
ton, Mass.,  3  May,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1839,  studied  theology  while  acting  as
tutor  there  in  1842-'4,  and  from  1844  till  1851  was

Siastorof  a  Congregational  church  in  Framingham,
dass.,  which  he  left  to  become  secretary  of  the
American  education  society,  later  the  American
college  and  education  society,  in  Boston,  Mass.
This  office  he  filled  till  1884.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  D.D.  from  Yale  and  from  Iowa  college  in


1869.  He  wrote  extensively  on  historical  and  re-
ligious subjects  for  the  "  New  Englander,"  "  Bib-
liotheca  Sacra,"  "  Historic-Genealogical  Register,"
and  other  periodicals,  was  in  1849-'51  associate
editor  of  the  "  Congregationalist,"  contributed
many  poems  and  hymns  to  that  and  other  journals,
and  from  1881  till  his  death  was  historiographer
for  the  New  England  historic-genealogical  society.
Dr.  Tarbox  published  juvenile  books  entitled  the
"Winnie  and  Walter  Stories"  (4  vols.,  Boston,
1860) and  "  When  I  was  a  Boy"  (1862) ;  "  Nineveh,
or  the  Buried  City"  (1864);  "The  Curse,  or  the
Position  occupied  in  History  by  the  Race  of  Ham  "
(1865);  "Tyre  and  Alexandria  the  Chief  Commer-
cial Cities  of  Scripture  Times  "  (1865) ;  "  Missionary
Patriots:  James  H.  and  Edward  M.  Schneider"
(1867) ;  "  Uncle  George's  Stories  "  (1868) ;  "  Life  of
Israel  Putnam  (Old  Put),  Major-General  in  the  Con-
tinental Army  "  (1876) ;  "  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  and
his  Colony  in  America  "  (1884) ;  "  Songs  and  Hymns
for  Common  Life"  (1885);  and  "Diarv  of  Thomas
Robbins,  D.  D."  (2  vols.,  1886-'7).

TARDIVAL,  Julius  Paul,  Canadian  journal-
ist, b.  in  Covington,  Ky.,  2  Sept.,  1851.  He  re-
moved to  Canada  in  1868,  was  educated  at  St.
Hyacinth  college,  in  the  province  of  Quebec,  was
assistant  editor  of  "  Le  Canadien  "  in  1874,  and  is
editor  of  "  La  verite,"  in  Quebec,  which  he  founded
in  1881.  He  was  assistant  government  translator
at  Ottawa  from  1879  till  1881.  Mr.  Tardival  has
published  "  Vie  du  Pape  Pie  IX..  ses  ceuvres  et  ses
douleurs  "  (Quebec,  1878) ;  "  Borrowed  and  Stolen
Feathers,  or  a  Glance  through  Mr.  James  M.
Lemoine's  Latest  Work, '  The  Chronicles  of  the  St.
Lawrence '  "  (1878) ;  "  L'Anglicisme,  voila  l'en-
nemie"  (1879);  and  "Melanges"  (1887).

TARIEU  DE  LANAUDIERE,  Charles  (tah-
ree-uh),  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Canada  in  1744;
d.  there  in  1841.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  took
part  in  the  battle  of  Saint  Foye,  as  an  officer  in  the
regiment  de  la  Sarre,  and  was  severely  wounded.
He  went  to  France  with  his  regiment  after  the  sur-
render of  Montreal,  visited  the  principal  courts  of
Europe,  and  married  shortly  after  his  return  to
Canada.  In  1775  he  held  a  command  in  the  Cana-
dian militia,  and  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Ameri-
cans in  a  skirmish  on  the  frontier.  He  was  instru-
mental in  saving  Gen.  Carleton  from  capture  when
Benedict  Arnold  reached  Montreal,  escorting  the
English  leader  to  Quebec  at  the  head  of  three  hun-
dred Canadians.  He  was  made  aide-de-camp  on
Carleton's  staff,  and  several  years  later  master
of  the  waters  and  forests.  Tarieu  made  frequent
journeys  to  Europe,  the  expenses  of  which  impaired
his  fortune.  When  he  returned  to  Canada  in  1787
he  endeavored  to  turn  his  influence  with  the  Cana-
dian government  to  account,  in  order  to  obtain  a
change  in  the  system  of  seignorial  tenures,  and
presented  a  petition  to  this  effect  in  January,  1788.
The  result  of  the  changes  he  asked  for  would
enable  the  Canadian  seigneurs  to  draw  larger
revenues  from  their  fiefs  by  throwing  them  open
to  American  and  English  settlers.  The  measure
was  opposed  by  most  of  the  other  great  proprie-
tors, and  the  agitation  that  then  began  was  not
settled  until  1854,  when  the  question  of  land-ten-
ure in  Canada  received  a  definitive  solution.  In
1792  he  was  created  a  member  of  the  legislative
council,  which  post  he  held  till  his  death,  and  in
which  his  talents,  combined  with  his  influence  over
successive  governors,  gave  him  great  power.

TARLETON,  Sir  Banastre,  bart.,  British  sol-
dier, b.  in  Liverpool,  21  Aug.,  1754;  d.  in  England,
23  Jan.,  1833.  He  came  to  America  with  Lord
Cornwallis  in  Sir  Peter  Parker's  squadron  in  May,


TARLETON


TASCHER  DE  LA  PAGERIE


35


1776.  He  was  major  in  Col.  Harcourt's  regiment
of  dragoons,  and  accompanied  Harcourt  in  the
raid  upon  Baskingridge,  N.  J.,  which  resulted  in
the  capture  of  Gen.  Charles  Lee,  13  Dec. Little  is

heard  of  him  dur-
ing the  next  three
years.  In  Decem-
ber, 1779,  he  accom-
panied the  expedi-
tion of  Sir  Henry
Clinton  to  South
Carolina  with  the
rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel.  He  raised
and  organized  a
troop  known  as  the
"British  legion,"
or  sometimes  as
"  Tarleton's  le-
gion." It  com-
prised both  light
infantry  and  cav-
alry, with  a  few
field  -  pieces,  and
was  thus  a  minia-
ture army  in  itself.
It  was  made  up
partly  of  British
regulars,  partly  of
New  York  loyalists,  and  was  further  recruited  by
loyalists  of  South  Carolina.  At  the  head  of  this
legion  Tarleton  soon  made  himself  formidable  in
partisan  warfare.  In  the  difficult  country  of  the
Carolinas,  with  poor  roads,  frequent  swamps  or
pine-barrens,  and  scant  forage,  he  could  move  far
more  rapidly  than  the  regular  army,  and  his  blows
were  delivered  with  sudden  and  crushing  effect.
After  Clinton's  capture  of  Charleston,  12  May,  1780,
Col.  Buford's  regiment,  which  had  been  "march-
ing toward  Charleston,  began  its  retreat  to  Vir-
ginia, but  Tarleton,  giving  chase,  overtook  and
overwhelmed  it  at  Waxhaw  Creek,  near  the  border
between  the  two  Carolinas.  Nearly  all  Buford's
men  were  slaughtered,  and  thenceforth  the  phrase
"  Tarleton's  quarter  "  was  employed  to  denote
wholesale  butchery.  At  Camden,  15  Aug.,  Tarle-
ton completed  the  ruin  of  Gen.  Gates's  left  wing.
At  Fishing  Creek,  18  Aug.,  he  surprised  Gen.
Thomas  Sumter,  and  utterly  routed  and  dispersed
his  force;  but  at  Blackstock's  Hill,  20  Nov.,  Sum-
ter returned  the  compliment,  and  severely  defeated
Tarleton.  Early  in  January,  1781,  Lord  Corn-
wallis  sent  Tarleton,  with  1,100  men,  westward  to
the  mountain  country  to  look  after  Gen.  Daniel
Morgan,  who  was  threatening  the  British  inland
posts.  At  the  Cowpens,  17  Jan.,  Morgan,  with  900
men,  awaited  his  attack  and  almost  annihilated  his
force  of  1,100  men  in  one  of  the  most  brilliant
battles  of  the  war.  Tarleton  accompanied  Corn-
wallis  during  his  campaigns  in  North  Carolina  and
Virginia.  In  June,  1781,  he  made  a  raid  upon
Gov.  Jefferson's  house  at  Monticello :  but  the  gov-
ernor, forewarned,  had  escaped  to  the  mountains  a
few  minutes  before  Tarleton  s  arrival.  He  remained
with  Cornwallis  until  the  surrender  at  Yorktown.
On  returning  to  England  he  was  promoted  colonel.
In  1790  he  was  elected  to  parliament  from  Liver-
pool, and  was  so  popular  that  all  the  expenses  of
the  election  were  borne  by  his  friends.  He  was
member  of  parliament  in  1790-1800,  and  again  in
1807-12.  In  1817  he  reached  the  grade  of  lieu-
tenant-general, and  was  made  a  baronet,  6  Nov.,
1818.  Ross,  the  editor  of  Cornwallis's  "Corre-
spondence," says  (p.  44)  that,  in  the  house  of  com-
mons, Tarleton  "  was  notorious  for  his  criticisms


on  military  affairs,  the  value  of  which  may  be  esti-
mated from  the  fact  that  he  almost  uniformly  con-
demned the  Duke  of  Wellington."  He  published
a  "  History  of  the  Campaigns  of  1780  and  1781  in
the  Southern  Provinces  of  North  America  "  (Lon-
don, 1787).  This  book  has  value  in  so  far  as  it
contains  many  documents  that  cannot  elsewhere
be  obtained  except  with  great  labor.  As  a  narra-
tive it  is  spoiled  by  the  vanity  of  the  author,  who
distorts  events  for  his  self-glorification  to  a  degree
that  is  seldom  paralleled  in  books  of  this  charac-
ter. The  work  was  severely  criticised  by  Col.  Rod-
erick Mackenzie,  "Strictures  on  Lieutenant-Colonel
Tarleton's  History  "  (London,  1787).  Mackenzie  in
turn  was  answered  by  Tarleton's  second  in  com-
mand, Major  George  Hanger,  afterward  Lord  Cole-
rain,  "  Address  to  the  Army  in  Reply  to  Colonel
Mackenzie's  Strictures  "  (London,  1787).  The  best-
known  portrait  of  Tarleton  is  the  one  by  Sir  Joshua
Reynolds  (1782),  representing  him  in  full  uniform,
with  his  foot  on  a  cannon,  from  which  the  accom-
panying vignette  is  copied.  Among  the  English
colonel's  American  friends  was  Israel  Halleck,  a
loyalist,  father  of  Fitz-Greene,  who  was  for  a  time  a
member  of  his  military  family,  and  between  whom
and  Tarleton  there  was  an  enduring  friendship.

TASCHER  DE  LA  PAGERIE,  Joseph
(tash-ah-),  Chevalier,  French  soldier,  b.  in  the
castle  of  La  Pagerie,  near  Blois.  in  1701 ;  d.  in
Trois  Islets,  Martinique,  in  1762.  He  was  descended
from  a  family  of  German  origin  that  settled  in
Blaisois  about  the  12th  century,  and  whose  mem-
bers served  with  credit  in  the  army  and  in  the
magistracy.  In  1726  he  settled  in  Martinique,
where  he  married  a  wealthy  Creole,  Aymer  de  la
Chevalerie,  and  held  for  several  years  the  office  of
lieutenant  of  the  king  in  Saint  Pierre.  During  the
English  invasion  in  1756  he  armed  his  slaves,  led
them  to  the  front,  and  was  dangerously  wounded
at  the  attack  on  Grande  Savane. — His  son,  Joseph
Gaspard,  Chevalier,  and  afterward  Baron,  b.  in
Carbet,  Martinique,  5  July,  1735  ;  d.  in  Trois
Islets,  6  Nov.,  1790,  became,  when  seventeen  years
old,  a  page  to  the  Dauphine  Marie  Josephe,  served
afterward  as  lieutenant  in  the  marines,  and  fought
against  the  English  when  they  invaded  Martinique
in  1756.  After  the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1763  he
was  retired  with  the  brevet  of  captain,  made  a
knight  of  Saint  Louis,  and  devoted  himself  to
agricultural  pursuits  on  his  large  estate  at  Trois
Islets.  He  published  several  treatises  on  colonial
methods  of  culture. — By  his  wife,  Rose  Claire
des  Vergers  de  Sannois  (b.  in  Saint  Pierre,
Martinique,  27  Aug.,  1736;  d.  in  Trois  Islets,  2
June,  1807),  he  had  three  daughters,  the  eldest  of
whom  was  Marie  Josephine  Rose,  who  became  the
Empress  Josephine.

TASCHER  DE  LA  PAGERIE,  Louis  Robert
Pierre  Claude,  Count  and  afterward  Duke,
West  Indian  soldier,  b.  in  Fort  de  France,  Mar-
tinique, 1  April,  1787 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  3
March,  1861.  He  was  a  first  cousin  to  Empress
Josephine,  and  received  his  early  education  in
Martinique.  Napoleon  Bonaparte  summoned  him
to  France  in  1802,  and  placed  him  at  the  military
school  of  Fontainebleau.  He  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant in  1806,  assisted  in  the  battle  of  Eylau,
was  aide-de-camp  to  Napoleon  at  the  battle  of
Friedland,  served  under  Junot  in  Portugal  in
1808,  was  afterward  aide-de-camp  to  Prince  Eu-
gene de  Beauharnais,  son  of  Empress  Josephine,
and,  accompanying  him  to  Bavaria  in  1815,  be-
came a  major-general  in  the  Bavarian  army.  He
was  created  a  senator  of  the  empire  on  31  Dec,
1852,  and  made  on  27  Jan.,  1853,  grand-master  of


36


TASCHEREAU


TASSE


the  Empress  Eugenie's  household,  which  post  he
retained  till  his  death.  By  his  marriage  with
Princess  Marie  de  Leyen,  he  had  several  sons,  "one
of  whom  was  for  some  years  French  consul-gen-
eral in  New  Orleans,  Porto  Rico,  and  Havana.

TASCHEREAU,  Elzear  Alexandre  (tash-
er-o),  Canadian  cardinal,  b.  in  Sainte  Marie  de  la
Beauce,  province  of  Quebec,  17  Feb.,  1820.  His
great-grandfather,  Thomas  Jacques  Taschereau,
emigrated  from  Touraine,  France,  and  in  1746
was  granted  the  seigniory  of  Sainte  Marie  de  la

Beauce.  When  he
was  eight  years  of
age  Elzear  was  en-
tered as  a  pupil  at
the  Seminary  of
Quebec,  and  when
he  was  seventeen
he  went  to  Rome,
where  a  year  later
he  received  the
tonsure.  The  same
year  he  returned
to  Quebec,  resum-
ing his  theological
studies,  and  on  13
Sept.,  1842,  was
ordained  a  priest.
Soon  afterward  he
was  appointed  to
the  chair  of  moral
philosophy  in  the
Seminary  of  Quebec,  which  he  filled  for  twelve  years,
and  during  this  period  displayed  liberal  tendencies,
opposing  the  ultramontane  element  in  the  church
to  which  he  belonged.  In  1847,  during  the  prev-
alence of  a  fatal  fever  among  the  emigrants  at
Grosse  island,  he  volunteered  to  assist  the  chaplain
at  that  place  in  ministering  to  the  sick  and  dying,
and  labored  untiringly  among  them  until  he  was
stricken  by  the  pestilence.  In  1854  he  was  sent  to
Rome  by  the  second  provincial  council  of  Quebec
to  present  its  decrees  for  ratification  to  Pius  IX.,
and  he  remained  two  years  in  the  city,  studying
canon  law.  In  July,  1856,  the  degree  of  doctor
of  canon  law  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  Roman
seminary.  Soon  afterward  he  returned  to  Quebec,
and  became  director  of  the  Petit  seminaire,  which
post  he  held  till  1859,  when  he  was  appointed
director  of  the  Grande  seminaire,  and  a  member
of  the  council  of  public  instruction  for  Lower
Canada.  In  1860  he  became  superior  of  the  semi-
nary and  rector  of  Laval  university,  and  in  1862
he  accompanied  Archbishop  Baillargeon  on  a  visit
to  Rome,  and,  returning  toward  the  end  of  the  same
year,  was  appointed  vicar-general  of  the  diocese
of  Quebec.  In  1865  he  again  went  to  Rome  on
business  connected  witli  the  university,  in  1866  (his
term  of  office  as  superior  having  expired)  ho  was
again  made  director  of  the  Grande  seminaire,  and
three  years  later  he  was  re-elected  superior.  He
attended  the  ecumenical  council  at  Rome  in  1870,
and  on  the  death  of  the  archbishop  of  Quebec  in
October  of  the  same  year  he  became  an  adminis-
trator of  the  archdiocese  conjointly  with  Vicar-
General  Cazeau.  In  February,  1871,  he  was  ap-
pointed archbishop  of  Quebec,  and  he  was  conse-
crated on  19  March  by  Archbishop  Lynch,  of
Toronto.  Subsequently  he  visited  Rome  several
times  on  business  of  importance,  and  in  1886  he
became  the  first  Canadian  cardinal,  the  beretta
being  conferred  upon  him  with  great  ceremony  on
21  July  at  Quebec.  Immediately  after  his  eleva-
tion Cardinal  Taschereau  issued  a  circular  letter
forbidding  the  use  of spirituous  and  fermented


liquors  at  bazaars,  and  also  prohibiting  the  holding
of  such  sales  on  Sundav.

TASCHEREAU,  Jean  Thomas,  Canadian  ju-
rist, b.  in  Quebec,  12  Dec,  1814.  He  studied  law,
was  admitted  as  an  advocate  in  1836,  appointed
professor  of  commercial  law  in  Laval  university  in
1855,  and  was  assistant  judge  of  the  superior  court
of  Quebec  m  1850,  1855,  and  1858.  He  became
queen's  counsel  in  1860,  puisne  judge  of  the  supe-
rior court  of  Quebec  in  1865,  and  judge  of  the  court
of  queen's  bench  in  1873,  and  he  was  puisne  judge  of
the  supreme  court  of  Canada  in  1875-'8. — His  son,
Henri  Thomas,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Quebec,  6
Oct.,  1841,  was  graduated  in  law  in  1861,  admitted
as  an  advocate  in  1863,  entered  parliament  in  1872,
and  was  appointed  puisne  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Lower  Canada  in  1878.  He  edited  "  Les
debats"  in  1862  and  "La  tribune"  in  1863.—
Jean  Thomas's  cousin,  Henri  Elzear,  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  St.  Mary's,  Beauce,  Canada  East,  7
Oct.,  1836.  He  was  educated  at  the  Seminary  of
Quebec,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1867,  and  practised  in  the  city  of  Quebec.  He
represented  Beauce  in  the  Canadian  assembly  from
1861  till  1867,  when  he  was  defeated  as  a  candi-
date for  the  Dominion  parliament.  He  was  ap-
pointed clerk  of  the  peace  for  the  district  of  Que-
bec in  1868,  but  soon  resigned  and  became  puisne
judge  of  the  superior  court  of  the  province  of  Que-
bec, 12  Jan.,  1871,  and  of  the  supreme  court  of  the
Dominion  in  October,  1878,  in  succession  to  Jean
Thomas  Taschereau.  He  is  a  cousin  of  Cardinal
Taschereau.  He  has  published  "  The  Criminal  Law
for  the  Dominion  of  Canada,  with  Notes,  Commen-
taries, Precedents  of  Indictments,  etc."  (2  vols.,
Montreal  and  Toronto,  1874-'8 ;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,
Toronto,  1888) ;  and  "  Code  de  procedure  civile  du
Bas  Canada,"  with  annotations  (Quebec,  1876).

TASISTRO,  Louis  Fitzgerald,  author,  b.  in
Ireland  about  1808 ;  d.  about  1868.  He  received  a
liberal  education,  travelled  in  various  countries,  and
while  yet  a  young  man  came  to  the  United  States.
He  edited  a  paper  in  New  York  city,  and  afterward
one  in  Boston,  wrote  for  periodicals,  and  essayed
the  dramatic  profession,  making  his  appearance  as
Zanga,  in  "  The  Slave,"  at  the  Park  theatre,  New
York  city,  and  afterward  as  Hamlet,  at  the  Chest-
nut street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  31  Aug.,  1831.
Subsequently  he  settled  in  Washington,  D.  C,
where  he  was  for  several  years  translator  for  the
department  of  state.  Afterward  he  engaged  in
lecturing  and  literary  work.  He  was  the  author  of
"  Travels  in  the  Southern  States :  Random  Shots
and  Southern  Breezes  "  (New  York,  1842).

TASSE,  Joseph,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  Mon-
treal, 23  Oct.,  1848.  He  was  educated  at  Bourget's
college,  and  afterward  connected  himself  with  the
press.  In  1867  he  became  editor  of  "  Le  Canada  "
at  Ottawa,  and  from  1869  till  1872  he  was  associate
editor  of  "La  Minerve  "  in  Montreal,  and  at  the
same  time  a  director  of  "Le  revue  Canadienne,"
to  which  he  contributed  essays  on  history,  literature,
and  political  economy.  He  was  afterward  employed
as  assistant  French  translator  of  the  house  of  com-
mons, and  in  1873  visited  Europe,  publishing  a  de-
tailed account  of  his  travels.  He  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  French  Canadian  institute  of  Ottawa
in  1872  and  1873,  was  a  delegate  to  the  French
national  convention  at  Montreal  in  1874,  and  took
an  active  part  in  its  deliberations  regarding  the
return  of  expatriated  Canadians  from  the  United
States.  He  declined  to  become  a  candidate  for  the
Canadian  parliament  in  1874,  was  elected  to  that
body  for  Ottawa  in  1878,  and  was  re-elected  in  1882.
He  was  chosen  president  of  the  Quebec  press  asso-


TASSEMACHER


TATNALL


37


ciation  in  1883,  and  has  been  a  frequent  lecturer
before  national  and  literary  societies  in  Canada  and
the  United  States.  Among  other  works  he  has
published  the  pamphlets  "  Philemon  Wright,  ou
colonisation  et  commerce  de  bois  "  (Montreal.  1871);
"  Le  chemin  de  fer  Canadien  Paciflque "  (1872) ;
and  "  Le  vallee  de  l'Outawais "  (1872) ;  and,  in
book-form,  "  Les  Canadiens  de  .  l'ouest  "  (2  vols.,
1878).  The  purport  of  the  last  work  is  to  demon-
strate that  French  Canadians  have  been  chiefly
the  pioneers  and  discoverers  of  the  United  States
and  also  the  Canadian  northwest.  It  has  been
partly  translated  in  the  collections  of  the  Histori-
cal societv  of  Wisconsin.

TASSEMACHER,  or  TESSCHENMAEKER,
Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Holland  about  1650;  d.
in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  8  Feb.,  1690.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  University  of  Utrecht,  came  to  King-
ston, N.  Y.,  in  1675,  where  he  preached  in  both  Eng-
lish and  Dutch,  and  then  spent  two  years  in  Dutch
Guiana.  Gov.  Edmund  Andros,  on  30  Sept.,  1679,
authorized  the  Dutch  clergymen  to  examine  and
ordain  him  for  the  church  at  New  Amstel,  Del.
The  assembling  of  this  body  constituted  the  first
American  classis  or  ecclesiastical  gathering  of  the
Reformed  church  that  was  held  on  this  continent,
as  well  as  the  first  ordination  of  a  domine.  He
preached  on  Staten  island  in  1679-'82,  and  then  lived
at  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  until  1690,  when  he  was  slain
in  the  massacre.  Orders  had  been  given  to  spare  his
life  and  obtain  his  papers,  but  these  the  Indians  dis-
regarded. His  farm  of  eighty  acres  on  Staten  island
was  claimed,  2  Nov.,  1692,  for  the  poor  fund.

TASS1N,  Charles  Stanislas  (tas-sang),  South
American  artist,  b.  in  Berbice,  Guiana,  in  1751 ;
d.  in  Paris  in  October,  1812.  He  studied  with
Watteau,  and  became  one  of  his  best  pupils.  In
1773  he  exhibited  a  "  Christ  in  the  Cradle,"  which
attracted  much  attention,  and  procured  for  the
artist  a  prize  of  $600  from  Louis  XV.  Later  he
produced  "  Venus  and  Cupid  "  (1777) ;  several  pas-
toral pictures ;  "  A  Runaway  Match  "  (1784) ;  "  Over
the  Wall"  (1786);  "Peasants  Dancing"  (1788);
"  Marchioness  as  Shepherdess "  (1790),  and  other
pictures;  and  obtained  the  title  of  royal  painter.
He  also  decorated  several  panels  in  the  castles  of
Trianon,  Sceaux,  and  Luciennes,  painted  portraits
of  Madame  du  Barry,  Duke  de  la  Vauguyon,  Ad-
miral d'Estaing,  Bailly  de  Suffren,  and  Duchess
Jules  and  Countess  Diane  de  Polignac.  In  1791
he  went  to  England  and  executed  portraits  of  Will-
iam Pitt,  Charles  James  Fox,  and  Edmund  Burke,
and,  having  inherited  a  large  estate  in  Guiana,  re-
turned to  his  native  land  in  1795,  remaining  there
till  the  peace  of  Amiens,  when  he  returned  to  Paris
in  1802.  His  later  works  include  "Sunset  in
Guiana  "  (1799) ;  "  Fish- Vender  at  Berbice  "  (1802) ;
"  A  Creole  "  (1803) ;  and  "  Love  Victorious  "  (1805).

TASTER  A,  Jacques  (le  (tah-stay-rah),  French
missionary,  b.  in  Bayonne  in  1480;  d.  in  Mexico,  8
Aug.,  1544.  He  served  a  few  years  in  the  army,  but,
despite  fair  prospects  of  advancement,  became  a
Franciscan  friar  at  Seville  in  1508,  and  soon  attained
to  the  highest  ranks  in  the  order.  After  preaching
with  success  at  Seville  he  was  appointed  court  chap-
lain of  Ferdinand  of  Aragon,  and  later  he  became  a
favorite  with  Charles  V.,  who  offered  him  a  bishop-
ric ;  but  he  declined,  and  in  1529  went  to  New  Spain.
From  Mexico  he  went  to  Champoton  in  Yucatan,
where  he  founded  a  convent,  and  for  years  he
travelled  alone  in  the  country,  accompanied  only
by  one  interpreter,  evangelizing  the  Indians  and
preaching  the  gospel  with  success.  In  1533  he  was
appointed  prior  of  the  Convent  of  Santo  Evangelio
at  Mexico,  and,  continuing  to  interest  himself  in


the  welfare  of  the  Indians,  summoned  and  presided
over  councils  of  Franciscan  missionaries  at  Michoa-
can  and  Guatemala  in  1535  and  1537,  where  means
for  the  protection  of  the  conquered  nation  were
devised,  an  embassy  being  sent  to  the  holy  see  to
obtain  its  ratification  of  the  measures.  In  1541  he
went  to  Milan  and  took  part  in  the  general  coun-
cil of  the  Franciscan  order  in  that  city,  and  before
returning  to  Mexico  obtained  from  the  pontiff  an
encyclical  letter  to  the  Spanish  officials,  advising
them  to  show  leniency  toward  the  Indians.  In
1542  he  was  appointed  commissary-general  of  the
Franciscan  friars  in  the  New  World,  which  post  he
held  until  his  death.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Arte
de  la  lengua  Mexicana  "  (Seville,  1555),  and  "  Lit-
ters? annuae  Mexicans  "  (1571).  The  recent  pub-
lication, "  Cartas  de  Indias,"  prepared  by  the  Span-
ish government  from  manuscripts  in  the  state
archives,  contains  several  letters  of  Tastera.

TATHAM,  William,  engineer,  b.  in  Hutton,
England,  in  1752 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  22  Feb..
1819.  He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1769,  entered
a  mercantile  establishment  on  James  river,  Va.,
and  served  as  adjutant  of  militia  against  the  In-
dians. He  studied  the  character  and  customs  of
the  red  men,  and  wrote  biographical  accounts  of
Atakullakulla,  Oconistoto,  Cornstalk,  and  other
warriors.  During  the  Revolutionary  war  he  served
as  a  colonel  in  the  Virginia  cavalry  under  Gen.
Thomas  Nelson,  and  was  a  volunteer  in  the  party
that  stormed  the  redoubt  at  Yorktown.  In  1780.
with  Col.  John  Todd,  he  compiled  the  first  exact
and  comprehensive  account  of  the  western  country.
After  the  Revolution  he  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1784.  removed  to  North  Carolina,  and
in  1786  founded  the  settlement  of  Lumberton.  He
was  a  member  of  the  North  Carolina  legislature  in
1787.  Tatham  went  back  to  England  in  1796,  and
in  1801  became  superintendent  of  the  London
docks,  but  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1805,
and  became  poor  in  his  old  age.  He  was  given  the
office  of  military  store-keeper  in  the  Richmond
arsenal  in  1817,  and  while  there  committed  suicide
by  throwing  himself  before  a  cannon  at  the  moment
of  discharge.  His  publications  include  "  Memorial
on  the  Civil  and  Military  Government  of  the  Ten-
nessee Colony";  "An  Analysis  of  the  State  of
Virginia"  (Philadelphia,  1790-'l);  "Two  Tracts
relating  to  the  Canal  between  Norfolk  and  North
Carolina  " ;  "  Plan  for  Insulating  the  Metropolis
by  Means  of  a  Navigable  Canal"  (London,  1797):
"Remarks  on  Inland  Canals"  (1798);  "Polit-
ical Economy  of  Inland  Navigation,  Irrigation,
and  Drainage"  (1799);  "Communications  on  the
Agriculture  and  Commerce  of  the  United  States  "
(1800) ;  "  Historical  and  Practical  Essay  on  the
Culture  and  Commerce  of  Tobacco "  (1800) ;  "Na-
tional Irrigation"  (1801);  "Oxen  for  Tillage"
(1801) ;  and  two  reports  "  On  the  Navigation  of  the
Thames  "  (1803).

TATNALL,  Henry  Lea,  artist,  b.  in  Brandy-
wine  Village,  Del..  31  Dec,  1829  ;  d.  in  Wilmington,
Del,  26  Sept.,  1885.  After  being  educated  at  the
Friends'  Westtown  boarding-school,  Chester  co.,
Pa.,  he  entered  the  flour-mills  of  Tatnall  and  Lea
as  a  clerk,  but  afterward  turned  his  attention  to
agriculture.  In  1856  he  removed  to  Wilmington
and  began  the  lumber  business,  and  at  the  same
time  cultivated  his  musical  and  artistic  talent,
which  showed  itself  in  early  life.  He  could  play
on  almost  every  instrument,  and  composed  and
set  to  music  many  popular  songs.  His  friends
induced  him  to  fit  up  a  studio  over  his  count-
ing-house, where  the  intervals  of  business  were
devoted  to  the  study  and  practice  of  marine  and


38


TATTNALL


TATTNALL


landscape  painting.  His  success  was  rapid  and
extraordinary,  and  in  a  few  years  his  orders  were
so  numerous  that  he  turned  the  lumber  business
over  to  his  sons,  opened  a  larger  studio,  and  de-
voted the  remainder  of  his  life  to  his  adopted  pro-
fession. He  was  called  the  father  of  Wilmington
art,  and  on  the  formation  of  the  Delaware  artists'
association  he  was  elected  its  president.

TATTNALL,  Josiah,  statesman,  b.  in  Bonaven-
ture,  near  Savannah,  Ga.,  in  1762 ;  d.  in  Nassau,
New  Providence,  6  June,  1803.  Upon  the  revolt  of
the  American  colonies  he  and  his  brother  were
obliged  to  go  to  England  with  their  father  and
grandfather,  who  remained  loyal  to  the  British
crown  but  refused  service  in  the  army  to  coerce  the
colonies.  The  family  estates  in  Georgia  were  con-
fiscated by  the  Americans  because  of  their  absence
in  England.  In  1780  Josiah  ran  away  from  his
parents  in  England  and  returned  to  this  country,
where  he  joined  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene's  army  and
served  against  the  British  until  the  close  of  the
war.  In  recognition  of  this  service  the  state  of
Georgia  restored  a  part  of  the  confiscated  estates
to  him.  He  was  the  third  captain  of  the  Chatham
artillery,  colonel  of  the  1st  Georgia  regiment,  and
brigadier-general  commanding  the  1st  division  of
the  Georgia  state  militia.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Georgia  legislature,  a  U.  S.  senator  in  1796-'9,
and  governor  of  Georgia  in  1800.  He  served  in
the  general  assembly  at  Louisville  in  1796,  when
the  Yazoo  act  of  1795  was  rescinded.  His  remains
were  brought  from  Nassau  and  are  buried  at  Bona-
venture,  which  estate  has  been  converted  into  a
cemetery. — His  son,  Josiah,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Bonaventure,  near  Savannah,  Ga.,  9  Nov.,  1795 ;  d.
in  Savannah,  Ga.,  14  June,  1871,  was  educated  in

England  under
the  supervision
of  his  grandfa-
ther in  1805-
'11.  He  returned
to  the  United
States  in  1811
and  entered  the
navy  as  a  mid-
shipman, 1  Jan.,
1812.  He  served
in  the  war  of
1812  in  the  sea-
men's battery  on
Craney  island,
and  with  a  force
of  navy  -  yard
workmen  in  the

ing  the  Algerine
war  he  participated  in  the  engagements  of  De-
catur's squadron.  He  returned  to  the  United
States  in  September,  1817,  was  promoted  to  lieu-
tenant, 1  April,  1818,  and  served  in  the  frigate
"  Macedonian,"'  on  the  Pacific  station,  in  1818-'21.
In  1823-'4  he  served  in  the  schooner  "Jackal,"  one
of  Porter's  "  Mosquito  fleet,"  in  the  suppression  of
piracy  in  the  West  Indies.  In  October,  1828,  he
was  appointed  1st  lieutenant  of  the  sloop  "  Erie,"
in  the  West  Indies,  where  he  cut  out  the  Spanish
cruiser  "  Federal,"  which  had  confiscated  American
property  at  sea  during  the  wars  of  the  Spanish-
American  republics  for  independence.  In  August,
1829,  he  took  charge  of  the  surveys  of  the  Tortugas
reefs  off  the  coast  of  Florida,  which  surveys  proved
to  be  of  great  value  for  the  location  of  fortifications
at  Dry  Tortugas.  In  March,  1831,  he  took  com-
mand of  the  schooner  "Grampus"  in  the  West


Indies,  and  in  August,  1832,  he  captured  the  Mexi-
can war-schooner  "  Montezuma  "  for  illegal  acts
against  an  American  vessel.  His  services  with  the
"  Grampus  "  in  protecting  American  commerce
elicited  letters  of  thanks  from  the  merchants  and
insurance  companies  at  Vera  Cruz  and  New  Orleans,
from  whom  he  also  received  a  service  of  silver.  In
December,  1832,  he  was  relieved  of  his  command
at  his  own  request,  and  he  subsequently  served  on
duty  in  making  experiments  in  ordnance  and  in
the  conduct  of  the  coast  tidal  survey.  In  Novem-
ber, 1835,  in  command  of  the  bark  "  Pioneer,"  he
took  Gen.  Santa- Anna  to  Mexico  after  he  had  been
captured  in  a  battle  with  the  Texans  and  surren-
dered to  the  United  States.  Upon  their  arrival  at
Vera  Cruz,  Tattnall  personally  prevented  an  attack
on  Santa- Anna  by  an  excited  mob  of  his  opponents.
He  was  promoted  to  commander,  25  Feb.,  1838,  and
placed  in  charge  of  the  Boston  navy-yard.  While
on  his  way  to  the  African  station  in  the  "  Saratoga  "
in  1843  he  encountered  a  hurricane  off  Cape  Ann,
Mass.,  and  won  a  brilliant  professional  reputation
by  the  skill  he  displayed  in  cutting  away  the  masts
and  anchoring  when  almost  on  the  rocks  off  the
cape.  When  war  was  declared  with  Mexico  he
was  assigned  to  command  the  steamer  "  Spitfire,"
joined  the  squadron  at  Vera  Cruz,  and  was  given
command  of  the  Mosquito  division.  With  this  he
covered  the  landing  of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott's  army,
and  assisted  in  the  bombardment  of  the  citv.  After
the  fall  of  Vera  Cruz  he  led  in  the  attack  on  the
forts  at  Tuspan  and  was  severely  wounded  in  the
arm  by  grape-shot.  The  legislature  of  Georgia
gave  him  a  vote  of  thanks  and  a  sword.  He  was
promoted  to  captain,  5  Feb.,  1850,  and  in  command
of  the  steamer  "Saranac"  contributed  much  to
preserve  peace  between  the  United  States  and  Spain
during  the  Cuban  insurrection.  On  15  Oct.,  1857,
he  was  appointed  flag-officer  of  the  Asiatic  station.
He  found  China  at  war  with  the  allied  English  and
French  fleets,  and  went  to  the  scene  of  operations
at  Pei-ho.  Shortly  before  an  engagement  his  flag-
ship grounded  and  was  towed  off  by  the  English
boats.  This  service  was  taken  as  an  excuse  for
subsequent  active  participation  in  the  attack  on
the  Chinese.  In  explanation  of  his  violation  of
neutrality,  Tattnall  exclaimed  that  "blood  was
thicker  than  water."  He  was  sustained  in  his  course
by  public  opinion  at  the  time  and  also  by  the  gov-
ernment. On  20  Feb.,  1861,  he  resigned  his  com-
mission as  captain  in  the  navy,  and  offered  his
services  to  the  governor  of  Georgia.  He  was  com-
missioned senior  flag-officer  of  the  Georgia  navy,  28
Feb.,  1861,  and  in  March,  1861,  he  became  a  captain
in  the  Confederate  navy,  and  was  ordered  to  com-
mand the  naval  defences  of  Georgia  and  South
Carolina.  On  7  Nov.,  1861,  he  led  an  improvised
naval  force  against  the  attack  on  Port  Royal.  He
conducted  attacks  on  the  blockading  fleet  at  the
mouth  of  the  Savannah,  constructed  batteries  for
the  defence  of  that  river,  and  materially  delayed
the  operations  of  the  National  forces.  In  March,
1862,  he  was  ordered  to  relieve  Franklin  Buchanan,
who  was  wounded  in  the  engagement  with  the
"  Monitor,"  and  took  command  of  the  "  Merrimac  "
and  the  naval  defences  of  the  waters  of  Virginia.
He  set  out  for  Hampton  Roads  on  11  April,  1862,
accompanied  by  the  gun-boats,  which  cut  out  three
merchant  vessels,  but  the  "Merrimac"  did  not
venture  to  lose  communication  with  Norfolk.
When  the  Confederates  were  forced  to  abandon  the
peninsula,  Norfolk  and  the  navy-yard  were  also
surrendered,  and  on  11  May,  1862,  Tattnall  de-
stroyed the  "  Merrimac  "  off  Craney  island  in  order
to  prevent  her  capture. He  was  then  ordered  to


TAUSTE


TAYLOR


39


resume  command  of  the  naval  defences  of  Georgia.
At  his  request  a  court  of  inquiry  was  ordered  to
investigate  the  destruction  of  the  •'  Merrimac,"  and
he  was  censured  for  destroying  the  vessel  without
attacking  the  enemy's  fleet,  and  for  not  taking  her
to  Hog  island  to  defend  the  James  river.  He  then
demanded  a  regular  court-martial,  which  met  at
Richmond,  5  July,  18(52,  and,  after  a  thorough  in-
vestigation, honorably  acquitted  him.  He  was
indefatigable  in  his  efforts  to  defend  Savannah
river,  but  in  January,  1865,  he  was  obliged  to  de-
stroy all  the  vessels  he  had  collected.  He  then  went
to  Augusta,  where  he  was  included  in  the  parole  of
the  surrender  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston's  army.
He  remained  there  until  12  June,  1866,  when  he
took  his  family  to  Nova  Scotia,  after  first  obtaining
permission  from  the  war  department  to  leave  the
country.  He  resided  near  Halifax,  but  his  pecun-
iary resources  became  nearly  exhausted,  and  in
1870  he  returned  to  his  home  in  quest  of  employ-
ment. On  5  Jan.,  1870,  the  mayor  and  city  council
appointed  him  inspector  of  the  port  of  Savannah.
He  held  this  office,  which  had  been  created  for
him,  for  seventeen  months,  when  it  was  abolished
by  his  death.  See  "  The  Life  of  Commodore  Tatt-
nall," by  Charles  C.  Jones,  assisted  by  J.  R.  F.
Tattnall,  the  commodore's  son  (Savannah,  1878).

TAUSTE,  Francisco  (tah-oo'-stay),  Spanish
missionary,!),  in  Tauste,  Aragon,  about  1630;  d.
in  Venezuela  toward  the  end  of  the  17th  century.
He  entered  the  Capuchin  order  in  Spain,  and  was
sent  as  a  missionary  to  the  coast  of  Cumana,  where
he  soon  became  proficient  in  the  Indian  languages
of  that  province,  and  evangelized  numerous  tribes.
He  wrote  "  Arte  y  Diccionario  de  la  Lengua  de
Cumana"  (Madrid,  1680),  and,  according  to  Juan
de  San  Antonio,  in  his  "  Biblioteca  Franciscana,"
left  in  manuscript  "  Doctrina  Cristiana  para  in-
struccion  de  los  Indios  Chaimas,  Cumanagotas,
Cores  y  Parias,  en  sus  respectivos  Idiomas."

TAVARES-BASTOS,  Aureliano  Candido
(tah-vah'-ravs),  Brazilian  lawyer,  b.  in  Pernambuco
in  1840 ;  d.*  in  Nice,  France,  3  Dec,  1875.  After
finishing  his  studies  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
his  native  city,  and  soon  attained  prominence  as
an  able  and  eloquent  orator.  He  was  counsel  for
several  political  prisoners,  advocated  religious  free-
dom with  great  vehemence,  and  participated  in  the
movement  that  led  to  the  abolition  of  slavery
throughout  the  empire.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Brazilian  parliament  in  1872,  but  his  health  failing
he  went  to  Nice,  where  he  died.  His  works  in-
clude "  Cartas  de  um  solitario  "  (Rio  Janeiro,  1865) ;
"  O  valle  do  rio  Amazonas  "  (1869) ;  "  Estudos  sobre
algumas  reformacOes  legislativas  "  (1870) ;  and  sev-
eral political  pamphlets.

TAYERNIER,  Jacques  (tah-vair-ne-ay),  called
Le  Lyonnais,  French  buccaneer,  b.  in  Lyons,
France,  about  1625 ;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1673.
He  early  followed  the  sea,  served  on  privateers  in
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  later  joined  the  buccaneers
in  Tortugas.  He  took  part  in  most  of  the  expe-
ditions under  the  leadership  of  Laurent  van  Graaf,
Grand  mount,  Jacques  Nau,  Pierre  le  Pieard,  Henry
Morgan,  and  other  famous  chiefs,  but  never  com-
manded a  strong  following,  as  he  was  unable  to
read  and  write.  After  1664,  however,  he  was  the
owner  of  the  ship  "  La  Perle,"  carrying  twelve  can-
nons, and  he  made  some  daring  inroads  on  the  coasts
of  Venezuela,  Panama,  Cuba,  and  even  Mexico.  He
assisted  at  the  capture  of  Maracaibo  in  1666,  and
of  Porto  Cabello  in  1667,  was  with  Morgan  at
Panama  in  1671,  and  later  ravaged  with  Bradley
the  Bay  of  Honduras.  On  returning  from  the  last
expedition  he  fell  in  with  two  Spanish  men-of-war ;


a  desperate  battle  ensued,  and  one  of  the  Spanish
ships  took  fire  and  was  obliged  to  head  for  the
coast.  Tavernier  and  his  buccaneers  boarded  the
other  vessel  and  had  nearly  captured  it,  when  a
sudden  storm  parted  the  cables  that  lashed  the  two
vessels  together.  The  buccaneers  retreated  in  great
haste  to  their  ship,  but  a  few,  including  the  chief,
were  unable  to  regain  it,  as  the  two  vessels  parted.
The  fight  continued,  nevertheless,  for  some  time  on
board  the  Spanish  vessel,  but  Tavernier  being
severely  wounded,  the  buccaneers,  deprived  of  their
chief,  lost  courage  and  were  finally  overcome.
Tavernier  was  brought  nearly  dying  to  Havana,
where  he  was  immediately  executed  before  the
palace  of  the  audiencia.

TAYLOR,  Alexander  Smith,  ethnologist,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  16  April,  1817 ;  d.  near  Santa  Bar-
bara. Cal.,  27  July,  1876.  He  received  a  limited
education,  left  Charleston  in  1837,  travelled  for
several  years  in  the  West  Indies  and  in  India  and
China,  went  to  California  from  Hong  Kong  in  1848,
and  lived  at  Monterey  till  1860,  where  he  was  clerk
of  the  U.  S.  district  court  in  1853,  and  afterward
on  a  ranch  near  Santa  Barbara.  He  has  written  for
magazines  and  newspapers  articles  on  the  Indian
races,  the  history  of  California,  and  natural  history.
He  published  a  translation  of  the  diary  of  Juan
Rodriguez  Cabrillo,  under  the  title  of  "  The  First
Voyage  to  the  Coast  of  California  "  (San  Francisco,
1853) ;  a  "  History  of  Grasshoppers  and  Locusts  of
America"  in  the  "Report"  of  the  Smithsonian
institution  for  1858 ;  "  The  Indianology  of  Cali-
fornia" in  the  "California  Farmer"  (1860-'4);
and  "  Bibliographia  Californica  "  in  the  Sacramento
" Union "  (1863-6).

TAYLOR,  Alfred,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Fairfax
county,  Va.,  23  May,  1810.  He  entered  the  navy
as  a  midshipman,  1  Nov.,  1826,  became  a  passed
midshipman,  4  June,  1831,  and  was  commissioned  a
lieutenant,  9  Feb.,  1837.  During  the  Mexican  war
he  was  attached  to  the  frigate  "  Cumberland  "  in
the  blockade  of  Vera  Cruz  and  in  some  of  the
operations  on  the  coast.  He  served  at  the  Wash-
ington navy-yard  in  1848-'51,  and  in  the  steamer
"  Mississippi "  with  Perry's  expedition  to  Japan  in
1853-'5,  was  commissioned  commander,  14  Sept.,
1855,  and  commanded  the  sloop  "  Saratoga  "  on  the
coa§t  of  Africa  when  the  civil  war  opened  in  1861.
He  was  commissioned  captain,  16  July,  1862,  and
was  attached  to  the  navy-yard  at  Boston  in  1862-'5.
He  commanded  the  flag-ship  "Susquehanna"  on
the  Brazil  station  in  1866,  and  was  promoted  to
commodore,  27  Sept.,  1866.  He  was  then  on  wait-
ing orders  until  February,  1869,  when  he  was  ap-
pointed light-house  inspector.  He  was  promoted
to  rear-admiral,  29  Jan.,  1872,  and  was  retired  by
operation  of  law,  23  May,  1872.  He  has  been  a  resi-
dent of  New  York  city  since  his  retirement.

TAYLOR,  Alfred,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1831.  He  was  pastor  of  Presbyterian
churches  at  Bristol  and  Williamsport,  Pa.  He  has
exerted  himself  for  the  improvement  of  Sunday-
school  teaching,  and  in  1870-'l  conducted  a  weekly
called  the  "  Sunday-School  Workman."  His  pub-
lications include  "Union  Praver-Meeting  Hymn-
Book  "  (Philadelphia,  1858) ;  "  Sunday-School  Pho-
tographs" (Boston  and  Edinburgh,  1864);  "Extra
Hvmn-Book"  (Philadelphia,  1864);  and  "Hints
about  Sunday-School  Work  "  (1869).

TAYLOR,  Archibald  Alexander  Edward,
educator,  b.  in  Springfield,  Ohio,  27  Aug.,  1834.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1854,  and  at  the
theological  seminary  there  in  1857.  He  was  pastor
of  a  Presbyterian  church  at  Portland,  Ky.,  in
1857-'9,  then  at  Dubuque,  Iowa,  till  1865,  for  the


40


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


next  four  years  at  Georgetown,  D.  C,  and  at  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  from  1869  till  1873.  In  1870-'2  he
was  co-editor  of  "  Our  Monthly,"  published  in  Cin-
cinnati. From  1873  till  1883  he  was  president  of
Wooster  university,  Ohio.  He  continued  to  be  con-
nected with  the  institution  as  professor  of  logic
and  political  economy  and  dean  of  the  post-gradu-
ate department  for  Ave  years  longer,  editing  in
1886-'8  "  The  Post-Graduate,"  a  quarterly  journal
of  philosophy.  He  then  became  editor  of  "The
Mid-Continent,"  the  organ  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  the  southwest,  published  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Wooster
in  1872,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  when  he  retired  from
the  presidency  in  1883.

TAYLOR,  Bayard,  author,  b.  in  Kennett
Square,  Chester  co.,  Pa.,  11  Jan..  1825;  d.  in  Ber-
lin, Germany,  19  Dec,  1878.  He  was  the  son  of
Joseph  and  Rebecca  (Way)  Taylor,  and  was  of
Quaker  and  South  German  descent.  His  first
American ancestor, Robert  Taylor,  was  a  rich

Quaker,  who  came
over  with  Penn  in
1681,  and  whose
eldest  son  inherit-
ed land  that  now
includes  "  Cedar-
croft,"  the  poet's
recent  estate.  His
grandfather  mar-
ried a  Lutheran
of  pure  German
blood,  and  was  ex-
communicated by
the  Quakers.  The
poet's  mother,  al-
though a  Luther-
an, was  attached
to  the  Quaker  doc-
trines, and  the
Quaker  speech  and
manners  prevailed
in  her  household.  Bayard  was  named  after  James
A.  Bayard,  of  Delaware,  and  his  first  book  bore  on
its  title-page,  through  a  mistake  of  Griswold,  its
editor,  the  name  of  "  James  Bayard  Taylor."  After
reaching  his  majority  he  always  signed  his  name
Bayard  Taylor.  His  boyhood  was  passed  near  Ken-
nett on  a  farm.  He  learned  to  read  at  four,  began
to  write  early,  and  from  his  twelfth  year  wrote
"poems,  novels,  historical  essays,  but  chiefly  po-
ems." At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  studied  Latin  and
French,  and  Spanish  not  long  afterward.  In  1837
the  family  removed  to  West  Chester.  There,  and  at
Unionville,  the  youth  had  five  years  of  high-school
training.  His  first  printed  poem  was  contributed  in
1841  to  the  "  Saturday  Evening  Post,"  Philadelphia.
In  1842  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer  of  West
Chester.  His  contributions  to  the  "  Post "  led  to
a  friendship  with  Rufus  W.  Griswold,  who  was
then  connected  with  that  paper  and  was  also  edi-
tor of  "  Graham's  Magazine."  Griswold  advised
him  concerning  the  publication  of  "Ximena,  and
other  Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1844),  which  was  dedi-
cated to  his  adviser  and  sold  by  subscription.  By
this  time  he  found  a  trade  distasteful,  and,  to
gratify  his  desire  for  travel  and  study  in  Europe,
he  bought  his  time  of  his  employer.  The  "  Post "
and  the  "  United  States  Gazette  "  each  agreed  to
pay  him  fifty  dollars  in  advance  for  twelve  foreign
letters.  Graham  bought  some  of  his  poems,  and
with  one  hundred  and  forty  dollars  thus  collected
he  sailed  for  Liverpool,  1  July,  1844.  Horace  Gree-
ley gave  him  a  conditional  order  for  letters  to  the
"  Tribune,"  of  which  he  afterward  wrote  eighteen


/J&yasuL Jcc^La^


from  Germany.  His  experiences  abroad  are  well
condensed  in  his  own  language :  "  After  landing
in  Liverpool,  I  spent  three  weeks  in  a  walk  through
Scotland  and  the  north  of  England,  and  then  trav-
elled through  Belgium  and  up  the  Rhine  to  Heidel-
berg, where  I  arrived  in  September,  1844.  The
winter  of  1844-'5 1  spent  in  Frankfort-on-the-Main,
and  by  May  I  was  so  good  a  German  that  I  was
often  not  suspected  of  being  a  foreigner.  I  started
off  again  on  foot,  a  knapsack  on  my  back,  and  vis-
ited the  Brocken,  Leipsic,  Dresden,  Prague,  Vien-
na, Salzburg,  and  Munich,  returning  to  Frankfort
in  July.  A  further  walk  over  the  Alps  and  through
northern  Italy  took  me  to  Florence,  where  I  spent
four  months  learning  Italian.  Thence  I  wandered,
still  on  foot,  to  Rome  and  Civita  Vecchia,  where  I
bought  a  ticket  as  deck-passenger  to  Marseilles,  and
then  tramped  on  to  Paris  through  the  cold  winter
rains.  I  arrived  there  in  February,  1846,  and  re-
turned to  America  after  a  stay  of  three  months  in
Paris  and  London.  I  had  been  abroad  for  two
years,  and  had  supported  myself  entirely  during
the  whole  time  by  my  literary  correspondence.
The  remuneration  which  I  received  was  in  all  five
hundred  dollars,  and  only  by  continual  economy
and  occasional  self-denial  was  I  able  to  carry  out
my  plan."  His  letters  were  widely  read,  and  shortly
after  his  return  were  collected  in  "  Views  Afoot,  or
Europe  seen  with  Knapsack  and  Staff  "  (New  York,
1846).  Six  editions  were  sold  within  the  year.  In
December,  1846,  Taylor  bought,  with  a  friend  as
partner,  a  printing-office  in  his  native  county,  and
began  to  publish  the  Phoenixville  "  Pioneer.'5  But
after  a  year  he  sold  his  newspaper  and  obtained  a
place  on  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "  in  the  literary
department  and  as  man-of-all-work.  In  Decem-
ber, 1848,  he  published  "  Rhymes  of  Travel,  Bal-
lads, and  Poems,"  which  gave  him  repute  as  a
poet.  In  1849-'50  he  was  sent  by  the  "  Tribune  "
to  California  to  report  on  the  gold  discoveries,
and  his  letters  were  collected  in  "  Eldorado,  or
Adventures  in  the  Path  of  Empire  "  (1850).  The
same  year  he  delivered  the  ♦  B  K  poem  at  Har-
vard. On  24  Oct.,  1850,  Taylor  married,  at  Ken-
nett, Mary  Agnew,  a  Quaker  girl  of  exquisite  char-
acter, to  whom  he  had  long  been  betrothed,  but
who  was  now  in  an  incurable  decline,  and  she  died
within  two  months.  He  obtained  an  interest  in
the  "  Tribune,"  and  also  issued  "  A  Book  of  Ro-
mances, Lyrics,  and  Songs  "  (1851).  In  the  autumn
he  again  visited  Europe  as  a  correspondent,  went
to  Egypt,  and  thence  to  Syria,  Palestine,  and  Asia
Minor,  and  reached  London  in  October,  1852.  His
instructions  next  led  him  to  join  Com.  Perry's  ex-
pedition to  Japan.  Travelling  through  Spain,  he
proceeded  to  Bombay  via  Cairo  and  Suez,  jour-
neyed through  India  to  Delhi  and  Calcutta,  thence,
to  the  Himalayas  and  back,  and  finally  voyaged  to
Hong  Kong,  China,  which  he  reached  in  March,
1853,  joining  Perry's  flag-ship  in  May,  and  obtain-
ing the  nominal  appointment  of  master's  mate.
He  remained  with  the  expedition  until  September,
sharing  its  visit  to  Japan,  and  transmitting  graphic
accounts  thereof  to  the  "  Tribune,"  besides  furnish-
ing valuable  notes  to  Perry  for  the  latter's  report
to  the  U.  S.  government.  After  his  return  home
he  was  in  demand  as  a  lecturer,  and  made  lecturing
a  vocation  throughout  much  of  his  after  career.  In
1854  he  published  "  A  Journey  to  Central  Africa  "
and  "  The  Land  of  the  Saracen."  "  A  Visit  to  In-
dia, China,  and  Japan  "  appeared  in  1855.  In  1854
he  also  brought  out  his  "  Poems  of  the  Orient,"
perhaps  his  freshest,  most  glowing  and  character-
istic book  of  verse.  The  next  year  or  two  were  oc-
cupied with  lecturing,  travelling  in  this  country,


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


41


and  authorship.  "  Poems  of  Home  and  Travel,"  a
collective  edition  of  his  verse,  and  a  revised  edition
of  "  Views  Afoot,"  came  out  in  1855.  His  income
grew  large  from  copyrights,  lecture-fees,  and  the
"  Tribune  "  stock.  He  edited  a  "  Cyclopaedia  of
Modern  Travel "  (New  York,  1856).  In  July,  1855,
he  revisited  Germany,  and  then  made  a  journey  to
Norway  and  Lapland.  His  letters  to  the  "Trib-
une "  composed  the  volume  "  Northern  Travel "
(1858).  He  married  in  October,  1857,  Marie  Han-
sen, of  Gotha,  and  spent  the  winter  of  1857-'8  in
Greece.  In  October,  1858,  they  returned  to  Ken-
nett  Square,  bringing  with  them  a  daughter,  Lilian
Bayard,  who  now  resides  at  Halle  with  her  hus-
band, Dr.  Kiliani.  Taylor  laid  the  corner-stone
of  his  country-home,  "  Cedarcrof  t,"  upon  a  gener-
ous tract  of
land  which  he
had  purchased
near  Kennett
Square.  In
1861  the  house
was  completed
and  became
his  residence.
It  is  represent-
ed in  the  ac-
companyingil-
lustration.  At
the  beginning
of  the  civil  war
he  spoke  and
wrote  for  the
National  cause,  and  in  May,  1862,  he  was  appoint-
ed secretary  of  legation.  Gen.  Simon  Cameron  be-
ing minister,  at  St.  Petersburg.  When  left  for
a  time  in  sole  charge,  he  was  influential,  as  the
files  of  the  state  department  show,  in  determining
Russia  to  extend  her  sympathy  and  active  friend-
ship to  the  U.  S.  government.  Resigning  his
office  in  1863,  he  visited  Gotha,  where  he  obtained
unusual  facilities  for  his  study  of  the  life  and
writings  of  Goethe.  After  the  loss  of  a  brother,
Col.  Frederic  Taylor,  at  Gettysburg,  he  went  home
in  the  autumn  of  1863  and  resumed  his  professional
labors.  In  1867  the  Taylors  revisited  Switzerland
and  Italy,  and  the  poet  was  brought  near  to  death
by  an  attack  of  Roman  fever.  He  made  a  trip  to
Corsica  in  1868.  Two  years  were  now  devoted  to
his  translation  of  "  Faust,"  which  was  published
in  the  United  States,  England,  and  Germany.  In
1870  he  delivered  a  course  of  lectures,  as  professor
of  German  literature,  at  Cornell  university.  He
went  again  to  Weimar  in  search  of  materials  for
biographies  of  Goethe  and  Schiller,  and  in  Febru-
ary, 1874,  revisited  Italy  and  Egypt.  Midsummer
found  him  at  the  Millennial  celebration  of  Iceland,
which  he  described  for  the  "  Tribune,"  and  reached
home  in  the  autumn.  In  1876  he  once  more  occu-
pied a  desk  in  the  "  Tribune  "  office.  On  4  July,
1876,  he  delivered  the  stately  National  ode  at  the
Centennial  celebration  in  Philadelphia.  In  1877
his  health  failed,  and  after  a  partial  recuperation
he  was  nominated  by  President  Hayes  as  minister
to  Berlin.  His  confirmation  was  followed  by  a
notable  series  of  popular  testimonials,  culminating
with  a  banquet  in  New  York,  at  which  the  poet
Bryant  presided,  4  April,  1878.  He  entered  upon
his  official  duties  in  May.  His  books  of  travel,  sub-
sequent to  those  heretofore  named,  were  "  Trav-
els in  Greece  and  Rome  "  (New  York,  1859) ;  "  At
Home  and  Abroad  "  (2  vols.,  1859-'62) ;  "  Colorado :
a  Summer  Trip  "  (1867)  ;  "  Bvways  of  Europe  "
(1869);  "Travels  in  Arabia"  (1872);  and  "Egypt
and  Iceland"  (1874). Among  his  miscellaneous


works  are  a  "  Masque,"  for  the  golden  wedding  of
his  parents  (printed  privately,  1868) ;  a  "  School
Historv  of  Germany  to  1871 "  (1874) ;  "  The  Boys
of  other  Countries  "  (1876) ;  and  "  The  Echo  Club  "
(1876). The  last-named  is  a  book  of  talk  upon
modern  poets,  with  burlesque  imitations  of  their
verse,  for  which  sparkling  by-play  Taylor  had  a
native  readiness. He  also  edited,  with  George  Rip-
ley, a  "  Handbook  of  Literature  and  Fine  Arts  "
(1852),  and,  alone,  the  "  Illustrated  Library  of  Trav-
el" (8  vols.,  1871-4),  besides  various  translations.
He  began  with  much  zest,  in  1863,  his  career  as  a
novelist,  laying  his  plots  and  scenes  in  his  own  coun-
try. "  Hannah  Thurston  "  (1863),  whose  heroine  is
a  Pennsylvania  Quakeress,  was  followed  bv  "  John
Godfrey's  Fortunes "  (1864) ;  "The  Storv'of  Ken-
nett "  (1866) ;  "  Joseph  and  his  Friend  "  (1870) ;  and
"  Beauty  and  the  Beast,  and  Tales  of  Home  "  (1872).
"  The  Story  of  Kennett "  is  the  most  complete  as  a
work  of  art. But  it  was  as  a  poet  that  Taylor
exerted  all  his  powers  and  hoped  to  be  remem-
bered, and  some  of  his  verse  reflects  his  highest
creative  mood. His  later  books  of  poetrv  comprise
"The  Poet's  Journal"  (Boston,  1862) ;'"  Poems  "
(1865) ;  "  The  Picture  of  St.  John,"  a  romantic  art-
poem  (1869) ;  "  Ballad  of  Abraham  Lincoln  "  (1869);.
"  The  Masque  of  the  Gods  "  (1872) ;  "  Lars :  a  Pas-
toral of  Norway  "  (1873) ;  "  The  Prophet :  a  Trage-
dy "  (1874) ;  "  Home-Pastorals "  (1875) ;  "The  Na-
tional Ode  "  (1876) ;  and  "  Prince  Deukalion :  a
Lyrical  Drama"  (1878). His  poetry  is  striking  for
qualities  that  appeal  to  the  ear  and  eye,  finished,
sonorous  in  diction  and  rhythm,  at  times'  too  rhetori-
cal, but  rich  in  sound,  color,  and  metrical  effects.
His  early  models  were  Byron  and  Shelley,  and
his  more  ambitious  lyrics  and  dramas  exhibit  the
latter's  peculiar,  often  vague,  spirituality. "  Lars,"
somewhat  after  the  manner  of  Tennyson^  is  his  long-
est and  most  attractive  narrative  poem. "  Prince
Deukalion"  was  designed  for  a  masterpiece;  its
blank  verse  and  choric  interludes  are  noble  in  spirit
and  mould. Some  of  Taylor's  songs,  oriental  idyls,
and  the  true  and  tender  Pennsylvanian  ballads,
have  passed  into  lasting  favor,  and  show  the  native
quality  of  his- poetic  gift. His  fame  rests  securely
upon  his  unequalled  rendering  of  "  Faust "  in  the
original  metres,  of  which  the  first  and  second  parts
appeared  in  1870  and  1871. His  commentary  upon
Part  II.  for  the  first  time  interpreted  the  motive
and  allegory  of  that  unique  structure. During  his
one  summer  in  Germany  he  was  able  only  to  revise
the  proofs  of  "  Prince  Deukalion  "  and  to  write  an
"  Epicedium  "  on  the  death  of  Bryant. Tributes
were  paid  to  his  memory  at  Berlin,  Berthold  Auer-
bach  pronouncing  an  eloquent  address. His  re-
mains, on  arriving  at  New  York,  were  honored
with  a  solemn  reception  by  the  German  societies
and  an  oration  by  Algernon  S.  Sullivan. The  body
lay  in  state  at  the  city-hall,  was  then  removed  to
Kennett,  and  there  interred,  15  March,  1879. Post-
humous collections  of  Taylor's  miscellanies,  "Stud-
ies in  German  Literature  "  (1879),  and  "  Essays  and
Notes  "  (1880),  were  edited  by  George  H.  Boker  and
Mrs.  Taylor. In  person  he  was  of  a  handsome
and  commanding  figure,  with  an  oriental  yet  frank
countenance,  a  rich  voice,  and  engaging  smile  and
manner. — His  wife,  Marie  Hansen,  b.  in  Gotha,
Germany,  2  June.  1829,  is  the  daughter  of  the  late
Prof.  Peter  A.  Hansen,  founder  of  the  Erfurt  ob-
servatory. She  zealously  promoted  her  husband's
literary  career,  and  translated  into  German  his
"Greece"  (Leipsic, 1858); "Hannah  Thurston"
(Hamburg,  1863); "  Storv  of  Kennett"  (Gotha,
1868);  "Tales  of  Home " '(Berlin,  1879);  "Studies
in  German  Literature  "  (Leipsic,  1880) ;  and  notes


42


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


to  "Faust,"  both  parts  (Leipsic,  1881).  After  her
husband's  death  she  edited,  with  notes,  his  "  Dra-
matic Works"  (1880),  and  in  the  same  year  his
"  Poems  "  in  a  "  Household  Edition,"  and  brought
together  his  "  Critical  Essays  and  Literary  Notes."
In  1885  she  prepared  a  school  edition  of  "  Lars,"
with  notes  and  a  sketch  of  its  author's  life.  After
six  years'  labor  in  collecting  and  arranging  the
poet  s  extensive  private  correspondence,  she  com-

Eleted,  with  Horace  E.  Scudder,  the  "Life  and
letters  of  Bayard  Taylor"  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1884).
TAYLOR,  Benjamin  Cook,  clergvman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  24  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Bergen,  N.  J.,
2  Feb.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1819
and  at  the  New  Brunswick  theological  seminary
in  1822,  held  various  pastorates  between  1825  and
1828,  and  from  the  latter  year  till  the  time  of  his
death  was  pastor  of  the  Reformed  church  at  Ber-
gen, the  200th  anniversary  of  which  he  commemo-
rated in  a  sermon  in  1861.  Besides  this  and  other
discourses,  he  published  "  Annals  of  the  Classis
and  Township  of  Bergen  "  (1856).  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Hobart  in  1843. — His  brother,
Isaac  Ebenezer,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
25  April,  1812,  was  educated  at  Rutgers,  and  gradu-
ated at  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1834.  He  was  engaged  in  mer-
cantile business  in  New  York  city  from  1835  till
1839,  then  began  practice,  travelled  and  studied  in
Europe  in  1840-'l,  and  after  his  return  had  charge
for  seven  years,  as  attending  physician,  of  cases  of
diseases  of  women  in  the  Eastern,  City.  Northern,
and  Demilt  dispensaries,  in  which  he  introduced  a
system  of  clinical  instruction  in  his  department.
In  1851  he  was  elected  physician  to  Bellevue  hos-
pital. In  1860  he  suggested  the  establishment  of
a  medical  college  in  connection  with  the  hospital,
and  in  the  following  year  Bellevue  hospital  medical
college  was  incorporated  and  went  into  operation,
with  Dr.  Taylor  as  its  president  and  treasurer.  In
1863,  at  his  suggestion,  an  out-door  department
was  organized  in  connection  with  the  hospital.  He
resigned  his  professorship  of  obstetrics  in  1867,
but  was  elected  emeritus  professor,  and  continued
in  the  presidency  of  the  faculty.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  medical  board  of  Bellevue  hospital
from  1868  till  1876,  when  he  ceased  his  labors  as
attending  obstetrical  physician.  From  1860  till
1874  he  was  attending  physician  to  Charity  hospi-
tal, and  for  the  first  two  years  was  president  of  its
medical  board.  As  consulting  physician,  he  is  still
connected  with  both  hospitals.  Since  1876  he  has
been  obstetrical  physician  to  the  Maternity  hospi-
tal. He  is  vice-president  of  the  American  gyne-
cological society.  He  was  one  of  the  originators
of  the  "  New  York  Medical  Journal  "  and  president
of  its  association  in  1869-'70.  As  early  as  1839
Dr.  Taylor  suggested  the  hypodermic  method  of
treatment  by  morphia  and  strychnia.  He  was  the
earliest  American  physician  to  use  the  speculum
in  diseases  of  women,  publishing  a  paper  on  the
subject  in  1841.  He  was  also  the  first  to  intro-
duce the  subject  of  uterine  auscultation,  and  in
1843  edited  Dr.  Evory  Kennedy's  work  on  that
diagnostic  method.  He  has  published  original
monographs  on  the  symptoms  and  treatment  of
Addison's  disease,  the  inhalation  of  chloroform
as  a  remedy  for  regurgitation  of  the  stomach,
the  non-shortening  of  the  cervix  uteri  during
gestation,  the  nature  of  placenta  previa,  the  seat
of  disease  in  procidentia  uteri,  the  mechanism  of
spontaneous  inversion  of  the  uterus,  and  on  con-
tracted and  faulty  pelves,  and  various  other  sub-
jects connected  with  midwifery. — A  son  of  Ben-
jamin C,  William  James  Romeyn,  clergyman,


b.  in  Schodack,  Rensselaer  co.,  N.  Y.,  31  July,  1828,
was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1841,  and  at  the
theological  seminary  at  New  Brunswick  in  1844,
and  licensed  by  the  classis  of  Bergen  in  the  latter
year.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Reformed  church  at
New  Durham,  N.  J.,  in  1844-'6,  then  in  Jersey  City
for  three  years,  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  for  about
the  same  length  of  time,  then  of  another  church
in  Jersey  City  in  1852-'4,  and  after  that  of  the  3d
Reformed  church  of  Philadelphia  till  1862,  when
he  became  corresponding  secretary  of  the  American
Bible  society.  He  resumed  the  active  work  of  the
ministry  in  1869,  and  from  that  year  has  had  charge
of  a  church  in  Newark,  N.  J.  He  presided  over  the
general  synod  in  1871.  From  1872  till  1876  he
edited  the  "  Christian  Intelligencer,"  and  attended
the  Presbyterian  councils  held  in  Philadelphia,
Belfast,  and  London.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  him  by  Rutgers  in  1860.  Dr.  Taylor  has
written  much  for  the  religious  press  and  published
hymns,  addresses,  sermons,  and  tracts.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Louisa,  a  Pastor's  Memorial "  (Phila-
delphia, 1860) ;  "  The  Bible  in  the  Last  Hundred
Years "  (1876) ;  "  Church  Extension  in  Large
Cities  "  (1880) ;  and  "  On  Co-operation  in  Foreign
Missions  "  (1884).

TAYLOR,  Bushrod  Bust,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Madison,  Ind.,  31  March,  1832  ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  22  April,  1883.  He  entered  the  navy  as  an
acting  midshipman,  3  April,  1849,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  the  naval  academy.  12  June,  1855.  He  was
promoted  to  master  on  16  Sept.,  lieutenant,  31  July,
1856,  and  served  in  the  Paraguay  expedition  of
1859.  He  went  to  the  naval  academy  as  an  in-
structor in  October,  1860,  and  assisted  in  the  re-
moval of  the  academy  from  Annapolis  to  Newport.
From  May  to  August,  1861,  he  served  in  the  flag-
ship "Colorado,"  in  the  Gulf  squadron,  on  the
blockade.  He  was  in  the  supply  and  despatch
steamer  " Connecticut "  in  1861-2,  and  was  execu-
tive of  the  steamer  "  Cimmerone  "  in  James  river  and
the  South  Atlantic  blockade  in  1862-3.  He  was
promoted  to  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,
served  in  the  steamer  "  Ticonderoga,"  flag-ship  of
the  West  India  squadron,  in  1863,  and  commanded
the  steamer  "  Kanawha,"  in  the  Western  Gulf  squad-
ron, until  28  Sept.,  1865.  He  next  served  at  the
Philadelphia  navy-yard  in  1865-'6,  and  at  the  naval
academy  as  an  instructor  in  1866-'9.  He  was  com-
missioned commander,  14  March,  1868,  and  had  the
steamer  "  Idaho,"  of  the  Asiatic  squadron,  in  1869.
In  this  vessel  he  encountered  the  centre  of  a  terrible
typhoon,  in  which  she  was  completely  dismantled
and  became  almost  a  total  wreck.  This  was  one  of
the  worst  storms,  that  was  ever  survived  by  any
ship.  He  next  commanded  the  "  Ashuelot "  on  the
same  station,  until  January,  1872,  served  at  the
Philadelphia  navy-yard  in  1872,  and  in  the  bureau
of  yards  and  docks  at  Washington  in  1872-4.  He
commanded  the  steamer  "  Wachusett  "  during  the
threatened  war  with  Spain  in  1874,  was  a  member
of  the  board  of  inspection  in  1876,  and  at  the  Bos-
ton navy-yard  in  1876-'9.  He  was  commissioned
captain,  27  Oct.,  1869,  and  had  special  duty  at  Wash-
ington in  1880.

TAYLOR,  Christopher,  Quaker  preacher,  b.
near  Skipton,  Yorkshire,  England,  about  1620 ;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  April,  1686.  He  was  a
Puritan  minister  until  he  was  converted  to  Quaker
doctrines  by  the  teachings  of  George  Fox.  He  was
a  man  of  learning,  and  expounded  his  belief  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  England  while  pursuing  the  voca-
tion of  a  teacher  of  the  classics.  After  suffering
Eersecution  and  imprisonment  for  his  convictions
e  left  his  school  at  Edmonton,  Middlesex,  and


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


43


emigrated  to  Pennsylvania.  He  settled  in  Bucks
county,  which  he  represented  in  the  first  assembly
of  the  province,  and  after  the  arrival  of  William
Penn  he  became  a  member  of  the  council,  and  con-
tinued a  councillor  till  the  time  of  his  death.  He
also  held  the  office  of  registrar-general,  removing
to  Philadelphia  from  Chester  county,  where  he  had
for  some  time  resided  and  held  a  commission  as
justice  of  the  peace.  He  published  "  Compendium
trium  linguarum"  (1679).

TAYLOR,  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in  England
in  1642 ;  d.  in  Westfield,  Mass.,  29  June,  1729.
He  began  his  education  in  England  with  the  in-
tention of  following  the  ministry,  left  that  country
on  account  of  measures  that  were  taken  against
non-conformists,  and  on  his  arrival  in  Massachu-
setts in  1668  entered  Harvard,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1671.  He  was  invited  to  become
minister  to  the  people  of  Westfield,  and  arrived
there  on  3  Dec,  1671,  but,  owing  to  the  insecu-
rity of  that  frontier  settlement  and  the  small
nuniber  of  its  inhabitants,  the  church  was  not  or-
ganized till  27  Aug.,  1679.  He  performed  the
duties  of  minister  there,  and  for  much  of  the  time
those  of  physician  also,  until  his  death.  He  left
several  manuscript  volumes,  including  a  "Com-
mentary on  the  Four  Gospels,"  "  Christographia.
or  a  Discourse  on  the  Virtues  and  Character  of
Christ,"  and  poems  in  English  and  in  Latin.

TAYLOR,  Edward  Thompson,  missionary,  b.
in  Richmond,  Va.,  25  Dec,  1793 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  6  April,  1871.  He  was  left  an  orphan  in
infancy,  taken  away  by  a  sea-captain  when  seven
years  old,  and  trained  as  a  sailor,  in  which  call-
ing he  passed  his  early  life.  In  1819  he  became
a  minister  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.
About  1830  he  became  a  Bethel  missionary  in  Bos-
ton. He  served  as  chaplain  on  the  frigate  "  Mace-
donian," which  took  supplies  to  the  famishing
Irish  in  1827,  and  delivered  addresses  in  Cork  and
Glasgow.  "Father  Taylor,"  as  he  was  called,
mingled  nautical  terms  and  figures  in  his  dis-
courses, and  by  his  wit,  pathos,  and  imagination
controlled  the  moods  and  wrought  upon  the  feel-
ings of  his  hearers  in  a  remarkable  degree.

TAYLOR,  George,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Ireland  in  1716 ;  d.  in  Easton,
Pa.,  23  Feb.,  1781.  He  is  said  to  have  been  the  son
of  a  clergyman  and  to  have  received  a  liberal  edu-
cation and  begun  the
study  of  medicine,
which  he  abandoned
in  order  to  emigrate
to  this  country  in
1736.  Leaving  his
home  clandestinely
and  without  money,
he  took  passage  as  a
redemptioner,  and  on
his  arrival  at  Phila-
delphia was  bound  to
an  iron-manufacturer
at  Durham,  Pa.,  for  a
term  of  years.  He
worked  as  a  clerk,  in-
stead of  at  common
labor,  and  when  his
employer  died,  several
years  later,  he  married
the  widow,  and  be-
came proprietor  of  the  works,  which  prospered  un-
der his  direction.  Removing  to  Northampton  coun-
ty, where  he  established  a  large  iron-mill,  he  was
soon  called  to  take  part  in  public  affairs  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  provincial  assembly  that  met  at  Philadel-


yi^yk^o^i


phia  on  15  Oct.,  1764.  He  was  appointed  on  the  com-
mittee on  grievances,  and  engaged  effectively  in  the
debate  on  the  revision  of  the  charter.  He  was  re-
elected for  each  year  till  1770,  taking  an  active  part
in  the  discussions,  and  after  that  applied  himself  to
his  business,  which  proved  unprofitable  in  the  new
situation,  holding  only  the  offices  of  county  judge
and  colonel  of  militia.  Returning  to  Durham,  he
was  again  sent  to  the  provincial  assembly  in  1775,
and  was  placed  on  the  committee  of  safety.  He
was  a  member  also  of  committees  on  grants  of  the
crown  and  military  preparations  and  of  the  one
that  was  appointed  to  draw  up  instructions  for  the
delegates  to  the  Continental  congress.  These  in-
structions, forbidding  them  to  vote  for  separation,
were  revoked  in  June,  1776,  and  because  five  of  the
delegates  from  Pennsylvania  hesitated  to  agree  to
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  others  were  chosen
in  their  place  on  20  July.  George  Taylor  was  one
of  the  new  delegates.  He  took  his  seat  in  congress
on  the  day  of  his  election,  and  signed  his  name  to
the  declaration  with  the  other  members  when  the
engrossed  copy  of  the  instrument  was  ready,  2
Aug.  He  made  a  treaty  in  behalf  of  congress  with
several  Indian  tribes  of  the  Susquehanna  border  at
Easton,  where  he  had  resided  in  the  neighborhood  of
his  estates  in  Northampton  county,  and  in  March,
1777,  he  retired  from  congress.

TAYLOR,  George  H.,  physician,  b.  in  Willis-
ton,  Vt.,  in  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  the  New
York  medical  college  in  1852,  studied  the  Swedish
treatment,  developed  the  massage-cure  for  nervous,
gynecological,  and  other  classes  of  diseases,  and
invented  mechanical  massage,  with  apparatus  for
expanding  the  chest,  lifting  the  contents  of  the  pel-
vis, kneading  the  abdomen,  and  transmitting  mo-
tor energy.  Dr.  Taylor  is  the  author  of  "  Exposi-
tion of  the  Swedish  Movement-Cure  "  (New  York,
1860) ;  "  Paralysis  and  Diseases  of  the  Nerves,  and
the  Remedial  Use  of  Transmitted  Motor  Energy  "
(1872);  "Health  for  Women  "  (1880):  "Massage"
(1884) ;  "  Pelvic  and  Hernial  Therapeutics  "  (1884) ;
and  "  Massage ;  Mechanical  Processes  "  (1887). — His
brother,  Charles  Fayette,  surgeon,  b.  in  Williston,
Vt.,  25  April,  1827,  was  graduated  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1856,
and  settled  in  New  York  city,  devoting  himself  to
the  specialty  of  orthopedy.  He  founded  the  New
York  orthopedic  dispensary  and  hospital  in  1866,
and  was  surgeon  there  till  1876.  In  1867  he  was
appointed  consulting  orthopedic  surgeon  to  St.
Luke's  hospital.  Dr.  Taylor  is  the  inventor  of  an
antero-posterior  spinal  apparatus,  and  other  con-
trivances for  the  correction  of  spinal  deviations
consequent  upon  Pott's  disease  and  angular  and
lateral  curvature  of  the  spine ;  a  long  counter-ex-
tension hip-splint  for  disease  of  the  hip-joint;  a
jointed  supporting  splint  for  the  recovering  stage
of  hip-disease  and  for  other  purposes;  and  various
apparatus  for  the  correction  of  club-foot  and  other
deformities  of  the  feet  and  legs,  and  others  for
promoting  the  development  of  certain  muscles  or
groups  of  muscles  by  means  of  local  exercise ;  also
of  an  osteoclast  and  a  genuclast.  He  received
medals  for  his  inventions  at  the  international  ex-
hibitions of  1873  and  1876  at  Vienna  and  Philadel-
phia, and  was  elected  a  corresponding  member  of
the  Royal  society  of  physicians  at  Vienna.  Besides
monographs  on  the  Swedish  treatment  in  the  New
York  medical  journals,  he  published  a  volume  on
the  "  Theory  and  Practice  of  the  Movement-Cure  "
(Philadelphia,  1861).  He  is  the  author  of  many
medical  papers,'  the  chief  of  which  are  those  on
"  Synovitis  of  the  Knee-Joint,"  "  Emotional  Prodi-
gality," and  "  Bodily  Conditions  as  related  to  Men-


44


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


tal  States,"  and  of  volumes  on  "  Spinal  Irritation,
or  Causes  of  Backache  in  American  Women"  (New
York,  18G4);  "Mechanical  Treatment  of  Angular
Curvature  of  the  Spine  "  (New  York,  1864 ;  German
translation,  Berlin,  1873) ;  "  Infantile  Paralysis  and
its  Attendant  Deformities"  (Philadelphia,  1867);
"  Mechanical  Treatment  of  Disease  of  the  Hip-
Joint  "  (New  York,  1873 ;  German  ed.,  Berlin,  1873) ;
and  "Sensation  and  Pain "  (New  York,  1881).

TAYLOR,  George  Lansing,  clergyman,  b.  in
Skaneateles,  N.  Y.,  13  Feb.,  1835.  He  removed  to
Ohio  in  1847,  studied  for  two  years  at  Ohio  Wes-
leyan  university,  Delaware,  Ohio,  and  for  two  years
more  at  Columbia,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1861,
was  assistant  editor  of  the  "Christian  Advocate"
in  New  York  city  in  1861-2,  entered  the  itinerant
ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in
April,  1862,  and  has  since  held  pastorates  in  the
New  York  east  conference.  He  married,  in  1861,
Eliza  M.,  a  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Mansfield  French.
During  the  civil  war  he  served  in  the  Christian
commission  in  Virginia  and  Maryland.  He  has
been  actively  connected  with  the  National  temper-
ance society,  and  has  frequently  preached  at  camp-
meetings.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Syracuse  university  in  1876,  and  that  of  L.  H.  D.
from  Columbia  in  1887.  Besides  numerous  ser-
mons, pamphlets,  addresses,  fugitive  poems,  and
magazine  articles,  Dr.  Taylor  is  the  author  of
"  Elijah,  the  Reformer,  a  Ballad-Epic,  and  other
Sacred  and  Religious  Poems  "  (New  York,  1885) ;
"  Ulysses  S.  Grant,  Conqueror,  Patriot,  Hero ;  an
Elegy,  and  other  Poems  ''(1885) ;  "  What  Shall  We
Do  with  the  Sunday-School?"  (New  York,  1886);
"  The  Progress  of  Learning,  a  Poem  delivered  at
the  Celebration  of  the  Centennial  of  Columbia
College  "  (1887) ;  and  "  The  New  Africa:  its  Dis-
coverv  and  Destiny,"  with  maps  (1888).

TAYLOR,  George  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Hun-
terdon county,  N.  J.,  22  Nov.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Alexan-
dria, Va.,  1  Sept.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  the
military  academy  of  Alden  Partridge,  Middletown,
Conn.,  and  received  a  midshipman's  warrant  in  the
navy  in  1827,  but  resigned  at  the  end  of  four  years
and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  In  the  be-
ginning of  the  Mexican  war  he  assisted  in  raising
a  company  in  New  Jersey,  being  commissioned  as
lieutenant  on  8  March,  1847,  and  as  captain  in  the
following  September,  and  served  through  Gen.
Zachary  Taylor's  campaigns.  After  the  war  he
went  to  California,  remaining  there  three  years.
Returning  then  to  New  Jersey,  he  occupied  him-
self in  mining  and  iron-manufacturing.  When  the
civil  war  began  he  was  made  colonel  of  the  3d  New
Jersey  infantry,  which  left  for  the  field  on  28  June,

1861,  assisted  in  guarding  Long  Bridge,  formed
part  of  the  reserve  division  at  Bull  Run,  and  par-
ticipated in  the  occupation  of  Manassas  in  March,

1862,  being  the  first  to  perceive  the  enemy  retreat-
ing. When  Gen.  Philip  Kearny  was  promoted,
Col.  Taylor  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  bri-
gade, which  he  led  in  the  advance  on  Richmond
and  the  seven  days'  battles,  receiving  his  commis-
sion as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  9  May,
1862.  At  Gaines's  Mills  his  command  was  subject-
ed to  the  hottest  fire.  At  the  second  battle  of  Bull
Run  he  fought  with  distinguished  courage,  and
received  wounds  from  which  he  soon  after  died.

TAYLOR,  Jacob,  mathematician,  d.  in  Phila-
delphia after  1736.  He  was  a  school-master  in
Philadelphia,  holding  the  appointment  of  surveyor-
general  of  the  commonwealth,  and  published  alma-
nacs, for  which  he  composed  poetical  pieces.  He
also  practised  medicine.  One  of  his  poems  is  en-
titled "Pennsylvania"  (1728).


TAYLOR,  James,  pioneer,  b.  in  Midway,  Va.,  19
April,  1769 ;  d.  in  Newport,  Ky.,  8  Nov.,  1848.  His
father  was  a  first  cousin  of  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor.
The  son  emigrated  to  Kentucky  in  1792.  During
the  second  war  with  Great  Britain  he  used  his
money  and  credit  to  pay  the  troops,  took  the  field
as  brigadier-general  of  Kentucky  militia,  served  as
quartermaster-general  of  the  northwestern  army
under  Gen.  William  Hull,  and  was  active  in  con-
certing a  plan  to  displace  Hull  and  confide  the
command  of  the  fortress  at  Detroit  to  Gen.  Dun-
can McArthur.  When  Gen.  Hull  ordered  him  to
act  with  Col.  James  Miller  and  the  British  officers
in  drawing  up  articles  of  capitulation,  he  refused
to  have  any  participation  in  the  surrender.  He
became  one  of  the  largest  land-owners  in  the  west.

TAYLOR,  James  Barnett,  clergyman,  b.  in
Barton-on-Humber,  England,  19  March,  1819 ;  d.
in  Richmond,  Va.,  22  Dec,  1871.  He  was  brought
in  his  infancy  to  the  United  States,  and  received
his  early  education  in  New  York  city,  whence  his
parents  removed  about  1818  to  Mecklenburg  county,
Va.  After  passing  through  an  academical  course,  he
became  a  Baptist  home  missionary,  and  in  1826
was  chosen  pastor  of  a  church  in  Richmond,  Va.,
where  he  soon  acquired  a  high  reputation  as  a
preacher.  In  1839-'40  he  officiated  as  chaplain  of
the  University  of  Virginia.  Returning  to  Rich-
mond, he  served  as  a  pastor  there  for  five  years
longer.  He  labored  also  as  a  missionary,  and  in
1845,  soon  after  the  organization  of  the  Southern
Baptist  convention,  became  its  corresponding  sec-
retary. This  office  he  filled  till  within  a  few
weeks  of  his  death,  travelling  constantly,  preach-
ing throughout  the  south,  and  editing  the  "Re-
ligious Herald"  for  a  short  time,  and  subsequently
the  "Southern  Baptist  Missionary  Journal"  and
the  "  Home  and  Foreign  Journal."  both  of  which
he  founded,  and  the  "  Foreign  Mission  Journal."
He  was  pastor  also  of  the  Baptist  church  at  Tay-
lorsville,  Hanover  co.,  Va.,  till  the  civil  war  began.
During  the  war  he  labored  as  a  colporteur  in  camps
and  hospitals,  and  for  three  years  as  Confederate
post-chaplain.  After  its  close  he  exerted  himself
to  revive  the  missions  of  the  Southern  Baptist  con-
vention, and  took  much  interest  in  the  education
of  the  freedmen,  preaching  often  to  colored  con-
gregations, and  conferring  with  the  secretary  of
the  Freedmen's  bureau  with  regard  to  the  best
plans  for  assisting  the  emancipated  slaves.  He  was
one  of  the  originators  of  the  Virginia  Baptist  edu-
cation society,  and  a  founder  of  Richmond  college.
His  chief  published  works  were  "  Life  of  Lot  Cary  "
(Baltimore,  1837) ;  "  Lives  of  Virginia  Baptist  Min-
isters " (Richmond.  1837) ;  and  "Memoir  of  Luther
Rice,  one  of  the  First  Missionaries  in  the  East"
(1841).  He  had  nearly  completed  before  his  death
a  "  History  of  Virginia  Baptists."  See  "Life  and
Times  of  James  B.  Taylor,  by  his  son,  George  B.
Taylor  (Philadelphia,  1872).  His  wife  was  a
daughter  of  Elisha  Scott  Williams. — Their  son,
George  Boardman,  clergyman,  b.  in  Richmondt
Va.,  27  Dec,  1832,  was  graduated  at  Richmond
college,  taught  for  a  short  time,  and  then  studied
three  years  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  at  the
same  time  serving  as  pastor  of  two  Baptist  churches
in  the  vicinity.  He  was  graduated  in  most  of  the
schools  in  the  university,  was  pastor  for  two  years
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  then  for  twelve  years  at  Staun-
ton, Va.,  leaving  his  church  during  the  campaign
of  1862  to  act  as  chaplain  to  Stonewall  Jackson's
corps.  Subsequently,  till  the  close  of  hostilities,
he  officiated  as  post-chaplain  in  conjunction  with
his  pastorate.  In  1869  he  was  chosen  chaplain  of
the  University  of  Virginia  for  the  usual  period  of


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


45


two  years,  after  which  he  returned  to  his  former
church  at  Staunton,  of  which  he  again  took  leave
in  1873,  on  being  appointed  by  the  mission  board
of  the  Southern  Baptist  convention  missionary  to
Rome,  Italy.  Pie  was  co-editor  of  the  "  Christian
Review  "  for  two  years,  and  since  1876  he  has  been
one  of  the  editors  of  "  II  Seminatore,"  a  monthly
Baptist  magazine  published  in  Rome.  The  degree
of  D.  D.  was  given  him  by  Richmond  college  and
the  University  of  Chicago  in  1872.  His  publica-
tions include  "Oakland  Stories"  (4  vols.,  New
York,  1859-65);  "Costar  Grew"  (Philadelphia,
1869) ;  "  Roger  Bernard,  the  Pastor's  Son  "  (1870) ;
and  "  Walter  Ennis,"  a  tale  of  the  early  Virginia
Baptists  (1870).

TAYLOR,  James  Brainerd,  clergyman,  b.  in
Middle  Haddam,  Conn.,  15  April,  1801;  d.  in
Hampden  Sidney,  Va.,  29  March,  1829.  He  be-
came a  merchant's  clerk  in  New  York  city  after
receiving  a  common-school  education,  but  at  the
age  of  eighteen  determined  to  become  a  minister,
and  entered  the  preparatory  academy  at  Lawrence-
ville,  N.  J.  He  engaged  in  missionary  work  while
in  school  and  college,  and  gained  many  converts.
After  his  graduation  at  Princeton  in  1826  he
studied  at  Yale  divinity-school,  taking  an  active
part  in  the  revivals  in  the  neighborhood  and  in  the
south,  whither  he  removed  on  account  of  failing
health.  His  faith  and  ardor  are  commemorated
in  a  "  Memoir  "  by  John  H.  and  Benjamin  H.  Rice,
who  were  hear  him  in  his  last  days  at  the  Theo-
logical seminary  of  Virginia  (New  York,  1833). —
His  brother.  Fitch  Waterman,  author,  b.  in
Middle  Haddam,  Conn.,  4  Aug.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  23  July,  1865,  went  to  New  York  city
at  the  age  of  fifteen  with  the  intention  of  fol-
lowing a  mercantile  career,  but  afterward  decided
to  enter  upon  the  Christian  ministry. He  was

fraduated  at  Yale  in  1828,  received  orders  in  the
rotestant  Episcopal  church,  and  was  minister  of
a  parish  in  Maryland  till  1841,  when  he  was  ap-
pointed to  a  chaplaincy  in  the  navy.  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  was  the  senior  chaplain  in  the
service.  He  published,  under  the  title  of  "  The
Flag-Ship"  (New  York,  1840),  a  narrative  of  a
voyage  around  the  world  in  the  frigate  "  Colum-
bia," and  under  that  of  "  The  Broad  Pennant "
(1848)  an  account  of  a  cruise  in  the  M  Cumberland  "
and  of  naval  operations  in  the  Mexican  war.

TAYLOR,  James  Wickes,  author,  b.  in  Starkey,
Yates  co.,  X.  Y.,  6  Nov.,  1819.  He  was  educated
there  and  in  Ohio,  and  in  1838  was  graduated  at
Hamilton  college.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
New  York  and  Ohio,  practised  in  both  those  states,
and  resided  in  the  latter  from  1842  till  1856,  when
he  removed  to  St.  Paul,  Minn.  He  was  a  member
of  the  Ohio  constitutional  convention  of  1849-'50,
secretary  of  the  commission  to  revise  the  judicial
code  of  that  state  in  1851-2,  and  was  librarian  of
Ohio  in  1852-6.  During  the  civil  war,  and  for
several  years  afterward,  Mr.  Taylor  was  special
agent  of  the  U.  S.  treasury,  being  charged  with
making  inquiries  into  the  reciprocal  relations  of
trade  and  transportation  between  the  United  States
and  Canada.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at
Winnipeg,  Manitoba,  14  Sept.,  1870,  which  post  he
has  held  ever  since.  He  has  engaged  largely  in
journalism,  published  the  Cincinnati  "  Signal "  in
1847,  and  is  the  author  of  "  History  of  the  State  of
Ohio :  First  Period,  1620-1787  "  (Cincinnati,  1854) ;
"  Manual  of  the  Ohio  School  System "  (1857) ;
"  Railroad  System  of  Minnesota  and  Northwestern
Connections  "  (St.  Paul,  1859) ;  "  Reports  to  Treas-
urv  Department  on  Commercial  Relations  with
Canada  "  (Washington,  1860,  1862,  and  1868) ;  "  Al-


leghania,  or  the  Strength  of  the  Union  and  the
Weakness  of  Slavery  in  the  Highlands  of  the
South "  (St.  Paul,  1862);  "Forest  and  Fruit  Cul-
ture in  Manitoba"  (Winnipeg,  1882);  pamphlets
relating  to  the  Indian  question  in  relation  to  the
Sioux  war  of  1862-'3  (St.  Paul);  and,  with  John  R.
Browne,  "  Mineral  Resources  of  the  United  States  "
(Washington,  1867).

TAYLOR,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Orange  county,
Va.,  in  1750 ;  d.  in  Caroline  county,  Va.,  20  Aug.,
1824.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary
college  in  1770,  became  a  planter,  and  did  much  to
improve  methods  of  cultivation  and  extend  the
knowledge  of  agriculture.  When  Richard  Henry
Lee  resigned  from  the  U.  S.  senate,  Taylor  was  ap-
pointed to  the  vacant  seat.  He  entered  the  senate
on  12  Dec,  1792,  and  was  elected  for  the  term  that
began  in  the  following  March,  but  resigned  in  1794.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1797,  and  in  1803
again  served  in  the  senate  for  the  two  months  that
elapsed  between  the  death  of  Stevens  T.  Mason  and
the  election  of  his  successor.  He  was  elected  a
senator  two  years  before  his  death,  taking  his  seat
on  30  Dec,  1824.  He  shared  the  political  opinions
of  Thomas  Jefferson,  and  was  the  mover  in  the
Virginia  house  of  delegates  of  the  resolutions  of
1798.  He  published  "  An  Inquiry  into  the  Princi-
ples and  Policy  of  the  Government  of  the  United
States  "  (Fredericksburg,  1814) ;  "  Arator ;  being  a
Series  of  Agricultural  Essays,  Practical  and  Politi-
cal "  (6th  ed.,  Petersburg,  1818) ;  "  Construction
Construed  and  the  Constitution  Vindicated "
(Richmond,  1820) ;  "  Tyranny  Unmasked  "  (Wash-
ington, 1822) ;  and  "  New  Views  of  the  Constitu-
tion of  the  United  States"  (Washington,  1823).

TAYLOR,  John,  Baptist  preacher,  b.  in  Fau-
quier county,  Va.,  in  1752  ;  d.  in  Forks  of  Elkhorn,
Franklin  co.,  Ky.,  in  1833.  He  became  an  itiner-
ant missionary  of  the  Baptist  church  in  western
Virginia  at  the  age  of  twenty,  and  in  1783  removed
to  Kentucky.  He  resided  at  Clear  Creek,  where
for  three  years,  he  was  pastor  of  the  church,  till
1795,  when  he  settled  in  Boone  county.  He
preached  frequently  and  took  part  in  revivals  of
religion  while  devoting  himself  to  clearing  and
cultivating  land,  and  in  his  last  years,  though  he
declined  the  pastoral  relation,  he  officiated  in  a
church  that  he  had  assisted  in  organizing  at  Forks
of  Elkhorn.  He  published  an  account  of  his  re-
ligious labors  and  of  the  churches  that  he  had
aided  in  founding,  under  the  title  of  "  A  History  of
Ten  Baptist  Missions  "  (Bloomfield,  1826).

TAYLOR,  John,  senator,  b.  near  the  present
site  of  Columbia,  S.  O,  4  May,  1770;  d.  in  Colum-
bia, S.  C,  16  April,  1832.  Pie  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1790,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1793,  and  practised  for  a  few  years  in  Co-
lumbia, but  made  planting  his  chief  business.  He
was  a  representative  and  senator  in  the  legislature
of  South  Carolina  for  many  years,  was  elected  to
congress  in  1806,  and  re-elected  in  1808.  On  3
Dec,  1810,  he  took  his  place  in  the  U.  S.  senate,
having  been  chosen  to  supply  the  vacancy  that  was
caused  by  the  resignation  of  Thomas  Sumter.  In
1816  he  resigned  his  seat  and  was  returned  to  the
National  house  of  representatives.  He  was  again
elected  to  the  state  senate  in  1822,  and  in  Decem-
ber, 1826,  after  being  defeated  as  a  candidate  for
re-election  by  Wade  Hampton,  was  elected  gov-
ernor by  thelegislature,  serving  till  1828.

TAYLOR,  John,  president  of  the  Mormon
church,  b.  in  Winthrop,  England,  1  Nov.,  1808;
d.  25  July,  1887.  He  united  with  the  Methodist
church  in  England,  and  in  1832  emigrated  to  To-
ronto, Canada. In  1836  Parley  P.  Pratt,  a  Mor-


46


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


raon  elder,  preached  in  Toronto,  and  John  Taylor
was  converted  and  baptized.  The  next  year  he
went  to  reside  in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  in  1838  he
was  made  one  of  the  twelve  apostles,  and  removed
to  Missouri.  For  twenty  years  he  did  mission-
ary work  for  the  Mormons  in  Great  Britain  and
France,  and  while  there  published  the  "  Book  of
Mormon  "  in  French,  and  also  a  German  transla-
tion in  Hamburg.  In  1852  he  returned  to  this
country,  and  in  April,  1853,  assisted  in  laving  tho
corner-stone  of  the  Temple  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In
1854  he  went  to  New  York  city,  where  he  issued  a
paper  called  "The  Mormon,"  and  was  editor  of
numerous  other  church  publications.  He  was  by
the  side  of  Joseph  Smith  when  the  latter  was  as-
sassinated in  Carthage  jail,  and  received  four  shots
in  his  body ;  a  fifth  lodged  in  his  watch,  which
probably  saved  his  life.  He  was  a  delegate  to  con-
gress to  ask  for  the  admission  of  Utah  into  the
Union.  On  the  death  of  Brigham  Young,  in  1877,
he  succeeded  to  the  presidency  of  the  church,  and
in  1880  was  made  president  and  prophet  of  the
portion  of  the  Mormon  church  that  indorsed  and
practised  polygamy  He  was  an  early  advocate
and  adherent  of  polygamy,  and  in  March,  1885,
was  indicted  for  that  crime.  His  last  appear-
ance in  public  was  on  1  Feb.,  1885,  after  which,
to  avoid  arrest,  he  went  into  exile  and  remained
hidden  until  his  death.

TAYLOR,  John  Glanville,  author,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1823 ;  d.  in  Batticaloa,  Ceylon,  about  Janu-
ary, 1851.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1841,
and  after  engaging  in  a  mining  enterprise,  becom-
ing a  planter  in  1843,  and  afterward  serving  as  an
overseer  in  Cuba,  he  returned  to  England  in  the
latter  part  of  1845.  A  narrative  of  his  adventures
was  published  under  the  title  of  "  Eight  Years  of
Change  and  Travel "  (London,  1851).

TAYLOR,  John  Louis,  jurist,  b.  in  London,
England,  1  March,  1769 ;  d.  in  Raleigh,  N.  C,  29
Jan.,  1829  He  was  brought  to  the  United  States
at  the  age  of  twelve  by  a  brother,  his  father  having
died.  He  was  for  two  years  at  William  and  Mary
college,  then  removed  to  North  Carolina,  studied
law.  and,  after  being  admitted  to  the  bar,  settled
in  Fayetteville,  which  he  represented  in  the  legis-
lature in  1792-'4.  He  removed  to  New  Berne  in
1796,  and  in  1798  was  elected  a  judge  of  the  supe-
rior court.  In  1808  he  was  chosen  by  his  colleagues
to  preside  over  the  supreme  court,  which  was  then
composed  of  judges  of  the  superior  court  who  met
at  Raleigh  to  review  questions  that  arose  on  the
circuits.  When  a  new  tribunal  was  instituted  in
1818  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  judges,  and  con-
tinued as  chief  justice  till  his  death.  In  1817  he
was  appointed  a  commissioner  to  revise  the  statute
laws  of  North  Carolina.  The  work  was  completed
and  published  in  1821,  and  a  continuation  by  Judge
Taylor  appeared  in  1825.  He  began  to  take  notes
of  cases  that  came  before  him  soon  after  he  was
elevated  to  the  bench.  His  publications  include
"  Cases  in  the  Superior  Courts  of  Law  and  Equity
of  the  State  of  North  Carolina  "  (New  Berne,  1802) ;
"  The  North  Carolina  Law  Repository "  (2  vols.,
1814-'16);  "Charge  to  the  Grand  Jury  of  Edge-
combe, exhibiting  a  View  of  the  Criminal  Law"
(1817);  "Term  Reports"  (Raleigh,  1818):  and  a
treatise  "  On  the  Duties  of  Executors  and  Admin-
istrators "  (1825).

TAYLOR,  John  Neilson,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  24  July,  1805 ;  d.  there,  6  Feb.,
1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1824,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  New  York
city  in  1825,  and  practised  there  and  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y. He  was  the  author  of  a  "  Treatise  on  the


American  Law  of  Landlord  and  Tenant "  (New
York,  1844),  and  "  The  Law  of  Executors  and  Ad-
ministrators in  New  York  "  (1851).

TAYLOR,  John  W.,  speaker  of  the  house  of
representatives,  b.  in  Charlton,  Saratoga  co.,  X.  Y.,
26  March,  1784;  d.  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  8  Sept.,
1854.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1803,  or-
ganized the  Ballston  Centre  academy  in  that  year.
studied  law  in  Albany,  was  admitted  to  the"  bar
in  1807,  and  practised  in  Ballston,  becoming  a
justice  of  the  peace  in  1808,  then  state  commis-
sioner of  loans,  and  in  1811-'12  a  member  of  the
legislature.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat and  a  supporter  of  the  war  with  Great  Britain,
and  was  re-elected  nine  times  in  succession,  serving
altogether  from  24  May,  1813,  till  2  March,  1833.
On  20  Nov.,  1820,  owing  to  the  absence  of  Henry
Clay,  Taylor  was  chosen  in  his  place  as  speaker,
and  served  till  the  end  of  the  second  session,  dur-
ing which  the  Missouri  compromise  was  passed.
On  the  question  of  the  admission  of  Missouri  to
the  Union  he  delivered  the  first  speech  in  congress
that  plainly  opposed  the  extension  of  slaver)'.  He
was  again  elected  speaker  on  the  organization  of
the  19th  congress,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1825,  till  3
March,  1827.  He  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the
National  Republican,  and  afterward  of  the  Whig,

{>arty.  After  retiring  from  congress  he  practised
aw  at  Ballston,  and  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  in  1840-'l,  but  resigned  in  consequence  of  a
paralytic  stroke,  and  from  1843  till  his  death  lived
with  a  daughter  in  Cleveland.  He  was  the  orator
of  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  at  Harvard  in  1827.
and  frequently  spoke  in  public  on  literary  as  well
as  on  national  topics. — His  nephew,  John  Orville,
educator,  b.  in  Charlton,  N.  Y.,  14  May,  1807,  was
graduated  at  Union  college  in  1830,  and  entered
Princeton  seminary,  but  soon  left  to  become  a
teacher  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  remained  two
years.  Thenceforth  for  many  years  he  engaged  in
the  work  of  educational  reform.  He  published  a
book  pointing  out  the  deficiencies  of  the  common
schools,  entitled  "  The  District  School,  or  Popular
Education  "  (New  York,  1835),  which  was  publicly
commended  by  statesmen  and  thinkers  both  in  the
United  States  and  in  Great  Britain.  In  January,
1836,  he  began  the  publication  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  of
a  monthly  educational  magazine  called  the  "  Com-
mon-School Assistant,"  which  was  also  successful.
Public-spirited  citizens  sent  large  subscriptions  for
gratuitous  circulation  of  the  periodical,  and  after
four  years  the  New  York  state  legislature  estab-
lished a  paper  of  the  same  character  and  intent.
Mr.  Taylor  published,  with  a  long  introduction,  a
translation  of  Victor  Cousin's  "  Report  of  the  Prus-
sian School  System  "  (New  York,  1836).  and  for  the
succeeding  fifteen  years  lectured  on  the  improve-
ment of  common-school  education  in  the  principal
cities  of  the  country.  In  1837,  in  connection  with
James  Wadsworth,  he  induced  the  New  York  legis-
lature to  pass  a  law  establishing  school  libraries.
In  that  year  he  was  elected  professor  of  popular
education  in  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York,  and  lectured  during  one  season  to  a  class  of
seventy  prospective  teachers  of  both  sexes.  On  13
Dec,  1838,  he  gave  a  lecture,  at  the  invitation  of
congress,  in  the  hall  of  the  house  of  representa-
tives. After  fifteen  years  of  fruitful  exertions  for
educational  progress,  he  engaged  in  mercantile
business  in  New  York  city,  but,  having  met  with
reverses,  retired  to  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  1879,
and  has  since  then  contributed  to  various  journals.
— Another  nephew,  Klisha  Ephraim  Leech,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Pompey,  N.  Y.,  25  Sept.,  1815 ;  d.  in
Marlborough,  N.  Y.,"l8  Aug.,  1874,  was  graduated


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


47


at  Madison  university  in  1837  and  at  the  theo-
logical seminary  at  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  in  1839.  He
organized  a  Baptist  church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and
after  a  nine-years'  pastorate  resigned  and  founded
in  the  southern  part  of  the  city  a  mission  church
which  became  a  nourishing  society.  In  1864  he
retired  from  the  pulpit  on  account  of  failing
health,  and  two  years  later  he  became  secretary  of
the  Baptist  church-edifice  fund,  obtaining  $250,000
for  the  construction  of  church  buildings  in  the
west.— A  son  of  Elisha  E.  L.,  James  Monroe,
educator,  b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  5  Aug.,  1848,  was


graduated  at  the  University  of  Rochester  in  1868.
and  at  Rochester  theological  seminary  in  1871.  He
travelled  and  studied  in  Europe  in  1871-2,  and
was  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  at  South  Norwalk,
Conn.,  in  1873-'81,  and  of  one  at  Providence,  R.  I.,
in  1882-'6.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Rochester  in  1886.  Dr.  Taylor  has  contributed  to
religious  reviews,  and  was  an  active  member  of
school-boards  in  both  Connecticut  and  Rhode
Island.  Since  June,  1886,  he  has  been  president
of  Vassar  college. (See  illustration.)

TAYLOR,  Lachlan,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in
Killean,  Argyllshire,  Scotland,  18  June,  1815 ;  d.  in
Brackley  Point,  Prince  Edward  island,  4  Sept.,
1881.  He  received  his  early  education  in  Glas-
gow, and  in  1832  came  with  his  father's  family  to
Canada,  where  he  engaged  in  teaching.  In  1843
he  was  ordained  a  minister  of  the  Wesleyan  Meth-
odist church,  ministered  successively  at  Bytown
(now  Ottawa),  Kingston,  Hamilton,  Toronto,  and
Montreal,  and,  after  visiting  Great  Britain,  was  ap-
pointed in  1851  agent  of  the  Upper  Canada  Bible
society.  In  1857  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  meeting
of  the  Evangelical  alliance  at  Berlin,  and  he  sub-
sequently represented  Canada  at  the  annual  meet-
ing of  the  British  and  foreign  Bible  society.  In
1863-'4,  in  connection  with  the  work  of  the  society,
he  traversed  British  Columbia,  California,  New
Mexico,  and  Central  America,  and  on  his  return
was  appointed  secretary  and  treasurer  of  the  mis-
sionary society.  From  1874  till  1877  Dr.  Taylor
was  employed  by  the  Dominion  government  to
stimulate  emigration  from  Great  Britain  to  Cana-
da. He  visited  at  one  time  Egypt,  Palestine,  Asia
Minor,  Turkey,  Greece,  and  Italy,  and  lectured  on
those  countries. He  recei  ved  the  degree  of  D.  D.

TAYLOR,  Marshall  William,  clergyman,  b.
in  Lexington,  Ky.,  1  July,  1846 ;  d.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  11  Sept.,  1887.  He  was  the  child  of  free
colored  parents,  was  instructed  in  a  school  for  ne-
groes at  Louisville,  Ky.,  followed  the  occupation
of  a  steamboat-cook  for  three  years  before  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war,  and  served  as  a  soldier
with  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  from  1862  till
1865.  He  became  a  teacher  at  Hardinsburg,  Ky.,
in  1866,  preached  at  Litchfield,  Ky.,  in  1871,  en-
tered the  Lexington  Methodist  conference  in  1872,
and  was  stationed  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  Indianapolis,
Ind.,  and Cincinnati, Ohio. He  was presiding


elder  in  Ohio  in  1878-83,  preached  in  Louisville
again  during  the  following  year,  and  then  went  to
New  Orleans,  La.,  to  assume  the  editorship  of  the
"  Southwestern  Christian  Advocate."  The  degree
of  D.  D.  was  given  to  him  by  Central  Tennessee
college.  He  published  "Handbook  for  Schools"
(Louisville,  1871) ;  •'  Life  of  Rev.  George  W.  Down-
ing "  (1878) ;  several  editions  of  "  Plantation  Melo-
dies and  Revival  Songs  of  the  Negroes " ;  "  Life
and  Travels  of  Amanda  Smith"  (1886) ;  and  "  The
Negro  in  Methodism  "  (1887).

TAYLOR,  Mary  Cecilia,  actress,  b.  in  New
York  city,  13  March,  1827;  d.  there,  10  Nov.,  1866.
She  began  her  career  as  chorus-singer  at  the  New
York  National  and  Park  theatres,  and  gradually
won  her  way  to  the  representation  of  small  parts
and  soubrette  and  burlesque  performances,  until
she  attained  a  respectable  rank  as  a  comedian
and  opera-singer.  On  a  few  occasions  she  appeared
in  Brooklyn,  Albany,  and  Boston,  but  during  most
of  her  career  was  connected  with  the  Olympic,
Brougham's,  and  Burton's  theatres,  of  New  York
city.  Several  years  before  her  death  Miss  Taylor
married  William  O.  Ewen,  a  merchant,  and  re-
tired from  the  stage.  She  was  personally  attract-
ive and  her  voice,  though  small,  was  agreeable,  but
her  style  suffered  from  want  of  refinement.  She
had  winning  ways,  which  charmed  the  public  and
for  years  rendered  M  Our  Mary,"  as  she  was  called,
a  very  general  favorite.

TAYLOR,  Moses,  merchant,  b.  in  New  York
city,  11  Jan.,  1806.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  became  a  merchant's  clerk  at  the  age  of
fifteen,  and  when  ten  years  older  embarked  in
business  on  his  own  account.  He  acquired  a  large
trade  with  Cuba,  and  was  an  extensive  ship-owner.
In  1855  he  became  president  of  the  City  bank.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  Union  defence  committee,  and,  as
chairman  of  the  loan  committee  of  the  associated
banks,  he  was  instrumental  in  obtaining  sub-
scribers for  more  than  $200,000,000  of  govern-
ment securities.  He  was  one  of  the  originators
of  submarine  telegraphy,  and  has  been  an  active
promoter  of  important  railway  lines.  Among  his
charitable  gifts  was  one  of  $250,000  in  1882  for
a  hospital  for  employes  of  the  Delaware,  Lacka-
wanna and  Western  railroad,  and  coal  and  iron
companies  at  Scranton.  Pa.

TAYLOR,  Nathaniel  William,  theologian,  b.
in  New  Milford,  Conn.,  23  June,  1786;  d.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  10  March,  1858.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1807,  studied  theology,  and  on  8  April,
1812,  was  installed  as  pastor  of  the  1st  Congrega-
tional church  in  New  Haven.  In  November,  1822,
he  resigned  this  office  on  being  appointed  professor
of  didactic  theology  at  Yale.  His  theological  sys-
tem was  in  some  respects  a  development  of  that  of
Timothy  Dwight,  whose  pupil  and  amanuensis  he
was  for  two  years  after  leaving  college.  His  views
on  total  depravity  and  other  dogmas,  which  he  first
enunciated  in  the  annual  discourse  to  the  clergy  in
1828,  and  afterward  defended  in  the  "  Christian
Spectator,"  were  earnestly  controverted  by  Bennett
Tyler,  Leonard  Woods,  and  other  clergymen.  His
other  essays  and  doctrinal  sermons  that  were  pub-
lished during  the  Unitarian  controversy  excited
attention  and  discussion.  He  was  the  leader  of  the
New  Haven  school  of  theology,  and  exercised  a
powerful  influence  on  the  religious  thought  of  his
time.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Union
college  in  1823.  After  his  death  his  son-in-law,
Noah  Porter,  published  his  "  Practical  Sermons "
(New  York,  1858) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Moral  Gov-
ernment of  God"  (2 vols., 1859); and  "Essays


48


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


and  Lectures  upon  Select  Topics  in  Revealed  The-
ology "  (1859).  See  "  Memorial  of  Nathaniel  W.
Taylor"  (New  Haven,  1858).

TAYLOR,  Nelson,  soldier,  b.  in  South  Norwalk,
Conn.,  8  June,  1821.  He  received  a  common-school
education.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  with  Mexi-
co he  joined  the  army  as  captain  of  the  1st  New
York  volunteers  on  1  Aug.,  1846,  served  through
the  war,  and  at  its  close  settled  in  Stockton,  San
Joaquin  co.,  Cal.,  where  he  was  elected  a  state
senator  in  1849  and  sheriff  in  1855.  He  was  also
president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  State  in-
sane asylum  from  1850  till  1856.  Returning  to
New  York  city,  he  studied  law,  taking  his  degree
at  the  Harvard  law-school  in  1860.  He  was  an
unsuccessful  Democratic  candidate  for  congress  in
1860.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  en-
tered the  volunteer  service  as  colonel  of  the  72d
New  York  infantry.  He  commanded  this  regiment,
which  formed  a  part  of  Gen.  Daniel  E.  Sicklos's
brigade,  during  the  Chickahominy  campaign.  He
had  command  of  the  brigade  at  Williamsburg  and
in  Gen.  John  Pope's  Virginia  campaign,  and  was
appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  in  recog-
nition of  his  services,  on  7  Sept.,  1862.  He  resigned
on  19  Jan.,  1863,  resumed  practice  in  New  York
city,  and  was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,
serving  from  4  Dec,  1865,  till  3  March,  1867.  He
was  a  member  of  the  select  committees  on  freed-
men  and  invalid  pensions.

TAYLOR,  Oliver  Alden,  clergyman,  b.  in  Yar-
mouth, Mass.,  18  Aug.,  1801  ;  d.  in  Manchester,
Mass.,  18  Dec,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1825,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1829,  made  German  translations,  and  assisted  Prof.
Moses  Stuart  in  teaching  Hebrew  at  Andover  for
several  years,  and  on  18  Sept.,  1839,  was  installed
as  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Man-
chester. He  published  many  articles  in  the  "  Bib-
lical Repository  "  and  other  periodicals,  and  was  a
frequent  contributor  of  poetry  to  magazines  be-
tween 1820  and  1828.  He  translated  Franz  V.
Reinhard's  "  Plan  of  the  Founder  of  Christianity  "
(New  York,  1831),  and  his  "  Memoirs  and  Confes-
sions" (Boston,  1832),  wrote  two  books  for  the  young,
entitled  "  Brief  Views  of  the  Saviour  "  (Andover,
1835)  and  "Life  of  Jesus  "  (1840),  made  a  catalogue
of  the  library  of  Andover  seminary  (1838),  and  pub-
lished a  memoir  of  Andrew  Lee  under  the  title  of
"  Piety  in  Humble  Life  "  (Boston,  1844)  and  a  ser-
mon on  "  The  Ministerial  Office  "  (Andover,  1848).
See  a  "  Memoir  "  of  him  by  his  brother,  Rev.  Timo-
thy Alden  Taylor  (Boston,  1853).— His  brother,
Riifns.  clergyman,  b.  in  Hawley,  Mass.,  24  March,
1811,  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1837,  and  at
Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1840.  He  was
pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Shrewsbury,
N.  J.,  till  1852,  when  he  went  to  Manchester,  Mass.,
as  his  brother's  successor,  remaining  six  years.  Af-
ter a  pastorate  of  four  years  more  at  Hightstown,
N.  J.,  he  became  district  secretary  of  the  American
and  foreign  Christian  union.  This  office  he  held
for  a  period  of  ten  years,  after  which  he  preached
in  New  Jersey  and  Massachusetts  till  1878,  and
afterward  confined  himself  to  literary  work,  resid-
ing at  Beverly,  N.  J.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Lafayette  college  in  1863.  Dr.  Taylor  is
the  author  of  "  Union  to  Christ "  (New  York,  1846)  ;
"  Love  to  God  "  (New  York,  1848) :  "  Thoughts  on
Prayer  "  (Boston,  1854) ;  and  "  Cottage  Piety  Ex-
emplified" (Philadelphia,  1869):  also  of  a  series
of  interesting  letters  from  northern  Europe,  and
numerous  pamphlets.

TAYLOR,  Oliver  Swalne,  educator,  b.  near
New  Ipswich,  N.  H.,  17  Dec,  1784;  d.  in  Auburn,


N.  Y.,  19  April,  1885.  He  prepared  himself  for
college  in  the  intervals  of  farm-work,  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1809,  taught  for  some  time,
then  studied  medicine,  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.
from  Dartmouth  in  1813,  and  practised  till  1817,
when  he  resumed  teaching.  For  a  brief  period  he
was  associated  with  Jeremiah  Evarts  in  editing  tho
"Panoplist."  In  1826  he  took  charge  of  the
academy  at  Homer,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1830  removed
to  Auburn,  which  has  since  been  his  home.  He
taught  there  and  elsewhere,  numbering  among  his
pupils  many  who  attained  eminence.  He  engaged
earnestly  in  Sunday-school  work,  teaching  the
prisoners  in  Auburn  penitentiary  for  seventeen
years,  and  at  the  age  of  ninety  still  conducting
three  classes  each  Sunday.  He  also  preached  fre-
quently, being  licensed  on  17  June,  1840,  and
ordained  as  an  evangelist  on  8  Dec,  1848.  His
hundredth  birthday  was  publicly  celebrated  at
Auburn.  —  His  son,  Charles,  missionary,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  15  Sept.,  1819,  was  educated  at  the
academy  of  his  father  and  at  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1840.  He  taught  ancient  languages  in  the  high-
school  of  the  South  Carolina  conference,  and,
after  joining  the  conference  in  1844,  studied  medi-
cine in  Philadelphia,  preparatory  to  engaging  in
missionary  work  in  China,  obtaining  his  degree  in
1848.  He  departed  for  his  field  of  Tabor  the  same
year,  being  the  first  missionary  to  China  that  was
appointed  by  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
south.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1854
on  account  of  the  failure  of  his  wife's  health,  be-
came a  professor  in  Spartanburg  female  college,  and
in  1857  was  its  president. In  1858  he  was  elected

feneral  Sunday-school  secretary  of  the  Methodist
Ipiscopal  church,  south,  for  four  years.  In  1866
he  was  elected  president  of  Kentucky  Wesleyan
college  at  Millersburg,  which  post  he  resigned  in
1870,  in  order  to  resume  the  active  work  of  the
ministry.  The  degree  di  D.  D.  was  conferred  on
him  by  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York  in
1869.  Dr.  Taylor,  while  in  China,  with  the  assist-
ance of  a  native  teacher,  prepared  several  tracts,
a  catechism,  and  a  "  Harmony  of  the  Gospels  "  in
the  Shanghai  dialect.  He  has  published  "Five
Years  in  China"  (New  York,  1860)  and  "Baptism
in  a  Nutshell "  (Nashville,  1874).

TAYLOR,  Richard  Cowling,  geologist,  b.  in
Hinton,  Suffolk,  England,  18  Jan.,  1789;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  Nov.,  1851.  He  was  educated
as  a  mining  engineer  and  geologist,  partly  under
the  direction  of  William  Smith,  the  "  father  of  Brit-
ish geology,"  and  in  the  early  part  of  his  career
was  engaged  in  the  ordnance  survey  of  England.
Subsequently  he  devoted  his  attention  to  investi-
gating and  reporting  on  mining  property  in  various
parts  of  England,  including  that  of  the  British
iron  company  in  Wales,  his  plaster  model  of  which
received  the  Isis  medal  of  the  Society  of  arts.  In
1830  he  removed  to  the  United  States,  and,  after
surveying  the  Blossburg  coal  region  in  Pennsyl-
vania, gave  three  years  to  the  exploration  of  the
coal-  and  iron-veins  of  Dauphin  county  in  the  same
state,  concerning  which  he  published  an  elaborate
report  with  maps.  He  continued  occupied  with
similar  work  in  the  United  States,  and  also  made
surveys  of  mining  lands  in  Cuba  and  the  British
provinces.  Mr.  Taylor's  knowledge  of  theoretical
geology  led  him  to  refer  the  old  red  sandstone  that
underlies  the  Pennsylvania  coal-fields  to  its  true
place,  corresponding  with  its  location  in  the  series
of  European  rocks.  He  was  the  first  to  point  out
this  fact.  Prior  to  his  arrival  in  this  country  he
devoted  much  attention  to  archaeology,  and  pub-


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


49


lished  "  Index  Monasticus,  or  the  Abbeys,  Monas-
teries, etc.,  formerly  established  in  the  City  of  Nor-
wich and  the  Ancient  Kingdom  of  East  Anglia "
(London,  1821);  "The  Geology  of  East  Anglia"
(1827) ;  and  a  very  complete  "  General  Index  to
Dugdale's  '  Monasticon  Anglicanum  ' "  (1830).  He
was  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  contributed
to  their  transactions.  Among  his  publications  are
"The  Geology  and  Natural  History  of  the  North-
east Extremity  of  the  Alleghany  Mountains  " ;  "A
Supplement  to  the  Natural  History  of  the  Birds  of
the  Alleghany  Range  " ;  "  History  and  Description
of  Fossil  Fuel "  (London,  1841) ;  and  "  Statistics  of
Coal "  (Philadelphia,  1848).

TAYLOR,  Robert  Barraud,  lawyer,  b.  in  Nor-
folk, Va.,  24  March,  1774 ;  d.  there,  13  April,  1834.
He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1793,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  became
an  eminent  advocate.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Virginia  assembly  in  1798-'9.  As  brigadier-gen-
eral of  Virginia  militia  he  served  in  the  defence  of
Norfolk  in  1813-'14,  and  he  was  appointed  to  the
same  rank  in  the  U.  S.  army  on  19  July,  1813,  but
declined.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  of  1829-30,  and  judge  of  the
general  court  of  Virginia  from  1831  till  his  death.

TAYLOR,  Robert  William,  physician,  b.  in
London,  England,  11  Aug.,  1842.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,
New  York,  in  1868,  and  has  made  a  specialty  of  the
treatment  of  syphilis,  skin  diseases,  and  genito-
urinary diseases.  For  three  years  he  was  professor
of  diseases  of  the  skin  in  the  Women's  medical  col-
lege in  New  York  city,  and  then  he  was  called  to  a
similar  chair  in  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Vermont.  He  is  one  of  the  surgeons
of  the  venereal  department  of  the  Charity  hospital,
and  physician  to  the  department  of  skin  diseases  in
Bellevue  hospital  dispensary,  and  for  six  years  he
was  surgeon  to  the  department  of  venereal  and
skin  diseases  of  the  New  York  dispensary.  Dr.
Taylor  is  a  member  of  medical  societies  at  home
and  abroad,  was  president  of  the  Dermatological
society  of  New  York,  and  has  been  vice-president
of  the  American  dermatological  association.  His
contributions  to  medical  journals,  chiefly  in  the
line  of  his  specialty,  include  about  twenty  papers.

TAYLOR,  Samuel  Harvey,  educator,  b.  in
Derry,  N.  H.,  3  Oct.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Andover,  Mass.,
29  Jan.,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1832,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1837,  when  he  took  charge  of  Phillips  Andover
academy,  having  been  a  tutor  in  Dartmouth  col-
lege during  the  last  two  years  of  his  theological
course.  He  was  principal  of  the  academy  till  his
death,  holding  a  high  position  among  the  classical
scholars  and  instructors  of  the  country.  In  1852  he
became  associate  editor  of  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra,"
succeeding  Bela  B.  Edwards.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  in  1854  by  Brown.  He  was
the  translator  and  editor  of  text-books  of  Greek
and  Latin  philology  from  the  German,  the  author
of  "Method  of  Classical  Study"  (Boston,  1861),
and  the  compiler  of  "  Classical  Study :  its  Value
Illustrated  by  Extracts  from  the  Writings  of  Emi-
nent Scholars  "  (Andover,  1870).

TAYLOR,  Samuel  Priestly,  musician,  b.  in
London,  England,  in  1779 ;  d.  in  New  York  city
in  1874.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Rev.  James  Tay-
lor. In  early  childhood  he  was  regarded  as  a  mu-
sical prodigy,  and  was  placed  under  the  instruction
of  Dr.  William  Russell,  of  Oxford.  When  twenty-
one  years  old  he  became  organist  of  Silver  street
chapel,  and  afterward  of  Islington  church.  He
came  to  this  country  in  1806,  and  soon  after  his


arrival  in  New  York  was  appointed  organist  of
St.  Ann's  church,  where  he  introduced  the  custom
of  chanting.  He  was  afterward  organist  of  Grace
church,  New  York,  then  of  St.  Ann's  church,
Brooklyn,  and  later  at  St.  George's,  New  York,  and
conducted  the  music  at  the  funeral  services  of
Gen.  Richard  Montgomery  at  St.  Paul's,  New  York.
In  1818  he  removed  to  Boston,  where  he  was  organ-
ist of  the  Old  South  church,  but  in  1826  he  re-
turned to  Brooklyn  and  resumed  his  former  post
at  St.  Ann's.  In  1834  he  was  appointed  organist
of  St.  Paul's,  New  York.  His  last  performance  on
the  organ  was  in  1871.

TAYLOR,  Stephen  William,  educator,  b.  in
Adams,  Mass.,  23  Oct.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Hamilton,  N.
Y.,  7  Jan.,  1856.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton
college,  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  in  1817,  and  became  prin-
cipal of  Black  River  academy  at  Lowville,  N.  Y.,
which  place  he  filled  until  1831.  In  1834  he  as-
sumed charge  of  the  preparatory  department  of
what  is  now  Madison  university  at  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,
and  from  1838  till  1845  was  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  natural  philosophy.  He  then  became
one  of  the  founders  of  a  Baptist  university  at
Lewisburg,  Pa.,  of  which  he  was  president  for
five  years.  From  1851  till  his  death  he  was
president  of  Madison  university.  He  was  some-
what eccentric,  but  a  man  of  great  executive  abil-
ity, and  during  his  presidency  the  last-named
institution  was  brought  from  a  very  depressed  to  a
highly  prosperous  condition.  He  was  the  author
of  a  history  of  the  university,  and  a  series  of  essays
on  the  theory  of  education,  published  posthu-
mously.— His  son,  Benjamin  Franklin,  author,
b.  in  Lowville,  Lewis  co„  N.  Y.,  19  July,  1819  ;  d.
in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  24  Feb.,  1887,  was  graduated
at  Madison  uni-
versity in  1839.
A  year  later  he
became  literary
editor  of  the  Chi-
cago "  Evening
Journal,"and  dur-
ing the  civil  war,
1861-'5,  he  was  its
correspondent  in
the  field,  follow-
ing the  western
armies.  His  war
letters  were  very
picturesque,  and
many  of  them
were  translated
and  republished
in  Europe.  The
London  "  Times  "
called  him  "  the
Oliver  Goldsmith  of  America."  Mr.  Taylor  trav-
elled in  Mexico  and  the  islands  of  the  Pacific,  and
was  for  many  years  a  public  lecturer.  The  Uni-
versity of  California  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
His  publications  in  book-form  are  "Attractions
of  Language"  (New  York,  1845);  "January  and
June"  (Chicago,  1853);  "Pictures  in  Camp  and
Field"  (1871):  "The  World  on  Wheels"  (1873);
"  Old-Time  Pictures  and  Sheaves  of  Rhyme  "  (1874) ;
"  Songs  of  Yesterday  "  (1877) ;  "  Summer  Savory,
gleaned  from  Rural  Nooks  "  (1879) ;  "  Between  the
Gates,"  pictures  of  California  life  (1881) ;  "  Dulce
Doraum,  the  Burden  of  Song  "  (1884) ;  a  complete
edition  of  his  poems  in  a  single  volume  (1887):
and  "Theophilus  Trent,  or  Old  Times  in  the  Oak
Openings,"  a  novel  (1887).  His  most  successful
poems  are  "The  Isle  of  the  Long  Ago,"  "The  Old
Village  Choir,"  and  "  Rhymes  of  the  River."


X^iJ^^^^AA^^


50


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


TAYLOR,  Thomas  Honse,  b.  in  Georgetown,
S.  C,  18  Oct.,  1799;  d.  in  West  Park,  N.  Y.,  9
Sept.,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  South  Carolina
college  in  1818,  received  deacon's  orders  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1821,  had  a  charge
at  North  Santee,  S.  C,  was  ordained  priest  at  St.
John's,  Colleton.  John's  island,  S.  C,  on  16  March,
.  1826,  and  was  rector  of  the  church  in  that  place
until  he  was  called  to  succeed  Dr.  Jonathan  M.
Wainwright  in  Grace  church,  New  York  city,  in
April,  1834,  of  which  he  was  rector  from  that  time
until  his  death.  He  was  distinguished  as  a  writer
and  debater,  and  in  the  controversy  over  the  ritual
and  liturgy  which  divided  his  church  he  was  a
representative  of  the  Low-church  party.  A  volume
of  his  "  Sermons  preached  in  Grace  Church  "  was
published  after  his  death  (New  York,  1869).

TAYLOR,  Virgil  Corydon,  musician,  b.  in
Barkhamstead,  Conn.,  in  1817.  He  was  long  an
organist  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  where  he  wrote  arti-
cles on  political  subjects  for  the  newspapers.  He
endeavored  to  introduce  in  musical  notation  an  in-
dex-staff in  which  the  key-note  occupies  a  heavier
line  or  a  wider  space.  He  published  collections  of
sacred  and  secular  songs,  containing  many  compo-
sitions by  himself.  Their  titles  are  "  Sacred  Min-
strel "  (1846) ;  "  The  Lute,  or  Musical  Instructor  "
(1847);  "Choral  Anthems"  (1850);  "The  Golden
Lyre  "  (1850) ;  "  Concordia  "  (1851) ;  "  The  Chime  "
(1854);  "The  Celestina"  (1856);  "The  Song  Fes-
tival " (1858) ;  "The  Enchanter "(1861):  "  The  Con-
certina "  (1864) ;  and  "  The  Praise  Offering  "  (1868).

TAYLOR,  Waller,  senator,  b.  in  Lunenburg
county,  Va.,  before  1786 ;  d.  in  Lunenburg,  Va.,  26
Aug.,  1826.  He  received  a  common-school  educa-
tion, studied  law,  served  one  or  two  terms  in  the
Virginia  legislature  as  the  representative  of  Lunen-
burg county,  and  settled  in  Vincennes,  Ind.,  in
1805,  having  been  appointed  a  territorial  judge.
He  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  William  H.
Harrison  at  the  battle  of  Tippecanoe,  and  in  the
war  of  1812-'15.  On  the  admission  of  Indiana  as
a  state  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator,  and  at  the
close  of  his  term  was  re-elected,  serving  from  12
Dec,  1816,  till  3  March,  1825.

TAYLOR,  Walter  Herron,  soldier,  b.  in  Nor-
folk, Va.,  13  June,  1838.  He  was  educated  at  the
Virginia  military  institute,  and  became  a  mer-
chant and  banker.  He  joined  the  Confederate
army  on  the  secession  of  Virginia,  and  was  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee  during  the  entire  period
of  the  civil  war,  and  from  the  time  that  Gen.  Lee
assumed  command  of  the  Army  of  Northern  Vir-
ginia, served  as  adjutant-general  of  that  army,
with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  After  the
war  he  resumed  the  banking  business  at  Norfolk,
Va.,  where  he  has  held  municipal  offices,  and  was
elected  to  the  state  senate,  of  which  he  was  a  mem-
ber from  1869  till  1873.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Four
Years  with  Gen.  Lee  "  (New  York,  1878).

TAYLOR,  William,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Rock-
bridge county,  Va.,  2  May,  1821.  He  was  brought
up  as  a  farmer  and  tanner,  became  a  Methodist
preacher  in  1842,  was  admitted  on  trial  to  the  Bal-
timore conference  in  March,  1843,  and  was  an  itin-
erant till  1849,  when  he  was  sent  to  California  as  a
missionary  by  the  missionary  society  of  the  Meth-
odist Episcopal  church.  After  laboring  there  for
seven  years  and  for  five  years  in  Canada  and  the
eastern  states,  he  went  to  Europe  in  1862,  spending
seven  months  in  evangelistic  work  in  the  British
islands,  and  then  travelling  over  the  continent  and
in  Egypt  and  the  Holy  Land.  For  the  next  three
years  he  conducted  missionary  services  throughout
Australia,  Tasmania,  and  New  Zealand. He  after-


//L^Cc^ec^i^.  a^/^u^uc/y-


ward  visited  South  Africa,  and  converted  many  of
the  Kaffirs  to  Christianity,  going  thence  to  Great
Britain,  where  he  conducted  special  services  for
about  a  year.  He  next  made  the  tour  of  the  Meth-
odist missions  in  the  West  Indies,  visited  Austra-
lia a  second  time,  and  then  spent  some  time  in
Ceylon,  crossing
over  in  1872  to  In-
dia, where  within
four  years  he  suc-
ceeded in  estab-
lishing self-sup-
porting churches
in  Bombay,  Poo-
nah,  Jubbulpore,
Agra,  Calcutta,
Madras,  Banga-
lore, Secundera-
bad,  and  else-
where. As  a  re-
sult of  his  labors
the  South  India
conference  and
the  Madras  con-
ference have  been
organized.  He
devoted  himself
afterward  to  educational  and  evangelistic  work  in
Central  America  and  in  Brazil,  Chili,  and  Peru,
and  there  also  he  founded  independent  mission
churches.  These  self-supporting  missions,  which
he  began  to  establish  in  1878,  now  occupy  as  cen-
tres Aspinwall,  Callao,  Iquique,  Coquimbo,  San-
tiago, Concepcion,  Pernambuco,  and  Para.  On  22
May,  1884,  he  was  elevated  to  the  episcopal  office
under  the  title  of  missionary  bishop  in  Africa.  Go-
ing to  Central  Africa,  he  established  a  chain  of
thirty-six  mission  stations  on  the  Congo,  extending
1,200  miles  and  390  miles  along  the  west  coast,  and
employing  seventy  missionaries,  who  are  supported
by  voluntary  contributions  of  American  Methodists
until  self-support  can  be  developed  from  school-
farms.  In  1888  Bishop  Taylor  revisited  the  United
States  on  the  occasion  of  the  general  conference  held
in  New  York  in  May.  He  has  published  "  Seven
Years'  Street  Preaching  in  San  Francisco "  (New
York,  1856;  London,  1863);  "Address  to  Young
America,  and  a  Word  to  the  Old  Folks"  (1857);
"California  Life  Illustrated"  (New  York,  1858;
London,  1863) ;  "  The  Model  Preacher  "  (Cincinnati,
1860 ;  London,  1865) ;  "  Reconciliation,  or  How  to  be
Saved  "  (1867) :  "  Infancy  and  Manhood  of  Christian
Life  "  (1867) ;  "  The  Election  of  Grace  "  (Cincinnati,
1868);  "Christian  Adventures  in  South  Africa"
(1867) ;  "  Four  Years'  Campaign  in  India  "  (1875) ;
"  Our  South  American  Cousins"  (1878) ;  "Letters
to  a  Quaker  Friend  on  Baptism"  (1880);  "Ten
Years  of  Self-Supporting  Missions  in  India  "  (1882) ;
and  "  Pauline  Methods  of  Missionary  Work  "  (1889).
TAYLOR,  William  Bower,  physicist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  May,  1821.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1840,
and  after  studying  law  was  admitted  to  the  Phila-
delphia bar  in  1844.  Subsequently  he  studied
civil  engineering,  but  he  has  always  been  more
attracted  to  literary  pursuits  or  scientific  investi-

fations.  In  1854  he  was  made  an  examiner  in  the
T.  S.  patent-office  in  Washington,  where  he  re-
mained until  1877.  He  was  appointed  editor  of
the  publications  of  the  Smithsonian  institution  in
1878,  which  place  he  has  since  held.  Mr.  Taylor
is  a  member  of  the  Philosophical  societies  of  Phila-
delphia and  Washington,  and,  in  addition  to  re-
views and  magazine  articles,  has  published,  through
the  medium  of  the  Smithsonian  reports,  memoirs


S*Sk»!  ;


gtsy-


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


51


on  "  Thoughts  on  the  Nature  and  Origin  of  Force  "
(1870);  "On  the  Refraction  of  Sound"  (1875):
"Kinetic  Theories  of  Gravitation"  (1876);  "Re-
cent Researches  in  Sound  "  (1876) ;  "  History  of  the
Electro-Magnetic  Telegraph  "  (1878) ;  "  The  Scien-
tific Work  of  Joseph  Henry  "  (1878) ;  "  Physics  and
Occult  Qualities"  (1882) ;  and  "  On  the  Crumpling
of  the  Earth's  Crust "  (1882) ;  also  a  discussion
with  the  Rev.  J.  Newton  Brown  "  On  the  Obliga-
tion of  the  Sabbath  "  (Philadelphia,  1853).

TAYLOR,  William  Mackergo,  clergyman,  b.
in  Kilmarnock,  Scotland,  23  Oct.,  1829.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Glasgow  in  1849,
and  at  the  theological  seminary  of  the  United  Pres-
byterian church  in  Edinburgh  in  1852,  and  after
officiating  for  two  years  as  pastor  of  the  small  par-
ish of  Kilmaurs,  Ayrshire,  removed  in  1855  to  Liv-
erpool, England,  to  form  a  new  Presbyterian  con-
gregation. There  he  gathered  a  large  congrega-
tion of  merchants,  mechanics,  and  tradespeople.
He  visited  the  United  States  in  1871,  and  preached
in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  with  such  effectiveness  that  in
the  following  year  he  was  called  to  occupy  the  pul-
pit of  the  Broadway  Tabernacle  in  New  York  city,
as  the  successor  of  the  Rev.  Joseph  P.  Thompson.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  both  Yale  and
Amherst  in  1872,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Prince-
ton in  1883.  He  was  lecturer  at  Yale  seminary  in
1876  and  1886,  and  at  Princeton  seminary  in  1880.
In  1876-'80  Dr.  Taylor  edited  the  "Christian  at
Work."  He  is  the  author  of  "  Life  Truths,"  a  vol-
ume of  sermons  (Liverpool,  1862) ;  "  The  Miracles :
Helps  to  Faith,  not  Hindrances  "  (Edinburgh,  1865) :
"  The  Lost  Found  and  the  Wanderer  Welcomed  "
(1870);  "Memoir  of  the  Rev.  Matthew  Dickie"
(Bristol,  1872) ;  "  Prayer  and  Business  "  (New  York,
1873) ;  "  David,  King  of  Israel  "  (1875) ;  "  Elijah,
the  Prophet "  (1876) ;  "  The  Ministry  of  the  Word,"
containing  lectures  delivered  at  Yale  (1876):
"  Songs  in  the  Night  "  (1877) ;  "  Peter,  the  Apos-
tle "  (1877) ;  "  Daniel,  the  Beloved  "  (1878) ;  "  Moses,
the  Lawgiver"  (1879);  "The  Gospel  Miracles  in
their  Relation  to  Christ  and  Christianity,"  consist-
ing of  his  Princeton  lectures  (1880) :  "  The  Limita-
tions of  Life,  and  other  Sermons  "  (1880) ;  "  Paul,
the  Missionary"  (1882);  "Contrary  Winds,  and
other  Sermons "  (1883) ;  "  Jesus  at  the  Well "
(1884);  "John  Knox:  a  Biography  "  (1885) ;  "Jo-
seph, the  Prime  Minister "  (1886) ;  "The  Parables
of  Our  Saviour  Expounded  and  Illustrated  "  (1886) ;
and  "  The  Scottish  Pulpit "  (1887).

TAYLOR,  William  Vigneron,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1781 ;  d.  there,  11  Feb.,
1858.  He  went  to  sea  before  the  mast,  became  a
captain  in  the  merchant  marine,  and  entered  the
navy  as  a  sailing-master,  28  April,  1813.  He  was
attached  to  Com.  Oliver  H.  Perry's  flag-ship,  the
"  Lawrence,"  in  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie,  where  he
was  severely  wounded,  afterward  receiving  a  vote
of  thanks  and  a  sword  for  his  services.  He  was
commissioned  a  lieutenant,  9  Dec,  1814,  cruised  in
the  "Java"  on  the  Mediterranean  station  in
1815-16,  and  was  on  leave  at  Newport  on  account
of  his  wound  in  1816-'23,  after  which  he  served  in
the  ship  "  Ontario,"  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,
in  1824-6,  at  the  Boston  navy-yard  in  1827-'8,  and
in  the  frigate  "Hudson,"  on  the  Brazil  station,  in
1829-30.  He  was  promoted  to  master-comman-
dant, 3  March,  1831,  was  in  charge  of  the  receiving-
ship  at  Boston  in  1833-'4,  and  the  sloop  "  Warren  "
in  1835.  In  1839-'41  he  had  the  store-ship  "  Erie."
He  was  promoted  to  captain,  8  Sept.,  1841,  and
commanded  the  Pacific  squadron  in  the  "  Ohio  "  in
1847-'8.  After  this  he  was  on  leave  at  Newport
until  his  death. — His  son,  William  Rogers,  naval


officer,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  7  Nov.,  1811,  entered
the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  1  April,  1828,  became  a
passed  midshipman,  14  June,  1834,  and  cruised  in
the  "Peacock"  in  the  East  Indies  in  1835-6.
When  the  "  Peacock "  was  stranded  on  the  island
of  Massera  in  1836,  he  was  sent  to  take  the  U.  S.
diplomatic  agent,  Edmund  Roberts,  to  Muscat  to
arrange  treaties.  This  voyage  lasted  five  days  in
an  open  boat,  and  upon  arrival  at  Muscat  the  sul-
tan offered  him  the  sloop  "Sultane  "  to  go  to  the
relief  of  the  "  Peacock  " ;  but  the  latter  had  got  off,
and  he  rejoined  her  at  sea.  He  served  as  acting
lieutenant  on  the  same  station  and  in  the  Pacific
in  the  schooner  "Enterprise"  and  ship  "North
Carolina"  in  1836-8.  He  was  commissioned  a
lieutenant,  10  Feb.,  1840,  and  was  engaged  in  the
survey  of  Tampa  bay,  Fla.,  in  1842-3,  during
which  he  at  times  had  command  of  the  steamer
"  Poinsett "  and  the  brig  "  Oregon."  He  served  on
the  Brazil  station  in  the  brig  "  Perry  "  and  the  ship
'•Columbus"  in  1843-4.  During  the  Mexican  war
he  was  on  the  sloop  "  St.  Mary's  "  in  the  engage-
ment with  batteries  at  Tampico,  where  he  com-
manded the  launch  in  the  expedition  that  captured
that  port  and  five  Mexican  schooners,  14  Nov.,
1846.  During  the  siege  and  bombardment  of  Vera
Cruz  he  commanded  the  eight-inch  gun  in  the
naval  battery  on  shore  for  thirty-six  hours.  He
was  promoted  to  commander,  14  Sept.,  1855,  and
was  on  ordnance  duty  at  Washington  in  1857-'9.
In  1861  he  was  ordered  to  command  the  steamer
"  Housatonic,"  and  he  was  promoted  to  captain,  16
July,  1862.  While  senior  officer  in  the  blockade
off  Charleston  he  engaged  the  Confederate  rams
"  Chicora  "  and  "  Palmetto  "  in  the  "  Housatonic  "
when  they  attacked  the  squadron  in  January.  1863.
When  Dahlgren  took  command  he  was  appointed
fleet-captain,  and  participated  in  the  actions  against
Morris  island  in  July,  1863.  On  16  July  he  was  in
the  battle  on  board  the  monitor  "  Catskill,"  and  on
18  July  in  the  monitor  "  Montauk."  He  command-
ed the  steamer  "  Juniata  "  in  both  attacks  on  Fort
Fisher.  He  was  president  of  the  board  to  revise
the  navy  regulations,  was  in  charge  of  the  ordnance-
yard  at  Washington  in  1866-'7,  and  was  promoted
to  commodore,  25  July,  1866.  He  was  a  member
of  the  examining  board  in  1868,  commanded  the
northern  squadron  of  the  Pacific  fleet  in  1869-'71,
was  promoted  to  rear-admiral,  19  Jan.,  1871.  and
was  president  of  the  examining  board  in  1871— '2,
and  commanded  the  South  Atlantic  squadron  from
22  May,  1872,  till  7  Nov.,  1873,  when  he  was  retired.
TAYLOR,  Zachary,  twelfth  president  of  the'
United  States,  b.  in  Orange  county,  Va.,  24  Sept.,
1784;  d.  in  the  executive  mansion,  Washington,
D.  C,  9  July,  1850.  His  father,  Col.  Richard  Tay-
lor, an  officer  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  was
conspicuous  for  zeal  and  daring  among  men  in
whom  personal  gallantry  was  the  rule.  After  the
war  he  retired  to  private  life,  and  in  1785  removed
to  Kentucky,  then  a  sparsely  occupied  county  of
Virginia,  and  made  his  home  near  the  present  city
of  Louisville,  where  he  died.  Zachary  was  the
third  son.  Brought  up  on  a  farm  in  a  new  settle-
ment, he  had  few  scholastic  opportunities  ;  but  in
the  thrift,  industry,  self-denial,  and  forethought
required  by  the  circumstances,  he  learned  such  les-
sons as  were  well  adapted  to  form  the  character
illustrated  by  his  eventful  career.  Yet  he  had  also
another  form  of  education.  The  liberal  grants  of
land  that  Virginia  made  to  her  soldiers  caused
many  of  them,  after  the  peace  of  1783,  to  remove
to  the  west ;  thus  Col.  Taylor's  neighbors  included
many  who  had  been  his  fellow-soldiers,  and  these
often  met  around  las  wide  hearth. Their  corner-


52


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


sation  would  naturally  be  reminiscences  of  their
military  life,  and  all  the  sons  of  Col.  Taylor,  save
one,  Hancock,  entered  the  U.  S.  army.  The  rapid
extension  of  settlements  on  the  border  was  pro-
ductive of  frequent  collision  with  the  Indians,  and
required  the  protection  of  a  military  force.

In  1808,  on  the  recommendation  of  President
Jefferson,  congress  authorized  the  raising  of  five
regiments  of  infantry,  one  of  riflemen,  one  of  light
artillery,  and  one  of  light  dragoons.  From  the
terms  of  the  act  it  was  understood  that  this  was
not  to  be  a  permanent  increase  of  the  U.  S.  army,
and  many  of  the  officers  of  the  "  old  army  "  de-
clined to  seek  promotion  in  the  new  regiments.  At
this  period  questions  had  arisen  between  the  United
States  and  Great  Britain  which  caused  serious  an-
ticipations of  a  war  with  that  power,  and  led  many
to  regard  the  additional  force  authorized  as  a  pre-
liminary step  in  preparation  for  such  a  war.  Zach-
ary  Taylor,  then  in  his  twenty-fourth  year,  applied
for  a  commission  and  was  appointed  a  1st  lieu-
tenant in  the  7th  infantry,  one  of  the  new  regi-
ments, and  in  1810  was  promoted  to  the  grade  of
captain  in  the  same  regiment,  according  to  the
regulations  of  the  service.  He  was  happily  mar-
ried in  1810  to  Miss  Margaret  Smith,  of  Calvert
county,  Md.,  who  shared  with  him  the  privations
and  dangers  of  his  many  years  of  frontier  service,
and  survived  him  but  a  short  time.  The  troubles
on  the  frontier  continued  to  increase  until  1811,
when*  Gen.  William  H.  Harrison,  afterward  presi-
dent of  the  United  States,  marched  against  the
stronghold  of  the  Shawnees  and  fought  the  battle
of  Tippecanoe.

In  June,  1812,  war  was  declared  against  Eng-
land, and  this  increased  the  widespread  and  not
unfounded  fears  of  Indian  invasion  in  the  valley
of  the  Wabash.  To  protect  Vincennes  from  sudden
assault,  Capt.  Taylor  was  ordered  to  Fort  Harri-
son, a  stockade  on  the  river  above  Vincennes,  and
with  his  company  of  infantry,  about  fifty  strong,
made  preparations  to  defend  the  place.  He  had
not  long  to  wait.  A  large  body  of  Indians,  know-
ing the  smallness  of  the  garrison,  came,  confidently
counting  on  its  capture ;  but  as  it  is  a  rule  in  their
warfare  to  seek  by  stratagem  to  avoid  equal  risk  and
probable  loss,  they  tried  various  expedients,  which
were  foiled  by  the  judgment,  vigilance,  and  courage
of  the  commander,  and  when  the  final  attack  was
made,  the  brave  little  garrison  repelled  it  with  such
loss  to  the  assailants  that  when,  in  the  following  Oc-
tober. Gen.  Hopkins  came  to  support  Fort  Harrison,
no 'Indians  were  to  be  found  thereabout.  For  the
defence  of  Fort  Harrison,  Capt.  Taylor  received
the  brevet  of  major,  an  honor  that  had  seldom,  if
ever  before,  been  conferred  for  service  in  Indian
war.  In  the  following  November,  Maj.  Taylor,
with  a  battalion  of  regulars,  formed  a  part  of  the
command  of  Gen.  Hopkins  in  the  expedition
against  the  hostile  Indians  at  the  head-waters  of
the  Wabash.  In  1814,  with  his  separate  command,
he  being  then  a  maior  by  commission,  he  made  a
campaign  against  the  hostile  Indians  and  their
British  allies  on  Rock  river,  which  was  so  suc-
cessful as  to  give  subsequent  security  to  that  im-
mediate frontier.  In  such  service,  not  the  less
hazardous  or  indicative  of  merit  because  on  a  small
scale,  he  passed  the  period  of  his  employment  on
that  frontier  until  the  treaty  of  peace  with  Great
Britain  disposed  the  Indians  to  be  quiet.

After  the  war,  3  March,  1815,  a  law  was  enacted
to  fix  the  military  peace  establishment  of  the
United  States.  By  this  act  the  whole  force  was
to  be  reduced  to  10,000  men,  with  such  proportions
of  artillery,  infantry,  and  riflemen  as  the  presi-


dent should  judge  proper.  The  president  was  to
cause  the  officers  and  men  of  the  existing  army  to
be  arranged,  by  unrestricted  transfers,  so  as  to
form  the  corps  authorized  by  the  recent  act,  and
the  supernumeraries  were  to  be  discharged.  Maj.
Taylor  had  borne  the  responsibilities  and  per-
formed the  duties  of  a  battalion  commander  so
long  and  successfully  that  when  the  arranging
board  reduced  him  to  the  rank  of  captain  in  the
new  organization  he  felt  the  injustice,  but  resigned
from  the  army  without  complaint,  returned  home,
and  proceeded,  as  he  said  in  after-years,  "  to  make
a  crop  of  corn."  Influences  that  were  certainly
not  employed  by  him,  and  are  unknown  to  the
writer  of  this  sketch,  caused  his  restoration  to  the
grade  of  major,  and  he  resumed  his  place  in  the
army,  there  to  continue  until  the  voice  of  the  peo-
ple called  him  to  the  highest  office  within  their
gift.  Under  the  rules  that  governed  promotion  in
the  army,  Maj.  Taylor  became  lieutenant  -  colonel
of  the  1st  infantry,  and  commanded  at  Fort
Snelling,  then  the  advanced  post  in  the  northwest.

In  1832  he  became  colonel  of  the  1st  infantry,
with  headquarters  at  Fort  Crawford,  Prairie  du
Chien.  The  barracks  were  unfinished,  and  his
practical  mind  and  conscientious  attention  to  every
duty  were  manifest  in  the  progress  and  completion
of  the  work.  The  second  Black  Hawk  campaign
occurred  this  year,  and  Col.  Taylor,  with  the
greater  part  of  his  regiment,  joined  the  army  com-
manded by  Gen.  Henry  Atkinson,  and  with  it
moved  from  Rock  Island  up  the  valley  of  Rock
river,  following  Black  Hawk,  who  had  gone  to
make  a  junction  with  the  Pottawattamie  band  of
the  Prophet,  a  nephew  of  Black  Hawk.  This  was
in  violation  of  the  treaty  he  had  made  with  Gen.
Edmund  P.  Gaines  in  1831,  by  which  he  was  re-
quired to  remove  to  the  west  of  the  Mississippi,
relinquishing  all  claim  to  the  Rock  river  villages.
It  was  assumed  that  his  purpose  in  returning  to
the  east  side  of  the  river  was  hostile,  and,  from
the  defenceless  condition  of  the  settlers  and  the
horror  of  savage  atrocity,  great  excitement  was
created,  due  rather  to  his  fame  as  a  warrior  than
to  the  number  of  his  followers.  If,  as  he  subse-
quently declared,  his  design  was  to  go  and  live
peaceably  with  his  nephew,  the  Prophet,  rather
than  with  the  Foxes,  of  whom  Keokuk  was  the
chief,  that  design  may  have  been  frustrated  by  the
lamentable  mistake  of  some  mounted  volunteers
in  hastening  forward  in  pursuit  of  Black  Hawk,
who,  with  his  band — men,  women,  and  children —
was  going  up  on  the  south  side  of  the  Rock  river.
The  pursuers  fell  into  an  ambuscade,  and  were
routed  with  some  loss  and  in  great  confusion.  The
event  will  be  remembered  by  the  men  of  that  day
as  "  Stillman's  run."

The  vanity  of  the  young  Indians  was  inflated
by  their  success,  as  was  shown  by  some  exultant
messages ;  and  the  sagacious  old  chief,  whatever  he
may  have  previously  calculated  upon,  now  saw  that
war  was  inevitable  and  immediate.  With  his  band
recruited  by  warriors  from  the  Prophet's  band,  he
crossed  to  the  north  side  of  Rock  river,  and.  pa-s-
ing through  the  swamp  Koshkenong,  fled  over  the
prairies  west  of  the  Four  Lakes,  toward  Wiscon-
sin river.  Gen.  Henry  Dodge,  with  a  battalion  of
mounted  miners,  overtook  the  Indians  while  they
were  crossing  the  Wisconsin  and  attacked  their
rear-guard,  which,  when  the  main  body  had  crossed,
swam  the  river  and  joined  the  retreat  over  the
Kickapoo  hills  toward  the  Mississippi.  Gen.  At-
kinson, with  his  whole  army,  continued  the  pur-
suit, and,  after  a  toilsome  march,  overtook  the
Indians  north  of  Prairie  du  Chien,  on  the  bank  of


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


53


the  Mississippi,  to  the  west  side  of  which  they
were  preparing  to  cross  in  bark  canoes  made  on  the
spot.  That  purpose  was  foiled  by  the  accidental
arrival  of  a  steamboat  with  a  small  gun  on  board.
The  Indians  took  cover  in  a  willow  marsh,  and  there
was  fought  the  battle  of  the  Bad  Axe.  The  Indians
were  defeated,  and  dispersed,  and  the  campaign
ended.  In  the  mean  time,  Gen.  Winfield  bcott,
with  troops  from  the  east,  took  chief  command  and
established  his  headquarters  at  Rock  Island,  and
thither  Gen.  Atkinson  went  with  the  regular  troops,
except  that  part  of  the  1st  infantry  which  consti-
tuted the  garrison  of  Fort  Crawford.  With  these
Col.  Taylor  returned  to  Prairie  du  Chien.  When
it  was  reported  that  the  Indians  were  on  an  island
above  the  prairie,  he  sent  a  lieutenant  with  an
appropriate  command  to  explore  the  island,  where
unmistakable  evidence  was  found  of  the  recent

fresence  of  the  Indians  and  of  their  departure,
mmediately  thereafter  a  group  of  Indians  ap-
peared on  the  east  bank  of  the  river  under  a
white  flag,  who  proved  to  be  Black  Hawk,  with  a
remnant  of  his  band  and  a  few  friendly  Winne-
bagoes.  The  lieutenant  went  with  them  to  the
fort,  where  Col.  Taylor  received  them,  except  the
Winnebagoes,  as  prisoners.  A  lieutenant  and  a
guard  were  sent  with  them,  sixty  in  number — men,
women,  and  children — by  steamboat,  to  Rock  Isl-
and, there  to  report  to  Gen.  Scott  for  orders  in
regard  to  the  prisoners.  Col.  Taylor  actively  par-
ticipated in  the  campaign  up  to  its  close,  and  to
him  was  surrendered  the  chief  who  had  most  illus-
trated the  warlike  instincts  of  the  Indian  race,  to
whom  history  must  fairly  accord  the  credit  of
having  done  much  under  the  most  disadvantageous
circumstances.  In  183G  Col.  Taylor  was  ordered
to  Florida  for  service  in  the  Seminole  war,  and  the
next  year  he  defeated  the  Indians  in  the  decisive
battle  of  Okechobee,  for  which  he  received  the
brevet  of  brigadier-general,  and  in  1838  was  ap-
pointed to  the  chief  command  in  Florida.  In
1840  he  was  assigned  to  command  the  southern
division  of  the  western  department  of  the  army.
Though  Gen.  Taylor  had  for  many  years  been  a
cotton-planter,  his  family  had  lived  with  him  at
his  military  station,  but,  when  ordered  for  an  in-
definite time  on  field  service,  he  made  his  family
home  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.

Texas  having  been  annexed  to  the  United  States
in  1845,  Mexico  threatened  to  invade  Texas  with
the  avowed  purpose  to  recover  the  territory,  and
Gen.  Taylor  was  ordered  to  defend  it  as  a  part  of
the  United  States.  He  proceeded  with  all  his
available  force,  about  1.500  men,  to  Corpus  Christi,
where  he  was  joined  by  re-enforcements  of  regu-
lars and  volunteers.  Discussion  had  arisen  as  to
whether  the  Nueces  or  the  Rio  Grande  was  the
proper  boundary  of  Texas.  His  political  opinions,
whatever  they  might  be,  were  subordinate  to  the
duty  of  a  soldier  to  execute  the  orders  of  his  gov-
ernment, and,  without  uttering  it,  he  acted  on  the
apophthegm  of  Decatur :  "  My  country,  right  or
wrong,  my  country."  Texas  claimed  protection
for  her  frontier,  the  president  recognized  the  fact
that  Texas  had  been  admitted  to  the  Union  with
the  Rio  Grande  as  her  boundary,  and  Gen.  Taylor
was  instructed  to  advance  to  that  river.  His
force  had  been  increased  to  about  4,000,  when,
on  8  March,  1846,  he  marched  from  Corpus
Christi.  He  was  of  course  conscious  of  the  inade-
quacy of  his  division  to  resist  such  an  army  as
Mexico  might  send  against  it,  but  when  ordered
by  superior  authority  it  was  not  his  to  remon-
strate. Gen.  Gaines,  commanding  the  western
department,  had  made  requisitions  for  a  sufficient


number  of  volunteers  to  join  Taylor,  but  the  sec-
retary of  war  countermanded  them,  except  as  to
such  as  had  already  joined.  Gen.  Taylor,  with  a
main  depot  at  Point  Isabel,  advanced  to  the  bank
of  the  Rio  Grande,  opposite  to  Matamoras,  and
there  made  provision  for  defence  of  the  place
called  Fort  Brown.  Soon  after  his  arrival,  Am-
pudia,  the  Mexican  general  at  Matamoras,  made
a  threatening  demand  that  Gen.  Taylor  should
withdraw  his  troops  beyond  the  Nueces,  to  which
he  replied  that  his  position  had  been  taken  by  order
of  his  government,  and  would  be  maintained.
Having  completed  the  intrenchment,  and  being
short  of  supplies,  he  left  a  garrison  to  hold  it,  and
marched  with  an  aggregate  force  of  2,288  men  to
obtain  additional  supplies  from  Point  Isabel,  about
thirty  miles  distant.  Gen.  Arista,  the  new  Mexican
commander,  availing  himself  of  the  opportunity  to
interpose,  crossed  the  river  below  Fort  Brown  with
a  force  estimated  at  6,000  regular  troops,  10  pieces
of  artillery,and  a  considerable  amount  of  auxiliaries.
In  the  afternoon  of  the  second  day's  march  from
Point  Isabel  these  were  reported  by  Gen.  Taylor's
cavalry  to  be  in  his  front,  and  he  halted  to  allow
the  command  to  rest  and  for  the  needful  disposi-
tions for  battle.  In  the  evening  a  request  was  made
that  a  council  of  war  should  be  held,  to  which  Gen.
Taylor  assented.  The  prevalent  opinion  was  in
favor  of  falling  back  to  Point  Isabel,  there  to  in-
trench and  wait  for  re-enforcements.  After  listen-
ing to  a  full  expression  of  views,  the  general  an-
nounced :  "  I  shall  go  to  Fort  Brown  or  stay  in  my
shoes,"  a  western  expression  equivalent  to  "  or  die
in  the  attempt."  He  then  notified  the  officers  to
prepare  to  attack  the  enemy  at  dawn  of  day.  In
the  morning  of  8  May  the  advance  was  made  by
columns  until  the  enemy's  batteries  opened,  when
line  of  battle  was  formed  and  Taylor's  artillery,
inferior  in  number  but  otherwise  superior,  was
brought  fully  into  action  and  soon  dispersed  the
mass  of  the  enemy's  cavalry.  The  chaparral,  dense '
copses  of  thorn-bushes,  served  both  to  conceal  the
position  of  the  enemy  and  to  impede  the  move-
ments of  the  attacking  force.  The  action  closed  at
night,  when  the  enemy  retired,  and  Gen.  Taylor
bivouacked  on  the  field.  Early  in  the  morning  of
9  May  he  resumed  his  march,  and  in  the  afternoon
encountered  Gen.  Arista  in  a  strong  position  with
artillery  advantageously  posted.  Taylor's  infantry
pushed  through  the  chaparral  lining  both  sides  of
the  road,  and  drove  the  enemy's  infantry  before
them ;  but  the  batteries  held  their  position,  and
were  so  fatally  used  that  it  was  an  absolute  neces-
sity to  capture  them.  For  this  purpose  the  general
ordered  a  squadron  of  dragoons  to  charge  them.
The  enemy's  gunners  were  cut  down  at  their  pieces,
the  commanding  officer  was  captured,  and  the
infantry  soon  made  the  victory  complete.  The
Mexican  loss  in  the  two  battles  was  estimated  at
a  thousand  ;  the  American,  killed,  forty-nine.  The
enemy  precipitately  recrossed  the  Rio  Grande,
leaving  the  usual  evidence  of  a  routed  army.  Gen.
Taylor  then  proceeded  to  Fort  Brown.  During
his  absence  it  had  been  heavily  bombarded,  and
the  commander,  Maj.  Brown,  had  been  killed.  The
Mexicans  evacuated  Matamoras,  and  Gen.  Taylor
took  peaceable  possession,  18  May.

The  Rio  Grande,  except  at  time  of  flood,  offered
little  obstacle  to  predatory  incursions,  and  it  was
obviously  sound  policy  to  press  the  enemy  back
from  the  border.  Gen.  Taylor,  therefore,  moved
forward  to  Camargo,  on  the  San  Juan,  a  tributary
of  the  Rio  Grande.  This  last-named  river  rose  so
as  to  enable  steamboats  to  transport  troops  and
supplies, and by September  a  sufficiently  large


54


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


force  of  volunteers  had  reported  at  Gen.  Taylor's
headquarters  to  justify  a  further  march  into  the
interior,  but  the  move  must  be  by  land,  and  for
that  there  was  far  from  adequate  transportation.
Hiring  Mexican  packers  to  supplement  the  little
transportation  on  hand,  he  was  able  to  add  one
division  of  volunteers  to  the  regulars  of  his  com-
mand, and  with  a  force  of  6,625  men  of  all  arms
he  marched  against  Monterey,  a  fortified  town  of
great  natural  strength,  garrisoned  by  10,000  men
under  Gen.  Ampudia.  On  19  Sept.  he  encamped
before  the  town,  and  on  the  21st  began  the  attack.
On  the  third  day  Gen.  Ampudia  proposed  to  sur-
render, commissioners  were  appointed,  and  terms
of  capitulation  agreed  upon,  by  which  the  enemy
were  to  retire  beyond  a  specified  line,  and  the
United  States  forces  were  not  to  advance  beyond
that  line  during  the  next  eight  weeks  or  until  the
pleasure  of  the  respective  governments  should  be
known.  By  some  strange  misconception,  the  U.  S.
government  disapproved  the  arrangement,  and
ordered  that  the  armistice  should  be  terminated,
by  which  we  lost  whatever  had  been  gained  in  the
interests  of  peace  by  the  generous  terms  of  the
capitulation,  and  got  nothing,  for,  during  the  short
time  that  remained  unexpired,  no  provision  had
been  or  could  be  made  to  enable  Gen.  Taylor  to
advance  into  the  heart  of  Mexico.  Presuming  that
such  must  be  the  purpose  of  the  government,  he
assiduously  strove  to  collect  the  means  for  that
object.  When  his  preparations  were  well-nigh  per-
fected, Gen.  Scott  was  sent  to  Mexico  with  orders
that  enabled  him  at  discretion  to  strip  Gen.  Taylor
of  both  troops  and  material  of  war,  to  be  used  on
another  line  of  operations.  The  projected  campaign
against  the  capital  of  Mexico  was  to  be  from  Vera
Cruz,  up  the  steppes,  and  against  the  fortifications
that  had  been  built  to  resist  any  probable  invasion,
instead  of  from  Saltillo,  across  the  plains  to  the
comparatively  undefended  capital.  The  difficulty
on  tnis  route  was  the  waterless  space  to  be  crossed,
and  against  that  Gen.  Taylor  had  ingeniously  pro-
vided. According  to  instructions,  he  went  to  Vic-
toria, Mexico,  turned  over  his  troops,  except  a
proper  escort  to  return  through  a  country  of  hos-
tiles  to  Monterey,  and  then  went  to  Agua  Nueva,
beyond  Saltillo,  wltere  he  was  joined  by  Gen.  John
E.  Wool  with  his  command  from  Chihuahua.

Gen.  Santa-Anna  saw  the  invitation  offered  by
the  withdrawal  of  Gen.  Taylor's  troops,  and  with  a
well-appointed  army,  20,000  strong,  marched  with
the  assurance  of  easily  recovering  their  lost  terri-
tory. Gen.  Taylor  fell  back  to  the  narrow  pass  in
front  of  the  hacienda  of  Buena  Vista,  and  here
stood  on  the  defensive.  His  force  was  5,400  of  all
arms ;  but  of  these,  only  three  batteries  of  artillery,
one  squadron  of  dragoons,  one  mounted  company
of  Texans,  and  one  regiment  of  Mississippi  riflemen,
had  ever  been  under  fire.  Some  skirmishing  oc-
curred on  22  Feb.,  and  a  general  assault  along  the
whole  line  was  made  on  the  morning  of  the  23d.
The  battle, with  varying  fortune, continued  through-
out the  day;  at  evening  the  enemy  retired,  and
during  the  night  retreated  by  the  route  on  which
he  had  advanced,  having  suffered  much  by  the
casualties  of  battle,  but  still  more  by  desertions.
So  Santa-Anna  returned  with  but  a  remnant  of  the
regular  army  of  Mexico,  on  which  reliance  had
been  placed  to  repel  invasion,  and  thenceforward
peace  was  undisturbed  in  the  valley  of  the  Rio
Grande.  At  that  time  Gen.  Taylor's  capacity  was
not  justly  estimated,  his  golden  silence  being  often
misunderstood.  His  reply  to  Sec.  Marcy's  strict-
ures in  regard  to  the  capitulation  of  Monterey
exhibited  such  vigor  of  thought  and  grace  of  ex-


pression that  many  attributed  it  to  a  member  of
his  staff  who  had  a  literary  reputation.  It  was
written  by  Gen.  Taylor's  own  hand,  in  the  open  air,
by  his  camp-fire  at  Victoria,  Mexico.

Many  years  of  military  routine  had  not  dulled
his  desire  for  knowledge;  he  had  extensively  studied
both  ancient  and  modern  history,  especially  the
English.  Unpretending,  meditative,  observant,
and  conclusive,  he  was  best  understood  and  most
appreciated  by  those  who  had  known  him  long  and
intimately.  In  a  campaign  he  gathered  information
from  all  .who  approached  him,  however  sinister
their  motive  might  be.  By  comparison  and  elimi-
nation he  gained  a  knowledge  that  was  often  sur-
? rising  as  to  the  position  and  designs  of  the  enemy,
n  battle  he  was  vigilantly  active,  though  quiet  in
bearing ;  calm  and  considerate,  though  stern  and
inflexible ;  but  when  the  excitement  of  danger  and
strife  had  subsided,  he  had  a  father's  tenderness
and  care  for  the  wounded,  and  none  more  sincerely
mourned  for  those  who  had  bravely  fallen  in  the
line  of  their  duty.

Before  his  nomination  for  the  presidency  Gen.
Taylor  had  no  political  aspirations  and  looked  for-
ward to  the  time  when  he  should  retire  from  the
army  as  the  beginning  of  a  farmer's  life. He  had

Jlanned  for  his  retreat  a  stock-farm  in  the  hills  of
efferson  county,  behind  his  cotton-plantation  on
the  Mississippi  river.  In  his  case,  as  in  some  other
notable  instances,  the  fact  of  not  desiring  office
rather  increased  than  diminished  popular  confi-
dence, so  that  unseeking  he  was  sought.  From
early  manhood  he  had  served  continually  in  the
U.  S.  army.  His  duties  had  led  him  to  consider
the  welfare  of  the  country  as  one  and  indivisible,
and  his  opinions  were  free  from  party  or  sectional
intensity.  Conscious  of  his  want  of  knowledge  of
the  machinery  of  the  civil  service,  he  formed  his
cabinet  to  supplement  his  own  information.  They
were  men  well  known  to  the  public  by  the  eminent
civil  stations  they  had  occupied,  and  were  only
thus  known  to  Gen.  Taylor,  who  as  president  had
literally  no  friends  to  reward  and  no  enemies  to
punish.  The  cabinet  was  constituted  as  follows:
John  M.  Clayton,  of  Delaware,  secretary  of  state ;
William  M.  Meredith,  of  Pennsylvania,  secretary
of  the  treasury ;  George  W.  Crawford,  of  Georgia,
secretary  of  war ;  W.  Ballard  Preston,  of  Virginia,
secretary  of  the  navy  ;  Reverdy  Johnson,  of  Mary-
land, attorney-general;  Alexander  H.  H.  Stuart,
of  Virginia,  secretary  of  the  interior.  All  these
had  served  in  the  U.  S.  senate  or  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives, and  all  were  lawyers.  Taylor  was  the
popular  hero  of  a  foreign  war  which  had  been  vic-
toriously ended,  bringing  to  the  United  States  a
large  acquisition  of  territory  with  an  alluring  har-
vest of  gold,  but,  all  unheeded,  bringing  also  a
large  addition  to  the  elements  of  sectional  conten-
tion. These  were  soon  developed,  and  while  the
upper  air  was  calm  and  the  sun  of  prosperity  shone
brightly  on  the  land,  the  attentive  listener  could
hear  the  rumbling  sound  of  approaching  convul-
sion. President  Taylor,  with  the  keen  watchful-
ness and  intuitive  perception  that  had  character-
ized him  as  a  commander  in  the  field,  easily  saw
and  appreciated  the  danger;  but  before  it  had
reached  the  stage  for  official  action  he  died.  His
partv  and  local  relations,  being  a  Whig  and  a
southern  planter,  gave  him  the  vantage-ground  for
the  exercise  of  a  restraining  influence  in  the  threat-
ened contest.  His  views,  matured  under  former
responsibilities,  were  tersely  given  to  confidential
friends,  and  as  none  of  his  cabinet  (except  Attor-
ney-General Stuart)  survive,  their  consultations
cannot  be  learned  unless  from  preserved  manu-


TAYLOR


TAYLOR


55


script.  During  the  brief  period  of  his  administra-
tion the  rules  that  would  govern  it  were  made
manifest,  and  no  law  for  civil-service  reform  was
needful  for  his  guidance.  With  him  the  bestowal
of  office  was  a  trust  held  for  the  people ;  it  was
not  to  be  gained  by  proof  of  party  zeal  and  labor.
The  fact  of  holding  Democratic  opinions  was  not
a  disqualification  for  the  office.  Nepotism  had
with  him  no  quarter.  So  stiict  was  he  in  this
that  to  be  a  relative  was  an  obstacle  to  appoint-
ment. Gen.  Winfield  Scott  related  to  the  writer
an  anecdote  that  may  appropriately  close  this
sketch.  He  said  he  had  remarked  to  his  wife  that
Gen.  Taylor  was  an  upright  man,  to  which  she  re-
plied :  "  He  is  not " ;  that  he  insisted  his  long  ac-
quaintance should  enable  him  to  judge  better  than
she.  But  she  persisted  in  her  denial,  and  he  asked :
"Then  what  manner  of  man  is  he?"  When  she
responded  :  "  He  is  a  downright  man."

As  president  he  had  purity,  patriotism,  and  dis-
cretion to  guide  him  in  his  new  field  of  duty,  and
had  he  lived  long  enough  to  stamp  his  character
on  his  administration,  it  would  have  been  found
that  the  great  soldier  was  equally  fitted  to  be  the
head  of  a  government.  Gen.  Taylor's  life  was
written  by  Joseph  R.  Fry  and  Robert  T.  Conrad
(Philadelphia,  1848)  and  by  John  Frost  (New  York,
1848). — His  wife,  Margaret,  b.  in  Calvert  county,
Md.,  about  1790 ;  d.  near  Pascagoula,  La.,  18  Aug.,
1852,  was  the  daughter  of  Walter  Smith,  a  Maryland
planter.  She  received  a  home  education,  married
early  in  life,  and,  until  her  husband's  election  to
the  presidency,  resided  with  him  chiefly  in  garri-
sons or  on  the  frontier.  During  the  Florida  war  she
established  herself  at  Tampa  bay,  and  did  good
service  among  the  sick  and  wounded  in  the  hos-
pitals there.  Mrs.  Taylor  was  without  social
ambition,  and  when  Gen.  Taylor  became  president
she  reluctantly  accepted  her  responsibilities,  regard-
ing the  office  as  a  "  plot  to  deprive  her  of  her  hus-
band's society  and  to  shorten  his  life  by  unnecessary
care."  She  surrendered  to  her  youngest  daughter
the  superintendence  of  the  household,  and  took  no
part  in  social  duties. — Her  eldest  daughter,  Sarah,
became  the  wife  of  Jefferson  Davis.  —  Another
daughter,  Elizabeth,  b.  in  1826,  was  educated  in
Philadelphia,  married  Maj.  William  W.  S.  Bliss  in
her  nineteenth  year,  and,  on  her  father's  inaugura-.
tion,  became  mistress  of  the  White  House.  Mrs.
Bliss,  or  Miss  Betty,  as  she  was  popularly  called,
was  a  graceful  and  accomplished  hostess,  and,  it
is  said,  "  did  the  honors  of  the  establishment  with
the  artlessness  of  a  rustic  belle  and  the  grace  of  a
duchess."  After  the  death  of  her  father  in  1850,
and  her  husband  in  1853,  she  spent  several  years
in  retirement,  subsequently  marrying  Philip  Dan-
dridge,  of  Winchester.  Va.,  whom  she  survives. —
His  onlv  son,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Orleans,
27  Jan.,  1826 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  12  April.  1879,
was  sent  to  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  when  thirteen
years  old,  where  he  spent  three  years  in  studying
the  classics,  and  then  a  year  in  France.  He  entered
the  junior  class  at  Yale  in  1843,  and  was  graduated
there  in  1845.  He  was  a  wide  and  voracious
though  a  desultory  reader.  From  college  he  went
to  his  father's  camp  on  the  Rio  Grande,  and  he
was  present  at  Palo  Alto,  and  Resaca  de  la  Pal  ma.
His  health  then  became  impaired,  and  he  returned
home.  He  resided  on  a  cotton-plantation  in  Jeffer-
son county,  Miss.,  until  1849,  when  he  removed  to
a  sugar-estate  in  St.  Charles  parish,  Louisiana,
about  twenty  miles  above  New  Orleans,  where  he
was  residing  when  the  civil  war  began.  He  was  in
the  state  senate  from  1856  to  1860,  was  a  delegate
to  the  Charleston  Democratic  convention  in  1860.


and  afterward  to  that  at  Baltimore,  and  was  a
member  of  the  Secession  convention  of  Louisiana.
As  a  member  of  the  military  committee,  he  aided
the  governor  in  organizing  troops,  and  in  June,
1861,  went  to  Virginia  as  colonel  of  the  9th  Louisi-
ana volunteers.  The  day  he  reached  Richmond
he  left  for  Manassas,  arriving  there  at  dusk  on  the
day  of  the  battle.  In  the  autumn  he  was  made  a
brigadier-general,  and  in  the  spring  of  1862  he  led
his  brigade  in  the  valley  campaign  under  "  Stone-
wall "  Jackson.  He  distinguished  himself  at  Front
Royal,  Middletown,  Winchester,  Strasburg,  Cross
Keys,  and  Port  Republic, and  Jackson  recommended
him  for  promotion.  Taylor  was  also  with  Jackson
in  the  seven  days'  battles  before  Richmond.  He
was  promoted  to  major-general,  and  assigned  to
the  command  of  Louisiana.  The  fatigues  and  ex-
posures of  his  campaigns  there  brought  on  a  partial
and  temporary  paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs ;  but  in
August  he  assumed  command.  The  only  com-
munication across  the  Mississippi  retained  by  the
Confederates  was  between  Vicksburg  and  Port
Hudson ;  but  Taylor  showed  great  ability  in  raising,
organizing,  supplying,  and  handling  an  army,  and
he  gradually  won  back  the  state  west  of  the  Missis-
sippi from  the  National  forces.  He  had  reclaimed
the  whole  of  this  when  Vicksburg  fell,  4  July,
1863,  and  was  then  compelled  to  fall  back  west  of
Berwick's  bay.  Gen.  Taylor's  principal  achieve-
ment during  the  war  was  his  defeat  of  Gen.
Nathaniel  P.  Banks  at  Sabine  Cross-Roads,  near
Mansfield,  De  Soto  parish,  La.,  8  April,  1864.  With
8,000  men  he  attacked  the  advance  of  the  northern
army  and  routed  it,  capturing  twenty-two  guns  and
a  large  number  of  prisoners.  He  followed  Banks,
who  fell  back  to  Pleasant  hill,  and  on  the  next
day  again  attacked  him,  when  Taylor  was  defeated,
losing  the  fruits  of  the  first  day's  victory.  These
two  days'  fighting  have  been  frequently  compared
to  that  of  Shiloh — a  surprise  and  defeat  on  the  first
day,  followed  by  a  substantial  victory  of  theNational
forces  on  the  second.  In  the  summer  of  1864  Tay-
lor was  promoted  to  be  a  lieutenant-general,  and
ordered  to  the  command  of  the  Department  of
Alabama,  Mississippi,  etc.  Here  he  was  able  merely
to  protract  the  contest,  while  the  great  armies  de-
cided it.  After  Lee  and  Johnston  capitulated  there
was  nothing  for  him,  and  he  surrendered  to  Gen.
Edward  R.  S.  Canby,  at  Citronelle,  8  May,  1865.
The  war  left  Taylor  ruined  in  fortune,  and  he  soon
went  abroad.  Returning  home,  he  took  part  in
politics  as  an  adviser,  and  his  counsel  was  held  in
special  esteem  by  Samuel  J.  Tilden  in  his  presi-
dential canvass.  During  this  period  he  wrote  his
memoir  of  the  war,  entitled  "  Destruction  and  Re-
construction "  (New  York,  1879). — His'  brother,
Joseph  Pannel,  soldier,  b.  near  Louisville,  Ky.,
4  May,  1796 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  29  June,  1864,
served  in  the  ranks  on  the  Canadian  frontier  dur-
ing the  war  of  1812,  was  appointed  a  lieutenant  of
U.  S.  infantry  on  20  May,  1813,  served  through  the
war  with  Great  Britain,  and  was  retained  on  the
peace  establishment  as  lieutenant  of  artillery,  be-
coming a  captain  in  July,  1825.  He  was  appointed
commissary  of  subsistence  in  1829,  and  thenceforth
served  in  that  department,  becoming  assistant  com-
missary-general, with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colo-
nel, in  1841.  On  30  May,  1848,  he  was  brevetted
colonel  for  his  services  in  prosecuting  the  war
with  Mexico,  during  which  he  was  chief  commis-
sary of  the  army  on  the  upper  line  of  operations.
In  September,  1861,  he  was  made  colonel  and
commissary-general,  and  on  9  Feb.,  1863,  was  pro-
moted brigadier-general.  His  wife  was  a  daugh-
ter of  Justice  John McLean.— Their  son,  John


56


TAZEWELL


TAZEWELL


McLean,  soldier,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  21  Nov.,
1828 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  21  Nov.,  1875,  entered
the  U.  S.  army  as  2d  lieutenant  in  the  3d  artillery
on  3  March,  1848,  and  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant
on  30  June,  1851,  and  captain  and  commissary  of
subsistence  on  11  May,  1851.  He  served  faithfully
in  his  department  during  the  civil  war,  becoming
major  on  9  Feb.,  1863,  and  receiving  the  brevets
of  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  to  date  from  13
March,  1865. — Another  son,  Joseph  Hancock,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Kentucky,  26  Jan.,  1836 ;  d.  in  Omaha,
Neb.,  13  March,  1885,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1856,  and  commissioned  2d
lieutenant  of  cavalry  on  16  Jan.,  1857.  He  served
in  Kansas,  in  the  Utah  expedition,  and  in  a  cam-

faign  in  1860  against  the  Kiowa  and  Comanche
ndians  of  Colorado.  He  was  promoted  1st  lieu-
tenant on  22  April,  1861,  and  captain  on  14  May,
and  was  appointed  acting  adjutant-general  of  Gen.
Edwin  V.  Sumner's  division  on  27  Nov.,  1861.
During  the  peninsula  campaign,  and  subsequently
in  the  Maryland  campaign,  he  served  as  acting  as-
sistant adjutant-general  of  the  2d  corps,  winning
the  brevet  of  major  at  Fair  Oaks,  and  that  of  lieu-
tenant-colonel at  the  Antietam.  He  was  assistant
adjutant-general  at  Fredericksburg,  and  assistant
inspector-general  of  cavalry  in  Stoneman's  raid.
On  1  June,  1863,  he  was  assigned  to  duty  as  assist-
ant adjutant-general  of  the  department  at  Wash-
ington. He  was  appointed  a  major  on  the  staff  on
30  March,  1866,  and  on  13  Aug.  was  brevetted
colonel  for  faithful  services  during  the  war.  He
was  on  duty  in  different  military  departments  till
his  death,  which  was  due  to  disease  that  he  had
contracted  in  the  line  of  duty.

TAZEWELL,  Henry,  senator,  b.  in  Brunswick,
county,  Va.,  in  1753 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  24
Jan.,  1799.  He  was  educated  at  William  and
Mary,  studied  law  with  his  uncle,  John,  was  ad-
mitted to  practice,  and  in  1775  was  elected  to  the
house  of  burgesses.  In  the  convention  of  1776  he
was  placed  on  the  committee  that  reported  the
declaration  of  rights  and  the  constitution.  He
continued  a  member  of  the  legislature,  taking  an
active  part  in  its  deliberations  till  1785,  when  he
was  appointed  to  a  seat  on  the  supreme  bench  of
Virginia.  He  served  as  a  member  of  the  court  of
appeals,  and  in  1793,  when  a  separate  appellate
court  was  constituted,  he  was  chosen  one  of  the
judges.  In  the  following  year  he  resigned  in  order
to  take  his  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  of  which  he
was  a  member  till  his  death.  In  1795  he  was
elected  president,  pro  tempore.  During  the  discus-
sion of  John  Jay's  English  treaty  he  was  the  leader
of  the  Republican  opposition. — His  son,  Littleton
Waller,  statesman,  b.  in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  17
Dec,  1774;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  6  March,  1860,  was
graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1792,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  Richmond  bar  in  1796,
and  entered  on  the  practice  of  his  profession  in
James  City  county.  He  was  elected  in  1796  a
member  of  the  Virginia  house  of  delegates  and
served  in  that  body,  by  re-election,  for  four  years.
As  an  adherent  of  the  Jefferson  party  he  support-
ed the  famous  resolutions  of  1798,  and  James  Madi-
son's report  of  1799.  In  1800  he  was  elected  to
succeed  John  Marshall  as  a  member  of  the  U.  S.
house  of  representatives,  and  participating  in  the
presidential  election  that  devolved  on  that  body  he
supported  Thomas  Jefferson  against  Aaron  Burr.
Declining  a  re-election  to  congress  he  removed
in  1802  to  Norfolk,  where  he  soon  took  rank  among
the  foremost  lawyers  of  that  commercial  port,  then
noted  for  its  able  bar.  He  gained  special  distinc-
tion in  criminal  and  in  admiralty  law. Though


W)VJcUX£


JZUa^ML


sharing,  in  politics,  the  general  views  and  consti-
tutional opinions  of  Jefferson,  he  frankly  dissent-
ed from  the  chief  measures  of  the  administration —
its  gun-boat  system  of  defence,  its  non-intercourse
act,  and  the  em-
bargo. He  was
equally  opposed
to  the  wrongs  that
were  committed
by  England  and
by  France  against
our  commerce
during  the  Napo-
leonic wars,  and,
favoring  at  an
early  stage  a  dec-
laration of  war
against  both  alike,
he  avowed  his
readiness  to  make
the  attack  of  the
"Leopard"  on  the
cruiser  "  Chesa-
peake "  in  1807  a  cause  of  immediate  war  against
Great  Britain,  and  offered  his  military  services  at
the  head  of  a  cavalry  troop.  But  he  finally
broke  with  the  administration  at  all  points  on  the
ground  of  its  incapacity  for  either  war  or  peace,
and  in  1808  opposed  the  election  of  Madison  as
president  for  a  like  reason.  In  1809  he  supported
the  Federalist  candidate  for  congress  in  the  Nor-
folk district,  and,  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  con-
tinued in  steadfast  opposition  to  war  with  Eng-
land ;  but  when  war  was  declared  in  1812  he  gave
to  it  his  hearty  support.  The  close  of  the  war  left
Norfolk  to  deal  with  a  new  set  of  economical
and  fiscal  questions,  and,  as  Mr.  Tazewell  was
known  to  be  specially  versed  in  such  matters,  he
was  elected  a  member  of  the  Virginia  legislature
in  1816,  and  took  an  active  part  in  its  deliberations.
He  was  appointed  by  President  Monroe  as  one  of
the  commissioners  of  the  United  States  under  the
treaty  with  Spain  for  the  purchase  of  Florida  in
1819.  In  1824  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
and  he  was  re-elected  in  1830.  As  a  member  of  the
committee  on  foreign  relations,  of  which  for  sev-
eral years  he  was  chairman,  he  wrote  the  celebrated
report  on  the  Panama  mission,  while  his  speeches
on  the  piracy  act,  the  bankrupt  act,  the  preroga-
tives of  the  president  in  the  appointment  of  for-
eign ministers,  and  the  tariff,  were  greatly  admired.
Though  antagonizing  the  general  policy  of  the  ad-
ministration of  John  Quincy  Adams,  he  soon  ar-
rayed himself,  with  equal  independence,  against
the  financial  measures  of  President  Jackson.  In
1832  he  favored  a  reduction  of  the  tariff  of  1828.
While  showing  himself  no  zealot  of  the  Bank  of
the  United  States,  when  the  question  of  its  rechar-
ter  arose  in  1832,  he  publicly  denounced  the  act  of
the  president  in  removing  the  deposits.  He  op-
posed the  nullification  measures  of  South  Carolina,
but  at  the  same  time  dissented  from  the  high  Fed-
eral doctrines  of  Jackson's  proclamation.  When
he  was  elected  president  of  the  senate  in  1831,  he
refused  to  accept  the  honor,  and  in  1833  resigned
his  seat  in  that  body  from  pure  disgust  of  Federal
politics.  In  the  following  year  he  was  chosen  gov-
ernor of  the  state,  and  after  his  term  of  office  had
expired  he  withdrew  entirely  "from  all  connection
with  politics.  While  serving  in  the  U.  S.  senate,
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  convention  that
was  called  in  1829  to  revise  the  constitution  of  Vir-
ginia, and  distinguished  himself  in  that  body
among  men  like  Madison,  Monroe,  and  Marshall
by  the  solidity  of  his  counsels,  and  the  weight  of


TEALL


TECUMSEH


5?


his  influence.  In  standard  English  literature
Tazewell  was  deeply  read ;  in  familiarity  with  Eng-
lish and  American  history  he  had  few  equals ;  in
knowledge  of  law  he  had  no  superior ;  in  politics
he  exhibited  the  traits  of  a  Cato  as  much  by  the
impracticability  of  his  principles  as  by  the  severity
of  his  virtues.  The  character  of  "  Sidney,"  in
William  Wirt's  "  Old  Bachelor,"  is  a  sketch  of
Tazewell  drawn  from  life  by  his  friend  and  com-
peer at  the  bar.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Review
of  the  Negotiations  between  the  United  States  and
Great  Britain  respecting  the  Commerce  of  the  Two
Countries  "  (London,  1829),  and  contributed  under
the  pen-name  of  Senex  to  the  Norfolk  "  Herald  "
in  1827.  See  a  discourse  on  his  life  by  Hugh  Blair
Grigsby,  LL.  D.  (Norfolk,  1860).

TEALL,  Francis  Augustus,  editor,  b.  in  Fort
Anne,  Washington  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  Aug.,  1822.  He
entered  a  printing-office  in  1836,  afterward  sup-
plemented his  common-school  education  by  the
study  of  languages,  and  in  1841  went  to  New  York
city.  Here  he  worked  at  the  case,  with  Walt  Whit-
man as  a  fellow-compositor,  and  was  soon  advanced
to  the  place  of  proof-reader.  In  this  capacity  he
has  rendered  much  critical  service  of  an  editorial
character  on  a  large  variety  of  works.  Among  other
interesting  things  that  received  his  attention  were
the  original  proofs  of  Edgar  A.  Poe's  "  Raven  "  and
"Bells."  He  assisted  Ephraim  G.  Squier  in  pre-
paring his  "  Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi
Valley  "  (Washington,  1848),  and  John  R.  Bartlett
in  the  first  edition  of  his  "  Dictionary  of  Ameri-
canisms," and  made  the  analytical  index  to  the
American  edition  of  Napier's  "  Peninsular  War."
For  some  time  he  was  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the
"  American  Whig  Review,"  and  in  1853  succeeded
Mr.  Whitman  as  editor  of  a  newspaper  at  Hunt-
ington, L.  I.  He  acted  as  proof-reader,  contribu-
tor, and  associate  editor  on  the  different  editions
of  the  "American  Cyclopaedia,"  and  noted  the
pronunciation  of  the  titles  in  the  volume  of  index
to  the  second  edition  and  in  the  text  of  the  con-
densed edition.  Since  1882  he  has  been  employed
in  the  compilation  of  the  "Century  Dictionary."
The  Universitv  of  Rochester  gave  him  the  degree
of  A.  M.  in  1875.

_  TECHOTLALATZIN  (tetch-ot-lah-lah-tseen'),
king  of  Texcoco,  d.  in  1409.  He  was  the  youngest
son  of  King  Quinatzin,  whom  he  succeeded  on  the
throne  in  1357.  During  his  reign  one  of  his  de-
pendent chiefs,  Tzompan,  cacique  of  Xaltocan,  re-
volted against  his  rule ;  but  he  asked  assistance
from  King  Huitzilihuitl  of  Mexico,  and  with  his
aid  routed  the  rebel.  From  that  date  a  mutual
alliance  began  between  the  monarchies  of  Texcoco,
Tlaltelolco,  and  Chapultepec.  He  was  succeeded
by  his  son  Ixtlilxochitl  I.

TECTO,  Juan  de,  Flemish  missionary,  b.  in
Ghent  in  1468;  d.  in  Honduras  in  1526.  He  was
graduated  as  D.  D.  in  Paris,  and  was  for  several
years  professor  of  theology  in  the  Sorbonne  uni-
versity, and  afterward  chaplain  of  Emperor
Charles  V.,  and  guardian  of  a  convent  of  Francis-
cans at  Ghent.  In  1522  he  obtained  from  Charles
V.,  who  was  much  attached  to  him,  permission  to
go  to  the  New  World,  and  fixed  his  residence  at
Texcoco,  where  he  founded  missions  for  the  Indi-
ans and  learned  their  language.  He  accompanied
Cortes  in  his  expedition  to  Hibueras  in  1525,  and
as,  owing  to  the  rebellion  of  Cristobal  de  Olid,  no
provisions  were  obtainable,  Tecto,  exhausted,  fell
behind  the  army,  and  was  found  later  by  a  patrol
leaning  against  a  tree,  where  he  had  died  of  hun-
ger. According  to  Bernal  Diaz  del  Castillo,  he  was
sent  by  Cortes  to  report  to  the  emperor  about  the


conquest  of  Hibueras,  and  died  at  sea,  off  the  coast
of  Spain.  Tecto  is  the  author  of  two  valuable
works :  "  Primeros  rudimentos  de  la  doctrina  Cris-
tiana  en  lengua  Mexicana,"  a  manuscript  which
was  utilized  by  Fray  Pedro  de  Gante  for  his
"  Catecismo  Mexicano  " ;  and  "  Apologia  del  bau-
tismo  administrado  a  los  gentiles  Mexicanos  con
sola  el  agua  y  la  forma  Sacramental,"  which  is
cited  by  Torquemada  in  his  "  Monarquia  Indiana."
TECUMSEH,  or  TECUMTHA,  Shawnee  chief,
b.  near  the  site  of  Springfield,  Ohio,  about  1768;
killed  in  the  battle  of  the  Thames,  Canada,  5  Oct.,
1813.  His  father,  Puckeshinwa,  or  Pukeesheno,
a  Shawnee  brave,  fell  in  battle  when  the  son  was
a  child.  The  latter  first  appears  in  a  fight  with
Kentucky  troops  on  Mad  river  when  he  was  about
twenty  years  old,  and  is  said  to  have  run  at  the
first  fire,  yet  in  the  campaign  that  ended  in  the
treaty  of  Greenville  in  1795  he  was  a  bold  and
active  warrior.  About  1805,  with  his  brother,
Ellskwatawa,  the  "  prophet,"  he  projected  the
union  of  all  the  western  tribes  of  Indians  against
the  whites.  He  claimed  that  the  treaties  by  which
large  tracts  of  Indian  land  had  been  ceded  to  set-
tlers were  illegal,  as  the  land  was  the  common
property  of  all  the  tribes,  and  therefore  could  be
alienated  only  by  common  consent.  The  general
discontent  was  increased  by  the  action  of  specu-
lators in  ejecting  Indians  from  lands,  and  by
British  emissaries ;  and  the  brothers  soon  had  a
large  following.  They  visited  the  tribes  from  the
Lakes  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and,  in  spite  of  the
warnings  of  Gen.  William  Henry  Harrison,  who
was  then  governor  of  the  Northwest  territory,  they
continued  to  follow  out  their  scheme.  In  August,
1810,  in  response  to  an  invitation  to  a  "  quiet  talk  "
with  the  governor,  Tecumseh,  with  400  fully
armed  warriors,  encamped  in  a  grove  near  Vin-
cennes,  Ind.  He  was  invited  to  the  portico  of  the
governor's  house,  but  replied :  "  Houses  were  built
for  you  to  hold  councils  in ;  Indians  hold  theirs  in
the  open  air."  He  opened  the  conference  in  a  speech
of  great  eloquence,  and  at  its  close,  being  invited
to  sit  near  his  "father,"  Gen.  Harrison,  said,  boast-
ingly :  "  The  sun  is  my  father,  and  the  earth  is  my
mother ;  on  her  bosom  I  will  repose,"  suiting  the
action  to  the  word.  In  the  discussion  that  followed
he  boldly  demanded  the  return  of  treaty  lands,
and  his  violent  and  threatening  manner  put  an
end  to  the  coun-
cil. On  the  next
day  Tecumseh  ex-
pressed regret  for
his  violence,  and
the  conference
was  resumed,  but
was  productive  of
no  results.  Will-
iam Clark,  of
Clarksville,  Pa.,  is
probably  the  only
survivor  of  those
that  were  present
at  this  interview

between  Harrison j^<k»: 1 J&-i '  .\ /V  \
and  Tecumseh.  In  ^%^.  ■  Xs^' /

the  following  year
Indian  depreda-
tions increased,
and  another  con-
ference was  held,  at  which  Tecumseh,  awed  by  a
militia  force,  professed  peaceful  intentions,  while
insisting  on  the  vacation  of  ceded  lands ;  yet  a  few
days  later  he  set  out  on  a  journey  to  secure  the
Creeks,  Choctaws,  and  Cherokees  for  his  proposed


58


TECUM-UMAN


TEFFT


league.  He  was  not  in  the  battle  of  Tippecanoe.
(See  Harrison,  William  Henry.)  That  defeat
ruined  his  plans,  yet  he  continued  his  efforts  among
the  southern  tribes,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1812  at-
tended a  great  council  at  Toockabatcha,  Ala.,  which
had  been  called  by  the  U.  S.  Indian  agent,  Col.
Hawkins.  Here  he  made  a  passionate  speech,
telling  the  Creeks  that  they  would  know  when  to
begin  war  on  the  whites  by  the  appearance  of  the
arm  of  Tecumseh  stretching  across  the  heavens
like  pale  fire.  He  had  been  told  by  the  British
that  a  comet  would  soon  appear.  To  the  chief
Tustinugee-Thlucco,  who  opposed  him,  he  said  :
"  You  do  not  believe  that  the  Great  Spirit  has
sent  me.  You  shall  believe  it.  I  will  go  straight
to  Detroit,  and  when  I  get  there  I  will  stamp  my
foot  upon  the  ground  and  shake  down  every  house
in  Toockabatcha."  In  the  following  December
there  was  an  earthquake  shock,  and  the  affrighted
Creeks  ran  from  their  dwellings  shouting :  "  Tecum-
seh is  at  Detroit ! "  This,  and  the  appearance  of
the  promised  sign  in  the  heavens,  caused  the  Creek
nation  to  rise  in  arms,  and  brought  about  their
speedy  ruin.  Tecumseh  now  joined  the  English,
and  commanded  the  Indian  allies  in  the  cam-
paigns of  1812-'13.  He  refused  to  meet  the  Amer-
ican commanders  in  council,  was  in  the  action  on
Raisin  river,  and,  after  being  wounded  at  Magua-
ga,  was  made  a  brigadier -general  in  the  royal
army.  He  led  2,000  warriors  in  the  siege  of  Fort
Meigs,  where  he  saved  American  prisoners  from
massacre.  After  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie  he  urged
Gen.  Henry  Proctor  to  engage  Gen.  William  Henry
Harrison  when  he  landed,  but  took  part  in  the
British  retreat,  and  was  wounded  while  holding
the  passage  of  a  stream.  He  aided  Proctor  in
selecting  the  battle-ground  at  the  Thames,  and
commanded  the  right  wing,  laying  aside  his  sword
and  uniform  and  putting  on  his  hunting-dress,  in
the  conviction  that  he  must  fall.  His  Indians
were  driven  back,  and  he  fought  desperately  till
he  was  killed.  His  death  was  unknown  to  the
Americans  for  several  days.  Afterward  it  was
claimed  for  Col.  Richard  Malcolm  Johnston,  who
had  killed  a  powerful  Indian  in  hand-to-hand
combat,  that  his  antagonist  was  Tecumseh,  and
the  claim  occasioned  a  long  controversy,  but  the
fact  has  not  been  established  satisfactorily.  Tecum-
seh possessed  great  executive  ability,  and  with  prop-
er training  would  have  been  distinguished  as  a  gen-
eral. Says  a  Canadian  historian :  "  No  one  can
fully  calculate  the  inestimable  value  of  those  de-
voted red  men,  led  on  by  the  brave  Tecumseh
during  the  struggle  of  1812.  But  for  them  it  is
probable  that  we  should  not  now  have  a  Canada ;
and  if  we  had  we  would  not  enjoy  the  liberty  and
privileges  which  we  possess  in  so  eminent  a  de-
gree." See  "  Life  of  Tecumseh,  and  his  Broth-
er, the  Prophet,  with  an  Historical  Sketch  of
the  Shawnee  Indians,"  based  on  the  accounts  of
various  persons  that  knew  the  chief  personally
(Cincinnati,  1841),  and  "Tecumseh  and  the  Shawnee
Prophet,"  by  Edward  Eggleston  (New  York,  1878).
TECUM-UMAN  (tay-coom),  last  king  of  Quiche,
d.  near  Quetzaltenango,  Guatemala,  in  1524.  He
was  the  son  of  King  Kicab-Tanub,  who  died  dur-
ing a  war  with  his  neighbors  the  Zutuhiles  and
Mames,  and  Tecum-Uman,  hearing  of  the  approach
of  the  Spaniards,  tried  to  form  an  alliance  with  his
former  enemies  against  the  invaders.  Only  the
Mames  accepted  his  offer,  and  with  their  auxiliary
troops  Tecum-Uman  is  said,  by  the  Spanish  chron-
iclers, to  have  gathered  an  army  of  230,000  war-
riors ;  but  they  could  not  resist  the  superior  arms
and  discipline  of  Alvarado's  army  of  450  Spaniards


and  about  5,000  auxiliary  Mexican  Indians.  The
first  battle,  in  the  ford  of  the  river  Tilapa,  24  Feb.,
1524,  was  sharp  and  not  decisive,  but  a  few  days
afterward  Tecum-Uman  was  totally  defeated  on
Olintepeque  river,  and  it  was  afterward  called
Xequigel,  or  river  of  blood.  Tecum-Uman  retired
with  the  rest  of  his  army,  but  was  overtaken  in  a
valley  between  Quezaltenango  and  Totonicapan,
where  he  made  the  last  desperate  stand,  and  was
killed  by  the  lance  of  Alvarado.

TEEDYUSCUNG,  Delaware  chief,  b.  near  Tren-
ton, N.  J.,  about  1700;  d.  in  Wyoming  vallev,  Pa.,
16  April,  1763.  He  was  also  known  as  Honest
John  and  War  Trumpet.  His  father,  "  Old  Cap-
tain Harris,"  and  his  brothers  and  half-brothers,
"Captain  John,"  "Young Captain  Harris,"  "Tom,"
"Joe,"  and  "Sam  Evans"  (names  given  them  by
the  English),  were  all  high-spirited  men.  In  1730  he
settled  in  the  forks  of  the  Delaware,  and  he  united
in  1749  with  the  Moravian  Indian  mission  at  Gna-
denhuetten,  Carbon  co.,  Pa.,  where,  on  12  March,
1750,  he  was  baptized  by  Bishop  Cammerhoff,  re-
ceiving the  name  of  Gideon.  Aware  of  how  his
countrymen  were  being  injured  by  the  whites  and
oppressed  by  the  Six  Nations,  in  1754,  when  the
Delawares  and  their  allies  appealed. to  him  to  lead
them  and  be  their  king,  he  deserted  the  Moravian
mission.  Henceforward  his  name  is  conspicuous
in  the  provincial  history  of  Pennsylvania.  After
the  repulse  of  Braddock  in  July,  1755,  he  assem-
bled the  Delawares,  Mohicans,  and  Shawnees  in  the
Wyoming  valley,  and  in  the  winter  began  to  wage
war  among  the  whites  that  resided  within  the
"  Walking  Purchase."  In  1756  the  government
sought  the  pacification  of  the  Delaware  king,  which,
through  treaties  at  Easton  in  July  and  November,
1756,  and  November,  1757,  was  accomplished.  In
the  following  spring,  agreeably  to  his  request  and
the  conditions  of  the  treaty,  a  town  was  built  for
him  and  his  followers  in  the  Wyoming  valley.
One  of  the  objects  of  his  life  was  to  recover  for
the  Lenni  Lenape  that  dignity  which  the  Iroquois
had  treacherously  wrested  from  them  in  1742.  He
was  burned  to  death  with  his  house  while  asleep
under  the  influence  of  liquor,  the  incendiary  being
instigated  by  his  enemies.  Teedyuscung  was  a  fine-
looking  man,  endowed  with  good  sense,  quick  of
comprehension,  ambitious,  and  a  patriot.

TEFFT,  Benjamin  Franklin,  clergyman,  b.
in  Floyd,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  Aug.,  1813 ;  d.  in
Brewer,  Penobscot  co.,  Me.,  16  Sept.,  1885.  He
was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  university  in  1835,
taught  four  years  in  Maine  Wesleyan  seminary,
and  then,  entering  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church,  was  pastor  at  Bangor,  Me.,  in
1839-'41.  He  then  taught  in  East  Greenwich,  R.
I.,  and  in  1842  accepted  a  charge  in  Boston,  but
his  health  failed  in  1843,  and  after  travelling  in
the  south  and  west  he  was  for  three  years  profes-
sor of  Greek  and  Hebrew  in  Indiana  Asbury  (now
De  Pauw)  university.  In  1846  he  became  editor  of
the  books  and  magazines  of  the  Methodist  book
concern  in  Cincinnati,  where  he  conducted  the
"  Ladies'  Repository  "  in  1846-'52,  and  in  1851-4
he  was  president  of  Genesee  college,  Lima,  N.  Y.,
also  editing  in  1852-'4  the  "  Northern  New  Yorker,"
published  at  Canandaigua.  He  was  pastor  of  dif-
ferent churches  in  Bangor,  Me.,  from  1858  till
1861,  when  he  was  made  U.  S.  consul  at  Stockholm
and  acting  minister  to  Sweden,  and  in  1864  he  was
commissioner  of  immigration  from  the  north  of
Europe  for  the  state  of  Maine.  In  1866  he  became
pastor  of  a  church  in  Portland,  and  from  1873  till
1878  he  edited  "  The  Northern  Border,"  published
at  Bangor,  Me. During  the  last  two  years  of  his


TEFFT


TEGANISSORENS


59


life  he  was  in  feeble  health.  Ohio  Wesleyan  uni-
versity gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1846,  and
Madison  university  that  of  LL.  D  in  1852.  Besides
pamphlets,  lectures,  addresses,  and  contributions
to  current  literature,  Dr.  Tefft  was  the  author  of
"Prison  Life,"  based  on  data  furnished  by  Rev.
James  B.  Finley  (Cincinnati,  1847) ;  "  The  Shoul-
der-Knot, a  Story  of  the  Seventeenth  Century"
(New  York,  1850) ;  "  Hungary  and  Kossuth  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1852);  "Webster  and  his  Masterpieces"
(2  vols.,  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  1854) ;  "  Methodism  Suc-
cessful, and  the  Internal  Causes  of  its  Success,"
with  an  introductory  letter  by  Bishop  Janes  (New
York,  1860):  "Our  Political  Parties"  (Boston,
1880);  and  "Evolution  and  Christianity"  (1885).
He  edited  Erwin  House's  "  Sketches,  Literary  and
Religious "  (Cincinnati,  1847),  and  Dr.  Charles
Elliott's  "  Sinfulness  of  American  Slavery  "  (1850).

TEFFT,  Thomas  Alexander,  architect,  b.  in
Richmond,  R.  I.,  3  Aug.,  1826;  d.  in  Florence,
Italy,  12  Dec,  1859.  He  was  graduated  in  the
scientific  course  at  Brown  in  1851,  and  after  study-
ing architecture  in  Providence  furnished  designs
for  many  private  and  public  buildings.  In  1856
he  went  to  Europe  in  order  to  study  art  and  to
announce  his  ideas  of  a  uniform  currency  for  all
nations,  on  which  subject  he  read  a  paper  before
the  British  institute  of  social  science.  After  his
death  the  principal  features  of  his  scheme  were
incorporated  in  the  plan  that  was  agreed  upon  by
an  international  conference  at  Paris  in  1867,  at
which  nineteen  nations  were  represented.  He  con-
tributed papers  on  architecture  to  the  "  New  York
Crayon,"  and  "  Letters  from  Europe  ".  to  the  "  New
York  Times  "  in  1857-'8,  and  published  "  Our  De-
ficiency in  Art  Education"  (Providence,  1852),
and  "  Universal  Currency :  a  Plan  for  obtaining  a
Common  Currency  in  France,  England,  and  Ameri-
ca, based  on  the  Decimal  System  "  (London,  1858).
See  "  Memoir  "  by  the  Rev.  Edwin  Martin  Stone
(Boston,  1869).

TEGAKOUITA,  Catharine,  Indian  convert,  b.
in  Gandahouague,  or  Gandawague,  in  northern
New  York,  in  1656 ;  d.  in  Caughnawaga,  Canada,
17  April,  1680.  The  name  Tegakouita  means  "  who
puts  things  in  order,"  and  is  still  in  use  at  Caugh-
nawaga. Her  father  was  a  heathen  Iroquois,  and
her  mother  a  Christian  Algonquin.  Her  parents
died  when  she  was  a  child,  and  she  was  brought  up
by  her  uncle,  who  was  a  chief.  Her  first  knowl-
edge of  Christianity  appears  to  have  been  obtained
from  Jacques  Fremin  and  two  other  missionaries,
whom  she  entertained  in  her  cabin.  She  embraced
the  new  creed  with  fervor,  resolved  to  remain  single,
and  suffered  much  ill  treatment  from  her  relatives
because  of  her  refusal  to  marry ;  but  she  was  not
baptized  until  1676.  Her  refusal  to  work  on  Sun-
days increased  the  hostility  of  her  tribe  toward
her,  and  she  had  on  one  occasion  a  narrow  escape
from  death.  Calumnies  were  spread  about  her
character,  and  she  finally  resolved  to  escape  to  the
Christian  village  of  La  Prairie,  which  she  reached
in  October,  1677,  after  many  dangers.  The  rest  of
her  life  was  spent  in  prayer,  labor,  and  mortifica-
tions of  the  severest  kind.  She  enrolled  herseif  in
the  Confraternity  of  the  Holy  Family,  and  began
to  be  regarded  both  by  the  French  and  Indians  as
a  great  saint.  After  death  her  grave  became  a
place  of  pilgrimage,  and,  although  an  effort  was
made  by  the  priests  of  the  neighboring  parishes  to
check  devotion  to  her,  she  was  invoked  as  a  saint
throughout  Canada.  Numerous  miracles  are  said
to  have  been  wrought  at  her  tomb,  or  by  her  relics.
The  third  plenary  council  of  Baltimore  petitioned
the  holy  see  to  take  steps  toward her  canoniza-


tion in  1884.  See  "  Life  of  Catharine  Tegakouita,"
by  Father  Claude  Chauchetiere  (New  York,  1886) ;
her  life  by  Cholonek,  in  vol.  xii.  of  "  Lettres  edi-
fiantes"  (Paris,  1727);  and  Kipp's  "Jesuit  Mis-
sions "  (New  York,  1847).

TEG  AN  A  KO  A,  Stephen,  Indian  convert,  d.  in
Onondaga,  N.  Y.,  in  1690.  While  still  a  pagan  he
was  noted  for  the  innocence  of  his  life  and  manners
and  his  attachment  to  his  wife  and  children.  He
went  with  his  family  to  the  mission  of  Caughna-
waga, or  Sault  Ste.  Louis,  when  he  was  about  thirty-
five  years  old,  applied  for  baptism,  and  after  the
usual  probation  was  received  with  his  wife  and  six
children.  He  was  afterward  considered  a  model  of
every  virtue.  In  August,  1790,  he  went  on  a  hunt-
ing expedition  with  his  wife  and  another  Indian.
In  the  following  September  the  party  was  attacked
by  a  band  of  seventeen  Cayugas  and  brought  to
Onondaga.  One  of  his  captors  said  to  Stephen  that
he  might  attribute  his  death  to  his  having  left  his
tribe  to  live  among  "  the  dogs  of  Christians  at  the
Sault."  Stephen  replied :  "  Do  what  you  will  with
me,  1  fear  neither  your  outrages  nor  your  fires.  I
willingly  give  my  life  for  a  God  who  shed  his  blood
for  me."  The  savages  then  put  him  to  death  with
slow  tortures.  He  bore  his  sufferings  calmly,  and
died  praving  for  his  murderers.

TEGANISSORENS,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  Onon-
daga, N.  Y. ;  d.  in  Sault  St.  Louis,  or  Caughna-
waga, on  Lake  Champlain,  after  1711.  He  was
strongly  attached  to  the  French,  and  in  1682  was
placed  at  the  head  of  a  deputation  of  Iroquois
chiefs  that  was  sent  to  Montreal  to  make  terms
with  Frontenac  and  his  Indian  allies.  It  was  soon
discovered  that  the  Iroquois  had  sent  Teganis-
sorens  as  a  blind,  and  were  taking  the  field  against
the  Illinois,  while  pretending  to  wish  for  peace.
But  the  French  governor  dismissed  him  with  honor,
knowing  that  his  influence  did  not  extend  to  all
the  Iroquois  tribes.  He  set  out  on  a  similar  mis-
sion in  1688,  and  the  preliminaries  for  a  treaty
were  arranged  between  Denonville,  the  Canadian
governor,  and  the  Iroquois  deputies.  The  Hurons
were  dissatisfied  with  the  proposed  treaty,  and,  on
the  return  of  Teganissorens  and  his  party,  they
were  attacked  by  Kondiaronk,  a  Huron  chief.
Some  were  killed  and  others  taken  prisoners,
among  the  latter  Teganissorens,  who,  on  complain-
ing of  this  attack  on  an  ambassador  and  a  friend
of  the  French,  was  told  by  Kondiaronk  that  the
latter  themselves  had  sent  him.  To  show  that  he
spoke  sincerely,  he  at  once  released  the  Iroquois
ambassador.  Teganissorens,  however,  remained
loyal,  and  continued  to  render  such  services  that
he  ranked  with  Oureouhare  and  Garaconthie  as
one  of  the  three  Indians  to  whom  the  French  col-
ony in  Canada  was  most  indebted.  He  became  a
Christian  in  1693,  and  in  May,  1694,  arrived  in
Quebec  with  eight  deputies.  He  was  received  with
kindness  by  Frontenac,  the  governor,  who  gave
him  many  presents.  He  proposed  the  restoration
of  Fort  Catarocouy  (Kingston),  and  that  it  should
be  strengthened  and  made  the  bulwark  of  the
colony.  The  suggestion  was  eagerly  adopted  by
Frontenac,  who  prepared  a  large  escort  which  was
to  conduct  to  that  port  a  garrison,  mechanics,  and
all  necessary  stores,  but  he  was  obliged  to  counter-
mand the  expedition,  owing  to  an  order  from  the
French  court.  He  excited  the  displeasure  of  the
governor  afterward  by  not  returning  to  Montreal
at  a  fixed  date  with  the  submission  of  some  of  the
Iroquois  tribes  who  were  holding  back.  But  the
reason  of  his  delay  was  that  he  found  his  efforts  to
bring  about  a  general  reconciliation  between  the
Iroquois  and  the  French  abortive. He  remained


60


TEJEDA


TELLO  DE  PORTUGAL


at  Onondaga,  where  he  received  three  French  am-
bassadors that  had  been  sent  to  make  a  treaty  with
the  Iroquois  on  10  Aug.,  1700.  He  afterward  re-
ceived both  French  and  English  agents  and  de-
clared his  intention  of  remaining  neutral.  Hear-
ing in  1703  that  some  of  the  Iroquois  were  concert-
ing with  Vaudreuil  (who  had  then  succeeded  Cal-
lieres  in  the  government  of  the  colony)  an  attack
on  the  English  settlements,  Teganissorens  went
to  Montreal  and  protested  angrily  against  this
breach  of  neutrality  and  declared  that  his  tribe
would  take  part  for  neither  side.  As  the  neutrali-
ty of  the  Iroquois  was  what  the  French  governor
wanted,  he  assured  the  chief  that  he  would  not
send  any  parties  against  the  English  in  New  York.
Teganissorens,  on  his  part,  pledged  himself  to  re-
tain the  missionaries  that  were  in  his  country.  In
1711  he  informed  Vaudreuil  that  preparations  were
made  at  New  York,  Albany,  and  Boston  for  an  in-
vasion of  Canada.

TEJEDA,  Juan  de  (teh-hay'-dah),  Spanish  sol-
dier, lived  in  the  second  half  of  the  16th  century.
In  1589  he  held  the  rank  of  major-general,  and
was  sent  to  govern  the  island  of  Cuba,  being  the
first  ruler  that  had  the  title  of  captain-general.
Under  his  government  the  three  fortresses  that
protect  Havana  were  built  under  the  direction  of
the  engineer  Juan  Antonelli,  the  aqueduct,  convey-
ing water  from  Chorrera  to  Havana,  was  finished,
and  in  1592  Havana  received  the  title  of  city  and
a  coat  of  arms.  In  1595  he  returned  to  Spain,  be-
ing superseded  by  Maldonado  Barnuevo.

TELFAIR,  Edward,  statesman,  b.  in  Scotland
ha  1735 ;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  17  Sept.,  1807.  He
was  educated  at  Kirkcudbright  grammar-school,
came  to  this  country  in  1758  as  agent  of  a  com-
mercial house,  and  resided  for  some  time  in  Vir-
ginia, but  removed  to  Halifax,  N.  C,  and  in  1766
to  Savannah,  where  he  engaged  in  business.  He
actively  espoused  the  patriot  cause  at  the  opening
of  the  Revolution,  served  on  many  committees,  and
was  one  of  the  party  that  broke  open  the  magazine
at  Savannah  and  removed  the  powder.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  in  1778  and
1780-'3,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  a  commissioner
to  treat  with  the  Cherokee's.  In  1786,  and  again  in
1790-3,  he  was  governor  of  Georgia. — His  son,
Thomas,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1805,
served  in  the  National  house  of  representatives  in
1813-'17,  and  died  in  1818.

TELLER,  Henry  Moore,  senator,  b.  in  Granger,
Allegany  co.,  N.  Y.,  23  May,  1830.  He  was  educated
at  Alfred  university,  N.  Y.,  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  in  1858,  and
removed  to  Illinois  in  the  same  year,  and  to  Colo-
rado in  1861.  He  was  major-general  of  Colorado
militia  in  1862-'4,  but  held  no  political  office  till,
on  the  admission  of  Colorado  as  a  state  in  1876,  he
was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  as  a  Republican,  and  took
his  seat,  4  Dec,  1876.  He  was  re-elected  for  the
term  that  ended  in  1883.  and  in  1877-'8  served  as
chairman  of  a  special  committee  on  election  frauds,
that  was  known  as  the  Teller  committee.  On  17
April,  1882,  he  resigned,  on  his  appointment  by
President  Arthur  to  the  portfolio  or  the  interior,
which  he  held  till  the  close  of  the  latter's  adminis-
tration. He  was  then  re-elected  to  the  senate  for
the  term  that  will  end  in  1891.  Alfred  university
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1886.

TELLIER,  Remigins  Joseph,  Canadian  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Soissons,  France,  in  1796 ;  d.  in  Mon-
treal, Canada,  7  Jan.,  1866.  He  entered  the  Society
of  Jesus  on  11  Oct.,  1818,  and  became  rector  of  the
College  of  Chambery,  and  in  1842  was  sent  with
five  colleagues  to  Canada,  where  the  Roman  Catho-


lic bishop  of  Montreal  had  requested  the  pope  to
send  members  of  the  order.  From  the  death  of
the  last  of  the  native  Canadian  Jesuits,  Father
Cazot,  in  1800,  there  had  been  no  establishment  of
the  order  in  that  country  until  the  arrival  of  these
six  priests.  For  eight  years  after  their  arrival  they
had  charge  of  the  parish  of  La  Prairie,  where
Father  Tellier  officiated  for  two  years.  Afterward
he  was  employed  among  the  Irish  emigrants  at  St.
Charles  Point  during  the  prevalence  of  ship-fever.
He  founded  the  Church  of  St.  Patrick  in  Montreal,
for  three  years  was  stationed  in  Upper  Canada,  and
subsequently  was  sent  to  the  United  States,  where
he  was  at  first  prefect  of  studies  and  president  of
St.  Francis  Xavier  college,  and  afterward  at  St.
John's  college,  Fordham,  N.  Y.  He  was  made
superior  of  his  order  in  1859,  and  returned  to  Mon-
treal, where  he  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life.

TELLKAMPF,  Johann  Ludwig,  German
scholar,  b.  in  Germany,  28  Jan.,  1808;  d.  there,  10
Feb.,  1876.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1838,
engaged  in  teaching,  and  in  1843-'7  was  professor
of  the  German  language  and  literature  in  Colum-
bia. He  then  returned  to  Germany  as  professor  in
Breslau.  In  1848  he  was  elected  to  the  Frankfort
parliament,  in  1849  to  the  Prussian  chamber  of
deputies,  in  1855  to  the  herrenhaus,  and  in  1871
to  the  first  German  reichstag.  He  wrote  "  Politi-
cal Economy"  with  Alonzo  Potter  (New  York,
1840);  "  Ueber  die  Besserungsgefangnisse  in  Nord-
Amerika  und  England  "  (1844) ;  with  his  brother,
Theodore,  "Essays  on  Law  Reform  and  Commercial
Policy  "  (London,  1859) ;  "  Ueber  Arbeiterverhalt-
nisse  und  Erwerbsgenossenschaften  in  England
und  Nord-Amerika "  (1870) ;  and  "  Selbstverwal-
tung  und  Reforme  der  Gemeinde  und  Kreisord-
nungen  in  Preussen,  und  Self-Government  in  Eng-
land und  Nord-Amerika"  (1872).

TELLO  DE  PORTUGAL,  Jose  de  Espinosa,
Spanish  geographer,  b.  in  Seville  in  March,  1763 ;
d..  in  Madrid,  6  Sept.,  1815.  He  was  a  younger  son
of  Count  del  Aguila,  entered  the  navy  as  a  cadet
in  1778,  served  in  the  West  Indies,  and  assisted  in
the  capture  of  Yorktown  in  October,  1781,  and  in
the  expedition  to  Tobago  under  Bouille.  After
the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1783  he  was  employed
in  the  naval  observatory  at  Cadiz,  and  made  charts
of  the  Spanish  coast  from  Fuenterrabia  to  Ferrol.
In  1790  he  joined  the  expedition  of  Alejandro
Malaspina,  determined  the  geographical  position
of  Acapulco  and  other  points,  and  with  Malaspina
explored  the  Straits  of  Nootka  on  the  northwest
coast  of  California.  He  afterward  made  astronom-
ical observations  in  the  Chilian  Andes,  and  trav-
elled through  Peru  and  the  La  Plata  provinces  in
1792-4.  On  his  return  to  Spain  he  was  promoted
adjutant  of  Gen.  Mazarredo,  and  in  1796  was  made
secretary  of  the  board  of  hydrography,  in  which
capacity  he  was  charged  in  1797  with  the  correc-
tion of  the  plates  of  the  great  naval  atlas  of  Spain
that  had  been  prepared  under  the  direction  of
Vicente  Tofiilo.  He  was  promoted  commodore
and  president  of  the  board  of  hydrography  in  1800,
and  secretary  to  the  admiralty,  with  the  rank  of
minister,  in  1807.  At  the  accession  of  Joseph
Bonaparte  he  retired  to  London,  where  he  lived
till  the  restoration  of  Ferdinand  VII.  in  1814,
when  he  returned  to  Spain.  His  works  include
"  Carta  esf  erica  que  comprende  las  Costas  del  Seno
Mejicano"  (Madrid,  1799;  revised  ed.,  1805);  "  Me-
morias  sobre  las  observaciones  astronomicas,  hechas
por  los  navegantes  Espafioles  en  distintos  lugares
del  Globo  "  (2  vols.,  1809) ;  "  Carta  de  las  Antillas
y  de  Tierra  Firme"  (London,  1811);  and  "Carta
del  Oceano  Athlntico"  (1812).


TEMBLEQUE


TEN  EYCK


61


TEMBLEQUE,  Francisco  (tem-blay'-keh),
Spanish  architect,  b.  in  Tembleque,  province  of
Toledo,  in  the  first  half  of  the  16th  century;  d.
in  Puebla,  Mexico,  near  the  end  of  that  century.
He  entered  the  Franciscan  order,  came  to  New
Spain  about  1550,  and  soon  learned  the  Aztec
language,  being  venerated  by  the  natives  as  their
best  friend.  Having  studied  architecture  and  hy-
draulics in  Spain,  he  made  use  of  his  knowledge  to
remedy  the  want  of  potable  water  in  the  towns  of
Otumba  and  Cempoala,  and  constructed  an  aque-
duct that  carried  the  water  of  a  mountain-stream
for  the  distance  of  fifty  miles  to  Otumba.  Not-
withstanding the  opposition  of  experts,  who  de-
clared the  work  impossible,  Tembleque  persisted  in
his  course,  and  at  the  end  of  sixteen  years  finished
the  work,  which  contains  more  than  thirty  miles
of  solid  masonry  and  crosses  three  valleys  on
bridges,  of  which  the  longest  has  sixty-seven  arches,
the  middle  one  being  128  feet  in  height  and  70  feet
span.  This  work,  called  the  Arches  of  Cempoala,
is  still  the  admiration  of  engineers.

TEMPLE,  Daniel,  missionary,  b.  in  Reading,
Mass.,  23  Dec,  1789 ;  d.  there,  9  Aug.,  1851.  He
learned  the  shoemaker's  trade,  and  labored  at  it  in
his  native  place  till  he  had  attained  his  majority,
but  afterward  entered  Dartmouth,  was  graduated
there  in  1817,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary
in  1820.  He  was  ordained  as  an  evangelist  in  1821,
and  went  to  Malta  as  a  missionary  in  1822  where
he  labored  till  his  return  to  this  country  in  Septem-
ber, 1828.  He  sailed  again  for  Malta  in  1830,  and
from  1833  till  1844  was  stationed  at  Smyrna.  After
this  he  was  an  agent  for  the  American  board  in
this  country,  and  in  1847  assumed  a  pastoral  charge
at  Phelps,  N.  Y.,  which  failing  health  obliged  him
to  relinquish  in  1849.  He  published  many  works
in  modern  Greek,  Italian,  and  Armenian,  including
several  biographies  of  Bible  characters,  and  edited
a  monthly  magazine  in  Greek.  See  his  "  Life  and
Letters  "  by  his  son,  the  Rev.  Daniel  H.  Temple,
with  an  introduction  by  the  Rev.  Richard  S.  Storrs,
D.  D.  (Boston,  1855).

TEMPLE,  Jackson,  jurist,  b.  in  Heath,  Frank-
lin co.,  Mass.,  11  Aug.,  1827.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1851.  studied  law,  and,  removing  to
California,  practised  there  with  success.  He  was
appointed  to  the  bench  of  the  state  supreme  court
to  fill  a  vacancy  in  1887,  and  then  continued  in  his
seat  by  re-election.  He  has  also  served  as  district
judge  and  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Sonoma
county.  While  occupying  the  last-named  post,
Judge  Temple  was  selected  to  try  the  "  debris  suits,"
and  by  his  decision  of  the  first  case  prevented
hydraulic  mining  from  injuring  farming  lands.

"TEMPLE,  William  tirenville,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Rutland,  Vt.,  23  March,  1824.  He  entered
the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  18  April,  1840,  was
graduated  at  the  naval  academy  in  1846,  and  was
attached  to  the  "  Boston  "  when  she  wao  wrecked  at
Eleuthera,  Bahama  islands,  15  March,  1846,  taking
charge  of  the  sick  men  from  the  wreck  in  the
schooner  "Volant."  In  February,  1847,  he  was
ordered  to  the  steamer  "Scourge,"  in  which  he
participated  in  the  bombardment  and  capture  of
Vera  Cruz  and  in  the  engagements  at  Alvarado,
Tuspan,  and  Tabasco,  sometimes  having  command
of  batteries  and  landing  parties  in  operations  on
shore  against  the  Mexicans.  He  assisted  in  the
survey  of  the  interoceanic  canal  and  railroad  across
the  Isthmus  of  Tehuantepec  in  1850-'2,  was  pro-
moted to  master,  21  July,  1854,  and  to  lieutenant,
18  April,  1855.  After  cruising  in  the  frigate
"Lancaster"  on  the  Pacific  station  in  1 859— '6 1 ,  he
commanded  the  steamer "  Flambeau " at New


<]££>?vzj&JLz>


York  for  one  month,  and  was  on  duty  as  ordnance-
officer  there  for  seven  months.  He  was  promoted
to  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,  and  com-
manded the  gun-boat  "  Pembina,"  in  the  Western
Gulf  blockading
squadron.  From
November,  1862,  he
was  fleet-captain  of
the  Eastern  Gulf
blockading  squad-
ron until  19  Sept.,
1864.  While  he  was
fleet-captain  he  at
times  commanded
the  "  San  Jacinto  "
on  special  service,
and  in  July,  1864,
he  led  a  force  of
sailors  in  defence
of  the  approaches
to  Washington.  He
commanded  the
steamer  "  Pontoo-
suc  "  from  Novem-
ber, 1864,  till  May,  1865,  participating  in  both  at-
tacks on  Fort  Fisher,  in  the  capture  of  Wilming-
ton, N.  C,  in  the  bombardment  of  forts  on  James
river,  at  Dutch  gap,  and  at  the  capture  of  Peters-
burg and  Richmond.  He  was  promoted  to  com-
mander, 3  March,  1865,  had  the  steamer  "  Tacony  "
in  the  North  Atlantic  squadron  in  1865-6,  and
was  on  ordnance  duty  in  1866-'70.  He  was  made
captain,  28  Aug.,  1870,  and  in  December,  1884,  was
delegated  to  escort  King  Kalakaua,  of  the  Sandwich
islands,  in  his  visit  to  this  country,  for  which  ser-
vice congress  allowed  him  to  accept  the  decoration
of  knight  commander  of  the  royal  order  of  Kanie-
hameha  I.  He  was  promoted  to  commodore,  5
June,  1878,  was  a  member  of  the  examining  and
retiring  board  in  1879-'81,  and  became  its  presi-
dent in  June,  1881.  He  was  promoted  to  rear-
admiral,  22  Feb.,  1884,  and  voluntarily  retired  from
active  service  on  29  Feb.,  1884.

TEN  BROECK,  Abraham,  soldier,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  13  May,  1734;  d.  there,  19  Jan.,  1810.
His  father,  Dirck,  was  for  many  years  recorder  of
Albany,  and  its  mayor  in  1746-'8.  The  son  be-
came a  merchant  in  1753,  and  married  Elizabeth,
daughter  of  Gen.  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer.  From
1760  till  1765  he  was  in  the  colonial  assembly,
where  he  was  an  active  upholder  of  popular  rights.
In  1775  he  sat  in  the  Provincial  congress,  and  in
1776  he  presided  over  the  convention  that  organ-
ized a  state  government.  He  was  made  a  colonel
of  militia  early  in  the  Revolution,  and  on  25  June,
1778,  became  brigadier -general  of  militia,  (Com-
manding the  forces  in  Dutchess  and  Ulster  coun-
ties, and  to  the  north  and  west.  He  did  good
service  during  Burgoyne's  invasion,  and  led  a  bri-
gade at  the  battle  of  Bemis  Heights  in  October,
1777.  He  was  mayor  of  Albany  in  1779-'83,  a
member  of  the  state  senate  in  1780-'3,  and  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in  1781-'4.  Gen.
Ten  Broeck  was  also  for  several  years  a  director
and  president  of  the  Albany  bank.

TEN  EYCK,  Abraham  S.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  Jersey  in  1785  ;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,
28  March,  1844.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman, 1  Sept.,  1811,  and  served  in  the  "Wasp"
when  she  captured  the  British  sloop  "  Frolic,"  18
Oct.,  1812.  The  British  ship  "  Poictiers  "  recap-
tured the  prize  the  same  day,  and  he  was  taken  to
Bermuda,  where  he  was  paroled.  He  was  included
in  the  vote  of  thanks  and  received  a  silver  medal
from  congress  by  act  of  29  Jan.,  1813,  for  the  vie-


62


TEN  EYCK


TENNENT


tory  over  the  "  Frolic."  After  the  war  he  served
in  the  frigate  "  United  States"  in  1815-'17  in  the
Mediterranean.  He  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,
27  April,  1816,  served  at  the.  New  York  navy-
yard  in  1818,  in  the  "Ontario,"  in  the  Mediterra-
nean and  West  Indies,  in  1819-'24,  in  the  receiving-
ship  at  New  York  in  1825,  and  in  the  "  Delaware  "
in  1827-30  in  the  Mediterranean.  He  was  pro-
moted master-commandant,  9  Feb.,  1837,  command-
ed the  store-ship  "  Erie  "  in  the  West  Indies  in  1838,
and  was  commissioned  captain,  10  Dec,  1843.

TEN  EYCK,  Henry  James,  journalist,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  25  July,  1856 ;  d.  there.  29  Nov.,
1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1879,  third  in
a  class  of  131,  and  entered  the  office  of  the  Albany
"  Evening  Journal,"  where  he  remained  until  his
death.  In  October,  1883,  he  became  its  managing
editor,  and  in  1885  city  editor.  He  was  an  occa-
sional contributor  to  the  magazines,  more  particu-
larly the  ."  Century  "  and  the  "  Popular  Science
Monthly,"  an  article  from  his  pen  in  the  latter
magazine  in  1886  on  "  Some  Tendencies  in  Taxa-
tion "  having  attracted  much  attention.

TEN  EYCK,  John  Conover,  senator,  b.  in  Free-
hold, N.  J.,  12  March,  1814 ;  d.  in  Mount  Holly,
N.  J.,  24  Aug.,  1879.  He  received  his  education  from

Erivate  tutors,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
ar  in  1835,  and  practised  in  Mount  Holly,  N.  J.
He  served  as  prosecuting  attorney  for  Burlington
county  in  1839-'49,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1844.  Mr.  Ten  Eyck
was  a  Whig  till  1856,  when  he  joined  the  Republi-
can party,  and  he  was  afterward  chosen  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  where  he  held  his  seat  from  5  Dec,  1859,  till
3  March,  1865.  In  the  senate  Mr.  Ten  Eyck  took
part  in  various  debates,  including  that  on  the  elect-
oral vote  of  Louisiana  in  1865,  but  his  principal
services  were  performed  on  the  judiciary  and  other
committees.  On  24  April,  1875,  he  was  appointed
a  member  of  a  commission  to  revise  the  New
Jersey  constitution,  and  on  the  death  of  Abram  O.
Zabriskie  he  became  its  president.

TENNENT,  William,  educator,  b.  in  Ireland
in  1673 ;  d.  in  Neshaminy,  Pa.,  6  May,  1746.  He
received  a  liberal  education  in  his  native  country,
being  graduated  probably  at  Trinity  college,  Dub-
lin, entered  the  ministry  of  the  Episcopal  church
of  Ireland  in  1704,  and  became  chaplain  to  an  Irish
nobleman.  Wishing  for  more  liberty  of  conscience,
he  came  to  this  country  with  his  family  in  1718,
and  on  application  was  received  as  a  minister  of
the  Presbyterian  church  by  the  svnod  of  Philadel-
phia. After  brief  pastorates  in  Westchester  coun-
ty, N.  Y.,  and  in  Bucks  county,  Pa.,  he  was  called
in  1726  to  Neshaminy,  Pa.,  where  he  remained  till
the^lose  of  his  life.  Here,  on  land  that  was  given
him  by  his  kinsman,  James  Logan,  in  1728,  he
erected  a  small  building,  and  opened  a  school  for
the  instruction  of  candidates  for  the  ministry.  In
this  academy,  which  became  known  as  the  Log  col-
lege, were  trained  many  that  became  eminent  in
the  Presbyterian  church.  The  name  was  probably
bestowed  at  first  in  contempt  by  its  opponents.
It  was  the  first  literary  institution  higher  than  a
common  school  within  the  bounds  of  the  Presby-
terian church  in  this  country,  and  is  regarded  as
the  germ  from  which  sprang  Princeton  college  and
several  lesser  institutions  of  learning.  Tennent
had  a  rare  gift  of  attracting  youths  of  genius  and
imbuing  them  with  his  own  zealous  spirit.  About
1742  he  withdrew  from  active  labor.  The  "Log
college "  has  long  since  disappeared.  It  is  de-
scribed by  George  Whitefield,  who  visited  it  in
1739,  as  "a  log-house  about  twenty  feet  long,  and
near  as  many  broad,  and  to  me  it  seemed  to  re-


semble the  school  of  the  old  prophets,  for  their
habitations  were  mean."  About  1840  part  of  one
of  the  logs  that  formed  the  building  was  discov-
ered, and  from  it  a  cane  was  made,  which  was  pre-
sented to  Rev.  Dr.  Samuel  Miller,  then  one  of  the
oldest  professors  in  Princeton  seminary.  See  Rev.
Dr.  Archibald  Alexander's  "History  of  the  Log
College  "  (1846).— William's  eldest  son,  Gilbert,
clergyman,  b.  in  County  Armagh,  Ireland,  5  Feb.,
1703;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  July,  1764,  came
to  this  country  with  his  father,  was  educated  by
him,  and  taught  for  some  time  in  the  Log  college.
After  studying  medicine  for  a  year,  he  abandoned
it  for  divinity,  and  in  May,  1725,  was  licensed  to
preach  by  the  Philadelphia  presbytery.  In  the
same  vear  he  received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Yale.  After  preaching  at  New  Castle,  Del.,
and  receiving  a  call  there,  he  left  so  abruptly  that
he  was  rebuked  by  the  synod,  and  in  1726  was  or-
dained as  pastor  at  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.  He  was
much  admired  as  a  preacher,  and  in  1740-'l  made
a  tour  with  George  Whitefield  at  the  latter's  re-
quest. He  had  much  to  do  with  the  division  in
the  Presbyterian  church  in  1741  by  his  indiscretion
in  denouncing  those  that  were  opposed  to  revivals,
but  seventeen  years  later  he  was  no  less  active  in
healing  the  breach.  In  1744  he  became  pastor  of
a  new  church  in  Philadelphia  that  had  been  formed
by  admirers  of  Whitefield.  Shortly  afterward  he
asked  Benjamin  Franklin's  advice  as  to  whom  he
should  call  upon  for  funds  to  erect  a  new  church
edifice.  Franklin  told  him  to  "call  on  everybody,"
and,  taking  the  sage  at  his  word,  Tennent  soon  ob-
tained money  for  an  expensive  building.  In  1753,
at  the  request  of  the  trustees  of  Princeton,  he
went  abroad,  with  Rev.  Samuel  Davies,  to  secure
funds  for  that  institution.  Mr.  Tennent  was  one
of  the  most  conspicuous  ministers  of  his  day.  He
affected  eccentricity  in  his  pulpit,  but  his  sermons
were  marked  both  by  forcible  reasoning  and  by  pas-
sionate appeal.  The  controversies  in  which  he  en-
gaged made  him  many  enemies,  and  he  was  even
accused  of  immorality.  His  published  volumes
are  "  XXIII.  Sermons  "  (Philadelphia,  1744) ;  "  Dis-
courses on  Several  Subjects"  (1745);  and  "Ser-
mons on  Important  Subjects  adapted  to  the  Peril-
ous State  of  the  British  Nation  (1758).  Among
his  many  separate  published  discourses  are  "  The
Necessity  of  studying  to  be  Quiet  and  doing  our
own  Business"  (1744);  several  on  the  lawfulness  of
defensive  war  (1747  et  seq.);  and  "A  Persuasive  to
the  Right  Use  of  the  Passions  in  Religion  "  (1760).
Mr.  Tennent  also  wrote  an  "  Account  of  a  Revival
of  Religion "  in  Prince's  "  Christian  History "
(1744).  See  also  a  volume  of  "  Sermons  and  Essays
by  the  Tennents  and  their  Contemporaries  "  (1855).
President  Samuel  Finley,  of  Princeton,  delivered
his  funeral  sermon,  which  was  published  with  an
appendix  and  a  "Funeral  Eulogy"  by  a  young
gentleman  in  Philadelphia  (1764). — Another  son,
William,  clergyman,  b.  in  County  Antrim,  Ire-
land, 3  Jan.,  170*5 ;  d.  in  Freehold,  N.  J.,  8  March,
1777,  also  came  to  this  country  with  his  father,
with  whom  he  followed  a  preparatory  course,  and
then  studied  theology  under  his  brother  Gilbert
in  New  Brunswick.  "He  had  nearly  finished  his
course  there  when  he  fell  into  a  remarkable  trance
or  cataleptic  fit,  continuing  for  several  days  as  if
dead.  His  physician  refused  to  permit  his  burial,
and  efforts  to  resuscitate  him  were  finally  success-
ful, though  his  life  was  despaired  of  for  weeks.
He  was  obliged  to  learn  anew  to  read  and  write,
and  had  no  recollection  of  his  former  life  till  on
one  occasion  he  felt  a  "  shock  in  his  head,"  after
which  his  former  knowledge  began  slowly  to  re-


TENNEY


TENOCH


63


turn.  He  subsequently  asserted  that  during  his
trance  he  had  thought  himself  to  be  in  heaven,
and  that  afterward  the  recollection  of  the  glories
that  he  had  witnessed  and  heard  was  so  intense  as
to  blot  out  for  a  long  time  all  interest  in  earthly
things.  Mr.  Tennent  was  ordained  at  Freehold,
N.  J.,  25  Oct.,  1733,  as  successor  to  his  brother
John,  and  was  pastor  there  forty-four  years. He

Eublished  several  sermons.  See  a  memoir  of  him
y  Elias  Boudinot,  with  a  detailed  account  of  his
trance  (New  York,  1847). — Another  son,  John,
clergyman,  b.  in  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  12  Nov.,
1706;  d.  in  Freehold,  N.  J.,  23  April,  1732,  also
came  to  this  country  with  his  father,  was  educated
at  the  Log  college,  and  licensed  to  preach,  18  Sept.,
1729,  and  from  1730  till  his  death  was  pastor  at
Freehold.  A  memoir  of  him  was  published  by
his  brother  Gilbert,  with  a  discourse  on  "  Regen-
eration" (1735),  which  warrants  the  belief  that,
had  he  lived,  he  would  have  become  as  eminent  as
his  brother. — The  second  William's  son,  William
(1740-'77),  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1758  with
Jeremias  Van  Rensselaer,  and  from  1772  till  his
death  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Charleston,  S.  C,
where  he  was  elected  to  the  Provincial  congress.

TENNEY,  Samuel,  physician,  b.  in  Byfieid,
Mass.,  27  Nov.,  1748;  d.  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  6  Feb.,
1816.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1772,
taught  one  year  at  Andover,  Mass.,  and  then,  after
studying  medicine,  went  to  practise  at  Exeter,
N.  H.,  but  on  the  day  of  the  battle  of  Bunker
Hill  joined  the  patriot  army  as  a  surgeon.  After
serving  one  year  with  Massachusetts  troops,  he
entered  the  Rhode  Island  forces.  At  the  battle  of
Red  Bank  he  dressed  the  wounds  of  Count  von
Donop,  the  Hessian  commander.  Dr.  Tenney
served  through  the  war,  and  at  its  close  returned
to  Exeter,  where  he  married,  but  did  not  resume
practice.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  in  1788,  and  judge  of  probate
from  1793  till  1800,  when  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation
of  William  Gordon,  and  taking  his  seat  on  8  Dec,
served  till  1807.  Dr.  Tenney  wrote  much  for  the
press  on  political  subjects,  especially  in  1788,  in
favor  of  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  of  the
United  States.  To  the  "  Memoirs  "  of  the  Ameri-
can academy,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  he  con-
tributed an  account  of  the  mineral  waters  of  Sara-
toga and  a  "  Theory  of  Prismatic  Colors  " ;  to  the
Massachusetts  historical  society  a  notice  of  the
so-called  "  dark  day,"  19  May,  1780,  and  an  account
of  Exeter ;  and  to  the  State  agricultural  society  a
treatise  on  orcharding,  which  was  highly  esteemed.
He  also  wrote  for  the  "  New  York  Medical  Reposi-
tory "  "  An  Explanation  of  Certain  Curious  Phe-
nomena in  the  Heating  of  Water"  (1811)., —  His
wife,  Tabitha,  author,  b.  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  in
1762  ;d.  there,  2  May,  1837,  was  the  daughter  of
Samuel  Gilman,  who  died  in  her  infancy.  She
was  educated  by  her  mother,  early  began  to  take
pleasure  in  reading,  and  became  known  for  her
facility  and  grace  in  conversation.  She  married
Mr.  Tenny  in  1788.  Mrs.  Tenney  was  the  author
of  "  Female  Quixotism :  exhibited  in  the  Romantic
Opinions  and  Extravagant  Adventures  of  Dor-
easina  Sheldon "  (2d  ed.,  Newburyport,  1807 ;  2
vols.,  Boston,  1829;  many  other  editions).  She
also  compiled  "  The  new  Pleasing  Instructor,"  a
selection  from  the  poets  and  other  classical  writ-
ers, for  the  use  of  voung  ladies.

TENNEY,  Sanborn,  naturalist,  b.  in  Stoddard,
N.  H.,  13  Jan.,  1827 ;  d.  in  Buchanan,  Mich.,  9
July, 1877. He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in


a,


1858,  and  then  taught  natural  history  in  the  New


England  normal  institute  in  Lancaster,  Mass.,  for
two  years.  In  1855  he  became  lecturer  before  the
Massachusetts  state  teachers'  institute,  meanwhile
studying  natural  history  under  Louis  Agassiz,  in
Cambridge,  and  delivering  courses  of  lectures  in
various  parts  of  the  country.  He  was  appointed
professor  of  natural  history  in  Vassar  college  in
1865,  and  continued  there  until  1868,  when  he  ac-
cepted a  similar  chair  in  Williams.  In  1873  he
delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  "  Physical  Struc-
ture and  Natural  Resources  of  the  United  States  "
before  the  Lowell  institute  in  Boston,  and  two  years
later  a  course  on  "  Geology  "  before  the  same  insti-
tute. At  the  time  of  his  death,  Prof.  Tenney  was
on  his  way  west  to  act  as  leader  of  the  Williams
Rocky  mountain  expedition.  Besides  contributions
to  "  The  Popular  Science  Monthly  "  and  other  simi-
lar periodicals,  he  published  "  Geology  for  Teach-
ers, Classes,  and  Private  Students  "  (Philadelphia,
1859) ;  "  A  Manual  of  Zoology  "  (New  York.  1865) ;
"  Elements  of  Zoology "  (1875) ;  and,  with  Mrs.
Tenney,  "  Natural  History  of  Animals  "  (1866). —
His  wife,  Abby  Amy  Gove,  was  the  author  of
"  Pictures  and  Stories  of  Animals  for  the  Little
Ones  at  Home "  (6  vols.,  New  York,  1868),  and
a  "  New  Game  of  Natural  History  "  (Philadelphia,
1870). She  also  contributed  to  scientific  journals.

TENNEY,  William  Jewett,  author,  b.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  in  1814 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  20  Sept.,
1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1832,  and
studied  medicine  in  Boston,  but  abandoned  it  for
law,  which  he  studied  in  New  Haven,  Conn.  After
his  admission  to  the  bar  he  opened  an  office  in  New
York  city,  but  was  connected  with  the  "  Journal  of
Commerce  "  in  1841  and  with  the  "  Evening  Post "
in  1842-'3  and  1847-'8.  In  1853  he  edited  the
u  Mining  Magazine,"  and  in  the  same  year  entered
the  employ  of  the  firm  of  D.  Appleton  and  Co.,
whose  "Annual  Cyclopaedia"  he  edited  from  its
inception  till  his  death  (1861-'82).  He  resided  for
a  long  time  in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  where  he  was  sev-
eral times  chosen  a  freeholder,  and  was  for  fourteen
years  in  the  city  council.  He  prepared  the  plan
for  organizing  the  public-school  system  there,  was
president  of  the  school  board,  and  during  Bu-
chanan's administration  collector  of  the  port.  For
two  years  he  was  presiding  judge  of  one  of  the
criminal  courts  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  he  was
usually  known  as  Judge  Tenney.  He  became  a
convert  to  Roman  Catholicism.  He  added  a  six-
teenth volume  to  Thomas  H.  Benton's  "Abridg-
ment of  the  Debates  of  Congress,"  and  indexed
the  work  (16  vols.,  New  York,  1857-'60),  edited
"The  Queens  of  England"  (1852),  and  was  the
author  of  a  "  Military  and  Naval  History  of  the
Rebellion  in  the  United  States"  (1865)  and  a
work  on  "  Grammatical  Analysis  "  (1866).  —  His
wife,  Sarah  Brownson,  author,  b.  in  Chelsea,
Mass.,  7  June,  1839 ;  d.  in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  30  Oct.,
1876,  was  the  only  daughter  of  Dr.  Orestes  A.
Brownson,  and*  inherited  much  of  her  father's
power  of  analysis.  She  was  the  author  of  "  Marian
Elwood,  or  How  Girls  Live"  (New  York,  1859);
"At  Anchor"  (1865);  and  "Life  of  Demetrius
Augustine  Gallitzin,  Prince  and  Priest"  (1873).

TENOCH,  or  TENOX  (ten-oss').  Aztec  priest,
lived  in  the  14th  century.  When  the  Aztecs  set-
tled in  Chapultepec  and  were  subdued  by  the  king
of  Culhuacan,  Tenoch  was  the  high-priest  of  his
nation.  Later  the  Culhuas  were  defeated  in  a  war
with  their  neighbors  of  Xochimilco  and  solicited
the  aid  of  their  slaves,  the  Mexicans.  By  the  ad-
vice of  Tenoch  the  Mexicans  consented,  and  under
the  former's  leadership  showed  themselves  so  brave
that  the  Culhuas,  partly  from  gratitude,  partly


64


TEPANCALTZIN


TERNAUX


from  fear,  gave  them  freedom.  Looking  for  a  safe
place  of  retreat  until  the  nation  should  become
stronger,  Tenoch  led  them  to  a  small  island  in  the
lake  of  Texcoco,  where,  according  to  his  prediction,
they  found  an  eagle  on  a  nopal-tree  devouring  a
snake.  There  they  laid  in  1327,  or,  according  to
others,  in  1325,  the  foundation  of  a  city  called
Tenoch-titlan,  and  Tenoch  built  a  hut  as  a  temple
for  their  god  Huitzilopochtli,  dedicating  it  by  the
sacrifice  of  some  Culhua  prisoners.

TEPANCALTZIN  (tay-pan-cal-tseen'),  Mexican
king,  d.  in  1103.  lie  was  the  ninth  monarch  of
Tollan,  becoming  the  successor  on  the  throne  of
Queen  Xiutlatzin  in  1042.  During  his  reign  the
national  beverage  of  "  pulque,"  prepared  from  the
fermented  sap  of  the  maguey-plant,  was  discovered
by  the  Princess  Xochitl,  whom  lie  afterward  mar-
ried. His  son  and  successor  was  Topiltzin,  to
whom  he  ceded  the  crown  in  1092,  as,  according  to
a  Toltec  superstition,  a  reign  of  more  than  fifty
years  would  bring  misfortune  to  the  nation.  Not-
withstanding this  change  of  ruler,  continued
drought  caused  famine  and  pestilence,  followed  by
internal  commotions.  Both  rulers  died  in  a  battle
against  the  insurgents,  and  the  kingdom  remained
in  a  state  of  anarchy  till  it  was  conquered  by
Xolotl  the  Great,  king  of  the  Chichimecs.

TERHUNE,  Edward  Payson,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  Brunswick.  N.  J.,  about  1825.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Rutgers  in  1850,  and,  after  the  completion  of
his  theological  studies  at  New  Brunswick  seminary
in  1854,  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Pres-
byterian church  in  Virginia,  becoming  pastor  of
the  congregation  at  Charlotte  Court-House  (now
Smithville).  In  1859  he  removed  to  Newark,  N.  J.,
and  took  charge  of  the  1st  Reformed  church.  He
was  the  American  chaplain  at  Rome,  Italy,  in
1876-7,  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1878,
and  was  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in
Springfield,  Mass.,  from  1879  till  1884,  when  he
took  charge  of  a  Reformed  church  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.  Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1869. — His  wife,  Mary  Virginia,  author,  b.  in
Amelia  county,  Va.,  about  1830,  is  a  daughter  of
Samuel  P.  nawes,  a  native  of  Massachusetts,  who
became  a  merchant  in  Virginia.  She  began  to  con-
tribute to  a  weekly  paper  in  Richmond  at  the  age
of  fourteen,  and  two  years  later  sent  to  a  magazine
a  sketch  entitled  "  Marrying  through  Prudential
Motives,"  which  was  reprinted  in  'England,  trans-
lated for  a  French  journal,  retranslated  into  Eng-
lish for  a  London  magazine,  and  then  reproduced
in  its  altered  form  in  this  country. In  1856  she

married  Mr.  Ter-
hune.  She  has
been  a  large  con-
tributor of  tales,
sketches,  and  es-
says to  magazines,
edited  a  month-
ly called  "Baby-
hood "  for  two
years,  besides  con-
ducting special
departments  in
"  Wide  Awake  "
and  "St.  Nicho-
las," and  in  1888
established  a  mag-
azine called  the
"  Home  -  Maker."
Her  first  novel  was
"Alone:  a  Tale  of  Southern  Life  and  Manners"
(Richmond,  1853),  which  was  issued  under  the  pen-
name  of  "Marian  Harland,"  and  attained  great


tMv, KiAJrtrvtXI,


<Je*sriA*^yA^


popularity.  Her  other  works  of  fiction,  some  of
which  were  also  very  successful,  bear  the  titles  of
"The  Hidden  Path"  (New  York.  1855);  "Moss
Side  "  (1857) ;  "  Miriam  "  (1860) ;  "  Nemesis  "  (1860) ;
"  Husks  "  (1863) ;  "  Husbands  and  Homes,"  a  series
of  stories  (1865) ;  "  Sunnybank  "  (1866) ;  "  Helen
Gardner's  Wedding-Day  "  (1867) ;  "  The  Christmas
Hollv  "  (1868) ;  "  Ruby's  Husband  "  (1868) ;  "  Phe-
mie's  Temptation  "  (1869) ;  "  At  Last "  (1870) ;  "  The
Empty  Heart "  (1871) ;  "  Eve's  Daughters  "  (1881) ;
"  Judith  "  (1883) ;  and  "  A  Gallant  Fight "  (1888).
She  is  the  author  also  of  a  popular  manual  of  do-
mestic economy  entitled  "  Common  Sense  in  the
Household"  (1871):  "Breakfast,  Luncheon,  and
Tea"  (1875);  "The  Dinner  Year-Book"  (1878);
"  Our  Daughters,  and  What  Shall  We  Do  with
Them :  a  Talk  with  Mothers  "  (1880) ;  and  "  Loit-
erings  in  Pleasant  Paths,"  containing  sketches  of
travel  in  Europe  (1880). — Their  daughter,  Chris-
tine, b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  13  June,  1859,  was  edu-
cated abroad  and  at  Smith  college,  and  married
James  F.  Herrick  in  1884.  She  has  published
"Housekeeping  Made  Easv"  (New  York,  1888).

TERNANT,  Jean  Baptiste,  Chevalier  de  (tair-
nong),  French  soldier,  b.  in  Sez,  Normandy,  in
1750;  d.  in  Couches  in  1816.  He  was  a  lieuten-
ant in  the  French  army,  but,  resigning  his  com-
mission, came  to  the  United  States  with  Baron
Steuben,  and  offered  his  sword  to  congress.  In
April,  1778,  he  was  commissioned  major,  and  ap-
pointed sub-inspector  in  Steuben's  division,  serving
under  that  general  till  25  Sept.,  1778,  when  he  was
made  lieutenant-colonel  and  inspector  of  the  ar-
mies in  Georgia  and  South  Carolina.  He  was
taken  prisoner  at  Charleston  in  1780,  but  was
soon  exchanged,  and  assumed  command  of  Col.
Armand  de  la  Rouarie's  regiment  when  the  latter
went  to  France  in  search  of  supplies.  After  the
return  of  Col.  La  Rouarie,  he  was  again  sent  to  the
south,  where  he  served  to  the  end  of  the  campaign.
Before  returning  to  France  after  the  conclusion
of  peace,  he  travelled  for  two  years  through  the
United  States.  Re-entering  the  French  army  in
1786  he  rose  to  the  rank  of  colonel,  was  in  the  bat-
tle of  Valmy,  and  served  in  Germany  under  the
Marquis  de  Custines.  He  was  minister  to  the
United  States  in  1790-'3,  and  showed  ability  in  the
difficult  negotiations  that  almost  culminated  in  a
war  with  France  in  1798.  After  the  coup  d'etat
of  18  Brumaire,  1799,  he  settled  at  Conches,  and
refused  Napoleon's  offer  of  another  commission.

TERNAUX,  Henry  (tair-no),  better  known  as
Ternaux-Compans,  French  historian,  b.  in  Paris
in  1807;  d.  there  in  December.  1864.  After  fin-
ishing his  studies  in  Paris,  he  entered  the  diplo-
matic service  and  was  secretary  of  the  embassies  at
Madrid  and  Lisbon,  and  charge  d'affaires  in  Brazil,
but  resigned,  and  devoted  several  years  to  travel
through  Spain  and  South  America,  making  re-
searches in  the  state  libraries.  Toward  the  close  of
Louis  Philippe's  reign  he  was  elected  deputy,  but
he  soon  returned  to  his  studies.  Ternaux-Com-
pans collected  and  published  a  valuable  series  of
works  concerning  the  discovery  and  early  history
of  South  America.  They  include  "  Bibliotheque
Americaine,  ou  catalogue  des  ouvrages  relatifs  &
l'Amerique  depuis  sa  decouverte  en  1493,  jusqu'en
l'an  1700"  (Paris,  1836);  "Voyages,  relations  et
memoires  originaux  pour  servir  a  l'histoire  de  la
decouverte  de  l'Amerique "  (10  vols.,  1836-'8;  2d
series,  10  vols.,  1839-'40) ;  "  Archives  des  voyages,
ou  collection  d'anciennes  relations  inedites  "  (2  vols.,
1840-1);  "Recueil  de  documents  et  memoires
originaux  sur  l'histoire  des  possessions  Espagnoles
dans  l'Amerique  k  diverses  epoques  de  la  conquete  "


TERNAY


TERRY


65


(1840) ;  "  Essai  sur  la  theogonie  Mexicaine  "  (1840) ;
"Essai  sur  l'ancien  Cundinamarca"  (1862);  "No-
tice historique  sur  la  Guyane  Francaise "  (1863) ;
and  "  Histoire  du  Mexique  par  Don  Alvaro  Tezozo-
mac  "  (2  vols.,  1849).

TERNAY,  Charles  Louis  d'Arsae,  Chevalier
de,  French  naval  officer ;  b.  in  the  castle  of  Ternay,
near  Laudun,  in  1722 ;  died  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  10
July,  1780.  He  was  descended  from  an  ancient
family  of  Brittany,  many  of  whose  members  had
served  with  credit  in  the  French  navy.  He  entered
the  naval  school  in  1738,  was  in  the  siege  of  Louis-
burg  in  1757,  and  commanded  afterward  a  division
of  gun-boats  on  St.  Lawrence.  After  his  promo-
tion to  captain,  he  was  sent  with  two  frigates  to
Newfoundland  in  1762,  and,  landing  at  St.  John  on
2  June,  reduced  the  place,  captured  several  British
merchant- vessels,  and  ruined  the  cod-fisheries  along
the  coast.  He  was  attached  after  the  conclusion
of  peace  to  the  station  of  the  Leeward  islands,  and
later  was  promoted  brigadier-general  of  the  naval
forces,  retiring  in  1772  with  the  brevet  of  chef
d'escadre.  He  was  appointed  governor  -  general
of  the  island  of  Bourbon,  which  post  he  held  till
1779,  when  he  re-entered  active  service.  Early  in
1780  he  armed  a  division  in  Brest,  and  was  charged
with  conveying  Rochambeau's  army  to  the  United
States.  After  defeating  a  British  force  in  the
West  Indies  he  arrived  safely  at  Newport  on  10
July,  and  died  there  a  few  days  later.

TERR AZ AS,  Francisco  de  (ter-rah'-thas),  Mex-
ican poet,  b.  in  Mexico  about  1520 ;  d.  there  in  1575.
He  was  the  son  of  a  companion  of  Cortes,  and
served  for  several  years  in  the  army.  Afterward
he  secured  a  post  in  the  household  of  the  arch-
bishop of  Mexico,  and  later  retired  to  his  estate,
devoting  himself  to  poetry.  He  composed  elegies
and  cantatas,  deriving  inspiration  from  ancient
Indian  recitatives,  and  gained  great  popularity  not
only  in  the  New  World,  but  also  in  Europe. His

Soems  were  never  published,  but  the  Spanish  poet,
[iguel  Cervantes,  has  inserted  with  words  of  high
praise  some  of  Terrazas's  verses  in  his  "  Galatea."
TERRELL,  William,  congressman,  b.  in  Fair-
fax county,  Va.,  about  1778;  d.  in  Sparta,  Ga.,  4
July,  1855.  During  his  infancy  his  parents  re-
moved to  Wilkes  county,  Ga.  He  received  a  good
English  education,  studied  medicine  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  and  practised  in  Sparta,  Ga.  He  served
in  the  legislature  for  several  terms,  and  in  1816
and  1818  was  elected  to  congress,  but  declined  re-
election in  1820.  About  1819  he  abandoned  the
practice  of  his  profession,  and  henceforth  was  much
interested  in  cotton-culture.  He  took  much  inter-
est in  the  promotion  of  agricultural  science,  and
in  1853  gave  $20,000  for  the  establishment  of  the
agricultural  professorship  that  bears  his  name  in
the  University  of  Georgia.

TERRILL,  William  Rufus,  soldier,  b.  in  Cov-
ington, Va.,  21  April,  1834;  d.  near  Perry ville,
Ky.,  8  Oct.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1853,  assigned  to  the  3d  artil-
lery, was  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  there
in  1853-'4,  on  duty  in  Kansas  in  1854-'5,  and  as-
sistant in  the  U.  S.  coast  survey  from  1855  till
1861.  He  was  appointed  captain  in  the  5th  artil-
lery, 14  Aug.,  1861,  and  took  part  with  great  credit
in  the  battle  of  Shiloh.  He  was  appointed  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  9  Sept.,  1862,  and  was
killed  in  the  battle  of  Perryville  in  the  following
month. — His  brother.  J  allies  Barbour,  soldier,
b.  in  Warm  Springs,  Bath  co.,  Va.,  20  Feb.,  1838 ;
d.  near  Bethesda  Church,  Va.,  31  May.  1864,  was
graduated  at  Virginia  military  institute,  Lexing-
ton, in  1858,  and  after  attending  the  law-school
vol.  vi. — 5


of  Judge  Brockenborough  began  practice  in  the
courts  of  his  native  county  in  1860.  In  May,  1861,  he
was  appointed  major  of  the  13th  Virginia  infantry.
He  was  promoted  to  the  colonelcy,  and  was  with
his  regiment  at  the  first  and  second  battles  of  Bull
Run,  Fredericksburg,  Cross  Keys,  Port  Republic,
Cedar  Run,  the  Wilderness,  andSpottsylvania,  and
was  killed  at  Bethesda  Church.  His  commanding
general  said  his  regiment,  "the  13th,  was  never
required  to  take  a  position  that  they  did  not  take
it,  nor  to  hold  one  that  they  did  not'hold  it."  His
nomination  as  brigadier-general  was  confirmed  by
the  Confederate  senate  on  the  day  of  his  death.

TERRY,  Adrian  Russell,  physician,  b.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  29  Sept.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  3
Dec,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  de-
partment of  Yale  in  1831,  and  subsequently  settled
in  Hartford.  For  several  years  he  held  the  chair
of  chemistry  and  natural  philosophy  in  Bristol
college,  Pa.  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on
him  by  Trinity  in  1836.  Dr.  Terry  published
"Travels  in  the  Equatorial  Regions  of  South
America  in  1832  "  (Hartford,  1834).

TERRY,  Alfred  Howe,  soldier,  b.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  10  Nov.,  1827.  He  was  educated  in  the
schools  of  New  Haven  and  at  the  Yale  law-school,
but,  having  been  already  admitted  to  the  bar,  he
was  not  graduated.
He  began  the  prac-
tice of  his  profes-
sion in  1849,  and
was  clerk  of  the
superior  and  su-
preme courts  of
Connecticut  from
1854  till  1860.  He
had  been  an  active
member  of  the
Connecticut  mili-
tia, and  was  in
command  of  the
2d  regiment  of
state  troops  when
the  civil  war  be-
gan. In  response
to  President  Lin-
coln's call  for  three
months'  troops,  he
wasappointed  colo-
nel of  the  2d  Connecticut  volunteers,  and  with  that
regiment  was  present  at  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run,
At  the  expiration  of  the  term  of  service  he  returned
to  Connecticut,  organized  the  7th  Connecticut  vol-
unteers, of  which  he  was  appointed  colonel,  and  on
17  Sept.  was  again  mustered  into  the  National  ser-
vice. He  was  present  in  command  of  his  regiment
at  the  capture  of  Port  Royal,  S.  C,  and  also  at  the
siege  of  Fort  Pulaski,  of  which  he  was  placed  in
charge  after  its  capitulation.  On  25  April,  1862,  he
was  promoted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  and
he  served  as  such  at  the  battle  of  Pocotaligo  and  in
the  operations  against  Charleston.  He  command-
ed the  successful  demonstration  up  Stono  river
during  the  descent  on  Morris  island,  and  at  the
action  on  James  island.  His  force  was  then  with-
drawn, and  he  was  assigned  by  Gen.  Quincy  A.
Gillmore  to  the  command  of  the  troops  on  Mor-
ris island,  which  post  he  held  during  the  siege  of
Forts  Wagner  and  Sumter.  After  the  reduction
of  Fort  Wagner  he  was  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  northern  district  of  the  Department  of  the
South,  including  the  islands  from  which  opera-
tions against  Charleston  had  been  carried  on.
Gen.  Terry  commanded  the  1st  division  of  the
10th  army  corps,  Army  of  the  James,  during  the


(y«^X^


66


TERRY


TERRY


Virginia  campaign  of  1864,  and  at  times  the  corps
itself.  He  was  brevetted  major-general  of  volun-
teers on  20  Aug.,  1864,  became  permanent  com-
mander of  the  10th  corps  in  October,  and  held
that  place  until  the  corps  was  merged  in  the  24th
in  the  following  December,  when  he  was  assigned
to  lead  the  1st  division  of  the  new  corps.  He  com-
manded at  the  action  of  Chester  Station,  and  was
engaged  at  the  battle  of  Drewry's  Bluff,  the  various
combats  in  front  of  the  Bermuda  Hundred  lines,
the  battle  of  Fussell's  Mills,  the  action  at  Deep
Bottom,  the  siege  of  Petersburg,  the  actions  at
Newmarket  heights  on  the  Newmarket  road,  the
Darbytown  road,  and  the  Williamsburg  road.  On
2  Jan.,  1865,  after  the  failure  of  the  first  attempt
to  take  Fort  Fisher,  which  commanded  the  sea-
approaches  to  Wilmington,  N.  C,  Gen.  Terry  was
ordered  to  renew  the  attack  with  a  force  number-
ing a  little  over  8,000  men.  On  the  13th  he  de-
barked his  troops  about  five  miles  above  the  fort,
and,  finding  himself  confronted  by  Gen.  Robert  F.
Hoke's  Confederate  division,  proceeded  to  throw  a
line  of  strong  intrenchments  across  the  peninsula
between  the  sea  and  Cape  Fear  river,  facing  toward
Wilmington,  and  about  two  miles  north  of  the  fort.
After  the  landing  of  the  troops,  the  co-operating
fleet,  under  Admiral  David  D.  Porter,  numbering
44  vessels  and  mounting  upward  of  500  guns,
opened  fire  upon  the  work,  and  from  4.30  to  6  p.  m.
four  shots  a  second,  or  20,000  in  all,  were  fired.
This  was  the  heaviest  bombardment  of  the  war.
On  the  14th  the  line  of  intrenchment  was  com-
pleted, and  Gen.  Charles  J.  Paine's  division  of  in-
fantry was  placed  upon  it.  While  this  was  in
progress.  Gen.  Terry  made  a  reconnoissance  of  the
fort,  and,  in  view  of  the  difficulty  of  landing  sup-
plies for  his  troops  and  the  materials  for  a  siege
upon  an  open,  unprotected  beach  in  midwinter,  he
determined  to  carry  the  work  by  assault  the  next
day,  and  the  plan  of  attack  was  arranged  with  Ad-
miral Porter.  At  11  a.  m.  on  the  15th  tiie  entire
fleet  opened  fire,  silencing  nearly  every  gun  in  the
fort.  Gen.  Newton  M.  Curtis's  brigade  of  Gen.
Adelbert  Ames's  division  was  then  pushed  forward
by  regiments  to  a  point  200  yards  from  the  fort,
where  it  sheltered  itself  in  shallow  trenches,  and
the  remainder  of  the  division  was  brought  up  with-
in supporting  distance.  Admiral  Porter  had  landed
2,000  sailors  and  marines,  and  their  commander
pushed  a  line  of  skirmishers  up  within  200  yards
of  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  northern  face  of
the  work,  the  attack  of  the  troops  being  upon  the
western  extremity  of  that  face.  At  3.30  p.  m.,  on
a  signal  from  Gen.  Terry  to  Admiral  Porter,  the
fire  of  the  fleet  was  diverted  from  the  points  of
attack,  and  the  leading  brigade  rushed  upon  the
work  and  gained  a  foothold  upon  the  parapet.  The
column  of  sailors  and  marines  followed  the  exam-
ple of  the  troops,  but.  having  to  advance  for  a  dis-
tance of  about  600  yards  along  the  open  beach,  they
were  unable  to  stem  the  fire  of  the  work.  Some  of
them  reached  the  foot  of  the  parapet,  but  the  mass
of  them,  after  a  display  of  great  gallantry,  was
forced  to  fall  back.  After  Gen.  Curtis  had  gained
the  parapet,  Gen.  Ames  ordered  forward  in  succes-
sion the  second  and  third  brigades  of  his  division,
and  they  entered  the  fort.  This  was  constructed
with  a  series  of  traverses,  each  of  which  was  stub-
bornly held.  Hand-to-hand  fighting  of  the  most
obstinate  character  ensued,  the  traverses  being  used
successively  as  breastworks,  over  the  tops  of  which
the  opposing  parties  fired  into  one  another's  faces.
By  five  o'clock  nine  of  these  traverses  had  been  car-
ried. Gen.  Terry  then  ordered  up  re-enforcements,
consisting  of  a  brigade  and  an  additional  regiment


from  the  intrenched  line,  the  sailors  and  marines
taking  their  places  there ;  by  nine  o'clock  two  more
traverses  were  carried,  and  an  hour  later  the  occu-
pation of  the  work  was  complete.  The  Confeder-
ate force  fell  back  disorganized  to  a  small  work
near  the  point  of  the  peninsula,  where,  being-  im-
mediately pursued,  it  surrendered  unconditionally.
The  garrison  originally  numbered  2,500  men,  of
whom  1,971  men,  with  112  officers,  were  captured;
the  others  were  killed  or  wounded.  The  fall  of
the  fort  was  followed  by  the  abandonment  of  Fort
Caswell  and  the  other  defences  of  the  Cape  Fear
river.  In  these  works  were  captured  169  pieces  of
artillery,  2,000  small  arms,  and  a  considerable  quan-
tity of  ammunition  and  commissary  stores.  The
National  loss  was  681  men,  of  whom  88  were  killed.
For  this  Gen.  Terry  was  promoted  to  be  brigadier-
general  in  the  regular  army  and  major-general  of
volunteers,  and  congress  passed  a  vote  of  thanks
"  to  Brevet  Maj.-Gen.  A.  H.  Terry  and  the  officers
and  soldiers  under  his  command  for  the  unsur-
passed gallantry  and  skill  exhibited  by  them  in  the
attack  upon  Fort  Fisher,  and  the  brilliant  and  de-
cisive victory  by  which  that  important  work  has
been  captured  from  the  rebel  forces  and  placed
in  the  possession  and  under  the  authority  of  the
United  States,  and  for  their  long  and  faithful  ser-
vice and  unwavering  devotion  to  the  cause  of  the
country  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  difficulties  and
dangers."  Gen.  Terry  was  engaged  in  the  capture
of  Wilmington,  N.  C,  and  commanded  at  the  com-
bat at  Northeast  creek,  which  followed.  In  April,
1865,  the  10th  army  corps  was  reconstituted,  and
Gen.  Terry  was  assigned  to  its  command,  and  with
it  took  part  in  the  subsequent  operations  under
Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  in  North  Carolina.  He
was  brevetted  major-general  in  the  regular  army
on  13  March,  1865,  for  his  services  at  the  capture
of  Wilmington.  Since  the  close  of  the  war  he  has
commanded  in  succession  the  Departments  of  Vir-
ginia, Dakota,  and  the  South,  and  again  the  De-
partment of  Dakota.  He  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  major-general,  3  March,  1886,  and  was  in
charge  of  the  division  of  the  Missouri,  with  head-
quarters at  Chicago,  until  his  voluntary  retirement
from  the  armv  in  April,  1888.

TERRY,  Eli,  clock-maker,  b.  in  East  Windsor,
Conn.,  13  April,  1772 ;  d.  in  Terryville,  Conn.,  24
Feb.,  1852.  He  was  apprenticed  to  Thomas  Har-
land,  a  maker  of  brass  clocks  in  Norwich,  Conn.,
and  there  acquired  the  rudiments  of  his  trade.  In
1792  he  made  his  first  wooden  clock,  which  is  still
preserved  in  the  family,  and  is  one  of  the  first  that
was  made  in  this  country.  A  year  later  he  settled
in  Plymouth,  Conn.,  and  there  began  the  manufac-
ture of  wooden  and  brass  clocks,  but  soon  ceased
to  make  the  latter,  as  the  former,  being  much
cheaper  than  the  metal  ones  and  quite  as  good
time  -  keepers,  proved  far  more  salable.  About
1797  Mr.  Terry  invented  a  clock  that  registered  the
difference  between  mean  and  apparent  time,  but
its  cost  prevented  it  from  becoming  popular.  Mr.
Terry  worked  alone  until  1800,  when  he  hired  two
men  to  assist  him,  and  then  for  several  years  fre-
quently travelled  on  horseback  through  the  coun-
try selling  his  clocks.  The  business  increased,
and  in  1807  he  contracted  to  deliver  4,000  move-
ments to  a  Waterbury  firm,  which  order  took  him
three  years  to  complete.  The  success  of  this  under-
taking marks  the  beginning  of  the  making  of
wooden  clocks  as  an  industry.  Mr.  Terry  had  in
his  employ  at  this  time  Silas  Hoadley  and  Seth
Thomas,  who  in  1810  purchased  his  business,  then
the  largest  of  its  kind  in  the  United  States.  In
1814  he  produced  the  Terry  shelf-clock,  also  of


TERRY


TESSIER


67


wood,  features  of  which  are  retained  in  clocks  that
are  now  made,  and  in  1816  he  began  the  manufac-
ture of  this  clock,  in  which  he  was  successful.  He
continued  active  as  an  inventor,  and  made  many
new  designs,  including  a  peculiar  form  of  gravity-
escapement  (1830).

TERRY,  Henry  Dwight,  soldier,  b.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  16  March,  1812;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  in  June,  1869.  He  early  settled  in  Michigan,
where  he  entered  the  legal  profession,  and  settled
in  Detroit.  Although  he  was  in  active  practice,  he
had  for  many  years  devoted  considerable  attention
to  military  matters,  and  when  the  first  call  was
made  for  troops  in  June,  1861,  at  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war,  he  raised  the  5th  Michigan  infantry,
of  which  he  was  appointed  colonel.  The  regiment
was  mustered  into  service  on  28  Aug.,  1861,  and
ordered  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  soon
gained  the  command  of  a  brigade,  and  on  17  July,
1862,  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers. He  served  through  the  war  in  the  Army
of  the  Potomac,  and  when  he  was  mustered  out  of
service,  in  1865,  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion in  Washington,  D.  C.

TERRY,  John  Orville,  poet.  b.  in  Orient,  N.  Y.,
13  Aug.,  1796 ;  d.  in  Greenport,  N.  Y.,  7  April,  1869.
He  was  educated  in  Orient,  and  then  studied  medi-
cine, but  never  practised.  In  early  manhood  he
made  several  voyages  to  South  America  and  taught
for  b  time  after  his  return.  His  life  was  passed
chiefly  in  farming,  and  his  rural  experiences  were
put  into  verse  as  "  The  Poems  of  J.  0.  T.,  consisting
of  Song,  Satire,  and  Pastoral  Descriptions,  chiefly
depicting  the  Scenery  and  illustrating  the  Manners
and  Customs  of  the  Ancient  and  Present  Inhabi-
tants of  Long  Island  "  (New  York,  1850).

TERRY,  Luther,  painter,  b.  in  Enfield,  Conn.,
18  July,  1813.  He  studied  for  a  short  time  under
a  portrait-painter  in  Hartford,  and  in  1838  went
to  Italy.  He  spent  a  year  at  the  Academia  delle
belle  Arti  in  Florence,  and  in  1839  went  to  Rome,
where  he  has  since  resided.  At  first  he  devoted
much  time  to  making  copies  from  the  works  of
Raphael.  The  first  important  work  from  his  easel
was  one  that  had  for  its  subject  Christ  disputing
with  the  doctors  in  the  temple,  which  is  now  in
the  Wadsworth  athenaeum,  Hartford,  Conn.  Other
paintings  bv  Mr.  Terry  are  "  The  Loves  of  the  An-
gels," from  Byron's  "  Heaven  and  Earth  "  (1843-4) ;
"  Columbus  before  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  " ;  "  Ja-
cob's Dream,"  several  times  repeated  ;  "  Angel  an-
nouncing the  Birth  of  Christ  to  the  Shepherds"
(1853) ;  several  subjects  from  Shakespeare  ;  "  Toby
and  the  Angel "  ;  and  "  Solomon's  Choice."  In
1846  he  was  made  an  honorary  member  of  the  Na-
tional academy,  and  like  honors  were  conferred
upon  him  by  the  academies  of  Philadelphia,  and
Providence,  R.  I.  He  married  in  1861  Louisa,
widow  of  Thomas  Crawford,  the  sculptor.

TERRY,  Milton  Spenser,  clergyman,  b.  in
Coeymans,  N.  Y.,  22  Feb.,  1840.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Charlotteville,  N.  Y.,  seminary  in  1859,
and  at  Yale  divinity-school  in  1862.  After  being
ordained  a  clergyman  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  he  held  various  pastorates  from  1863  till
1884,  when  he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  Hebrew
and  Old  Testament  exegesis  in  Garrett  biblical
institution,  Evanston,  111.  The  degree  of  S.  T.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  in  1879  by  Wesleyan  univer-
sity, and  he  was  elected  to  the  American  Oriental
society  in  1871,  and  in  1883  to  the  Society  of  bibli-
cal literature  and  exegesis.  Dr.  Terry  has  written
articles  for  the  "  Methodist  Quarterly  Review,"  and
has  published  tracts  on  "  Swedenborgianism  "  (New
York,  1872) ;  and  "  Man's  Antiquity  and  Language  "


(1881) ;  "  Commentaries  on  the  Historical  Books  of
the  Old  Testament "  (2  vols.,  1873-5) ;  and  " Bibli-
cal Hermeneutics  "  (1883).

TERRY,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Amherst  coun-
ty, Va.,  14  Aug.,  1824;  d.  near  Wytheville,  Va.,  5
Sept.,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at"  the  University
of  Virginia  in  1848,  studied  law,  and  in  1851  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  Settling  in  Wytheville,  he
practised  his  profession  and  was  one  of  the  editors
and  owners  of  "  The  Telegraph,"  published  in  that
place.  In  April,  1861,  he  became  a  lieutenant  in
the  4th  Virginia  infantry,  in  Gen.  Thomas  J.  Jack-
son's brigade.  In  1862  he  was  promoted  major,
and  in  February,  1864,  became  colonel.  He  was
commissioned  brigadier-general  on  20  May,  1864.
At  the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  returned  to  prac-
tice in  Wytheville,  and  in  1868  was  nominated  for
congress,  but,  being  under  political  disabilities,
withdrew.  He  was  afterward  elected  to  congress
from  Virginia  as  a  Conservative,  and  served  from
4  March,  1871,  till  3  March,  1873,  and  again  from
6  Dec,  1875,  till  3  March,  1877.  Subsequently  he
resumed  his  legal  business.  He  was  drowned  while
trying  to  ford  Reed  creek,  near  his  home.

TERRY,  William  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  Lib-
erty, Va.,  12  March,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Virginia  military  institute  in  1850,  and  then
turned  his  attention  to  commercial  pursuits.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  Con-
federate service  as  captain  of  Virginia  cavalry,
and  was  soon  promoted  and  given  command  of  the
24th  Virginia  regiment.  On  20  May,  1864,  he  was
made  brigadier-general,  and  given 'a  command  in
Gen.  George  E.  Pickett's  division  in  the  Army  of
Northern  Virginia,  which  was  known  as  Kemper's
brigade.  After  the  war  he  served  as  a  member  of
the  Virginia  senate  for  eight  years,  and  for  some
time  was  superintendent  of  the  penitentiary  in  Rich-
mond. At  present  he  is  superintendent  of  the  Lee
camp  soldiers'  home  in  Richmond.

TESCHEMACHER,  James  Englebert,  scien-
tist, b.  in  Nottingham,  England,  11  June,  1790;  d.
near  Boston,  Mass.,  9  Nov.,  1853.  He  began  a  com-
mercial career  in  1804  by  entering  a  foreign  mer-
cantile house  in  London,  where  he  showed  business
talents  of  a  high  order.  In  1830  he  accepted  a  lu-
crative offer  to  go  to  Cuba,  but  it  proved  unsatis-
factory when  he  reached  Havana,  and  he  returned
to  England.  He  then  determined  to  come  to  the
United  States,  and  reached  New  York  in  February,
1832,  after  which  he  settled  in  Boston,  where  he
engaged  in  commercial  pursuits  until  his  death.
Mr.  Teschemacher  devoted  his  leisure  to  science,
and  during  his  residence  in  this  country  published
about  thirty  papers  on  various  subjects  in  chemis-
try, mineralogy,  geology,  and  botany.  These  ap-
peared chiefly  in  the  transactions  of  scientific  so-
cieties of  which  he  was  a  member.  Besides  several
addresses,  he  published  "  Concise  Application  of
the  Principles  of  Structural  Botany  to  Horticul-
ture "  (Boston,  1840);  "Essay  on  Guano  "  (1845) ;
and  a  translation  of  Julius  A.  &tockhardt's  "  Chemi-
cal Field  Lectures  "  (Cambridge,  1852).

TESSIER,  Ulric  Joseph,  Canadian  jurist,  b.
in  Quebec,  4  May,  1817.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  as  an  advocate  in  1839.  was  mayor  of  Quebec
in  1851,  entered  the  parliament  of  Canada  the
same  year,  became  a  member  of  the  legislative
council  in  1858,  and  was  its  speaker  in  1863.  He
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  executive  council
in  1862.  was  senator  in  1867,  puisne  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  province  of  Quebec  in  1873,
and  in  1875  of  the  court  of  queen's  bench.  He
founded  "  La  banque  nationale "  in  1859,  and  is
dean  of  the  faculty  of  law  in  Laval  university.—


68


TESTE


TEACHER


His  son,  Jules,  b.  in  Quebec,  16  April,  1852,  was
educated  at  the  Quebec  seminary  and  at  the  Jesuit
college,  Montreal.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1874,  is  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Quebec  Law
Reports,"  was  secretary  of  the  National  conven-
tion in  1880,  is  president  of  the  Quebec  liberal
club,  and  in  1887  was  elected  to  the  legislative
assembly  of  the  province.

TESTE,  Lncien  Auguste  (test),  Swiss  geologist,
b.  in  the  canton  of  Valois  in  1765:  d.  in  Rome,
Italy,  in  1817.  He  was  attached  to  the  expeditions
around  the  world  under  command  of  Capt.  Malas-
pina  in  1789-'95,  during  which  time  he  studied
everywhere  the  geological  formations  and  formed
valuable  collections.  After  his  return  to  Vienna
he  became  an  assistant  professor  of  geology  in  the
university,  and  subsequently  a  corresponding  mem-
ber of  the  Academy  of  sciences.  He  was  appointed
in  1805  professor  in  the  University  of  Milan,  and
in  1815  was  sent  to  Brazil,  where  great  geological
discoveries  had  been  made.  He  explored  the  en-
virons of  Rio  Janeiro  and  visited  Bahia ;  but  his
health  failed,  and  he  returned  to  Europe.  His
works  include  "  Observations  geologiques  faites  en
Asie  et  en  Amerique  par  un  des  membres  de  l'ex-
pedition  autour  du  monde  du  Capitaine  Malaspina,
1789-1795"  (2  vols.,  Geneva,  1798);  "  Geologischer
Atlas  der  ganzen  Erde"  (Vienna,  1800);  "Dialoge
und  kleine  Aufsatze  iiber  die  Geologie  und  Geog-
nostie  "  (1802) ;  "  Bemerkungen  fiber  die  Geologie
von  Siidamerika"  (2  vols..  1805);  and  "Entwurf
eines  Systems  der  geognostischen  und  geologischen
Beschreibun<?  der  Erde  "  (1815).

TETINCHOUA,  Miami  chief,  lived  in  the  17th
century.  He  is  described  by  Nicolas  Perrot,  who
met  him  in  1671  at  Chicago,  as  being  the  most

Sowerful  of  Indian  chiefs.  According  to  the
'rench  traveller,  he  could  control  four  or  five
thousand  warriors,  never  marched  without  a  guard
of  forty  men,  who  patrolled  night  and  day  around
his  tent  when  he  camped,  and  seldom  held  any
direct  communication  with  his  subjects,  but  con-
veyed his  orders  to  them  by  subordinates.  Perrot
was  received  with  great  honor  as  an  envoy  from
the  French  governor.  Tetinchoua  sent  out  a  de-
tachment to  meet  him,  which,  after  performing
some  remarkable  military  evolutions,  escorted  Per-
rot and  his  Pottawattamie  guard  into  the  principal
town  of  the  Miamis.  Tetinchoua  then  assigned
him  a  guard  of  fifty  men,  regaled  him  splendidly
after  the  manner  of  the  country,  and  ordered  a
game  of  ball  to  be  played  for  his  diversion.  He
was  unable,  owing  to  his  age  and  infirmities,  to
accompany  Perrot  to  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  at  the
mouth  of  Lake  Superior,  where  the  French  took
formal  possession  of  all  the  country  on  the  lakes.
He  did  not  even  send  deputies  to  the  assembly
that  was  held  on  the  occasion,  but  he  gave  the
Pottawattamies  power  to  act  in  his  name.  In  1672
Father  Claude  Dablon  is  said  to  have  met  him  with
his  army  of  3,000  Miamis.  But,  although  the  mis-
sionary was  received  with  marks  of  friendship,  he
did  not  succeed  in  making  any  conversions.

TETLEP  ANQU  ETZ  AL  (tet-lay-pan  -  ket  -  sal'),
Mexican  king,  d.  in  1525.  He  was  the  fourth  Tec-
panec  king  of  Tlacopan,  and  reigned  after  1503  as
a  tributary  of  the  Mexican  emperor  Montezuma  II.,
whom  he  assisted  in  the  first  defence  of  Mexico.
Afterward  he  was  one  of  the  principal  auxiliaries
of  Cuauhtemotzin  (q.  v.),  and  when  the  city  was
finally  taken,  13  Aug.,  1521,  he  was  made  prisoner
and  tortured,  together  with  the  emperor,  by  the
Spaniards  that  he  might  reveal  the  hiding-place  of
the  imperial  treasure.  When  Cortes  marched  in
1525  to  Honduras  to  subdue  the  revolt  of  Cristobal


de  Olid,  he  carried  the  emperor  and  three  kings
with  him,  and,  under  the  pretext  that  he  had  dis-
covered a  conspiracy,  all  four  were  strangled.

TETU,  Louis  David  Henri  (tay-tew),  Canadian
clergyman,  b.  in  Riviere  Ouelle,  province  of  Quebec,
24  Oct.,  1849.  He  was  educated  at  the  College  of
Sainte  Anne  de  la  Pocatiere  and  at  the  Seminary
of  Quebec,  was  assistant  secretary  to  the  arch-
bishop of  Quebec  from  1870  till  1878,  and  in  the
latter  year  became  almoner.  He  was  named  cham-
berlain and  domestic  prelate  to  the  pope  in  1887.
He  has  published  "Notice  biographique ;  Mon-
seigneur  de  Laval,  premier  eveque  de  Quebec "
(Quebec,  1887),  and  "  Mandaments,  lettres,  pas-
torals et  circulaires  des  eveques  de  Quebec"  (3
vols.,  1888,  to  be  completed  in  seven  volumes).

TETZOTZOMOC  (tet-so-tso-mok),  king  of  Atz-
capotzalco,  d.  in  1427.  He  ascended  the  throne  in
1353  and  exercised  suzerainty  over  the  monarchs
of  Mexico,  but  approved  the  choice  of  King  Huit-
zilihuitl  II.  in  1403  and  gave  him  his  daughter
Miahuaxochitl  in  marriage,  notwithstanding  the  op-
position of  his  son  Maxtla.  He  declared  war  against
the  king  of  Texcoco,  Techotlalatzin,  and  being  de-
feated sued  for  peace ;  but  after  the  latter's  death
he  continued  the  war  against  his  successor,  Ixtlil-
xochitl  I.,  whom  he  defeated  and  assassinated  in
1419,  usurping  the  crown  of  Texcoco.

THACHER,  George,  jurist,  b.  in  Yarmouth,
Me.,  12  April,  1754;  d.  in  Biddeford,  Me.,  6  April,
1824.  Ho  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1776,  and
afterward  studied  law,  being  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1778.  He  was  a  delegate  from  Massachusetts
to  the  Continental  congress  in  1787-'8,  and  from
4  March,  1789,  to  3  March,  1801,  he  represented  the
Maine  district  of  Massachusetts  in  congress.  He
served  as  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  afterward  of  that  of  Maine,  from
1800  till  1824,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Maine
constitutional  convention  in  1819.

THACHER,  .1  sillies,  physician,  b.  in  Barnsta-
ble, Mass.,  14  Feb.,  1754 ;  d.  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  26
May,  1844.  He  began  the  study  of  medicine  under
Dr.  Abner  Hersey,  in  his  native  town,  about  1771,
applied  for  a  place  in
the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  Continen-
tal army  in  1775,  and
was  appointed  sur-
geon's mate  in  the  hos-
pital at  Cambridge,
of  which  Dr.  John
Warren  was  the  seni-
or attending  surgeon.
In  February,  1776,  he
was  made  surgeon's
mate  in  one  of  the
regiments  that  occu-
pied Prospect  Hill.
He  marched  with  his
regiment  to  Ticon-
deroga,  and  was  sur-
geon s  mate  in  the
general  hospital  of
that  fort  as  long  as  it  was  held  by  the  Continental
army.  He  then  retired  with  the  sick  and  wounded
to  Fort  Edward,  and  subsequently  to  Albany.  He
was  transferred  from  the  hospital  to  the  field  ser-
vice by  his  own  desire,  was  appointed  chief  sur-
geon to  the  1st  Virginia  regiment  in  1778,  and
to  a  New  England  regiment  in  1779.  Dr.  Thacher
was  present  sit  nearly  all  the  important  movements
of  the  Continental  army  until  the  surrender  of
Cornwallis,  ami  became  known  for  his  patriotism
and  self-sacrificing  devotion  to  his  patients,  as


Z-Oin£4


V/tuocJL&r


THACHER


THACHER


much  as  for  his  skill  in  his  profession.  After  his
retirement  from  the  army  he  practised  in  Plym-
outh, at  the  same  time  engaging  in  literary  and
scientific  pursuits.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Pil-
grim society  of  Plymouth,  and  of  the  Massachu-
setts medical  society.  Besides  publishing  works
of  a  purely  professional  or  scientific  character,  he
wrote  extensively  on  generai  literature,  especially
on  that  of  his  profession.  He  published  "  Amer-
ican New  Dispensatory  "  (Boston,  1810) ;  "  Observa-
tions on  Hydrophobia  "  (Plymouth,  1812) ; "  Amer-
ican Modern  Practice"  (Boston,  1817);  "Military
Journal  during  the  American  Revolutionary  War/'
which  is  one  of  the  most,  reliable  authorities  on
the  Revolution,  and  completely  vindicates  the
conduct  of  Washington  toward  Andre,  from  the
aspersions  of  contemporary  English  writers  (1823);
'•  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Management  of  Bees  "
(1829);  "American  Medical  Biography"  (2  vols.,
1828) ;  "  Essay  on  Demonology,  Ghosts,  Appari-
tions, and  Popular  Superstitions "(1831);  "History
of  the  Town  of  Plymouth  "  (1832) ;  and  "Obser-
vations relative  to  the  Execution  of  Major  John
Andre  as  a  Spy  in  1780  "  (1834).

THACHER,  John  Marshall,  commissioner  of
patents,  b.  in  Barre,  Vt.,  1  July,  1836.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1859,
and  studied  law.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  entered  the  National  forces  and  served  as
captain  in  the  13th  Vermont  regiment.  He  was
appointed  assistant  examiner  in  the  patent-office  in
1864,  and  was  promoted  through  the  different  grades
until  1  Nov.,  1874,  when  he  became  commissioner,
which  office  he  held  until  1  Oct.,  1875.  Meanwhile,
in  1870,  he  had  been  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Vir-
ginia, and  on  his  resignation  he  removed  to  Chicago,
where  he  has  since  practised  his  profession.

THACHER,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Salis-
bury, England,  1  May,  1620 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
15  Oct.,  1678.  He  was  carefully  educated  by  his
father,  a  minister  at  Salisbury,  who  prepared  him
for  entrance  to  one  of  the  English  umversities,.but
the  son  declined  to  subscribe  to  the  religious  tests
that  were  then  a  condition  of  matriculation,  and
resolved  on  settling  in  New  England.  He  reached
Boston  on  4  June,  1635,  and  soon  afterward  entered
the  family  of  Rev.  Charles  Chauncy  at  Scituate,
under  whose  guidance  he  studied  mental  philoso-
phy and  theology,  and  attained  a  remarkable
knowledge  of  the  oriental  languages.  He  was  es-
pecially noted  for  the  great  beauty  of  his  transcrip-
tions of  Syriac  and  other  oriental  characters,  and
also  acquired  a  knowledge  of  medicine,  practising
occasionally  with  success.  He  was  ordained  at
Weymouth  on  2  Jan.,  1644,  and  shortly  afterward
took  charge  of  the  congregation  of  that  village.
Here  he  remained  till  1664,  when  he  removed  to
Boston,  possibly  because  the  relatives  of  his  second
wife  resided  there,  although  he  is  said  to  have  been
dismissed  by  his  congregation  in  Weymouth  a  little
before  that  time.  He  practised  as  a  physician  in
Boston  for  the  next  two  years,  but  preached  occa-
sionally. On  16  Feb.,  1699,  he  was  installed  pastor
of  the  Old  South  church.  He  is  mentioned  in
terms  of  high  praise  by  Cotton  Mather  in  the
"  Magnalia,"  who  quotes  an  elegy,  written  partly
in  Latin  and  partly  in  Greek  by  Eleazar,  an  Indian
student  at  Harvard,  in  which  the  virtues  of  Mr.
Thacher  are  celebrated.  He  wrote  "  A  Brief  Rule
to  Guide  the  Common  People  of  New  England  how
to  order  Themselves  and  Theirs  in  the  Small  Pocks
or  Measels,"  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  the
first  work  on  medicine  that  was  published  in  Massa-
chusetts (Boston,  1677;  2d  ed.,  1702),  and  "A  Fast
of  God's  Chusing;  Fast  Sermon  "  (1674). — His  son,


Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  in  1651 ;  d.
in  Milton,  Mass.,  17  Dec,  1727,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1671,  and  was  tutor  there  for  several
years  afterward,  having  Cotton  Mather  as  one  of
his  pupils.  He  spent  some  time  in  England,  where
ineffectual  efforts  were  made  to  induce  him  to  con-
form to  the  established  church.  After  his  return
he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  church  in  Milton  in
1681,  and  labored  there  for  the  remainder  of  his
life.  He  attained  note  as  a  preacher  and  was  called
on  to  speak  on  many  important  public  occasions.
His  "Convention  Sermon"  (1711)  is  preserved  in
manuscript  in  the  library  of  the  Massachusetts
historical  society.  He  published  "  Unbelief  De-
tected and  Condemned,  to  which  is  added  the
Treasures  of  the  Fathers  Inheritable  by  their
Posterity"  (1708);  "Election  Sermon"  (1711);
"  Christ's  Forgiveness  a  Pattern :  A  Sermon  "
(1712) ;  "  A  Sermon  on  the  Death  of  Samuel  Man  "
(1719);  "A  Divine  Riddle:  He  that  is  Weak  is
Strong  "  (1723) ;  and  "  The  Perpetual  Covenant."
— Peter's  grandson,  Oxenbridge,  lawyer,  b.  in
Milton,  Mass.,  in  1720;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  July,
1765,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1738,  and  after-
ward studied  divinity,  but  abandoned  it  for  law  on
account  of  his  health.  He  was  successful  at  the
bar,  and  took  an  active  part  in  opposition  to  the
English  government  during  the  early  stages  of  the
Revolution,  being  at  that  time  one  of  the  four  rep-
resentatives of  Boston  in  the  general  court.  He
published  "  Considerations  upon  reducing  the  Value
of  the  Gold  Coins  within  the  Province"  (1760)
and  "  Sentiments  of  a  British-American,  occasioned
by  an  Act  to  lay  Certain  Duties  in  the  British
Colonies  and  Plantations"  (Boston,  1764).  In  the
latter  pamphlet  he  assailed  the  navigation  act  with
great  vigor. — Peter,  eldest  son  of  Oxenbridge,
clergyman,  b.  in  Milton,  Mass.,  21  March,  1752  ;  d.
in  Savannah,  Ga.,  16  Dec,  1802,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1769,  and,  after  serving  as  principal  of
a  grammar-school  for  a  few  months,  was  ordained
pastor  of  Maiden  on  19  Sept.,  1770.  His  gifts  as
an  orator  at  once  made  him  popular,  and  his  active

Eatriotism  during  the  Revolution  was  of  great
enefit  to  the  cause  of  American  liberty.  He  pub-
lished a  "Narrative  of  the  Battle  of  Bunker  Hill,"
at  the  request  of  the  Massachusetts  committee  of
safety,  and  delivered  at  Watertown  an  oration
against  standing  armies,  which  has  been  frequently
republished.  He  was  a  delegate  in  1780  to  the
convention  that  met  at  Cambridge  and  Boston  to
frame  a  constitution  for  Massachusetts,  supported
a  motion  for  abolishing  the  office  of  governor,  and
took  an  active  part  in  all  the  deliberations  of  the  as-
sembly. He  was  called  to  the  Brattle  street  church
on  12  Jan.,  1785,  and  continued  in  this  pastorate
for  the  rest  of  his  life.  In  1791  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Edinburgh.
Dr.  Thacher  was  for  some  time  secretary  of  the
Society  for  propagating  the  gospel  among  the  In-
dians of  North  America.  He  was  one  of  the  earli-
est members  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  soci-
ety, a  member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts
and  sciences,  and  actively  engaged  in  humanitarian
and  religious  movements.  He  was  chaplain  to  one
or  both  branches  of  the  general  court  for  fifteen
years.  He  published  about  twenty-two  of  his
sermons  between  1776  and  1800.  Dr.  Thacher
preached  funeral  sermons  for  three  governors  of
the  state  of  Massachusetts— Bowdoin,  Hancock,
and  Sumner,  all  of  whom  belonged  to  his  congre-
gation during  the  seventeen  years  of  his  pastorate.
He  published  a  work  entitled  "  Observations  on  the
State  of  the  Clergy  in  New  England,  with  Strict-
ures on  the  Power  of  dismissing  them,  Usurped  by


70


THACHER


THATCHER


some  Churches"  (Boston,  1783),  and  "Memoirs  of
Dr.  Boylston"  (1789). — Thomas,  another  son  of
Oxenbridge,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  24  Oct.,  1756 ;  d.
in  Dedham,  Mass.,  19  Oct.,  1812,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1775,  and  ordained  minister  of  the  3d
church  in  Dedham,  7  June,  1780.  In  1788  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  convention  that  ratified
the  Federal  constitution,  of  which  he  was  an  ear-
nest supporter.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Academy
of  arts  and  sciences,  and  published  several  dis-
courses between  1804  and  1811. — The  second  Peter's
son,  Samuel  Cooper,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  14  Dec,  1785  ;  d.  in  Moulins,  France,  2  Jan.,
1818,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1804,  and  began
his  preparation  for  the  ministry  under  William
Ellery  Channing.  In  1805  he  acted  for  a  time  as
head-master  of  the  Boston  Latin-school,  and  he
subsequently  conducted  a  private  school  of  his
own.  In  1807  he  was  appointed  librarian  of  Har-
vard, entering  on  the  duties  of  the  office  in  the
following  year.  He  was  ordained  and  installed
minister  of  the  New  South  church  (Unitarian),
at  Boston,  on  15  May,  1811,  but  his  health  failed
rapidly,  and  in  1815  he  went  to  England,  where  he
was  advised  to  winter  in  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.
He  resided  for  some  time  at  Cape  Town,  but  his
health  improved  very  slowly,  and  he  returned  to
England  and  subsequently  went  to  the  south  of
France,  where  he  died.  Dr.  Thacher  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Anthology  club,  and  he  published  arti-
cles in  nearly  all  the  volumes  of  its  magazine,  the
M  Monthly  Anthology."  Many  of  his  lectures  and
sermons  were  devoted  to  the  exposition  of  the  Uni-
tarian system,  and  were  considered  to  embody  a
more  vigorous  and  formal  defence  of  Unitarianism
than  any  that  had  appeared  previously.  His  works
are  "  Apology  for  Rational  and  Evangelican  Chris-
tianity "  (Boston,  1815);  "Unity  of  God  "  (Liver-
pool, 1810;  Worcester,  Mass.,  1817);  "Sermons,
with  a  Memoir  by  Rev.  Francis  W.  P.  Greenwood  "
(Boston,  1824) ;  and  "  Evidences  necessary  to  estab-
lish the  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  "  (1828).  He  also
published  a  volume  of  sermons  of  Rev.  Joseph
S.  Buckminster,  to  which  he  prefixed  a  memoir
(1814). — Samuel  Cooper's  brother,  Thomas  Cushing
(1771-1837),  was  graduated  from  Harvard  in  1790,
and  was  pastor  at  Lynn  in  1794-1813.  He  pub-
lished "  Eulogy  on  Washington "  (Boston,  1800),
and  sermons  (1794-1801).  —  The  first  Thomas's
grandson,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
in  1677;  d.  there,  26  Feb.,  1738,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1696,  and  for  some  time  afterward
taught  at  Hatfield,  Mass.  He  was  ordained  pastor
of  the  church  at  Weymouth  on  26  Nov.,  1707,
where  he  remained  until  1720,  when  he  was  called
to  the  pastorate  of  the  New  North  church,  Boston.
He  was  a  noted  preacher,  and  published  several
sermons,  etc.,  between  1711  and  1730.

THACHER,  Thomas  Antony,  educator,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  11  Jan.,  1815;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  7  April,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1835,  and  after  teaching  for  three  years  in  Con-
necticut and  Georgia  was  appointed  tutor  there  in
1838,  and  professor  of  Latin  in  1842,  which  post  he
retained  to  the  end  of  his  life.  He  went  to  Germany
in  the  following  year,  and  for  some  time  taught
English  to  the  crown  prince  of  Prussia  and  nis
cousin,  Prince  Frederick  Charles.  He  returned  in
1845,  and,  although  often  in  feeble  health,  was
actively  interested  in  the  management  of  Yale
until  his  death,  at  which  time  he  was  the  member
of  the  faculty  that  had  been  longest  in  continuous
.  service.  He  was  a  fine  classical  scholar,  and  con-
tributed many  articles  to  periodicals  on  classical
subjects,  especially  to  the  "  New  Englander." He


also  assisted  in  the  compilation  of  Webster's  Dic-
tionary. He  edited  many  classical  works,  among
others  Cicero's  "  De  Officiis,"  with  notes  (New  York,
1850),  and  an  English  translation  and  adaptation
of  Madvig's  "  Latin  Grammar,"  which  was  long  in
use  at  Yale.  In  his  introduction  to  this  work  he
earnestly  upholds  the  English  system  of  pronounc-
ing Latin.  He  also  wrote  "  Sketch  of  the  Life  of
Edward  C.  Herrick  "  (New  Haven,  1862).

THARIN,  Robert  Seymour  Symmes  (tha-
rin).  lawyer,  b.  at  Magnolia,  near  Charleston,  S.  C,
10  Jan.,  1830.  The  family-seat  at  Magnolia  was
also  the  birthplace  of  Robert's  father,  William  Cun-
nington  Tharin.  grandson  of  its  founder,  Col.  Will-
iam Cunnington,  an  officer  on  Gen.  Francis  Mar-
ion's staff.  Robert  was  graduated  at  the  College
of  Charleston  in  1857  and  at  the  law-school  of  the
University  of  New  York  in  1863.  He  began  prac-
tice in  Wetumpka,  Ala.,  in  1859.  During  the  po-
litical excitement  of  this  time,  he  became  known
for  his  Union  sentiments  and  his  sympathy  with
non -slaveholders.  He  advocated  the  establishment
of  small  farms  and  factories,  the  emigration  of
the  blacks  to  Africa,  the  representation  of  non-
slaveholders,  who  were  in  the  majority,  in  legisla-
tures, conventions,  and  congress,  and  the  repeal  of
the  ordinance  of  secession.  His  Union  sentiments
led  to  an  attack  on  him  by  a  mob  in  1861,  and  he
fled  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  Mr.  Tharin  then  settled
in  Richmond,  Ind.,  and  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the
Indiana  volunteers,  but  was  mustered  out  in  1862.
While  he  was  in  the  service  he  wrote  a  letter  to
the  London  "  Daily  News,"  denouncing  his  former
law-partner,  William  L.  Yancey,  who  was  then
commissioner  from  the  southern  Confederacy  to
England.  This  letter,  Mr.  Yancey  afterward  con-
fessed, was  worth  an  army  corps  to  the  Union,  as  it
defeated  recognition.  He  returned  to  the  south
after  the  war,  and  in  1884  was  corporation  counsel
of  Charleston,  S.  C.  In  February,  1888,  he  was  tend-
ered, by  the  Industrial  conference  at  Washington,
a  nomination  for  president  of  the  United  States,
but  declined  on  the  ground  that  the  body  was  not
a  convention,  and  that  presidential  conventions
are  dangerous  to  the  people  who  are  not  repre-
sented therein.  He  is  now  employed  in  the  au-
ditor's office  in  Washington.  He  is  the  author
of  "Arbitrary  Arrests  in  the  South  "  (New  York,
1863),  and  "  Letters  on  the  Political  Situation  "
(Charleston,  S.  C,  1871).

THATCHER,  Benjamin  Bussey,  author,  b.  in
Warren,  Me.,  8  Oct.,  1809;  d.  in  Boston,  14  July,
1840.  His  father,  Samuel,  a  graduate  of  Harvard
in  1793  and  a  lawyer,  represented  Massachusetts
in  congress  in  1802-'5,  serving  afterward  eleven
years  in  the  legislature.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Har-
vard and  a  founder  of  Warren  academy.  The  son,
upon  his  graduation  at  Bowdoin  in  1826,  studied
law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Boston,  but
devoted  himself  to  literature.  In  1836-'8  he  trav-
elled in  Europe  for  his  health,  contributing  during
the  time  to  British  and  American  periodicals.  He
wrote  for  the  "  North  American  Review  "  in  1831,
and  contributed  to  the  "  Essayist "  several  critiques
on  American  poets  which  attracted  notice.  He
edited  the  "  Boston  Book  "  in  1837,  the  "  Colon  iza-
tionist,"  a  periodical  in  the  interests  of  the  Liberian
cause,  which  he  further  aided  by  eloquent  speeches,
and  a  volume  of  Mrs.  Hemans's  poems,  to  which  he
contributed  a  preface.  He  left  in  manuscript  an
account  of  his  residence  in  Europe.  His  poems,
some  of  which  are  in  Griswold's  "  Poets  and  Poetry
of  America"  (1842),  and  his  reviews  and  essays,
have  never  been  collected.  He  published  "  Biog-
raphy of  North  American  Indians"  (2  vols.,  New


THATCHER


THAYER


71


'&H<ryfC-


York,  1832 ;  new  ed.,  1842) ;  "  Memoir  of  Phillis
Wheatley  "  (Boston.  1834) ;  "  Memoir  of  S.  Osgood
Wright "  (1834) ;  "  Traits  of  the  Boston  Tea-Party  "
(1835);  "Traits  of  Indian  Manners,  etc."  (1835);
and  "  Tales  of  the  American  Revolution  "  (1846).

THATCHER,  Henry  Knox,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Thomaston,  Me.,  26  May,  1806  ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
5  April,  1880.  He  was  a  grandson  of  Gen.  Henry
Knox, fie  received  his  early  education  in  the

schools  of  Boston,
and  in  1822  was
admitted  as  a  cadet
at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy.  The
records  of  the  acad-
emy show  that  he
was  absent  on  sick-
leave  from  28  Nov.,

1822,  till April,

1823,  when  his  res-
ignation is  record-
ed. He  had  ex-
changed his  cadet-
ship  for  the  ap-
pointment in  the
navy,  which  he  en-

',.  yfoWc^J^  'era1  as  a  mid-
shipman, 4  March,
1823.  He  became
a  passed  midshipman,  23  March,  1829,  and  was
commissioned  lieutenant,  28  Feb.,  1833.  After
serving  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  he  was  pro-
moted to  commander  by  action  of  the  naval  re-
tiring board,  14  Sept.,  1855.  He  commanded  the
sloop  "  Decatur,"  Pacific  station.  Early  in  1862
he  was  ordered  to  command  the  sailing-sloop  "  Con-
stellation "  on  the  Mediterranean  station,  and  he
was  thereby  prevented  from  engaging  in  active
operations  during  the  first  years  of  the  civil  war.
He  was  promoted  to  the  grade  of  commodore,  16
July,  1862,  without  having  had  any  commission  as
a  captain.  In  July,  1863,  he  returned  from  the  Medi-
terranean and  took  charge  of  the  steam  frigate
"  Colorado  "  on  the  North  Atlantic  blockade,  and
in  her  commanded  the  first  division  of  Com.  David
D.  Porter's  fleet  in  both  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher.
He  was  then  appointed  acting  rear-admiral  in  ad-
vance of  his  regular  promotion  to  that  grade,  and
was  ordered  to  succeed  Vice-Admiral  Farragut  in
command  of  the  Western  Gulf  squadron  at  Mobile.
There  he  conducted  combined  operations  with  Gen.
Edward  R.  S.  Can  by  which  resulted  in  the  sur-
render of  the  city  and  the  Confederate  fleet  after
its  flight  and  pursuit  up  Tombigbee  river.  The
navy  department  sent  him  congratulations  on  the
successful  results  at  Mobile.  Other  points  on  the
Gulf  were  quietly  surrendered,  and  on  2  June,
1865,  Galveston,  Tex.,  was  occupied  by  Thatcher's
squadron  without  opposition,  and  the  entire  coast
was  restored  to  the  Union.  He  was  placed  in
command  of  the  consolidated  Gulf  squadrons  until
May,  1866,  after  which  he  commanded  the  North
Pacific  squadron  until  August,  1868.  He  was
commissioned  rear-admiral,  25  July.  1866.  and  was
placed  on  the  retired  list,  26  May,  1868.  After  his
return  home  he  was  port-admiral  at  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  in  1869-'71,  after  which  he  was  unemployed
until  his  death.  Upon  his  death  the  secretary  of
the  navy  published  an  obituary  order  and  directed
salutes  of  thirteen  minute-guns  to  be  fired  in  his
honor,  and  flags  to  be  displayed  at  half-mast.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  Society  of  the
Cincinnati  and  the  military  order  of  the  Loyal  le-
gion. While  in  command  of  the  North  Pacific
squadron  he  was  presented  with  a  medal  and  made


a  knight  of  the  order  of  Kamehameha  I.  by  the
king  of  the  Hawaiian  islands,  which  honors  he  was
allowed  to  accept  by  act  of  congress.

THAXTER,  Adam  Wallace,  journalist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  16  Jan..  1832 ;  d.  there.  8  June,  1861. .
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1852,  and  at  the
law-school  in  1854.  Devoting  himself  to  literature,
he  was  for  seven  years  dramatic  and  literary  critic
of  the  M  Boston  Evening  Gazette,"  from  which  his
health  finally  compelled  him  to  withdraw,  and  he
contributed  to  many  periodicals.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  a  poem  that  he  read  before  a  Harvard
society  (Cambridge,  1850)  and  "The  Grotto
Nymph  "  (Boston,  1859),  and  produced  some  suc-
cessful plays,  among  which  are  "  Olympia,"  "  The
Sculptor,"  "  The  Painter  of  Naples,"  "  The  Regi-
cide," "  Mary  Tudor,"  and  "  Birds  of  a  Feather."

THAXTER,  Celia,  poet,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  29  June,  1836.  Her  father,  Thomas  B.
Laighton,  took  her  when  she  was  a  child  to  the
Isles  of  Shoals,  where  she  has  spent  most  of  her
life  at  Appledore.  She  married  there  Levi  Lincoln
Thaxter,  of  Watertown,  Mass..  in  1851.  She  has  pub-
lished "  Among  the  Isles  of  Shoals  "  (Boston,  1873);,
"  Poems  "  (1871) :  "  Driftweed  "  (1878) ;  "  Poems  for
Children  "  (1884) ;  and  "  The  Cruise  of  the  Mystery,
and  other  Poems"  (1886).  Among  the  finest  of,
her  single  poems  are  "  Courage,"  "  Kitterv  Church-,
Yard,"  "The  Spaniards'  Graves,"  "The "Watch  of
Boon  Island,"  and  "  The  Sandpiper."

THAYER,  Abbott  Henderson,  artist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  12  Aug.,  1849.  He  studied  in  the
Brooklyn  academy  of  design  and  the  National
academy,  under  Lemuel  E.  Wilmarth.  In  1875  he
went^to  Paris,  where  for  a  year  he  was  a  student  at
the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts  under  Charles  E.  R.  H.
Lehmann,  and  three  years  with  Jean  L.  Gerome*
He  painted  chiefly  animals  until  he  had  been  two
years  abroad.  Since  that  time  he  has  devoted  him-j
self  principally  to  figure-painting.  He  has  also
essayed  landscapes  with  success.  At  the  Paris;
salon  of  1877  he  exhibited  "Le  sommeil,"  and  in.
the  following  year  he  sent  a  portrait.  He  is  a
member  of  the  Society  of  American  artists,  to  whose
exhibitions  he  has  contributed,  besides  several  por-
traits, "Child  and  Cats"  (1884);  "Woman  and
Swan  "  (1886) ;  and  "  An  Angel "  (1888).  ;

THAYER,  Alexander  Wheelock,  author,  b.
in  South  Natick,  Mass.,  22  Oct.,  1817.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1843.  and  at  the  law-
school  in  1848.  He  contributed  musical  and  other
letters  to  the  Boston  "Courier"  in  1857-'8  under
the  pen-name  of  "  A  Quiet  Man,"  and  to  "  Dwight's
Journal  of  Music  "  under  the  name  of  "  A  Diarist,"
wrote  many  articles  for  Grove's  "Dictionary  of
Music  and  Musicians,"  and  was  musical  critic  of
the  New  York  "Tribune."  In  1859-'82  he  was.
U.  S.  consul  at  Trieste,  where  he  still  resides.  He
has  published  "  Signor  Masoni,  and  other  Papers
of  the  Late  J.  Brown,"  a  collection  of  his  own  con-
tributions (Berlin,  1862);  "The  Hebrews  and  the.
Red  Sea  "  (Andover,  1883) ;  and  "  Life  of  Beetho-
ven," which  is  valued  for  its  accuracy  and  extent
of  research  (3  vols.,  Berlin,  1866-87).

THAYER,  Eli,  educator,  b.  in  Mendon.  Mass.,
11  June,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1845,  was  subsequently  principal  of  the  Worcester
academy,  and  in  1848  founded  the  Oread  institute,
a  collegiate  school  for  young  ladies,  in  Worcester,*
Mass.,  of  which  he  is  treasurer.  He  was  for  several
years  a  member  of  the  school  board  of  Worcester,
and  in  1853  an  alderman  of  the  city.  In  1853-'4
he  was  a  representative  in  the  legislature,  and  .
while  there  originated  and  organized  the  Emigrant
aid  company,  laboring  till 1857  to  combine  the


72


THAYER


THAYER


northern  states  in  support  of  his  plan  to  send  anti-
slavery  settlers  into  Kansas.  Lawrence,  Topeka,
Manhattan,  and  Ossawatomie  were  settled  under
the  auspices  of  his  company.  Gov.  Charles  Robin-
son, at  the  quarter-centennial  celebration  of  Kan-
sas, at  Topeka,  said  :  "  Without  these  settlements
Kansas  would  have  been  a  slave  state  without  a
struggle;  without  the  Aid  society  these  towns
would  never  have  existed ;  and  that  society  was
born  of  the  brain  of  Eli  Thayer."  Charles  Sum-
ner also  said  that  he  would  rather  have  the  credit
that  is  due  to  Eli  Thayer  for  his  Kansas  work
than  be  the  hero  of  the  battle  of  New  Orleans.  In
1857-61  Mr.  Thayer  sat  in  congress  as  a  Republi-
can, serving  on  the  committee  on  militia,  and  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  public  lands.  In
1860  he  was  a  delegate  for  Oregon  to  the  National
Republican  convention  at  Chicago  and  labored  for
the  nomination  of  Lincoln.  He  has  patented  many
inventions,  which  cover  a  wide  field.  Among  these
are  a  hydraulic  elevator  in  use  in  this  country  and
in  Europe,  a  sectional  safety  steam  boiler,  and  an
automatic  boiler-cleaner,  or  sediment-extractor.
He  has  published  a  volume  of  congressional
speeches  (Boston,  1860) ;  several  lectures  (Worces-
ter, 1886);  and  is  now  writing  a  history  of  the
Emigrant  aid  company  that  he  organized  and  its
influence  on  our  national  history.

THAYER,  Elihu,  clergyman,  b.  in  Braintree,
Mass.,  29  March,  1747;  d.  "in  Kingston,  N.  H.,  3
April,  1812.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1769,  and  after  a  private  theological  course  was
settled  in  1776  over  a  Congregational  church  in
Kingston,  N.  H.,  where  he  continued  until  his
death.  At  the  organization  of  the  New  Hampshire
missionary  society  he  was  elected  its  president,
holding  office  till  1811.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
conferred  upon  him  in  1807  by  Dartmouth. He

Eublished  a  sermon  at  the  funeral  of  Gov.  Josiah
iartlett  (1795),  and  a  "Summary  of  Christian
Doctrines  and  Duties,"  by  request  of  the  New
Hampshire  missionary  society.  A  volume  of  his
sermons  was  published  in  1813.

THAYER,  Eugene,  musician,  b.  in  Mendon,
Mass.,  1 1  Dec,  1838.  He  began  the  study  of  the
organ  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  and,  settling  in  Bos-
ton, soon  gained  a  reputation  as  an  excellent
organist.  In  1865-'6  he  studied  in  Europe  under
Carl  Haupt  and  others.  While  in  Boston  he  edited
the  "  Organist's  Journal "  and  the  •'  Choir  Journal,"
and  was  director  of  the  Boston  choral  union,  the
New  England  church-music  association,  and  other
societies.  He  has  given  organ  recitals  in  the  United
States  and  Europe.  Since  1881  he  has  resided  in
New  York,  following  his  profession  as  an  organist
and  teacher.  The  degree  of  Mus.  Doc.  was  con-
ferred on  him  by  Wooster  university,  Ohio,  in  1883.
THAYER,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  about  1755 ;  d.  in  Limerick,  Ireland,  5  Feb.,
1815.  He  was  the  minister  of  a  Protestant  church
in  Boston,  when,  in  1781,  he  went  to  Europe,  where,
after  visiting  France,  England,  and  Italy-  he
united  with  the  Roman  Catholic  church  in  1783.
He  studied  for  the  priesthood  in  Paris,  was  or-
dained in  1784,  and  returned  to  Boston,  where  he
held  weekly  conferences  on  the  doctrines  of  the
Roman  Catholic  church,  attracting  crowds  by  his
learning  and  eloquence.  He  was  sent  to  Kentucky
in  1799,  and  remained  there  till  1803,  when  he  went
to  England  and  engaged  in  missionary  work  for
about  a  year.  He  spent  the  last  years  of  his  life  in
Limerick.  Ireland,  and  devoted  his  time  aud  fortune
to  the  welfare  of  the  poor.  His  works  are  "  Con-
troversy between  the  Rev.  John  Thayer,  Catholic
Missionary  of  Boston,  and  the  Rev.  George  Leslie,


Pastor  of  a  Church  in  Washington,  N.  H."  (Bos-
ton. 1793),  and  "An  Account  of  the  Conversion
of  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Thayer,  lately  a  Protestant
Minister  at  Boston  in  North  America,  who  em-
braced the  Roman  Catholic  Religion  at  Rome,  on
the  25th  of  May,  1783,  written  by  Himself  "  (5th
ed.,  reprinted  from  the  London  edition,  Baltimore,
1788;  French  translation,  Paris  1788;  Spanish
translation,  from  the  French,  Valencia,  1788).  It
was  also  translated  into  Italian.  The  work  pro-
voked several  replies  and  rejoinders.

THAYER,  John  Milton,  governor  of  Nebraska,
b.  in  Bellingham,  Mass.,  24  Jan.,  1820.  After  his
graduation  at  Brown  in  1841  he  studied  and  prac-
tised law,  and  in  1854  removed  to  Nebraska,  where
he  was  a  member  in  1860  of  the  territorial  legisla-
ture, and  in  1866  of  the  Constitutional  convention.
Previous  to  his  civil  appointments  he  had  been
made  brigadier-general  of  militia,  and  organized
and  commanded  several  expeditions  against  the
Indians.  In  the  civil  war,  as  colonel  of  the  1st
regiment  of  Nebraska  infantry,  he  led  a  brigade  at
Donelson  and  Shiloh,  and  was  made  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  4  Oct.,  1862.  His  appointment
expired  on  4  March,  1863,  but  he  was  reappointed
on  13  March.  He  commanded  a  brigade  and  divis-
ion at  Vicksburg  and  Jackson,  and  led  a  storm-
ing column  at  Chickasaw  bayou,  for  which  and
for  his  services  at  Vicksburg  he  was  brevetted  ma-
jor-general of  volunteers,  13  March,  1865.  He  re-
signed, 19  July,  1865,  and,  returning  to  Nebraska,
he  served  as  U.  S.  senator  in  1867-'71,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Republican,  and  was  then  appointed
by  Gen.  Grant  governor  of  Wyoming  territory.
In  1886  he  was  elected  governor  of  Nebraska  by  a
majority  of  about  25,000,  which  office  he  still  holds
(1888).  He  was  department  commander  of  the
Grand  army  of  the  republic  in  the  state  of  Nebras-
ka in  1886.

THAYER,  Joseph  Henry,  biblical  scholar,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  7  Nov.,  1828.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1850,  and  at  Andover  theologi-
cal seminary  in  1857,  and  was  pastor  of  a  church
in  Salem,  Mass.,  from  1859  till  1864.  when  he  was
appointed  professor  of  sacred  literature  in  Ando-
ver theological  seminary.  He  resigned  in  1882,
and  since  1884  has  been  professor  of  criticism  and
interpretation  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  divin-
ity-school of  Harvard.  In  the  mean  time  he  was
chaplain  to  the  40th  Massachusetts  regiment  in
1862-'3,  secretary  of  the  New  Testament  company
of  the  American  revision  committee,  and  a  mem-
ber of  the  corporation  of  Harvard  in  1877-'84
The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Yale
in  1873  and  by  Harvard  in  1884.  He  has  pub-
lished occasional  sermons  and  reviews,  and  con-
tributed to  the  American  edition  of  Smith's  "  Bible
Dictionary."  His  works  include  "A  Grammar  of
the  Idiom  of  the  New  Testament,"  a  translation  of
Lunemann's  enlarged  and  improved  edition  of
Winer's  well-known  work  (Andover,  1869) ;  a  trans-
lation, with  additions,  of  Alexander  Buttmann's
"  Grammar  of  the  New  Testament  Greek  "  (1873) ;
and  "  A  Greek-English  Lexicon  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, being  Grimm's  Wilke's  '  Clavis  Novi  Testa-
menti,'  translated,  revised,  and  enlarged"  (New
York  and  Edinburgh,  1886).  He  has  edited  "Notes
on  Scrivener's  Plain  Introduction  to  the  Criticism
of  the  New  Testament,"  by  Prof.  Ezra  Abbot  (Bos-
ton, 1885).  and  has  carried  through  the  press  a  new
edition  of  Prof.  Evangelinus  A.  Sophocles's  "Greek
Lexicon  of  the  Roman  and  Byzantine  Periods"
(New  York,  1887)  and  a  volume  of  "  Critical  Es-
says," selected  from  the  published  writings  of  Prof.
Ezra  Abbot  (Boston,  1888).


THAYER


THAYER


73


THAYER,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hamp-
ton. N.  H.,  11  July,  17G9 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N,  Y.,
23  June,  1840.  His  father,  Rev.  Ebenezer  Thayer,
was  pastor  in  Hampton  for  many  years.  The  son
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1789,  studied  the-
ology, and  became  a  pastor  at  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.  In
1795  he  was  installed  over  the  Unitarian  society  at
Lancaster,  Mass.,  where  he  remained  for  nearly
fifty  years.  He  received  the.degree  of  D.  D.  from
Harvard  in  1817.  On  account  of  Dr.  Thayer's  tact
and  sagacity  he  was.  perhaps  more  than  any  other
man  of  his  day,  selected  for  the  settlement  of  eccle-
siastical difficulties,  and  he  frequently  drew  up  the
decisions  of  church  councils.  He  died  while  on  a
journey  foi  the  benefit  of  his  health.  He  pub-
lished twenty-three  occasional  sermons  in  1795-
1831. — His  son,  Nathaniel,  capitalist,  b.  in  Lan-
caster, Mass.,  11  Sept.,  1808;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
7  March.  1883,  for  many  years  constituted,  with
his  deceased  brother,  the  firm  of  John  E.  Thayer
and  Brother,  in  Boston,  which  was  active  in  the
development  of  railroads  in  the  west,  of  several  of
which  he  was  a  director.  He  was  a  fellow  of
Harvard  in  1868-'75,  and  one  of  its  largest  bene-
factors. He  contributed  to  a  Commons  hall,  erected
Thayer  hall  in  1870  as  a  memorial  of  his  father  and
brother,  bore  the  expenses  of  Prof.  Louis  Agassiz's
expedition  to  South  America,  which  was  known  as
the  Thayer  expedition,  built  a  fire-proof  herbarium
at  the  Botanic  garden,  and  gave  much  in  aid  of
poor  students  of  the  college,  and  was  one  of  the
most  generous  citizens  of  Boston.

THAYER,  Simeon,  soldier,  b.  in  Mendon,  Mass.,
30  April,  1737;  d.  in  Cumberland,  R.  I.,  14  Oct.,
1800.  He  removed  to  Rhode  Island  in  his  youth,
became  an  apprentice,  served  in  the  French  war  in
1756  with  the  Rhode  Island  troops  and  with  Maj.
Robert  Rogers's  rangers,  and  in  1757  was  taken
prisoner  at  Fort  William  Henry.  In  May,  1775,  he
was  appointed  captain  by  the  Rhode  Island  assem-
bly, and  accompanied  Benedict  Arnold's  expedi-
tion against  Quebec,  where  he  was  made  prisoner.
He  was  promoted  major,  1  Jan.,  1777,  and  served
with  great  credit  in  the  defence  of  Red  Bank  and
at  Fort  Mifflin,  receiving  for  the  latter  a  sword
from  the  Rhode  Island  assembly  in  July.  He  was
wounded  in  the  battle  of  Monmouth,  and  retired
from  the  service,  1  Jan.,  1781.  His  "  Journal  of
the  Invasion  of  Canada  in  1775  "  has  been  edited
by  Edwin  M.  Stone  (Providence,  1867).

THAYER,  Sylvanus,  soldier,  b.  in  Braintree,
Mass.,  9  June,  1785;  d.  in  South  Braintree,  Mass.,
7  Sept.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1807,  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1808,  and
assigned  to  the  corps  of  engineers.  During  the
next  four  years  he  was  employed  on  engineer  ser-
vice on  the  eastern  coast,  and  as  instructor  of
mathematics  at  the  academy,  receiving  promotion
as  1st  lieutenant,  1  July,  1812.  Being  called  to  the
field  in  the  latter  year,  he  served  as  chief  engineer
under  Gen.  Henry  Dearborn,  on  the  Niagara  fron-
tier ;  in  1813  under  Gen.  Wade  Hampton's  division
on  Lake  Champlain,  receiving  promotion  to  cap-
tain of  engineers,  13  Oct.,  1813,  and  in  1814  under
Gen.  Moses  Porter's  forces  in  defence  of  Norfolk,
Va.,  being  brevetted  major,  20  Feb.,  1815,  for  dis-
tinguished services.  In  1815  he  was  sent  to  Europe
to  examine  military  works  and  schools,  and  study
the  operations  of  the  allied  armies  before  Paris,  but
he  was  recalled  in  1817  to  the  superintendency  of
the  academy  at  West  Point,  which  he  assumed  on
28  July  of  that  year,  and  held  till  his  resignation,
1  July,  1833.  During  the  sixteen  years  of  his  ad-
ministration he  organized  the  school  on  its  present
basis,  and  raised  it  from  an  elementary  condition


to  the  same  grade  with  the  best  military  schools  in
the  world.  During  his  term  of  office  he  was  bre-
vetted lieutenant-colonel,  3  March,  1823,  made
major,  24  May,  1828,  and  brevetted  colonel,  3
March,  1833.  Five  years  after  his  resignation  he
was  again  offered  the
charge  of  the  academy,
with  almost  absolute
control,  but  he  did  not
accept.  On  leaving  West
Point  he  was  made  a
member  of  the  board  of
engineers,  of  which  he
was  president  from  7
Dec,  1838.  and  for  thirty
years  following  he  was
engaged  in  the  construc-
tion of  defences  in  and
about  Boston  harbor,
which  are  models  of  his
engineering  skill  and
standards  of  economy
and  stability  of  construc-
tion. On  7  July,  1838,
he  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  engineers,  and
he  became  colonel,  3
March,  1863.  On  1  June,
1863,  he  was  retired  from
active  service,  after  receiving  the  brevet  of  briga-
dier-general the  day  before.  The  degree  of  A.  M.
was  conferred  on  him  by  Dartmouth  in  1810,  and
by  Harvard  in  1825,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  St.
John's  college,  Md..  in  1830,  by  Kenyon  and  Dart-
mouth in  1846,  and  by  Harvard  in  1857.  He  was
also  a  member  of  various  scientific  associations.
Gen.  Thayer  gave  about  $300,000  for  the  endow-
ment of  an  academy,  and  $32,000  for  a  free  li-
brary, at  Braintree,  and  $70,000  for  a  school  of
architecture  and  civil  engineering  at  Dartmouth.
His  body  was  reinterred  at  West  Point,  8  Nov.,
1877,  and  his  statue  was  unveiled  there,  11  June,
1883,  Gen.  George  W.  Cullum  making  the  presen-
tation. It  bears  the  inscription.  "  Colonel  Thayer,
Father  of  the  United  States  Military  Academy,"
and  is  represented  in  the  accompanying  illustra-
tion. A  fine  full-length  portrait  by  Robert  W.  Weir
is  in  the  library  at  West  Point.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  "  Papers  on  Practical  Engineering"  (1844).
— His  cousin,  Martin  Russell,  jurist,  b.  in  Peters-
burg, Va..  27  Jan.,  1819,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1840,  admitted  to  the
Philadelphia  bar  in  1842,  and  began  to  practise  in
that  city.  In  1862-'7  he  sat  in  congress,  having
been  elected  as  a  Republican,  serving  in  the  com-
mittee on  the  bankrupt  law  and  as  chairman  of  the
committee  on  private  land  claims.  In  1862  he  was
appointed  a  commissioner  to  revise  the  revenue
laws  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1867,  declining  re-
election to  congress,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the
judges  of  the  district  court  of  the  county  of  Phila-
delphia, and  he  has  recently  been  re-elected.  In
1873  he  was  appointed  on  the  board  of  visitors  to
West  Point,  and  wrote  the  report.  In  the  succeed-
ing year  he  became  president- judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  of  Philadelphia.  He  is  the  author
of  "The  Duties  of  Citizenship"  (Philadelphia,  1862) ;
"The  Great  Victory:  its  Cost  and  Value"  (1865):
"The  Law  considered  as  a  Progressive  Science"
(1870);  "On  Libraries"  (1871);  "The  Life  and
Works  of  Francis  Lieber"  (1873);  and  "The  Bat-
tle of  Germantown  "  (1878).

THAYER,  Thomas  Baldwin,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  10  Sept.,  1812  ;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,
12  Feb.,  1886. He  entered  Harvard  at  an  early


74


THAYER


THEONDECHOREN


age,  but  left  after  the  first  year  and  began  to  teach,
at  the  same  time  studying  divinity  He  was  or-
dained in  1832,  and  in  1833-45  was  pastor  of  the
1st  Universalist  society  in  Lowell,  where  his  min-
istry was  important  in  the  history  of  Universalism
in  New  England.  During  the  crusade  against
Universalism,  in  1840-'2,  he.  established  and  edit-
ed in  its  defence  the  "Star  of  Bethlehem,"  and
with  his  co-worker,  Rev.  Abel  C.  Thomas,  wrote
the  "Lowell  Tracts"  in  the  same  interest.  Mr.
Thayer  was  called  to  a  pastorate  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  in  1845,  where  he  edited  the  "  Golden  Rule  "
in  the  interest  of  the  fraternity  of  Odd-FelloWs.
After  six  years  he  returned  to  his  old  parish  in
Lowell.  In  1859  he  became  pastor  of  the  Shaw-
mut  avenue  church,  Boston,  which  charge  he  re-
signed in  1867.  In  1862  Dr.  Thayer  assumed  the
editorship  of  the  "  Universalist  Quarterly,"  which
contains  some  of  his  most  important  literary
work.  He  continued  these  labors,  with  an  inter-
val of  travel  in  Europe  and  the  East,  until  his
last  illness.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Tufts  college  in  1865,  and  he  was  for  many  years
on  the  board  of  overseers  of  Harvard.  Dr.  Thayer
was  a  biblical  scholar  of  rare  breadth,  and  a  pioneer
in  Universalist  literature.  He  wrote  much  verse
that  has  never  been  collected,  and  published
"  Christianity  against  Infidelity  "  (Boston,  1833 ;
enlarged,  Cincinnati,  1849);  "Bible  Class  Assist-
ant" (Boston,  1840);  "History  of  the  Origin  of
Endless  Punishment  "  (1855) ;  "  Theology  of  Uni-
versalism" (1862);  and  "Over  the  River"  (1864).

THAYER,  William  Makepeace,  author,  b.  in
Franklin,  Mass.,  23  Feb.,  1820.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1843,  studied  theology,  and  was
settled  over  the  orthodox  Congregational  church
at  Ashland,  Mass.,  in  1849-'57.  In  consequence  of
a  throat  trouble  he  relinquished  his  pastorate,  and
on  his  return  to  Franklin  in  1858  devoted  himself  to
literary  work.  In  1857  and  1863  he  was  a  member
of  the  legislature,  and  in  1860-'76  he  was  secretary
of  the  Massachusetts  temperance  alliance.  He  has
written  many  religious  and  juvenile  books,  the  first
of  which  was  published  in  1852.  In  "The  Bobbin
Boy"  (Boston,  1859)  he  originated  the  conversa-
tional style,  and  its  success  was  so  great  that  he
wrote  his  succeeding  biographies  in  dialogue.
After  "The  Pioneer  Boy"  (1863)  was  published,
the  same  style  was  adopted  by  other  writers.  His
most  popular  works  are  a  series  of  biographies  (10
vols.,  Boston,  1859-63) ;  ".Youth's  History  of  the
Rebellion "(4  vols.,  1863-'5);  "White  House  Se-
ries "  (1880-5) ;  and  " Marvels  of  the  New  West "
(Norwich,  1887).  Nearly  1,000,000  copies  of  his
works  have  been  sold,  "  From  Log-Cabin  to  the
White  House  "  exceeding  300,000  copies,  two  thirds
of  them  being  sold  in  Europe.  "  The  Poor  Boy
and  Merchant  Prince  "  (Boston,  1858),  "  The  Good
Girl  and  True  Woman"  (1859),  "The  Pioneer
Boy,"  "  Tact,  Push,  and  Principle  "  (Boston,  1880).
"  From  Pioneer  Home  to  the  White  House  "  (Nor-
wich, 1882),  and  "From  Tannery  to  the  White
House "  (Boston,  1885),  have  each  reached  50,000
copies.  Many  have  been  republished  in  England,
and  some  have  been  translated  into  German,  French,
Italian,  Greek,  Swedish,  and  Hawaiian.  Mr.  Thayer
has  also  edited  the  "  Home  Monthly  "and  "  Moth-
er's Assistant "  (Boston).

THEAKER,  Thomas  Clarke,  commissioner  of
patents,  b.  in  York  county,  Pa.,  1  Feb.,  1812;  d.
in  Oakland,  Md.,  16  July,  1883.  He  received  a
good  English  education,  removed  to  Bridgeport,
Ohio,  in  1830,  and  was  principally  occupied  as  a
machinist  and  millwright.  He  served  in  congress
as  a  Republican  in  1859-'61,  and  was  an  unsuccess-


ful candidate  for  the  ensuing  congress.  He  was
made  a  member  of  a  board  of  commissioners  who
were  appointed  to  investigate  the  workings  of  the
patent-office,  and  was  afterward  made  by  Presi-
dent Johnson  commissioner  of  patents,  serving
from  17  Aug.,  1865,  till  6  June,  1868.

THEBAUD,  Augustine  J.  (tay-bo),  clergy-
man, b.  in  Brittany  in  1807;  d.  in  Fordham,  X.  Y,
17  Dec,  1885.  He  studied  for  the  priesthood,  and
after  his  ordination  was  for  several  years  engaged
in  missionary  work  in  Brittany.  He  afterward
went  to  Rome  and  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus.
In  1838  he  came  to  the  United  States  and  was  ap-
pointed professor  in  St.  Mary's  college,  Ky.,  where
he  remained  until  that  institution  passed  from  the
control  of  the  Jesuits  in  1845.  He  then  taught
physics  and  mathematics  in  St.  John's  college,
Fordham,  of  which  he  was  president  in  1846-'52.
He  was  then  made  pastor  of  St.  Joseph's  church,
Troy,  where  he  began  his  investigations  in  Irish
history.  He  was  afterward  transferred  to  New
York,  where  he  continued  the  same  line  of  research,
the  result  of  which  was  the  publication  of  "  The
Irish  Race,"  a  work  that  placed  him  in  the  first
rank  as  a  philosophic  historian,  and  of  which  Dr.
Orestes  A.  Brownson  wrote  that  it  had  caused  him
to  change  life-long  opinions  on  questions  of  para-
mount importance  in  the  philosophy  of  history.
Father  Thebaud  went  to  Canada,  where  he  re-
mained a  year,  and  then  returned  to  New  York.
The  rest  of  his  life  was  spent  in  missionary  labors
and  literary  pursuits.  He  was  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  Roman  Catholic  periodicals.  Besides
the  work  already  mentioned  he  published  "Gen-
tilism";  "The  Church  and  the  Moral  World";
and  "  Twit-Twatso."

THEKAKISQUI,  Iroquois  chief,  b.  in  central
New  York  in  1756;  d.  in  1802.  Owing  to  his
bravery  and  skill  in  the  use  of  arms  and  in  hunt-
ing, he  became  a  chief  at  the  age  of  twenty.  He
made  several  raids  ou  the  Spanish  colonies,  and
rendered  considerable  assistance  to  the  English  in
the  wars  of  the  Revolution.  He  led  a  body  of  In-
dians into  the  Carolinas,  devastated  the  country
with  fire  and  sword,  and  brought  back  numerous
slaves  into  the  Iroquois  territory.  He  gave  up  part
of  the  lands  of  his  tribe  to  the  government  of  the
United  States  in  1794.  Under  his  sway  his  people
turned  their  attention  to  agriculture,  and  made
some  advances  in  civilization.

THELLER,  Edward  Alexander,  journalist,  b.
in  Canada  East  about  1810;  d.  in  Honitas,  Cal.,
in  1859.  He  was  graduated  as  a  physician,  and,
having  actively  participated  in  the  Canadian  re-
bellion of  1837,  was  arrested,  tried,  convicted,  and
sentenced  to  death.  Escaping  from  prison,  he
came  to  this  country,  and,  after  residing  in  New
York  in  1841-2,  went  to  California  in  1853,  and
was  editor  of  several  newspapers.  He  was  at  one
time  superintendent  of  public  schools  in  San  Fran-
cisco. He  published  "Canada  in  1837-'8:  Show-
ing the  Causes  of  the  Late  Attempted  Revolution
and  its  Failure  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1841).

THEONDECHOREN,  Joseph,  Indian  convert,
d.  near  Tadoussac,  Canada,  26  June,  1652.  Pre-
vious to  his  conversion  it  is  related  that  he  could
take  live  coals  and  red-hot  pebbles  in  his  hands  and
mouth  without  sustaining  any  injury,  and  plunge
his  arm  into  boiling  water,  and  he  attributed  this
power  to  satanic  influence.  He  became  a  Christian
in  1641,  and  endeavored  to  imitate  the  missionaries
in  everything  and  conform  to  their  mode  of  life.
The  Jesuit  relations  contain  extracts  from  sermons
that  he  preached,  which  are  remarkable  for  fervor
and  rude  eloquence. He  went  with  Father  Jogues


THEVENARD


THIBAUDIN


75


in  1643,  accompanied  by  his  two  brothers  and  his
son.  One  of  his  brothers  and  his  son  were  killed,
but  he  escaped,  during  a  hunting  expedition  of  the
Iroquois,  and  reached  Three  Rivers,  where  he
preached  some  remarkable  discourses  to  his  coun-
trymen, who  had  come  to  congratulate  him  on
his  escape.  After  his  return  to  his  own  coun-
try he  formed  one  of  a  convoy  of  100  warriors
who  went  down  to  Quebec.  He  was  wounded  in
an  attack  that  was  made  on  the  town  by  the  Iro-
quois, but  succeeded  in  escaping  to  the  woods.  He
was  discovered  by  a  band  of  hostile  Indians,  who
were  so  touched  by  his  discourse  that  they  saved
his  life  and  nursed  him.  When  the  Hurons  were
driven  from  their  country  in  1649  he  went  to  live
in  St.  Joseph's  island,  and  afterward  took  a  large
part  of  his  tribe  to  Quebec.  They  formed  a  settle-
ment close  to  the  city,  where  Theondechoren  edified
both  the  Indians  and  French  by  the  sanctity  of  his
life,  and  astonished  the  latter  by  his  eloquence.

THEVENARD,  Antoine  jean  Marie  (tay-
veh-nar),  Count,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Saint
Malo,  7  Dec,  1733;  d.  in  Paris,  9  Feb.,  1815.  He
entered  the  service  of  the  East  India  company  as
a  cabin-boy  in  1747,  assisted  in  three  combats  with
the  English,  and  rose  rapidly  in  rank.  In  1754
he  was  sent  with  a  sloop-of-war  to  Newfoundland,
and  destroyed  all  the  establishments  and  fisheries
along  the  northern  coast  of  that  colony.  After  the
conclusion  of  peace,  he  became  a  naval  engineer.  He
was  a  commodore  in  the  East  India  fleet  in  1767,  but
in  1769  joined  the  royal  navy,  was  made  captain  of
a  frigate  in  1770.  and  promoted  first  captain  and
knight  of  Saint  Louis  in  1773.  When  France  sent
aid  to  the  United  States  in  1778,  he  was  given
command  of  a  squadron,  and  carried  troops  and
supplies  to  the  Antilles  and  to  this  country.  He
made  successful  cruises  along  the  coast  of  New
England,  and  for  his  services  was  promoted  briga-
dier-general of  the  naval  forces  in  1782,  and  chef
d'escadre  in  1784.  Assuming  command  of  the
station  of  South  America  in  1785,  he  was  made
vice-admiral  in  1792,  and  he  was  successively  mari-
time prefect  at  Brest,  Toulon,  and  Rochefort  in
1792-3,  and  again  at  Toulon  in  1801.  He  was
created  a  senator  and  a  count  in  1810,  and  made  a
peer  of  France,  4  June,  1814.  He  was  a  member
of  several  learned  societies  of  Europe  and  America,
of  the  Royal  academy  of  marine  in  1773,  and  of
the  Paris  academy  of  sciences  after  1785.  He  pub-
lished "  Memoires  relatifs  a  la  marine  "  (4  vols.,
Paris.  1800),  which  is  still  a  standard  work.

THEVENAU,  Charles  Etienne  (tay-vay-no),
West  Indian  naturalist,  b.  in  St.  Lucia  in  1758 ;  d.
in  Paris  in  1820.  He  took  part  as  an  ensign  in  the
war  of  1778-83  in  the  West  Indies,  and  after  the
conclusion  of  peace  held  an  office  in  the  magistracy
of  St.  Lucia.  At  the  beginning  of  the  French
revolution  he  went  to  Paris,  where  he  became  noted
as  a  journalist;  but  he  strongly  opposed  the  en-
franchisement of  the  slaves,  and  for  his  attacks
against  the  club  called  "  Les  amis  des  noirs  "  was
imprisoned  during  the  reign  of  terror.  Being  re-
leased after  the  reaction  of  1794,  he  returned  to  St.
Lucia  and  devoted  himself  to  agriculture  and  sci-
ence. After  the  restoration  of  Louis  XVIII.  he
settled  in  Paris.  His  works  include  "  Observations
sur  des  poissons  recueillis  dans  un  voyage  a  la  Baie
de  Samana,  et  description  des  especes  nouvelles  et
peu  connues  "  (St.  Lucia,  1788) ;  "  Monographie  des
ignames  "  (Paris,  1790) :  "  Historia  naturalis  plan-
tarum  quas  in  insula  Santa  Lucia  crescent "  (3  vols.,
1802 -'9);  "  Enumeratio  plantarum  cellularium
quas  in  insula  Santa  Lucia  a  Thevenau  collectas  de-
scribit"  (3  vols.,  1807-12) ;  "  Fasciculus  plantarum


rariarum  et  exoticarum"  (1813);  "Essai  sur  les
simples  veneneux  des  Antilles  "  (1814) ;  and  "  Traite
des  arbres  fruitiers  des  Antilles"  (2  vols.,  1816).

THEVET,  Andre"  (tay-vay),  French  historian,
b.  in  Angouleme  in  1502;  d.  in  Paris,  23  Nov.,
1590.  He  united  with  the  Gray  Friars,  and  in  1555
accompanied  Admiral  Villegaignon  to  Brazil,  but
returned  to  France  in  the  following  year  and  was
appointed  in  1558  chaplain  to  Queen  Catherine  de
Medicis  and  historian  and  cosmographer  to  the
king.  He  enjoyed  royal  favor  under  Charles  IX.
and  his  successors,  and  composed  for  their  amuse-
ment several  works  which  have  since  been  held  in
high  esteem.  They  include  "  Les  singularitez  de
la  France  antarctique,  autrement  nomme  Ame-
rique,  et  de  plusieurs  terres  et  isles  decouvertes  de
notre  temps"  (Paris,  1558);  " Cosmographie  uni-
verselle,  illustree  de  diverses  figures  des  choses  plus
remarquables  vues  par  l'auteur"  (2  vols.,  1771);
and  "Vrais  portraits  et  vies  des  homines  illus-
tres,  Grecs,  Latins  et  Paiens  "  (2  vols.,  1584).  The
last  is  a  curious  work,  containing  the  biography
and  portraits  of  several  Indian  caciques,  emperors
of  Mexico,  and  incas  of  Peru,  and,  although  some
doubts  have  been  expressed  as  to  their  authenticity,
they  have  never  been  proved  spurious.  The  vet's
work  had  many  editions  and  has  been  translated
into  several  languages.  He  wrote  also  "  Histoire
naturelle  et  generale  des  Indes  Occidentales  "  and
•'  Voyage  dans  les  Indes  australes,"  which  are  pre-
served among  the  manuscripts  in  the  National  li-

[)!**!  T*V fit" rMVIS

THIBAUD,  Pierre  (tee-bo),  French  scientist,
b.  in  Pithiviers  in  1739 ;  d.  there  in  1804.  He  was
for  many  years  a  professor  in  Paris,  and  was  also
employed  by  the  French  academy  of  literature  in
making  linguistic  researches.  In  1788  he  was
elected  secretary  of  the  Academy  of  Caen,  but  re-
tired to  his  native  city  during  the  revolution.  Thi-
baud  devoted  himself  principally  to  the  study  of
the  migrations  of  men,  to  the  descent  of  nations,
and  their  travels  through  the  world ;  he  was  also
the  first  to  advance  the  theory  that  the  Indians  of
America  migrated  from  Asia  in  remote  antiquity,
and  through  patient  research  was  enabled  to  give
a  nearly  complete  history  of  the  Aztec  nation  since
their  first  appearance  in  the  basin  of  Mexico  about
500  b.  c.  Thibaud's  works  contain  some  errors,  but
he  was  a  pioneer  in  the  field  of  Indian  history. He

Sublished  "  Origine  des  Indiens  de  l'Amerique  du
ord,  contenant  une  description  de  leurs  manieres,
avec  une  etude  sur  lour  religion,  lour  langage,  et
leur  maniere  de  se  vetir"  (Caen,  1787);  "Histoire
et  migrations  de  la  nation  Aztec  ou  Mexicaine
depuis  le  cinquieme  siecle  de  notre  ere  jusqu'  a  la
chute  de  la  dynastie  de  Montezuma"  (1796);  and
"  Origine  des  Indiens  de  l'Amerique  du  Sud "
(Pithiviers,  1801).

THIBAUDIN,  Gaston  Louis  (tee-ho-dang),
French  explorer,  b.  in  Dunkirk  in  1727;  d.  in  Lima,
Peru,  in  1796.  He  studied  botany  in  Paris  under
Buffon,  was  employed  afterward  by  the  Academy
of  sciences,  and  at  the  request  of  that  body  was
given  by  Louis  XVI.  in  1776  a  mission  to  South
America.  His  instructions  were  to  collect  in  Chili,
Peru,  and  Cuba  specimens  of  medicinal  plants
that  could  be  naturalized  in  France.  He  landed  in
Concepcion  early  in  February,  1777,  journeyed  for
months  through  the  pampas  and  the  mountains,  and
formed  a  rich  herbarium.  After  visiting  Santiago
and  the  large  cities,  he  went  to  Callao,  making  also
a  voyage  to  the  island  of  Juan  Fernandez.  Toward
the  end  of  1780  his  herbarium  numbered  about
1,500  specimens,  including  many  new  ones,  when
he  left  for  the  West  Indies,  but,  owing  to  the  war


76


THIENPONT


THOM


that  then  raged  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  between
France  and  England,  he  remained  at  Carthagena
occupied  in  arranging  his  collections  till  the  truce
of  1782.  Then  he  resumed  his  voyage  and  went  to
Havana,  where  he  formed  a  nearly  complete  collec-
tion of  the  flora  of  the  island.  On  his  return  to
France  in  1785  he  was  elected  a  corresponding
member  of  the  Academy  of  sciences,  and  that  body
undertook  also  the  publication  of  his  works.  He
had  made  many  friends  in  Peru,  and,  feeling  inse-
cure in  Paris  during  the  revolution,  he  returned  in
1792  to  Lima,  where  he  taught  mathematics  till  his
death.  Thibaudin's  works  include  "  Description
des  plantes  recueillir  dans  un  voyage  au  Perou  et
au  Chili "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1786) ;  "  Memoire  sur  la
flore  de  l'ile  de  Cuba"  (1786);  "  Prodome  de  la
flore  du  Chili  avec  herbier  explicatif"  (4  vols,
1788) ;  and  "  Prodome  de  la  flore  du  Perou  avec
herbier  explicatif  "  (4  vols.,  1790).

THIENPONT,  Emanuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bel-
gium in  1803 ;  d.  in  Logan,  Hocking  co.,  Ohio,  19
Oct.,  1873.  He  came  to  the  United  States  at  an
early  age,  studied  for  the  priesthood,  and  was
ordained  in  Cincinnati  oh  20  Jan.,  1833.  He
spent  the  following  year  in  preparing  candidates
for  the  priesthood,  was  then  sent  to  take  charge  of
the  missions  along  the  Miami  canal,  and  for  some
time  had  entire  charge  of  all  the  Roman  Catholics
in  the  state  of  Ohio.  He  was  appointed  pastor  of
St.  Mary's,  Tiffin,  in  1835,  and  afterward  of  the
German  Catholics  of  Dayton,  and  then  had  charge
of  congregations  at  Portsmouth,  Steubenville,  and
other  places.  He  was  afterward  sent  to  Logan,  and
formed  a  new  congregation  in  the  neighborhood
at  Straitville.  Father  Thienpont  was  the  pioneer
secular  priest  of  Ohio,  and  was  the  first  to  build
Roman  Catholic  churches  in  Dayton,  Portsmouth,
Steubenville,  and  other  places  in  the  state.

THIERY  DE  MENONVILLE,  Nicolas  Jo-
seph, French  botanist,  b.  in  Saint-Mihiel,  France,
18  June,  1739 ;  d.  in  Port  au  Prince,  Santo  Domingo,
in  1780.  He  studied  law,  and  for  some  time  prac-
tised his  profession  in  his  native  city,  but  he  soon
abandoned  the  bar  for  botany,  of  which  he  was
passionately  fond.  He  formed  a  plan  to  naturalize
the  cochineal  insect  in  the  Franco-American  colo-
nies, and  after  landing  in  Santo  Domingo  in  1776,
in  order  to  learn  how  to  cultivate  it,  he  penetrated
to  Mexico  in  the  disguise  of  a  Catalonian  physician,
at  great  personal  risk,  as  the  Spaniards  kept  the
knowledge  of  this  branch  of  commerce  jealously
from  strangers.  With  great  difficulty  he  reached
Oaxaca,  which,  he  had  learned,  produced  a  finer
specimen  of  cochineal  than  could  be  found  else-
where, learned  the  art  of  planting  and  raising  the
nopal  on  which  the  insect  feeds,  bought  a  large
quantity  of  branches  and  insects,  filling  eight
chests  with  them,  and  succeeded  in  forwarding
them  by  different  routes  to  Santo  Domingo.  He
sent  a  part  of  his  cochineals  to  France,  and  was
successful  in  rearing  and  multiplying  those  that
he  retained,  in  the  Jardin  du  roi,  which  he  founded
at  Port  au  Prince.  He  received  the  title  of  botan-
ist of  the  king  soon  after  his  return  to  Mexico.
Shortly  after  his  death  the  cochineal  insect  disap-

? eared  from  Santo  Domingo.  The  club  of  "  The
'hiladelphes"  at  Cape  Francais  published  a  manu-
script that  he  left,  entitled  "  Traite  de  la  culture
du  nopal  et  de  l'education  de  la  cochenille  dans  les
colonies  franchises  de  l'Amerique,  precede  d'un
voyage  a  Oaxaca"  (Cape  Francais.  1786).

THOBURN,  James  Mills,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
St.  Clairsville,  Ohio,  7  March,  1836.  He  was
graduated  at  Alleghany  college.  Pa.,  in  1857,  and
began  preaching  in  Ohio  as  a  Methodist  minister


^Jt.  JjurUisi^


in  the  same  year.  In  1859  he  went  to  India  as  a
missionary,  where  he  was  stationed  successively  at
Nynee  Tal,  Moradabad,  Lucknow,  and  Calcutta.
He preached in

both the native  ^_^^

and  European  lan-
guages, and  built
the  largest  church
in  India.  He  was
presiding  elder  of
the  Indian  confer-
ence, preached  for
some  time  at  Simla,
the  summer  capi-
tal of  India,  and
was  for  five  years
editor  of  the  "  In-
dian Witness."  In
consequence  of  an
injury  that  result-
ed from  an  acci-
dent, he  returned
to  this  country  in
1886.  At  the  gen-
eral conference  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  New  York  city
in  1888  he  was  elected  missionary  bishop  of  India
and  Malaysia.  He  has  published  "  My  Missionary
Apprenticeship,"  being  a  history  of  twenty-five
years'  experience  in  India  (New  York,  1884),  and
'•  Missionary  Sermons  "  (1888).

THOM,  (George  (torn),  soldier,  b.  in  Derrv,  N.  H.,
21  Feb.,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1839,  assigned  to  the  topo-
graphical engineers,  and  became  2d  lieutenant  in
1840.  He  served  in  connection  with  the  survey  of
the  boundary  between  the  United  States  and  the
British  provinces  under  the  treaty  of  Washington,
in  1842-'7  and  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Franklin
Pierce  in  the  war  with  Mexico.  He  became  1st
lieutenant  in  1849,  and  captain  for  fourteen  years'
service  in  July,  1853.  In  18.53-'6  he  served  in  con-
nection with  the  survey  of  the  boundary  between
the  United  States  and  Mexico.  At  the  opening  of
the  civil  war  he  was  a  major,  but  was  appointed
colonel  and  additional  aide-de-camp  in  November,
1861.  Col.  Thoin  was  continuously  employed  on
engineer  and  other  duty  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Henry
W.  Halleck  till  April,  1865,  being  present  during
the  siege  of  Corinth.  He  was  also  present  at  the
battle  of  Cedar  Creek,  Va.  He  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  engineers  in  1866,  and  was  there-
after in  charge  of  river  and  harbor  improvements
in  the  New  England  states  till  20  Feb.,  1883,  when,
having  been  forty  years  in  service,  he  was,  at  his
own  request,  retired  from  active  service.  He  be-
came colonel  of  engineers  in  1880,  and  was  bre-
vetted  brigadier-general  U.  S.  army,  "  for  faithful
and  meritorious  services  during  the  rebellion."

THOM,  James  Crawford,  artist,  b.  in  New
York,  22  March,  1835.  He  studied  at  the  National
academy,  and,  in  1859  went  abroad,  where  he
studied  with  Edouard  Frere,  and  then  with  Henri
Pierre  Picou  and  Jean  Baptiste  Camille  Corot.
His  works  were  frequently  exhibited  in  London,
where  he  gained  several  medals  and  other  honors
at  various  times.  Since  his  return  to  the  United
States  in  1872  many  of  his  pictures  have  found
their  way  into  private  galleries  in  this  country.
Among  the  paintings  that  he  executed  while  abroad
are  "  By  the  River-Side."  "  Returning  from  the
Wood,"  "  Tired  of  Waiting."  "  Going  to  School."
and  "  The  Monk's  Walk."  The  last  three  were  ex-
hibited at  the  Royal  academy,  London.  He  has
shown  more  recently  at  the  Academy  of  design,


THOMAS


THOMAS


77


New  York,  "  Forgotten  Cares  "  (1877) ;  "  Song  of
the  Sea  "  (1881) ;  "  The  Old  Farm-House  "  (1884) ;
"  The  Pets  "  (1885) ;  and  several  landscapes  at  the
Mechanics'  fair,  Boston,  in  1878.

THOMAS,  Abel  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Exe-
ter, Pa.,  11  June,  1807;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28
Sept.,  1880.  His  grandfather,  Abel  Thomas,  was  a
Quaker  preacher.  The  grandson  was  educated  at
Lancaster,  Pa.,  and  at  an  early  age  entered  the
ministry  of  the  Universalist  church.  He  was  first
established  for  ten  years  over  the  Lombard  street
church  in  Philadelphia,  to  which,  after  a  few  years
in  Lowell,  Mass.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  he  returned,  remaining  for  seventeen  years.
With  the  Rev.  Thomas  B.  Thayer  he  wrote  the
" Lowell  Tracts,"  in  1840-42,  during  the  crusade
against  Universalism  in  Lowell,  and  organized
"  The  Lowell  Offering,"  whose  sole  conti'ibutors
and  editors  were  the  mill-operatives.  He  was  the
author  of  "Allegories  and  Divers  Day-Dreams"
(Lowell,  1841);  an  "Autobiography"  (Boston,  1852) ;
and  "  A  Centenary  of  Universalism  "  (Philadelphia,
1872).  He  prepared  "  Hymns  of  Zion,"  with  music
(Philadelphia.  1839) ;  "  The  Gospel  Liturgy  "  (1857) ;
and  "  The  Christian  Helper,  or  Gospel  Sermons  "
(1857).  He  published  also  many  tracts,  sermons,
and  discussions,  among  the  last,  "  Discussions  on
Universalism,"  with  Rev.  Dr.  Ezra  S.  Ely  (New
York,  1835),  and  he  was  connected  editorially  with
many  papers  of  his  denomination. — His  wife,  M.
Louise  Palmer,  b.  in  Mount  Holly,  N.  J.,  about
1830,  is  a  daughter  of  Judge  Strange  N.  Palmer,
of  Pennsylvania.  She  received  a  classical  educa-
tion and  read  Blackstone  with  her  brother,  Robert
M.  Palmer,  who  was  U.  S.  minister  to  the  Argen-
tine Republic  in  1861-'2.  For  many  years,  owing
to  the  failing  health  of  her  husband,  Mrs.  Thomas
managed  a  large  estate  near  Philadelphia.  This
gave  her  an  opportunity  to  educate  eighteen  chil-
dren, eleven  being  taken  from  the  colored  orphan
asylum  of  New  York  city.  She  has  been  president
of  the  Woman's  centenary  association  of  the  Uni-
versalist church  since  1880,  and  in  1886  was  elected
president  of  Sorosis,  a  woman's  club  in  New  York.
She  is  also  treasurer  of  the  national  council  of
women.  Since  1873  she  has  been  editor  and  pub-
lisher of  the  tract  department  of  the  Universalist
church,  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.

THOMAS,  Amos  Russell,  physician,  b.  in
Watertown,  N.  Y.,  3  Oct.,  182G.  He  acquired  his
education  while  working  on  a  farm,  taught  school,
and  was  graduated  at  Syracuse  medical  college  in
1854.  He  removed  to  Philadelphia,  was  appoint-
ed to  the  chair  of  anatomy  in  the  Penn  medi-
cal university,  and  also  was  lecturer  on  artistic
anatomy  in  the  Pennsylvania  academy  of  fine  arts
for  fifteen  years.  In  1863  he  received  a  similar
appointment  in  the  School  of  design  for  women.
During  the  civil  war  he  volunteered  and  served  as
army  surgeon.  In  1867  he  connected  himself  with
the  Hahnemann  medical  college  of  Philadelphia,  of
which  he  is  now  the  dean.  He  has  contributed
numerous  papers  to  medical  literature,  is  the  author
of  "  Post-mortem  Examinations  and  Morbid  Anat-
omy" (Philadelphia,  1870),  and  general  editor  of
the  "  Homoeopathic  Materia  Medica."

THOMAS,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsylvania
about  1800 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  1  Feb.,  1878.
He  entered  the  army  and  became  a  lieutenant  of
ordnance,  13  Aug.,  1819,  assistant  quartermaster  in
May,  1826,  captain  in  April,  1833,  quartermaster
with  the  rank  of  major  in  July,  1838,  and  brevet
lieutenant-colonel  for  meritorious-services  in  Mexi-
co, 30  May,  1848.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel  and deputy  quartermaster-general,  U.  S.


army,  in  May,  1850,  colonel  and  assistant  quarter-
master-general in  August,  1856,  and  brevet  major-
general,  13  March,  1865,  for  meritorious  services
during  the  civil  war.  He  was  retired  from  active
service  in  July,  1866,  after  having  been  in  the  army
for  more  than  forty-five  years.

THOMAS,  Cyrus,  ethnologist,  b.  in  Kingsport,
Tenn.,  27  July,  1825.  He  studied  law,  and  fol-
lowed that  profession  until  1865,  holding  in  1850-'3
the  office  of  county  clerk  of  Jackson  county,  111.
In  1865  he  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Evangelical
Lutheran  church,  but  in  1869  he  joined  the  scien-
tific corps  of  the  geological  and  geographical  sur-
veys of  the  territories  under  Ferdinand  V.  Hayden.
He  was  elected  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  the
Southern  Illinois  normal  university  in  1873,  and
in  1876  was  appointed  state  entomologist  of  Illi-
nois. A  year  later  he  became  a  member  of  the
U.  S.  entomological  commission,  and  since  1882  he
has  been  archaeologist  to  the  U.  S.  bureau  of  eth-
nology. He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and
has  contributed  to  the  "  Evangelical  Quarterly  Re-
view," "  American  Antiquarian,"  and  other  jour-
nals. His  work  for  the  government  has  appeared
in  the  reports  of  the  survey,  the  entomological
commission,  and  the  ethnological  bureau,  and  in-
cludes "Synopsis  of  the  Acridida>  of  North  Ameri-
ca" (Washington,  1873);  "Reports  of  the  State
Entomologist  on  the  Noxious  and  Beneficial  In-
sects of  Illinois''  (5  vols.,  1876-'80);  in  part  "Re-
ports on  the  Rocky  Mountain  Locust"  (2  vols.,
1878-'80);  "Study  of  the  Manuscript  Troano"
(1882) ;  "  Notes  on  Certain  Maya  and  Mexican
Manuscripts  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Burial  Mounds  of  the
Northern  Sections  of  the  United  States  "  (1888).

THOMAS,  David,  engineer,  b.  in  Montgomery
county,  Pa.,  in  1776 ;  d.  in  Cayuga  county,  N.  Y.,
in  1859.  He  was  of  Quaker  parentage.  Removing
to  the  vicinity  of  Aurora,  Cayuga  co.,  in  1805,  he
was  appointed  chief  engineer  of  the  Erie  canal
west  of  Rochester,  and  subsequently  he  became
principal  engineer  of  the  Welland  canal,  Canada,
He  was  distinguished  as  a  florist  and  pomologist,
and  by  his  writings  rendered  great  services  to  sci-
entific agriculture.  He  contributed  extensively  to
the  "  Genesee  Farmer  "  and  published  "  Travels  in
the  West "  (Auburn,  1819). — His  son,  John  J.,
agriculturist,  b.  near  Aurora,  Cayuga  co.,  N.  Y.,  8
Jan.,  1810,  was  almost  entirely  self-taught.  He
studied  the  botany  of  the  neighborhood  in  boy-
hood, making  an  herbarium  of  1.300  species,  in  1834
became  associate  editor  of  the  "  Genesee  Farmer  "
at  Rochester,  and  when  that  journal  was  merged
in  1853  in  the  "  Country  Gentleman,"  at  Albany,
he  became  connected  with  the  latter,  where  he  still
continues  (1888).  He  was  horticultural  editor  of
the  "  Albany  Cultivator"  in  1841-'53,  contributed
to  the  "  Transactions "  of  the  New  York  state
agricultural  society  in  1841-7,  and  to  "  The  Farm  "
(New  York,  1858),  and  edited  the  "Illustrated
Annual  Register  of  Rural  Affairs  "  (9  vols.,  Albany,
1855-'81).  He  has  published  "  The  American  Fruit
Culturist"  (Albany,  1845);  "Farm  Implements,
and  the  Principles  of  their  Construction  and  Use"
(New  York,  1854);  and  "Farm  Implements  and
Farm  Machinery"  (1869).  He  received  the  de-
gree of  A.  M.  from  Haverford  college,  Pa.,  in  1876.
— Another  son,  Joseph,  b.  in  Cayuga  county,  N.  Y.,
23  Sept.,  1811,  was  educated  at  Yale  and  at  Rens-.
selaer  polytechnic  institute,  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  was
graduated  as  a  physician  in  Philadelphia,  engaging
in  practice  in  that  city. He  was  for  some  time

Professor  of  Latin  and  Greek  in  Haverford  college,
a., and also taught privately. In 1857 Dr.
Thomas  visited  India,  and  spent  fourteen  months


78


THOMAS


THOMAS


in  the  study  of  Sanscrit.  Persian,  and  other  orien-
tal languages,  and  in  1858  he  passed  four  months
in  Egypt  in  the  study  of  Arabic.  He  has  con-
tributed to  journals,  and  is  the  author  of  the  sys-
tem of  pronouncing  geographical  names  in  "  Bald-
win's Pronouncing  Gazetteer  "  (Philadelphia,  1845) ;
the  geographical  and  biographical  vocabularies
in  several  editions  of  Webster's  Dictionary ;  and
*  Travels  in  Egypt  and  Palestine  "  (Philadelphia,
1853).  With  Thomas  Baldwin  he  edited  "  A  New
and  Complete  Gazetteer  of  the  United  States"
(1854)  and  "  Lippineott's  Pronouncing  Gazetteer
of  the  World  "  (1855),  and  he  edited  alone  a  "  Com-
prehensive Medical  Dictionary "  (1864)  and  a
"  Universal  Pronouncing  Dictionary  of  Biography
and  Mythology  "  (2  vols.,  1870-'l).

THOMAS,  David,  manufacturer,  b.  near  Neath,
Glamorganshire,  Wales,  3  Nov.,  1794 :  d.  in  Cata-
sauqua,  Lehigh  co.,  Pa.,  20  June,  1882.  He  was
employed  in  the  business  of  manufacturing  iron
after  1812,  and  in  1839  came  to  this  country  and
built  the  first  of  the  furnaces  of  the  Lehigh  Crane
iron  company.  He  remained  with  this  company
till  1854,  when,  with  his  sons  and  others,  he  or-
ganized the  Thomas  iron  company,  and  built  two
blast-furnaces  at  Hokendauqua.  They  were  at
the  time  the  largest  and  most  productive  anthra-
cite blast-furnaces  in  the  country.  Afterward
other  furnaces  were  built  by  the  company,  and
successfully  operated.  He  was  one  of  the  proprie-
tors of  the  Catasauqua  manufacturing  company
which  was  organized  to  roll  plate-  and  bar-iron,
for  many  years  served  as  its  president,  and  was
an  owner  of  the  Lehigh  fire-brick  works  at  Cata-
sauqua. Mr.  Thomas  was  the  first  in  this  country
to  make  the  manufacture  of  anthracite  pig-iron
commercially  successful,  and  was  the  first  person
in  the  world  fully  to  realize  the  value  of  powerful
blowing  engines  in  the  working  of  blast-furnaces.
He  supported  the  cause  of  the  Union  during  the
civil  war.  In  1866  he  was  an  unsuccessful  Repub-
lican candidate  for  congress.

THOMAS,  Edith  Matilda,  author,  b.  in  Chat-
ham, Medina  co.,  Ohio,  12  Aug.,  1854.  She  was
educated  at  Geneva  (Ohio)  normal  institute,  has
contributed  largely  to  periodicals,  and  has  pub-
lished in  book-form  "  A  New  Year's  Masque,  and
other  Poems"  (Boston,  1885);  "The  Round  Year"
(1886) ;  and  "  Lyrics  and  Sonnets"  (1887).

THOMAS,  Edward  Harper,  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  11  April,  1811 ;  d.  in  Lancaster,
Pa.,  18  Sept.,  1869.  He  was  apprenticed  at  the  age
of  nine  years,  but  succeeded  by  self-application  un-
der great  difficulties  in  his  early  life  in  securing  a
good  education.  In  1830,  having  become  a  mem-
ber of  the  Church  of  God,  a  religious  denomina-
tion organized  by  Rev.  John  Winebrenner,  he
was  ordained  to  the  work  of  the  ministry,  and  for
more  than  twenty  years  served  as  an  itinerant.
In  1854  he  took  editorial  charge  of  the  "  Church
Advocate,"  the  official  paper  of  his  church,  and
removed  to  Lancaster,  Pa.,  where  he  resided  until
his  death. — His  son,  Robert  Harper,  journal-
ist, b.  in  Philadelphia,  28  Jan.,  1834,  received  a
good  English  education,  served  as  aide  with  the
rank  of  colonel  on  the  staff  of  Gov.  Andrew  G.
Curtin,  and  was  commissioner  of  internal  revenue
from  1862  till  1866.  In  1870  he  purchased  the
."  Valley  Democrat,"  of  Mechanicsburg,  changing
the  name  to  the  "  Independent  Journal,"  and  sub-
sequently to  the  "Farmer's  Friend  and  Grange
Advocate."  He  was  commissioner  from  Pennsyl-
vania to  the  World's  industrial  and  cotton  centen-
nial exhibition  at  New  Orleans  in  1884-'5,  and  also
to  the  American  exposition  at  London  in  1887.


THOMAS,  Elisha  Smith,  P.  E.  Bishop,  b.  in
Wickham,  Mass.,  2  March,  1834.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1858,  and  at  Berkeley  divinity-
school,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1861,  was  ordered
deacon  in  June,  1861,  and  priest  soon  afterward.
He  was  at  once  put  in  charge  of  St.  Paul's  church,
New  Haven,  where  he  remained  three  years.  In
1864  he  was  elected  rector  of  Seabury  Hall,  Fari-
bault, Minn.,  and  professor  of  Old  and  New  Tes-
tament exegesis  there.  On  the  resignation  and
removal  of  Dr.  James  L.  Breck,  he  succeeded  him
in  the  secretaryship  of  the  Seabury  mission.  He
spent  the  year  1869  abroad,  studying  the  Se-
mitic languages  and  attending  lectures  on  New
Testament  exegesis.  On  his  return  he  was  elected
rector  of  St.  Mark's  church,  Minneapolis,  Minn.,
where  he  remained  five  years.  On  1  July,  1876,  h~
became  rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,  St.  Paul,  Minn.
He  was  deputy  from  the  diocese  to  three  succes-
sive general  conventions,  and  also  a  member,  and
for  several  years  president,  of  the  diocesan  stand-
ing committee,  trustee  of  the  Bishop  Seabury
mission,  and  of  St  Mary's  Hall  and  the  Breck
mission  and  farm.  He  was  instrumental  in  found-
ing two  missions  in  connection  with  his  own  parish,
and  built  mission  churches  at  Warsaw  and  Morris-
town.  He  was  consecrated  assistant  bishop  of
Kansas,  in  St.  Paul's  church.  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  4
May,  1887,  and  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Yale  the  same  year.

THOMAS,  Francis,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.
in  Frederick  county,  Md.,  3  Feb.,  1799 ;  d.  near
Frankville,  Md.,  22  Jan.,  1876.  He  was  graduated
at  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1820,  and  began  practice  in
Frankville.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  house
of  representatives  in  1822,  1827,  and  1829,  being
speaker  the  last  year,  was  elected  to  five  consecu-
tive congresses,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1831,  till  3
March,  1841,  was  president  of  the  Chesapeake  and
Ohio  canal  company  in  1839-'40,  and  governor
of  Maryland  in  1841-'4.  During  his  canvass  for
the  governorship  he  fought  a  duel  with  William
Price.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional
convention  in  1850,  and  was  instrumental  in  hav-
ing a  measure  adopted  that  weakened  the  power  of
the  slave-holding  counties. He  was  again  in  eon-

fress  from  1861  till  1869.  During  the  civil  war
[r.  Thomas  supported  the  Union  cause,  raised  a
volunteer  brigade  of  3,000  men,  but  he  refused  a
command.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Loyalist  con-
vention of  1866,  and  subsequently  opposed  Presi-
dent Johnson.  He  was  appointed  collector  of  in-
ternal revenue  for  the  Cumberland  district,  and
served  from  April,  1870,  till  he  was  appointed  min-
ister to  Peru,  25  March,  1872.  He  held  this  post
till  9  July,  1875,  and  afterward  retired  to  his  farm
near  Frankland,  where  he  was  killed  by  a  locomo-
tive while  walking  on  the  railroad-track.

THOMAS,  Gabriel,  author,  lived  in  the  17th
century.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  and  resided  in  Pennsylvania  and  western
New  Jersey  from  1682  till  1697.  He  wrote  "An
Historical  and  Geographical  Account  of  the  Prov-
ince and  County  of  Pennsylvania  and  of  West  New
Jersey"  (London,  1698).  A  lithographed  fac-simile
of  the  book  was  printed  privately  by  James  Austin
Brady  (New  York,  1848).

THOMAS,  Sir  George,  bart..  royal  governor  of
Pennsylvania,  b.  in  England  about  1705;  d.  in
London,  England,  11  Jan.,  1775.  He  was  a  wealthy
planter  of  Antigua  and  a  member  of  the  council
of  that  island,  and  in  1737  was  appointed  governor
of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  detained  in  England  in
defending  the  proprietary  rights  against  the  claims


"by  H  S  Hall  5  "NV*-  York


D.APPIi


THOMAS


THOMAS


79


that  were  raised  by  Lord  Baltimore  to  the  juris-
diction over  the  lower  counties  of  the  province,
and  did  not  assume  the  governorship  till  1738.
The  territorial  dispute  with  Maryland  was  pro-
visionally arranged  by  each  governor's  assuming
jurisdiction  over  the  people  from  his  own  province
who  were  settled  in  the  debatable  district  until  the
boundary-line  should  be  drawn.  At  first  he  was
unpopular  in  consequence  of  his  arbitrary  admin-
istration, especially  when  he  attempted  to  use  his
authority  to  organize  the  militia  at  the  beginning
of  the  Spanish  war,  although  the  legislature  had
refused  to  vote  supplies  for  the  purpose.  He
roused  the  intense  opposition  of  the  Quakers  by
refusing  to  sign  bills,  but  afterward  he  adopted  a
conciliatory  policy,  and  in  the  end  became  very
popular,  and  his  resignation  of  the  office  in  1747  was
received  with  general  regret.  From  1752  till  1766
he  was  captain-general  and  governor-in-chief  of
the  Leeward  and  Caribbee  islands.  He  was  cre-
ated a  baronet,  6  Sept.,  1766.

THOMAS,  George  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  South-
ampton county,  Va.,  31  July,  1816 ;  d.  in  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.,  28  March,  1870.  He  was  descended,
on  his  father's  side,  from  Welsh  ancestry,  and,  on
his  mother's,  from  a  French  Huguenot  family.
Not  much  is  known  of  his  youth.  He  was  eariy
distinguished  for  the  thoroughness  with  which
he  mastered  everything  he  undertook.  His  home
life  was  pleasant  and  genial,  and  he  was  carefully
educated  in  the  best  schools  and  academies  of  the
region.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  he  began  the  study
of  law,  but  the  next  year  he  received  an  appoint-
ment as  cadet  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  At
the  academy  he  rose  steadily  in  rank,  from  26th
at  the  end  of  the  first  year  to  12th  at  graduation.
He  was  nicknamed,  after  the  fashion  of  the  place,
"  George  Washington,"  from  a  fancied  resemblance
in  appearance  and  character  to  the  great  patriot.
He  was  graduated  and  commissioned  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  3d  artillery,  1  July,  1840,  and  en-
tered upon  duty  at  New  York,  but  was  soon  sent
to  Florida  to  take  part  in  the  Indian  war,  where,
in  1841,  he  gained  a  brevet  for  gallantry.  After  a
short  stay  at  various  posts  on  the  south  Atlantic
coast,  he  was,  in  the  autumn  of  1845,  sent  to
Texas.  When  the  Mexican  war  began,  he  accom-
panied the  column  under  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor,
distinguishing  himself  at  Monterey,  where  he  was
brevetted  captain,  and  at  Buena  Vista,  22  and  23
Feb.,  1847.  bore  a  more  decisive  part.  The  success
of  that  battle  was  largely  due  to  the  artillery.
"  Without  it,"  says  Gen.  John  E.  Wool  in  his  re-
port, "  we  would  not  have  maintained  our  position
a  single  hour."  Capt.  Thomas  W.  Sherman  said :
"  Lieut.  Thomas  more  than  sustained  the  reputation
he  has  long  enjoyed  as  an  accurate  and  scientific
artillerist."  He  was  again  brevetted  for  gallantry,
thus  earning  three  brevets  in  a  little  more  than  six
years  after  entering  the  service.  The  citizens  of
his  native  county  in  the  following  July  presented
him  with  a  superb  sword.  He  remained  on  duty  in
Mexico  and  Texas  till  1849,  and  was  again  sent  to
Florida.  In  1851  he  Was  detailed  as  instructor  of
artillery  and  cavalry  at  the  military  academy,  where
he  remained  until  1  May,  1854.  Soon  afterward
two  cavalry  regiments  were  added  to  the  army,
and  of  one  of  them,  the  2d,  brevet  Maj.  Thomas
was,  on  12  May,  1855,  appointed  junior  major.  In
the  composition  of  this  new  regiment  unusual
care  was  taken  in  the  selection  of  officers.  Jeffer-
son Davis  was  secretary  of  war,  and  the  choice  was
dictated  not  merely  by  ability  but  also  by  locality.
Of  the  fifty-one  officers  that  served  in  it  prior  to
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  thirty-one  were


from  the  south,  and  of  these  twenty-four  entered
the  Confederate  service,  twelve  of  whom  became
general  officers.  Among  these  were  Albert  Sid-
ney Johnston,  Robert  E.  Lee,  William  J.  Hardee,
Earl  Van  Dorn,  E.  Kirby  Smith,  John  B.  Hood,
and  Fitzhugh  Lee.

In  the  seclusion  of  garrison  life  in  Texas  during
the  exciting  period  from  1855  to  1861,  Major
Thomas  watched  with  increasing  apprehension  the
gradual  approach  of  the  inevitable  conflict.  In
affection  for  and  pride  in  his  native  state  he  was  a
Virginian  of  the  Virginians ;  but  he  never  for  a
moment  doubted  where  his  duty  lay.  Early  in
November,  1860,  he  left  Texas  on  a  long  leave  of  ab-
sence. Before  its  expiration  he  was  ordered,  11
April,  1861,  to  take  charge  of  his  regiment,  which
had  been  treacherously  surrendered  in  Texas,  and
was  now  arriving  in  New  York.  He  obeyed  the  or-
der with  alacrity  and  conducted  the  regiment  to
Carlisle,  Pa.,  barracks.  On  his  way  there,  he  heard
of  the  assault  on  Fort  Sumter,  and  on  reaching  the
place  he  renewed  his  oath  of  allegiance  to  the
United  States.  On  the  17th  the  Virginia  conven-
tion adopted  the  ordinance  of  secession,  and  Robert
E.  Lee,  colonel  of  his  regiment,  tendered  his  resig-
nation on  the  20th.  Hardee,  Van  Dorn,  Kirby
Smith,  and  Hood  had  already  resigned.  Thomas,
unmoved,  continued  with  ardor  the  preparations
necessary  to  sustain  the  cause  of  his  country.  At
the  head  of  a  brigade  he  soon  crossed  the  Potomac
into  Virginia,  where,  on  2  July,  he  met  and  put  to
flight  an  insurgent  militia  force  of  his  own  state,
under  command  of  Col.  Thomas  J.  Jackson,  drawn
up  to  resist  his  movements.  From  that  day  till
the  end  of  the  war  he  did  not  have  or  seek  a  single
hour's  respite  from  exacting  labors  in  the  field.
He  led  the  advance  of  Patterson's  column  to-
ward Winchester  prior  to  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,
and  at  the  close  of  that  campaign  he  was  appointed,
17  Aug.,  1861,  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  and
assigned  to  duty  in  the  Department  of  the  Cum-
berland, which  included  Kentucky  and  Tennessee.
He  found  the  whole  of  Kentucky  in  a  turmoil,
when,  on  10  Sept.,  he  entered  upon  his  work  at
Camp  Dick  Robinson,  100  miles  south  of  Cincin-
nati. The  Confederate  army  had  occupied  Colum-
bus in  spite  of  the  formal  protest  of  legislature
and  governor,  and  Thomas  was  menaced  with  per-
sonal violence.  The  camp  was  swarming  with  un-
organized Kentucky  regiments  and  crowds  of
refugees  from  east  Tennessee,  eager  to  be  armed
and  led  back  to  drive  the  enemy  from  their  homes.
For  the  first  few  months  Gen.  Thomas  was  fully
occupied  in  instructing  the  raw  recruits.  It  re-
quired infinite  patience  to  work  over  these  inde-
pendent backwoodsmen  into  any  semblance  to
soldiers.  Little  by  little  the  task  was  accomplished,
and  the  troops  so  organized  became  the  first  bri-
gade of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland.

Gen.  Robert  Anderson  was  soon  relieved  from
duty  on  account  of  failing  health,  and,  after  a
short  interregnum,  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell  was
placed  in  command  of  the  department.  Under
his  orders,  Gen.  Thomas  continued  his  preparations
for  a  movement  in  east  Tennessee.  Early  in
January,  1862,  he  placed  the  head  of  his  column
at  Somerset,  fifty  miles  south  of  Camp  Dick  Rob-
inson, and  on  the  night  of  the  18th  encamped  at
Logan's  Cross- Roads,  ten  miles  from  the  enemy's
position,  with  seven  regiments  of  infantry,  one
squadron  of  cavalry,  and  two  batteries.  At  early
dawn  the  next  morning  he  was  attacked  by  a  force
consisting  of  nine  regiments  of  infantry,  two  squad-
rons and  two  companies  of  cavalry,  and  two  bat-
teries. After  a  stout  resistance  Gen.  Thomas  sue-


80


THOMAS


THOMAS


ceeded  in  placing  one  of  his  regiments  on  the  flank
of  the  enemy's  line,  when  a  charge  was  ordered,
and  the  whole  Confederate  force  was  driven  in  eon-
fusion  from
the  field,  with
the  loss  of  its
leader.  Gen.
Felix  K.  Zol-
licoffer.  Pur-
suit was  con-
tinued till
dark,  when
the  enemy's
works  were
reached.  Dur-
ing the  night
that  follow-
ed, most  of
the  Confed-
erate army  escaped  across  the  river,  leaving  guns,
small-arms,  and  other  spoils.  This  contest,  which
is  known  as  the  battle  of  Mill  Springs,  was  the  first
real  victory  for  the  National  cause  since  the  dis-
aster at  Bull  Run,  six  months  before.  The  loss
was  39  killed  and  207  wounded  on  the  National
side,  against  125  Confederates  killed  and  5309
wounded.  Immediately  afterward  the  whole  army
entered  upon  the  movements  that  culminated  in
the  battle  of  Shiloh  and  the  expulsion  of  the  Con-
federate armies  from  the  entire  region  between  the
Cumberland  mountains  and  the  Mississippi,  Gen.
Thomas  shared  in  all  these  operations.  On  25
April,  1862,  he  was  made  major-general,  and  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  Gen.  Grant's  army,  the
latter  being  made  second  in  general  command  un-
der Halleck,  and  thus  virtually  retired  from  active
command  for  the  time  being.  Soon  after  the  oc-
cupation of  Corinth,  Gen.  Thomas  returned  to  his
old  command,  and  with  it  went  through  the  ex-
hausting campaign  by  which,  at  the  end  of  Sep-
tember, Gen.  Buell's  whole  army,  save  the  isolated
garrison  at  Nashville,  was  concentrated  at  Louis-
ville, prepared  to  give  battle  to  Gen.  Bragg,  who
had  audaciously  led  his  army  from  Chattanooga  to
the  Ohio  river.  At  Louisville,  on  29  Sept.,  the
command  of  the  National  army  was  offered  to  Gen.
Thomas,  but  he  declined  it.  On  30  Oct.  Gen.
Buell  was  superseded  by  Gen.  William  S.  Rose-
crans,  and  Gen.  Thomas  wa^  placed  in  command
of  five  divisions,  forming  the  centre  of  the  army.
On  31  Dec,  1862,  the  contending  forces,  under
Roseerans  and  Bragg,  met  in  bloody  conflict  on
the  banks  of  Stone  river,  near  Murfreesboro,  Tenn.
By  an  impetuous  and  overwhelming  charge  of  the
enemy  at  dawn,  the  whole  right  wing  of  the  Na-
tional army  was  swept  back  three  miles,  and  its
very  existence  was  imperilled.  But  the  centre,
under  Thomas,  firmly  held  its  ground  and  repelled
every  assault  till  nightfall.  The  contest  was  re-
newed on  2  Jan.,  1863,  when,  by  a  bold  and  fiery
attack  of  a  part  of  Thomas's  force  on  the  enemy's
right,  the  Confederate  position  was  endangered,
and  Bragg,  in  the  night  of  the  3d,  retreated.  The
National  army  lay  nearly  motionless  until  June,
when  it  entered  on  that  series  of  brilliant  flanking
movements  which,  without  any  serious  conflict,
drove  the  enemy  from  Tennessee  and  compelled
the  abandonment  of  Chattanooga  on  8  Sept.  The
terrible  battle  of  Chickamauga  followed,  when,  on
19  and  20  Sept.,  the  Confederate  army,  re-enforced
by  Longstreet's  corps  from  Virginia  and  some
troops  from  Mississippi,  put  forth  almost  super-
human efforts  to  overwhelm  the  National  forces  in
detail,  and  thus  secure,  once  more,  the  prize  of
Chattanooga,  the  gateway  to  the  heart  of  the  Con-


federacy. Again,  as  at  Stone  river,  the  right  was
swept  away,  carrying  with  it  the  commander  of
the  army  and  two  corps  commanders.  Gen.  Thomas
was  thus  left  with  but  little  more  than  six  out  of
thirteen  divisions  to  maintain  his  ground  against
five  corps  flushed  with  seeming  victory  and  eager
with  the  hope  of  making  him  an  easy  prey.  From
noon  till  night  the  battle  raged.  Every  assault  of
the  enemy  had  been  repelled,  the  National  troops
were  full  of  confidence  and  ardor,  and  the  final
assault  of  the  day  was  made  by  a  National  brigade
following  up  with  the  bayonet  a  retreating  Con-
federate division.  In  the  night,  by  orders  of  the
army  commander,  Gen.  Thomas  fell  back  to  Ross-
ville,  five  miles,  and  there  awaited  all  the  next  day
the  expected  attack;  but  the  enemy  was  in  no
condition  to  make  it.  For  the  only  time  in  its  his-
tory, the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  left  the  enemy
to  bury  its  dead.  Gen.  Daniel  II.  Hill,  command-
ing a  Confederate  corps  in  that  battle,  who  had
served  in  both  eastern  and  western  armies,  said :
"It  seems  tome  the  Hanoi  the  southern  soldier
was  never  seen  after  Chickamauga.  That  barren
victory  sealed  the  fate  of  the  southern  Confederacy."

Following  this  great  battle,  Gen.  Thomas  on  19
Oct.  was  placed  in  command  of  the  Army  of  the
Cumberland.  Its  affairs  were  in  a  most  critical  con-
dition. All  communication  with  its  base  of  supplies
was  cut  off.  an  almost  impassable  river  was  in  its
rear,  from  the  heights  of  Lookout  mountain  and
Mission  ridge  the  enemy  looked  down  on  the  be-
leaguered force,  slowly  starving  in  its  stronghold.
Immediate  measures  were  taken  for  its  relief,  and
from  every  quarter  troops  were  hurried  toward
Chattanooga,  both  to  open  communications  and  to
re-enforce  the  army  for  active  operations.  Two
corps  from  the  Potomac  and  two  from  Mississippi
were  speedily  forwarded,  and  all  were  placed  under
command  of  Gen.  Grant.  To  his  almost  despair-
ing message  to  Gen.  Thomas  to  hold  the  place,
came  the  cheering  reply,  "We  will  hold  the  town
till  we  starve."  Thomas  had  then  in  store  six  days'
supply  for  50,000  men.  Preparations  were  at  last
completed,  and  on  23  Nov.  the  forces  from  Missis-
sippi, aided  by  a  division  from  Thomas,  attacked
the  northern  end  of  Mission  ridge,  and  gained
some  ground.  On  the  24th  Lookout  mountain  was
captured  by  the  forces  from  the  Potomac,  strength-
ened by  two  of  Thomas's  brigades.  On  the  25th,
under  Thomas's  leadership,  the  Army  of  the  Cum-
berland, released  from  its  long  imprisonment,
stormed  and  carried  the  three  lines  of  rifle-pits
at  the  base,  midway,  and  on  the  summit  of  Mis-
sion ridge,  and  drove  the  Confederate  army,  in
utter  rout,  from  the  fortified  position  it  had  held
so  confidently  for  two  months.  As  the  jubilant
National  troops  reached  the  summit  of  the  ridge,
the  whistle  of  the  first  steamboat,  loaded  with  sup-
plies, told  that  the  siege  was  indeed  ended.

In  the  spring  of  1864  Gen.  Thomas  entered  upon
the  Atlanta  campaign,  at  the  head  of  65.000  veter-
ans, being  two  thirds  of  the  grand  army  com-
manded by  Gen.  Sherman.  He  occupied  the  centre
of  the  line.  From  Chattanooga  to  Atlanta  it  was
an  almost  continuous  battle  of  a  hundred  days.
The  relative  amount  of  work  done  by  each  of  the
three  armies  is  indicated  by  the  losses.  The  Army
of  the  Cumberland  lost,  in  killed  and  wounded,  32
per  cent.,  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  26  per  cent.,
the  Army  of  the  Ohio  16  per  cent.  On  1  Sept.,  at
Jonesboro',  the  14th  army  corps  of  Thomas's  army
made  a  successful  assault,  completely  driving  from
the  field  the  enemy's  right,  and  on  the  2d  the  20th
corps,  also  of  Thomas's  command,  entered  Atlanta,
and  the  campaign  was  ended.


THOMAS


THOMAS


81


When  Gen.  Hood  placed  his  whole  force  across
the  railroad  north  of  Atlanta,  and,  turning  his
cavalry  loose  in  Tennessee,  threatened  to  cut  off
supplies  from  Sherman's  army,  Gen.  Thomas  was
sent  to  Nashville,  while  Gen.  Sherman  prepared
for  his  march  to  the  sea.  At  the  end  of  October
the  4th  and  23d  corps  were  sent  to  Tennessee,  with
instructions  to  Gen.  Thomas  to  use  them  in  guard-
ing the  line  of  the  river  during  Sherman's  ab-
sence. It  was  supposed  that  Hood  would  follow
Sherman's  army  through  Georgia,  but  it  was  soon
found  that  the  entire  force  that  had  confronted
Sherman  on  his  way  to  Atlanta  was  now  threaten-
ing Thomas.  All  the  available  troops  were  concen-
trated, and  Hood's  advance  was  resisted  to  the  ut-
most. After  a  series  of  escapes  from  desperate
hazards,  a  part  of  the  two  National  corps  under
<xen.  John  M.  Schofield,  on  the  afternoon  of  30
Nov.,  1864,  at  Franklin,  Tenn.,  signally  defeated
the  repeated  assaults  of  Hood's  army,  inflicting
upon  it  irreparable  losses,  including  six  generals
killed  and  a  large  number  wounded.  That  night
the  National  force  retired  to  Nashville,  where  it
was  re-enforced  by  a  corps  from  Missouri  and  a
division  from  Chattanooga.  Hood  boldly  advanced
to  the  vicinity  and  fortified  himself.  Nearly  all
Thomas's  mounted  force  had  accompanied  Sher-
man, leaving  all  the  remaining  cavalry  to  be  re-
mounted. The  troops  from  Missouri  and  Chatta-
nooga were  destitute  of  transportation.  Thus  in
midwinter,  at  200  miles  from  the  main  base  of
supplies,  and  in  the  presence  of  a  bold  and  active
enemy,  he  had  thrust  upon  him  a  task  that  at  any
time  was  almost  overwhelming.  Some  called  him
"slow,"  yet,  within  two  weeks  from  the  day  when
his  unsupplied  and  dismounted  army  reached
Nashville,  it  was  ready  to  take  the  field.  But
Gen.  Grant  at  City  Point  grew  so  impatient  over
what  he  considered  needless  delay,  that  he  issued
an  order  dismissing  Gen.  Thomas  from  command,
and  directing  him  to  report  to  one  of  the  corps
commanders.  After  a  fuller  explanation  of  the
causes  of  the  delay,  this  unexampled  order  was  sus-
pended, but  Gen.  Grant  himself  set  out  for  the  scene
of  operations.  A  terrible  storm  of  sleet  and  rain,
freezing  as  it  fell,  came  up  on  9  Dec,  rendering  all
movement  impossible.  On  the  14th  a  thaw  began.
On  the  loth  and  16th,  in  exact  accordance  with
the  detailed  order  of  battle,  the  confident  troops
of  Gen.  Thomas,  who  had  never  lost  faith  in  their
leader,  by  skilful  and  energetic  movements,  com-
pletely overthrew  the  last  organized  Confederate
army  in  the  southwest.  A  feeble  remnant,  de-
spoiled of  guns  and  transportation,  came  together
some  weeks  later  at  Tupelo,  Miss.,  nearly  250  miles
distant. As  an  army  it  never  again  took  the  field.

What  Gen.  Thomas  accomplished  in  this  cam-
paign, and  with  what  means,  cannot  be  better  told
than  in  the  words  of  his  despatch  to  Gen.  Halleck
on  21  Dec:  "I fought  the  battles  of  the  15th  and
16th  with  the  troops  but  partially  equipped ;  and
notwithstanding  the  inclemency  of  the  weather
and  the  partial  equipment,  have  been  enabled  to
drive  the  enemy  beyond  Duck  river,  crossing  two
streams  with  my  troops  without  the  aid  of  pon-
toons, and  with  but  little  transportation  to  bring
up  supplies  of  provisions  and  ammunition.  .  .  .
Too  much  must  not  be  expected  of  troops  that
have  to  be  reorganized,  especially  when  they  have
the  task  of  destroying  a  force,  in  a  winter  cam-
paign, which  was  enabled  to  make  an  obstinate
resistance  to  twice  its  numbers  in  spring  and  sum-
mer." Following  this  great  victory  came  the  opera-
tions of  the  cavalry  as  organized  by  Gen.  Thomas
in  Alabama  and  Georgia,  resulting  in  the  taking  of
vol.  vi. — 6


Selma  and  the  capture  of  Jefferson  Davis.  But
the  battle  of  Nashville  was  substantially  the  end
of  the  rebellion  in  that  quarter.  For  it  he  received
the  appointment  of  major  -  general  in  the  U.  S.
army,  accompanied  by  the  assurance  of  the  secre-
tary of  war  that  "  no  commander  has  more  justly
earned  promotion  by  devoted,  disinterested,  and
valuable  services  to  his  country."  He  also  received
the  thanks  of  congress  and  of  the  legislature  of
Tennessee,  together  with  a  gold  medal  presented
to  him  by  the  latter  body  on  the  first  anniversary
of  the  battle.

With  the  close  of  the  war,  Gen.  Thomas  bent  all
his  energies  to  the  restoration  of  peace  and  order
throughout  his  command.  In  May,  1869,  he  was
placed  in  command  of  the  military  "division  of  the
Pacific,  and  held  it  until  his  death.  Though  he
had  seen  more  continuous,  varied,  and  active  ser-
vice than  any  officer  of  his  age  and  rank  in  the
army,  Gen.  Thomas  was  emphatically  a  lover  of
peace.  His  whole  nature  and  disposition  were
orderly,  gentle,  and  kindly.  He  abhorred  war,  not
merely  because  of  its  cruelty,  but  also  because  of
the  turmoil  and  disorder  it  occasioned.  Though  a
lover  of  home  life,  he  never  was  allowed  to  remain
long  in  one  place,  the  average  length  of  time  that
he  was  stationed  at  any  one  post  being  less  than
five  months.  He  enjoyed  the  calm  and  peaceful
life  of  nature,
loving  treesand
flowers  and  the
open  air.  His
range  of  read-
ing was  not
very  wide,  but
he  was  well  ac-
quainted with
natural  science,
was  a  good  ge-
ologist, expert
in  woodcraft,
and  well  versed
in  botany.  The
museums  of  the
Smithsonian  in-
stitution con-
tain rare and

curious  specimens  contributed  by  him.  In  his  own
profession  he  was  thoroughly  trained  in  all  depart-
ments, so  that,  when  he  was  placed  in  command  of
a  corps,  he  had  had  personal  experience  of  every
arm  of  the  service.  When  the  war  ended  he  was
the  only  general  officer  of  high  rank  and  distinc-
tion (except  Sheridan  and  Hancock)  who  had
served  uninterruptedly  in  the  army.  He  had  care-
fully studied  military  and  international  law,  and
especially  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,
and  was  a  thorough  believer  in  the  ideas  on  which
the  government  was  based.  No  man  was  ever
more  scrupulous  to  subordinate  the  military  to  the
civil  power.  The  general  of  the  army,  his  class-
mate and  life-long  friend,  in  announcing  his  death,
said :  "  The  very  impersonation  of  honesty,  integ-
rity, and  honor,  he  will  stand  to  posterity  as  the
beau-ideal  of  the  soldier  and  gentleman.  Though
he  leaves  no  child  to  bear  his  name,  the  old  Army
of  the  Cumberland,  numbered  by  tens  of  thousands,
called  him  father,  and  will  weep  for  him  in  tears  of
manly  grief."  He  was  buried  with  all  the  honors
of  his  rank  at  Troy,  X.  Y.,  on  !S  April,  1870.  A
fine  equestrian  statue,  in  bronze,  by  J.  Q.  A.  Ward,
erected  by  the  soldiers  of  his  old  army,  perpetuates
his  appearance  and  features  in  the  capital  of  the
country.  (See illustration.)  His  biography  has  been
written  by  Thomas  B.  Van  Home  (New  York,  1882).


82


THOMAS


THOMAS


See  also  John  W.  De  Peyster's  "  Sketch  of  G.  H.
Thomas"  (1870)  and  James  A.  Garfield's  " Oration
before  the  Society  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumber-
land," 25  Nov.,  1870  (Cincinnati,  1871).

THOMAS,  Henry  Goddard,  soldier,  b.  in  Port-
land, Me.,  5  April,  1837.  He  was  graduated  at
Amherst  in  1858,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  He  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  5th  Maine
volunteers  in  April,  1861,  and  was  captain  in  that
regiment  from  June  till  August,  when  he  was  given
that  rank  in  the  11th  regular  infantry.  He  was
present  at  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run  and  the  ac-
tion at  Snicker's  Gap,  Va.,  was  appointed  colonel
of  the  2d  U.  S.  colored  regiment  in  February,  1863,
and  engaged  in  the  actions  of  Bristol  Station,  Rap-
pahannock Station,  and  Mine  Run,  Va.  He  then
organized  the  19th  U.  S.  colored  regiment,  and  be-
came its  colonel  in  December,  1863.  In  February,
1864,  he  was  in  command  at  Camp  Birney,  Md.,
and  he  led  a  brigade  in  the  9th  corps,  Army  of  the
Potomac,  from  May,  1864,  till  November,  being
engaged  at  the  battles  of  the  Wilderness,  Spottsyl-
vania,  Petersburg,  and  Hatcher's  Run.  He  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  30  Nov.,
1864,  transferred  to  the  Army  of  the  James,  led  a
brigade  and  division  in  the  25th  corps  of  that
army,  and  temporarily  commanded  the  corps.
During  the  war  he  received  the  brevets  of  major,
12  May,  1864,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services
in  the  battle  of  Spottsylvania ;  lieutenant-colonel,
30  July,  1864,  for  services  at  Petersburg ;  and  colo-
nel, brigadier-general,  and  major-general  of  vol-
unteers, 13  March,  1865,  for  services  during  the
war.  He  was  honorably  mustered  out  of  the  vol-
unteer service  in  1866,  but  remained  in  the  Unit-
ed States  army,  and  is  now  paymaster,  with  the
rank  of  major.  Gen.  Thomas  was  the  first  regu-
lar officer  to  accept  a  colonelcy  of  colored  troops.
— His  brother,  William  Widgery,  diplomatist,  b.
in  Portland,  Me.,  26  Aug.,  1839,  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1860.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  appointed  in  1862  U.  S.  vice-consul  at
Galatz,  Moldavia,  and  the  same  year  U.  S.  consul
at  Gothenburg,  Sweden,  where  he  remained  in
charge  till  1865.  He  was  one  of  the  board  of  com-
missioners for  the  settlement  of  the  public  lands  of
Maine  in  1869,  and  in  1870,  as  commissioner  of
emigration  for  Maine,  went  to  Sweden  to  recruit  a
colony.  On  his  return  he  founded  New  Sweden  in
the  forests  of  northern  Maine,  which  is  now  one
of  the  most  flourishing  agricultural  settlements  of
New  England.  He  was  a  member  of  the  house  of
representatives  of  the  Maine  legislature  in  1873-'5,
and  its  speaker  in  1874-'5,  became  a  member  of
the  state  senate  in  1879,  and  was  U.  S.  minister  to
Sweden  and  Norway  in  1883-'5.  On  the  occasion
of  his  presentation  he  addressed  the  king  in  a
speech  in  the  Swedish  language.  He  has  published
•'  The  Last  Athenian,"  translated  from  the  Swedish
of  Victor  Rydborg  (Philadelphia,  1869),  and  ha«
now  almost  completed  "  Sweden  and  the  Swedes,"
which  is  to  be  issued  simultaneously  in  New  York
and  Stockholm,  Sweden.

THOMAS,  Isaac,  scout,  b.  in  Virginia  about
1735;  d.  in  Sevierville,  Tenn.,  in  1819.  He  early
engaged  in  trading  with  the  Indians,  and  about
1755  located  among  the  Cherokees,  in  the  vicinity
of  Fort  Loudon.  He  was  a  man  of  immense
strength  and  courage,  and  these  qualities  secured
him  great  respect  among  the  Indians.  It  is  related
that  he  once  interfered  in  a  feud  between  two
Cherokee  braves  who  had  drawn  their  tomahawks
to  hew  each  other  in  pieces.  He  wrenched  the
weapons  from  their  hands,  when  both  set  upon  him
at  once,  and  he  cooled  their  heated  valor  by  lifting


one  after  the  other  into  the  air  and  tossing  them
into  Tellico  river.  One  of  these  braves  subse-
quently saved  his  life  at  the  Fort  Loudon  massa-
cre, of  which  it  is  said  that  he  and  two  others
were  the  sole  survivors.  When  peace  returned  he
again  settled  among  the  Cherokees,  having  his
home  at  their  capital,  Echota,  where,  in  a  log-
cabin,  he  kept  the  trader's  usual  stock  of  powder
and  lead,  guns,  traps,  and  other  articles  of  value
to  the  Indians.  He  was  in  high  favor  with  Nancy
Ward,  the  Cherokee  prophetess,  who  was  very
friendly  to  the  white  settlers.  She  informed  him
early  in  1776  of  the  hostile  designs  of  the  Indians,
and  on  the  30th  of  May  said  to  him :  "  Send  my
white  brothers  word  to  be  ready,  for  the  bolt  will
fall  very  soon,  and  at  midnight."  He  sent  off  at
once  a  trusty  messenger  to  John  Sevier  and  James
Robertson  at  Watauga,  but  remained  behind  till
the  actual  outbreak  of  hostilities.  At  midnight
on  7  July,  1776,  Nancy  Ward  came  again  to  his
cabin  to  urge  his  immediate  departure  for  the  set-
tlements. At  the  imminent  risk  of  his  life  he  made
the  journey,  and  a  few  days  later  was  with  the  lit-
tle garrison  of  forty  that .  repelled  the  attack  of
Oconostota  on  the  fort  at  Watauga.  It  is  ques-
tionable if  Sevier  could  have  resisted  the  overpow-
ering force  that  was  brought  against  him  if  he
had  not  received  timely  warning  through  Isaac
Thomas.  Soon  afterward  he  piloted  the  expedi-
tion that  laid  waste  the  Indian  country,  and  sub-
sequently, for  twenty  years,  he  acted  as  guide  to
Gen.  Sevier  in  nearly  all  of  his  many  campaigns
against  the  Creeks  and  Cherokees.  Soon  after  the
Revolution  he  relinquished  trade  with  the  Indians,
and  settled  upon  an  extensive  farm  in  Sevier  coun-
ty. He  called  the  settlement  which  grew  up  about
his  station  Sevierville,  in  honor  of  his  general,  and
the  place  is  now  one  of  the  most  beautiful  locali-
ties in  the  state  of  Tennessee.

THOMAS,  Isaiah,  printer,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
19  Jan.,  1749 ;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  4  April,  1831.
At  the  age  of  six  years  he  was  apprenticed  to  Zach-
ariah  Fowles,  a  ballad-printer,  and  was  employed
setting  type.  Af-
ter eleven  years'
apprenticeship  he
travelled  from  the
West  Indies  to
Nova  Scotia,  and,
returning  to  Bos-
ton, entered  in
1770  into  part-
nership with  his
former  master  in
the  publication  of
the  "  Massachu-
setts Spy."  In
three  months  this
relationship  was
dissolved,  and  he
continued  the  pa-
per alone,  choos-
ing for  his  motto
"Open  to  all  par-
ties, but  influ-
enced by  none."  As  he  was  a  Whig,  the  policy  of
the  paper  gradually  changed,  and  it  became  the
organ  of  that  party,  publishing  many  spirited  at-
tacks on  the  British  government.  In  1771  Gov.
Thomas  Hutchinson  ordered  the  attorney-general
to  prosecute  Thomas ;  but  the  grand  jury  failed  to
find  cause  for  indictment.  As  the  Tories  became
more  incensed  against  the  independence  of  the
"  Spy,"  a  few  days  before  the  battle  of  Lexington,
in  which  he  participated,  he  packed  his  press  and


THOMAS


THOMAS


83


types  and  took  them  by  night  to  Worcester.  His
other  property  was  destroyed.  On  18  April  he  en-
gaged with  Paul  Revere  and  his  associates  in  giv-
ing information  of  the  march  of  the  British,  and  he
afterward  resumed  the  publication  of  the  "  Spy  "  in
Worcester,  where  it  is  still  (1888)  published.  In  the
year  1776-'7  it  was  issued  in  Boston.  Mr.  Thomas
was  connected  with  the  paper  until  1801.  In  1786
he  procured  from  Europe  the  first  font  of  music-
type  that  was  brought  to  this  country,  and  he  was
the  first  printer  here  to  use  such  type.  He  was  en-
gaged at  Walpole,  N.  H.,  in  book-publishing  and
printing  the  "  Farmer's  Museum,"  and  in  1788
opened  a  book-store  in  Boston  under  the  firm-name
of  Thomas  and  Andrews,  also  establishing  branches
of  his  publishing  business  in  several  parts  of  the
United  States.  The  "  Massachusetts  Magazine  "
was  published  by  the  firm  in  eight  volumes,  from
1789  till  1796.  He  printed  at  Worcester  a  folio
edition  of  the  Bible  (1791),  Watts's  "Psalms  and
Hymns,"  and  most  of  the  Bibles  and  school-books
that  were  used  in  this  country  at  that  date.  In  1812
he  founded  the  Antiquarian  society  of  Worcester,
of  which  he  was  president  and  a  liberal  patron.  He
gave  from  his  important  collection  nearly  8,000  vol-
umes to  its  library,  besides  tracts,  and  one  of  the
most  valuable  files  of  newspapers  in  the  country,
and  he  presented  land  and  a  hall,  with  a  provision
equal  to  $24,000  for  its  maintenance.  The  library
now  contains  about  90.000  volumes,  including  the
Mather  collection.  William  Lincoln,  in  his  "  His-
tory of  Worcester  "  (1837),  says  of  him :  "  His  repu-
tation in  future  time  will  rest,  as  a  patriot,  on  the
manly  independence  which  gave — through  the  in-
itiatory stage  and  progress  of  the  Revolution — the
strong  influence  of  the  press  he  directed  toward  the
cause  of  freedom,  when  royal  flattery  would  have
seduced  and  the  power  of  government  subdued  its
action."  Thomas  also  published  the  "  New  Eng-
land Almanac,"  which  had  something  of  the  flavor
of  Benjamin  Franklin's  "Poor  Richard."  It  ap-
peared in  1775,  and  was  continued  under  several
titles  until  1817.  Alleghany  college,  Pa.,  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1818.  He  was  the  author  of
a  valuable  "  History  of  Printing  "  (2  vols.,  Worces-
ter, Mass.).  See  a  memoir  of  him  by  his  grandson,
Benjamin  F.  Thomas  (Boston,  1874). — His  nephew,
Ebenezer  Smith,  journalist,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Mass.,
in  June,  1780 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  August,
1844.  learned  printing  with  his  uncle  in  Worcester,
and  in  1795  established  himself  as  a  bookseller  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  where,  from  1810  till  1816,  he
edited  the  "  City  Gazette."  He  removed  to  Balti-
more in  1816,  served  in  the  Maryland  legislature  in
1818-'19,  and  went  in  1829  to  Cincinnati,  where  he
edited  the  "  Daily  Advertiser  "  from  that  year  till
1835,  and  then  the  "  Evening  Post "  till  1839.  He
was  the  author  of  "  Reminiscences  of  the  Last  Sixty-
five  Years,  commencing  with  the  Battle  of  Lexing-
ton, etc.,  and  Sketches  of  his  own  Life  and  Times  "
(2  vols.,  Hartford,  1840),  and  "  Reminiscences  of
South  Carolina  "  (2  vols.,  1840). — Isaiah's  grandson,
Benjamin  Franklin,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
12  Feb.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  27  Sept.,  1878,
was  graduated  at .  Brown  in  1830,  studied  law  in
Cambridge,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1833.
He  served  in  the  legislature  in  1842,  and  was  pro-
bate judge  for  Worcester  county  from  1844  till
1848,  in  which  year  he  was  a  presidential  elector  on
the  Whig  ticket.  He  was  a  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Massachusetts  from  1853  till  1859,  when
he  resigned  and  resumed  his  practice.  He  was  in
congress  from  4  July,  1861,  till  3  March,  1863,  serv-
ing on  the  judiciary  committee  and  the  special
committee on the bankrupt law. In 1868 he


was  nominated  by  the  governor  for  chief  justice
of  Massachusetts,  but  the  nomination  was  not
confirmed  by  the  council.  He  was  president  of
the  American  antiquarian  society,  and  received
the  degree  of  LL.  1).  from  Brown  in  1853  and
from  Harvard  in  1854.  Judge  Thomas  pub-
lished a  "Digest  of  the  Laws  of  Massachusetts
in  Relation  to  the  Powers,  Duties,  and  Liabilities
of  Towns  and  of  Town  Officers"  (Worcester,
1845),  and  several  pamphlets,  including,  besides
the  memoir  of  his  grandfather  mentioned  above,
"  A  Few  Suggestions  upon  the  Personal  Liberty
Law  and  '  Secession,'  in  a  Letter  to  a  Friend  "
(1861).— Ebenezer  Smith's  son,  Frederick  Will-
iam, journalist,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in  1811 ;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  30  Sept.,  1866,  became  a
cripple  at  the  age  of  four  years.  He  was  educated
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  where  he  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1828.  In  1830  he  removed
to  Cincinnati  and  assisted  his  father  in  editing  the
"  Advertiser,"  in  which  appeared  his  song,  "  'Tis
said  that  absence  conquers  love."  He  became  an
associate  editor  of  the  "  Democratic  Intelligencer  "
in  1834,  and  of  the  "  Evening  Post "  in  1835.  From
1841  till  1850  he  was  a  clerk  in  the  treasury  de-
partment in  Washington,  D.  C,  for  which  he  se-
lected a  library.  In  1850  he  returned  to  Cincin-
nati, entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episco-
pal church  and  preached  in  that  city.  Subsequently
he  was  professor  of  rhetoric  and  English  literature
in  the  University  of  Alabama,  and  in  1858  re-
sumed the  practice  of  law  in  Cambridge,  Md.  In
1860  he  took  charge  of  the  literary  department  of
the  Richmond  "  Enquirer,"  and  afterward  became
editorially  connected  with  the  "  South  Carolinian  "
of  Columbia.  He  travelled  extensively  through
the  southern  states,  was  a  successful  lecturer,  and
occasionally  took  part  in  politics.  In  addition  to
contributions  to  magazines,  in  prose  and  verse,  he
was  the  author  of  "  The  Emigrant,  or  Reflections
when  descending  the  Ohio,  a  Poem  "  (Cincinnati,
1833);  "Clinton  Bradshaw.  a  Tale"  (Philadelphia,
1835) ;  "  East  and  West,  a  Novel "  (1836) ;  "  Howard
Pinckney,  a  Novel "  (1840) ;  "  The  Beechen  Tree,  a
Tale  told  in  Rhyme,  and  other  Poems  "  (New  York,
1844);  "  Sketches  of  Character,  and  Tales  founded
on  Fact"  (Louisville,  1849);  and  "John  Randolph
of  Roanoke,  and  other  Sketches  of  Character,  in-
cluding William  Wirt ;  together  with  Tales  of  Real
Life  "  (Philadelphia,  1853). — Another  son  of  Ebe-
nezer Smith,  Lewis  Foulke,  poet,  b.  in  Baltimore
county,  Md.,  in  1815 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  26
May,  1868,  assisted  his  brother  in  conducting  the
"  Commercial  Advertiser,"  and  the  "  Evening  Post,"
in  Cincinnati,  and,  after  the  latter  was  discontinued
in  1838,  studied  law.  He  then  edited  the  "  Daily
Herald  "  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  removed  in  1841  to  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  and  subsequently  to  Washington,  D.  C,
where  he  practised  law  until  his  death.  He  was
the  author  of  "  Inda,  and  other  Poems,"  the  first
book  of  poetry  that  was  published  west  of  the  Mis-
sissippi (St.  Louis,  1842)  and  two  tragedies — "  Os-
ceola, which  was  successfully  performed  in  Cin-
cinnati, St.  Louis,  and  New  Orleans  (1838),  and
"  Cortez,  the  Conqueror"  (Washington,  1857).—
Ebenezer  Smith's  daughter,  Martha  McCannon,
author,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  15  Nov.,  1823,  is  the
author  of  "  Life's  Lesson  "  (New  York,  1846),  and
"Capt.  Phil,  a  Story  of  the  Civil  War"  (1882).—
Another  daughter,  Mary  von  Erden,  author,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  8  Dec,  1825,  has  been  a  com-
puter in  the  office  of  the  U.  S.  coast  and  geodetic
survey  in  Washington,  D.  C.  since  1854.  She  is
the  author  of  a  novel  entitled  "  Winning  the  Bat-
tle "  (Philadelphia,  1882).


84


THOMAS


THOMAS


THOMAS,  James,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.  in
St.  Mary's  county,  Md.,  11  March,  178o ;  d.  there,
25  Dec,  1845.  His  father,  William,  served  as  a
private  in  the  "  Maryland  line,"  and  was  for  many
years  president  of  the  state  senate.  The  son  was
educated  at  Charlotte  Hall  academy,  and  was
graduated  at  the  Philadelphia  medical  college  in
1807.  In  April,  1812,  he  was  commissioned  major
of  the  4th  volunteer  cavalry,  and  he  afterward
became  major-general  of  Maryland  militia.  Sub-
sequently he  served  in  the  state  senate,  and  in
1833-'6  was  governor  of  Maryland.

THOMAS,  Jane,  heroine,  b.  in, Chester  county,
Pa.,  in  the  18th  century.  She  was  the  wife  of
John  Thomas,  colonel  of  the  Spartan  regiment  of
South  Carolina.  On  hearing  that  a  large  party
was  approaching  to  seize  the  ammunition  that
Gov.  John  Rutledge  had  intrusted  to  his  keeping,
Col.  Thomas  fled  with  his  band  of  twenty-five  men,
taking  with  him  a  part  of  the  powder.  Two  men
and  two  women  were  left  in  charge  of  the  house,
which  was  attacked  by  the  Tories.  Mrs.  Thomas
and  her  companion  loaded  the  guns  for  the  men,
and  a  continual  firing  was  kept  up  until  the  assail-
ants withdrew.  It  is  said  that  the  ammunition
that  she  saved  through  her  courage  was  the  main
supply  for  Sumter's  command  in  the  skirmishes  at
Rocky  Mount  and  Hanging  Rock.

THOMAS,  Jesse  Burgess,  senator,  b.  in  Hagers-
town,  Md.,  in  1777;  d.  in  Mount  Vernon,  Ohio,  4
May,  1853.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Lord  Balti-
more. He  removed  to  the  west  in  1779,  studied
law  with  his  brother,  Richard  Symmes  Thomas,
in  Bracken  county,  Ky.,  went  to  Lawrenceburg,  Ind.,
in  March,  1803,  and  practised  his  profession.  In
January,  1805,  he  was  elected  delegate  to  the  legis-
lature of  Indiana  territory  at  Vincennes,  and  he
was  speaker  of  the  house  in  1805-'8.  He  was  ter-
ritorial delegate  to  congress  in  1808-'9,  then  moved
to  Kaskaskia,  and,  upon  the  organization  of  the
territory  of  Illinois,  7  March,  1809,  was  appointed
by  President  Madison  one  of  the  judges  of  the
U.  S.  court.  In  July,  1818,  he  was  a  delegate  from
St.  Clair  county  to  the  convention  that  framed
the  state  constitution,  and  was'  its  president.  At
the  first  session  of  the  legislature  he  was  elected
XJ.  S.  senator,  and  held  that  post  from  4  Dec,
1818,  till  3  March,  1829.  In  1820  he  introduced
the  "  Missouri  Compromise  "  and  secured  its  adop-
tion. In  1824  he  strongly  advocated  the  nomina-
tion of  William  H.  Crawford  for  president,  and
was  delegate  to  the  convention  at  Columbus  in
1840  that  nominated  his  friend,  William  Henry
Harrison.  He  afterward  removed  to  Mount  Ver-
non. Ohio,  where  he  committed  suicide. — His  great-
nephew,  Jesse  Burgess,  clergyman,  b.  in  Edwards-
vilie,  111.,  29  July,  1832,  is  the  son  of  Jesse  Burgess
Thomas  (1806-1850),  who  was  for  many  years  a
judge  of  the  circuit  and  supreme  courts  of  Illinois.
After  graduation  at  Kenyon  college,  Gambier,
Ohio,  in  1850,  the  son  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Illinois  in  1852.  In  1853-'4  he  studied
in  Rochester  theological  seminary,  but  was  forced
to  leave,  owing  to  impaired  health,  and  engaged  in
mercantile  pursuits  in  Chicago.  He  entered  the
Baptist  ministry  in  1862,  and  was  pastor  of  a  church
in  Waukegan,  111.,  in  1862-'4,  of  the  Pierrepont
street  church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1864-'8,  of  the
1st  church  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  in  1868-'9,  and
of  the  Michigan  avenue  church  in  Chicago  from
1869  till  1874,  when  he  became  pastor  of  the  1st
Bapl  ist  church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In  1887  he  ac-
cepted a  professorship  in  the  theological  seminary
at  Newton  Centre,  Mass.  The '  University  of  Chi-
cago gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1866. He  is


the  author  of  "  The  Old  Bible  and  the  New  Sci-
ence "  (New  York,  1877),  and  "  The  Mould  of  Doc-
trine "  (Philadelphia,  1883).

THOMAS,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Marshfield,  Mass.,
in  1725;  d.  in  Chambly,  near  Montreal,  Canada,  2
June,  1776.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  town,
studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Cotton  Tufts,  of  Med-
ford,  and  practised  in  his  native  town  and  after-
ward at  Kingston,  Mass.,  where  he  attained  note
in  his  profession.  In  1746  he  was  appointed  surgeon
to  a  regiment  that  was  sent  to  Annapolis  Royal,
Nova  Scotia,  and  in  1747  he  served  on  the  medical
staff  of  Gen.  William  Shirley's  regiment,  but
changed  this  post  for  that  of  lieutenant.  In  1759
he  became  a  colonel  of  provincials,  and  was  em-
ployed with  his  corps  in  Nova  Scotia.  In  1760  he
commanded  a  regiment  under  Gen.  Jeffrey  Amherst
at  Crown  Point,  headed  the  left  wing  of  the  detach-
ment that  Amherst  sent  under  Col.  William  Havi-
land  from  Lake  Champlain  in  August,  1760,  to  co-
operate with  the  other  division  of  the  army  moving
against  Montreal,  and  was  present  at  the  capture
of  that  city.  He  then  returned  to  his  practice  in
Kingston,  where  he  remained  until  the  beginning
of  the  Revolution.  He  joined  the  Sons  of  liberty,
raised  a  regiment  of  volunteers,  and  on  9  Feb.,
1775,  was  appointed  a  brigadier-general  by  the
Provincial  congress.  Being  overlooked  in  promo-
tion, he  withdrew,  but,  on  the  receipt  of  letters
from  Gen.  Charles  Lee  and  Gen.  Washington  and
a  resolution  from  congress  that  he  should  have
precedence  of  all  brigadiers  in  the  army,  Gen.
Thomas  returned  to  his  command.  Gen.  Washing-
ton in  his  letter  to  congress,  under  date  of  10  July,

1775,  said :  "  Gen.  Thomas  is  much  esteemed,  and
most  earnestly  desired  to  continue  in  the  service ;
and,  as  far  as  my  opportunities  have  enabled  me  to
judge,  I  must  join  in  the  general  opinion  that  he
is  an  able,  good  officer,  and  his  resignation  would
be  a  public  loss."  During  the  siege  of  Boston  he
commanded  a  brigade  on  the  Roxbury  side,  nearest
the  British  lines. On  the  evening  of  4  March,

1776,  with  3.000  men  and  a  supply  of  intrenching
tools,  he  took  possession  of  Dorchester  heights,
and  before  dawn  formidable  works  had  been  thrown
up,  which  movement  caused  the  British  to  evacuate
the  town  on  17  March,  1776.  On  6  March,  1776,  he
was  appointed  major-general.  After  the  death  of
Gen.  James  Montgomery  he  was  intrusted  with
the  command  in  Canada,  and  joined  the  army  be-
fore Quebec  on  1  May ;  but  as  he  found  the  force
less  than  1,000  men,  300  of  whom,  being  entitled
to  discharge,  refused  to  serve,  and  as  the  small-pox
was  raging  among  the  troops,  and  the  enemy  had
been  re-enforced,  he  determined  that  they  were  not
in  a  condition  to  risk  an  assault.  The  disabled
soldiers  were  removed  to  Three  Rivers,  and  the
American  troops  retreated  from  one  post  to  another
until  by  18  June  they  had  evacuated  Canada.  Be-
fore reaching  Chambly,  on  the  river  Sorel,  Gen.
Thomas  was  fatally  attacked  by  small-pox.

THOMAS,  John,  founder  of  a  sect,  b.  in  Lon-
don, England,  12  April,  1805;  d.  in  Jersey  <  iiy,
N.  J.,  5  March,  1871.  He  was  educated  in  Lon-
don, and  became  demonstrator  of  anatomy  at  St.
Thomas's  hospital  in  that  city.  In  1850  he  came
to  this  country  and  joined  the  Campbellite  Bap-
tists, but  left  this  sect  to  found  another,  whose
members  he  called  Christadelphians.  In  1860  he
returned  to  England,  where  he  delivered  lectures,
gaining  many  converts  to  his  theories  there  as
well  as  in  this  country.  He  edited  the  "  Apostolic
Advocate"  from  1832  till  1837,  in  1845-7  the
"Herald  of  the  Future  Age,"  and  from  1851  till
1861  the  '•  Herald  of  the  Kingdom." In  addition


THOMAS


THOMAS


85


to  numerous  pamphlets,  he  published  "Elpis
Israel"  (Loudon,  1848),  and  "Eureka,"  an  exposi-
tion of  the  Apocalypse  (3  vols.,  1860).  Robert
Roberts,  of  Birmingham,  England,  whom  he  ap-
pointed to  be  his  successor,  visited  this  country  in
1888,  and  delivered  lectures  in  various  towns.

THOMAS,  John  Addison,  soldier,  b.  in  Ten-
nessee in  1811 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  26  March,  1858.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1833,  assigned  to  the  3d  artillery,  served  in
garrison  and  as  assistant  instructor  of  infantry
tactics,  and  became  2d  lieutenant  on  1  Dec,  1835,
and  1st  lieutenant,  30  June,  1837.  In  1840-1  he
was  assistant  professor  of  geography,  history,  and
ethics  at  West  Point,  and  in  1842-'5  he  was  com-
mandant of  cadets  and  instructor  of  infantry
tactics.  He  was  made  captain  on  19  Nov.,  1843,
and  resigned  on  28  May,  1846,  to  practise  law  in
New  York  city.  On  23  July,  1846,  he  became
colonel  of  the  4th  New  York  regiment,  which  had
been  raised  for  the  war  with  Mexico,  but  was  not
mustered  into  service.  He  was  chief  engineer  of
New  York  state  in  1853-'4,  and  from  19  April,
1853,  to  15  Jan.,  1854,  was  advocate  of  the  United
States  in  London,  England,  under  the  convention
of  8  Feb.,  1853,  with  Great  Britain  for  the  adjust-
ment of  American  claims.  From  1  Nov.,  1855,  till
4  April,  1857,  he  was  assistant  U.  S.  secretary  of
state  in  Washington,  D.  C.  He  gained  reputation
by  his  report  of  the  convention  with  Great  Britain,
and  by  other  state  papers.

THOMAS,  John  R.,  song-writer,  b.  in  Newport,
Wales,  in  1830.  He  came  to  this  country  at  an
early  age,  and  for  several  years  taught  music  in
Brooklyn  and  New  York  city  and  frequently  sang
in  oratorios.  About  1852  he  appeared  with  the
Seguin  opera  company,  and  afterward  he  joined  a
troupe  of  negro  minstrels.  Pie  has  composed  many
songs  that  have  become  popular,  including  "  The
Cottage  by  the  Sea,"  "Happy  be  thy  Dreams,"
"Some  One  to  Love,"  "'Tis  but  a  Little  Faded
Flower,"  "  Mother  Kissed  me  in  my  Dreams,"
"  Beautiful  Isle  of  the  Sea,"  "  Angel  Voices,"  "  Land
of  Dreams,"  "  Flag  of  the  Free,"  "  The  Mother's
Prayer,"  "The  Voice  of  Effie  Moore,"  "Eileen
Alanna,"  "Seek,  and  Ye  shall  Find,"  "No  Crown
without  the  Cross."

THOMAS,  Lorenzo,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Castle,
Del.,  26  Oct.,  1804;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  2
March,  1875.  His  father,  Evan,  was  of  Welsh  ex-
traction, and  served  in  the  militia  during  the  war  of

1812,  and  one  of  his
uncles  was  a  favor-
ite officer  of  Gen.
Washington.  He
was  at  first  des-
tined for  mercan-
tile pursuits,  but
received  an  ap-
pointment to  the
U.  S.  military  acad-
emy, and  was  grad-
uated there  in  1823.
He  served  in  the
4th  infantry  in
Florida  till  '1831,
and  again  in  the
Florida  war  of
1836 -'7,  and  as
chief  of  staff  of  the
army  in  that  state
in  1839-40,  becom-
ing captain,  23  Sept.,  1836,  and  major  on  the  staff
and  assistant  adjutant-general,  7  July,  1838.  He
there  did  duty  in  the  last-named  office  at  Washing-


ton till  the  Mexican  war,  in  which  he  was  chief  of
staff  of  Gen.  William  O.  Butler  in  1846-'8,  and  of
the  Army  of  Mexico  till  June,  1848,  and  received
the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  gallantry  at
Monterey.  He  was  then  adjutant-general  at  army
headquarters,  Washington,  till  1853,  and  chief  of
staff  to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  till  1861,  when  he  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  on  7  May,  and  made
adjutant-general  of  the  army  on  3  Aug.,  with  the
full  rank  of  brigadier-general.  Here  he  served  till
1863,  when  he  was  intrusted  for  two  years  with
the  organization  of  colored  troops  in  the  southern
states.  When  President  Johnson  removed  Edwin
M.  Stanton  from  his  post  as  secretary  of  war  he
appointed  Gen.  Thomas  secretary  ad  interim,  21
Feb.,  1868,  but,  owing  to  Stanton's  refusal  to  va-
cate, Thomas  did  not  enter  on  the  office.  He  was
brevetted  major-general,  United  States  army,  on
13  March,  1865,  for  services  during  the  civil  war,
and  on  22  Feb.,  1869,  he  was  retired.

THOMAS,  Philemon,  soldier,  b.  in  North
Carolina  in  1764;  d.  in  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  18  Nov.,
1847.  He  received  a  public  -  school  education,
served  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  and  removed
to  Kentucky,  where  he  was  sent  to  the  legislature.
Afterward  he  settled  in  Louisiana,  and  headed  the
insurrection  in  West  Florida  against  the  Spanish
government  in  1810— '11.  He  was  major-general  of
Louisiana  militia  in  1814-'15,  and  was  afterward
elected  to  congress,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1831,  till
3  March,  1835.

THOMAS,  Philip  Evan,  merchant,  b.  in
Mount  Radnor,  Montgomery  co.,  Md.,  11  Nov.,
1776;  d.  in  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,  1  Sept.,  1861.  His
ancestor,  Philip,  came  to  this  country  from  Wales
in  1651,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends.  The  son  settled  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  and
in  1800  established  himself  in  the  hardware  busi-
ness. He  was  president  of  the  Mechanics'  bank
for  many  years,  and  president  of  the  Maryland
Bible  society.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Indian
committee  from  the  Baltimore  yearly  meeting  of
Quakers  to  the  Indians  at  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.,  in
1804,  and  through  his  efforts  the  intrigues  of  the
Ogden  land  company  with  the  chiefs  to  dispossess
the  remnant  of  the  Six  Nations  of  their  reserva-
tions in  western  New  York  were  defeated,  the  chiefs
were  deposed,  and  a  republican  form  of  govern-
ment was  established.  Mr.  Thomas  was  an  origi-
nator of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad,  resigning
his  post  as  director  of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio
canal  to  give  his  attention  to  this  enterprise.  He
was  the  first  president  of  the  company,  which  office
he  resigned  in  1836.

THOMAS,  Philip  Francis,  governor  of  Mary-
land, b.  in  Easton,  Talbot  co.,  Md.,  12  Sept.,  1810.
He  is  a  connection  of  Sir  Philip  Francis,  the  sup-

Eosed  author  of  the  "  Junius  Letters,"  for  whom
e  is  named.  After  receiving  his  education  at  the
academy  in  Easton  and  at  Dickinson  college,  Car-
lisle, Pa.,  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1831,  and  practised  in  his  native  town.  He  was
a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention
in  1836,  and  served  in  the  legislature  in  1838,  and
again  in  1843-5.  Being  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  he  served  from  2  Dec,  1839,  till  3  March,
1841,  and  declined  a  renomination  to  the  28th
congress,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  law.  He
was  governor  of  the  state  from  1848  till  1851.  He
was  "judge  of  the  land-office  of  the  eastern  shore
of  Maryland,  and  in  1851  was  made  comptroller  of
the  treasury,  an  office  that  was  created  by  the  con-
stitution adopted  in  that  year,  but  resigned  in  1853
and  accepted  the  place  of  collector  of  the  port  of
Baltimore. "During  the  Mormon  war  he  was  of-


86


THOMAS


THOMAS


XcTXfTVw-e*


fered  the  governorship  of  the  territory,  which  he
declined,  and  he  also  declined  the  post  of  treasurer
of  the  United  States  which  was  tendered  him  by
President  Buchanan. On  16  Feb.,  1860.  he  was

appointed  commis-
sioner of  patents,
and  in  December,
1860,  he  succeeded
Howell  Cobb  as
secretary  of  the
treasury  in  Bu-
chanan's cabinet,
serving  until  11
Jan.,  1861.  He  was
elected  a  member
of  the  house  of
delegates  of  Mary-
land in  1866,  and
during  the  session
was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  but
was  refused  a  seat
on  19  Feb.,  1868,
on  the  ground  of
"  having  given  aid
and  comfort  to  the  rebellion,"  but  in  1874  he  was
chosen  to  the  house  of  representatives  as  a  Demo-
crat, and  served  from  6  Dec,  1875,  till  3  March,  1877.
In  1878  he  was  again  elected  to  the  legislature,  and
after  serving  one  term  resumed  the  practice  of  his
profession  in  Easton,  where  he  still  resides.

THOMAS,  Robert  Daily,  editor,  b.  in  West
Boylston,  Mass.,  24  April,  1766 ;  d.  there,  19  May,
1846.  Annually  he  prepared  for  the  press  the
"  Farmer's  Almanac"  (Boston,  1793-1846),  which
was  exceedingly  popular  and  has  been  continued
since  his  death,  attaining  a  circulation  of  225,000.
THOMAS,  Seth,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Plymouth
Hollow  (now  Thomaston),  Conn..  1  Dec,  1816;  d.
in  Thomaston,  Conn.,  28  April,  1888.  His  father,
Seth  (1786-1859),  for  whom  Thomaston  was  named,
was  employed  as  a  joiner  in  the  clock-factory  of
Eli  Terry  (q.  v.)  in  Plymouth,  and  afterward  began
the  manufacture  of  metal-movement  clocks.  The
son  enlarged  the  factory  at  Thomaston  and  intro-
duced his  clocks  into  all  parts  of  the  world,  includ-
ing China  and  Japan.  His  boast  was  that  he  had
manufactured  every  kind  of  time-piece,  from  a
delicate  watch  to  a  tower-clock.

THOMAS,  Stephen,  soldier,  b.  in  Bethel,  Wind-
sor co.,  Vt.,  6  Dec,  1809.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  was  apprenticed  to  the  trade
of  woollen  manufacturing.  He  served  in  the  legis-
lature in  1838-9,  1845-'6,  and  1860-'l,  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  State  constitutional  conventions  of
1844  and  1851,  state  senator  in  1848-'9,  register  of
the  probate  court  of  Orange  county  in  1842-'6,and
judge  of  the  same  in  1847-9.  On  12  Nov.,  1861,
he  was  appointed  colonel  of  volunteers,  and  en-
listed a  regiment  of  infantry  and  two  batteries.
He  was  mustered  into  the  U.  S.  service  on  21  Jan.,
1862,  commanding  the  8th  Vermont  regiment,  and
was  mustered  out  on  21  Jan.,  1865.  On  1  Feb.,
1865,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers and  served  until  24  Aug.,  1865.  In  1867-'8
he  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Vermont.  From
1870  till  1877  he  was  U.  S.  pension-agent,  and  since
then  has  engaged  in  farming  in  Vermont.

THOMAS,  Theodore,  musician,  b.  in  Esens,
Hanover,  Germany,  11  Oct.,  1835.  He  received
his  musical  education  principally  from  his  fa-
ther, who  was  a  violinist  of  ability,  and  at  the
age  of  six  years  he  played  the  violin  in  public
concerts.  In  1845  he  came  to  this  country  with
his  parents,  and  for  two  years  played  violin  solos


at  concerts  in  New  York  city.  Subsequently  he
joined  the  orchestra  of  an  Italian  opera  company,
and  visited  most  of  the  large  cities  of  the  country.
He  then  became  first  violin  in  the  orchestra  that
accompanied  Jenny  Lind  in  1850.  Henrietta  Son-
tag  in  1852,  and  Giulietta  Grisi  and  Giuseppi  Mario
in  1854,  and  finally  became  conductor  of  both  Ger-
man and  Italian  operas.  Mr.  Thomas  also  led  the
orchestras  that  accompanied  La  Grange,  Piccolo-
mini,  and  Thalberg  through  the  country.  Mean-
while, in  1855,  with  himself  as  first  violin,  Joseph
Mosenthal,  second  violin,  George  Matzka,  viola,
Carl  Bergmann,  violoncello,  and  William  Mason  as
pianist,  he  began  a  series  of  chamber  music  soirees
which  were  given  at  Dodworth's  academy,  and
continued  for  several  years.  After  1861  he  de-
voted himself  to  the  organization  of  his  own  or-
chestra, and  began  at  Irving  hall  in  1864  a  series
of  symphony  concerts  that  came  to  be  regarded  as
among  the  musical  institutions  of  New  York  city,
and  were  continued  until  1878.  In  1866  he  began
his  summer  -  night  concerts  in  Terrace  garden,
which  were  continued  at  the  Central  park  garden.
In  order  to  keep  his  orchestra  together,  he  trav-
elled with  it  during  the  winter  season.  At  these
concerts  he  introduced  Wagner's  music  to  the
American  people,  and  to  him,  more  than  to  any  one
else  in  this  country,  is  due  the  present  appreciation
of  the  modern  school  of  German  music.  In  1872
he  was  the  leading  spirit  in  founding  the  New  York
Wagner  union,  which  was  established  for  the  pur-
pose of  aiding  in  the  festival  performance  of  the
"  Nibelungen  Ring  "  at  Baireuth  in  1875,  and  he  or-
ganized the  chorus  society  which  gave  the  Wagner
memorial  concert  after  the  death  of  the  composer.
Mr.  Thomas  accepted  in  1878  the  directorship  of
the  newly  established  College  of  music  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  but  he  resigned  that  post  in  1881.  He
joined  the  Philharmonic  society  in  1853,  but  in
1858  resigned  his  membership.  Soon  after  the
death  of  Carl  Bergmann  in  1876  he  was  chosen  con-
ductor of  the  society,  which  office  he  has  since
held,  except  during  his  absence  in  Cincinnati.
Under  his  leadership  the  Philharmonic  has  had  an
unbroken  record
of  prosperity  and
has  steadily  pro-
gressed in  furnish-
ing a  higher  class
of  music  to  its  pa-
trons. The  Brook-
lyn Philharmonic
society  has  also
been  under  his  di-
rection almost  con-
tinuously since
1862.  Mr.  Thomas
has  conducted  all
of  the  Cincinnati
May  festivals  since
1873,  also  that  of
Chicago  in  1882,
and  the  great  fes-
tival of  New  York

that  was  held  in  the  7th  regiment  armory  in  1882.
He  was  conductor  of  the  American  opera  company
in  1885-'7,  and  in  the  same  years  organized  a  series
of  popular  concerts  in  New  York  city,  which  are
still  continued.  During  the  summer  of  1888  he
gave  a  series  of  concerts  in  Chicago,  at  the  close
of  which  he  disbanded  his  orchestra,  saying  that,
as  New  York  city  failed  to  provide  a  suitable  hall,
a  permanent  orchestra  was  impossible.

THOMAS,  Theodore  Gaillard,  physician,  b.
on  Edisto  island,  S.  C,  21  Nov.,  1831. He  was


/ -no-mas}^


THOMAS


THOMPSON


87


educated  at  Charleston  college,  received  his  medi-
cal degree  there  in  1852,  and  removed  to  New  York
city  in  that  year,  and  served  at  Bellevue  hospital.
He  has  also  been  professor  of  obstetrics  and  dis-
eases of  women  in  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  New  York  city,  surgeon  to  the  Wom-
en's hospital  in  New  York,  and  consulting  physi-
cian to  the  Nursery  and  child's  hospital  and  St.
Mary's  hospital,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In  1879  he  was
president  of  the  American  gynecological  society,
and  he  is  an  honorary  member  of  the  obstetrical
society  of  London  and  a  corresponding  secretary
of  that  of  Berlin.  Dr.  Thomas  has  contributed
largely  to  medical  literature,  and  is  the  author  of
a  "  Practical  Treatise  on  Diseases  of  Women,"
which  has  been  translated  into  several  foreign  lan-
guages (Philadelphia,  1868).

THOMAS,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  1755 ;  d.  in
Harrison,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y,  29  May,  1824.
He  commanded  a  regiment  in  1776,  and  partici-

fiated  in  the  battles  of  Harlem  and  White  Plains,
n  the  autumn  of  1776  the  enemy  burned  his  house,
took  his  aged  father  a  prisoner  to  New  York,  and
confined  him  in  the  provost  jail,  where  he  died
through  their  inhuman  treatment.  Col.  Thomas
was  an  active  partisan  officer  till  the  peace,  except
during  a  brief  term  of  captivity ;  and  was  after-
ward frequently  a  member  of  the  legislature.

THOMES,  William  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Port-
land, Me.,  5  May,  1824.  He  was  educated  in  the
public  schools  of  Boston,  worked  in  a  printing-
office,  and  was  afterward  connected  with  various
journals  as  reporter  and  editor.  He  went  to  Cali-
fornia in  1843,  and  again  in  1849,  subsequently
visiting  Honolulu,  the  East  Indies,  and  Australia,
and  contributing  articles  upon  his  travels  to  vari-
ous magazines.  Mr.  Thomes  was  the  first  presi-
dent of  the  New  England  society  of  California  pio-
neers. He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Gold-Hunters
of  Australia"  (Boston,  1869);  "Life  in  the  East
Indies"  (1870);  "A  Whaleman's  Adventures"
(1871);  "The  Gold-Hunters  in  Europe"  (1872);
"  A  Slaver's  Adventures  "  (1873) ;  "  Running  the
Blockade"  (1874);  "The  Belle  of  Australia"
(1885);  "On  Land  and  Sea "(1886);  and"Lewey
and  I"  (1887).

THOMPSON,  Albert,  artist,  b.  in  Woburn,
Mass..  18  March,.  1853.  He  became  a  pupil  of
William  E.  Norton  in  1873,  and  in  1872  and  1875
travelled  in  Europe.  During  1880-'l  he  studied
in  Paris  under  Jules  J.  Lefebvre  and  Gustave  R.  C.
Boulanger,  at  Julien's  academy,  and  also  anatomy
at  the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts.  Among  his  works,
mainly  landscapes  and  cattle-pieces,  are  "  After  the
Shower  "  (1876) ;  "  Clearing  up  "  (1877) ;  "  More
Wind  than  Rain,"  in  Woburn  public  library  (1885) ;
and  "  Changing  Pasture  "  and  "  An  October  After-
noon "  (1886).  He  is  the  author  of  "  Principles  of
Perspective"  (Boston,  1878).

THOMPSON,  Alexander  Ramsay,  soldier,  b.
in  1794;  d.  in  Manatee  county,  Pla.,  25  Dec.  1837.
His  father  was  Alexander  Thompson,  who  served
in  the  artillery  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  was
retained  as  captain  in  the  peace  establishment,  and
attached  in  1794  to  the  artillery  and  engineer
corps,  and  after  his  discharge  in  1802  till  his  death,
28  Sept.,  1809,  was  military  store-keeper  at  West
Point.  The  son  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1812,  and  during  the  war  with
Great  Britain  took  part  in  Gen.  James  Wilkinson's
expedition  down  the  St.  Lawrence  and  in  the  de-
fence of  Plattsburg  and  other  operations  on  Lake
Champlain,  being  promoted  captain  of  infantry  on
1  May,  1814.  He  was  retained  on  the  reduction  of
the  army,  promoted  major  on  4  April,  1832,  served


in  the  Black  Hawk  expedition,  became  lieutenant-
colonel  on  6  Sept.,  1837,  and  in  the  war  with  the
Seminole  Indians  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Okee-
chobee while  leading  his  regiment  in  a  desperate
charge. — His  nephew,  Alexander  Ramsay,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  New  York  city,  16  Oct.,  1822,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York  in  1842,  and  at  Princeton  theological  semi-
nary in  1845,  and  was  ordained,  and  after  holding
various  charges  became  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  Stapleton,  Staten  island,  in  1851-9,  the
Reformed  Dutch  church,  21st  street,  New  York
city,  in  1862-73,  first  as  colleague  of  the  Rev.
George  W.  Bethune,  then  as  his  successor,  and  the
North  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y„
from  the  latter  date  to  1884.  In  1885  he  became
acting  pastor  of  Bethany  chapel  in  Brooklyn.  He
was  chaplain  of  the  New  England  hospital  in
1863-'5  and  of  the  Roosevelt  hospital  in  New  York
from  1873  till  1884.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  him  by  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York  in  1865,  which  made  him  a  member  of  its
council  in  1872.  Among  various  sermons  he  pub-
lished "  Tribute  to  the  Memory  of  the  Rev.  George
W.  Bethune " ;  "  Casting  down  Imaginations,"  a
sermon  (1874) ;  "  Christian  Patriotism :  the  Points
of  Similarity  between  the  Struggle  for  Independ-
ence in  America  and  that  of  our  Holland  Ances-'
tors,"  in  "  Centennial  Discourses  "  (1876).  He  also
assisted  in  compiling  "  Hymns  of  the  Church "
(New  York,  1869),  and  "  Hymns  of  Prayer  and
Praise  "  (1874).

THOMPSON,  Alfred  Wordsworth,  artist,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md„  27  May,  1840.  During  1862-4
he  studied  in  Paris,  first  under  Charles  Gleyre,  and
later  with  Albert  Pasini  and  in  the  Ecole  des
beaux  arts.  He  first  exhibited  at  the  salon  in  1865,
and  in  1 868  returned  to  the  United  States,  settling
in  New  York.  He  was  elected  an  associate  mem-
ber of  the  National  academy  in  1873,  and  an
academician  two  years  later,  and  in  1877  became  a
membeivof  the  Society  of  American  artists.  He
has  travelled  at  various  times  in  all  parts  of  Eu-
rope, Asia  Minor,  and  northern  Africa,  and  his
pictures  cover  a  wide  range  of  subjects,  Oriental
and  American,  including  landscapes,  genre  pieces
and  military  scenes.  They  include  "  Desolation  "
and  "  Lost  in  the  Forest "  (1872) ;  "  Annapolis  in
1776,"  owned  by  the  Buffalo  fine  arts  academy,
and  "A  Twilight  in  Corsica"  (1875) :  "  Review  at
Philadelphia,  1777  "  (1878) ;  "  The  Market-Place  in
Biskra  "  (1884) ;  "  The  Hour  of  Prayer  " ;  "  Re-
turning from  a  Boar  Hunt,  Tangier  " ;  "  The  Ad-
vance of  the  Enemy  "  (1885) ;  "  The  Departure  for
the  War,  1776";  and  "A  Sabbath-Day  in  Troublous
Times."  To  the  Paris  exposition  of  1878  he  sent
"  The  School-House  on  the  Hill."

THOMPSON.  Augustus  Charles,  clergyman,
b.  in  Goshen,  Conn.,  30  April,  1812.  He  entered
Yale  with  the  class  of  1835,  but  feeble  health  com-
pelled him  to  leave  before  graduation.  The  col-
lege gave  him  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  in
1841.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Hartford  theo-
logical seminary  in  1838,  studied  in  the  University
of  Berlin  in  1838-'9,  and  on  27  July,  1842,  was  or-
dained pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  at  Rox-
bury,  Mass.,  where  he  still  remains.  He  was  as-
sociated with  Rev.  Dr.  Rufus  Anderson  in  a
deputation  to  the  missions  of  the  American  board
in  India  in  1854-'5,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
London  missionary  conference  of  1878.  Am-
herst gave  him  the  degree  of  D.D.  in  1860.  Dr.
Thompson  has  lectured  on  foreign  missions  at  An-
dover  seminary  in  1877-80,  at  Boston  university
in  1882,  and  at  Hartford  theological  seminary  in


88


THOMPSON


THOMPSON


1885-'6,  and  has  published  "Songs  in  the  Night"
(Boston,  1845) ;  "  Young  Martyrs  "  (2d  ed.,  1848) ;
"Lambs  Fed''  (1849;  translation  into  Mahrathi,
Bombay,  1853) ;  "  Last  Hours  "  (1851) ;  "  The  Poor
Widow,  a  Memorial  of  Mrs.  Anna  J.  Waters"
(1854 ;  translation  into  Tamil,  Jaffua,  Cevlon,
1855) ;  "  The  Better  Land  "  (1854) ;  "  The  Yoke  in
Youth :  a  Memorial  of  H.  M.  Hill "  (1856) ;  "  Gath-
ered Lilies"  (1858);  "Eliot  Sabbath-School  Me-
morial "  (1859) ;  "  Morning  Hours  in  Patmos  "
(1860) ;  "Lyra  Ccelestis  "  (1863) ;  "  The  Mercy-Seat "
(1863) ;  "  Our  Little  Ones  "  (1867) ;  "  Christus  Con-
solator"  (1867);  "Seeds  and  Sheaves"  (1868);
"  Discourse  Commemorative  of  Rev.  iiufus  Ander-
son, D.  D.  "  (1880) ;  "  Moravian  Missions  "  (New
York,  1882);  "Happy  New  Year"  (1883);  and
"  Future  Probation  and  Foreign  Missions."

THOMPSON,  Cephas  artist,  b.  in  Middlebor-
ough,  Mass.,  1  July,  1775;  d.  there,  6  Nov.,  1856.  His
profession  was  that  of  a  portrait-painter,  and  he
made  yearly  tours  in  the  south,  painting  in  all  the
cities  from  Philadelphia  to  New  Orleans.  When
about  fifty  years  of  age,  he  settled  in  his  home  in
Middleborough.  Among  his  portraits  were  those
of  John  Marshall,  Stephen  Decatur,  David  Ramsay
of  South  Carolina,  John  Howard  Payne,  and  George
Washington  Parke  Custis,  who  was  his  pupil. —
His  son,  Cephas  Giovanni,  artist,  b.  in  Middle-
borough,  Mass.,  3  Aug.,  1809;  d.  in  New  York
city,  5  Jan.,  1888,  had  some  instruction  from  his
father,  but  was  comparatively  self-taught.  At  the
age  of  nineteen  he  began  to  paint  portraits  in  Plym-
outh, Mass.,  and  two  years  later  he  was  working
in  Boston.  During  1837-'47  he  was  in  New  York,
and  in  1852  he  went  to  Europe,  where  he  spent
seven  years  in  Rome.  During  this  period  he  painted
numerous  Italian  subjects,  and  executed  some  ad-
mirable copies  of  the  old  masters,  notably  one  of
"  Beatrice  Cenci."  While  in  Italy  he  was  intimate
with  Nathaniel  Hawthorne,  who  complimented  him
in  the  "  Marble  Faun."  In  1860  he  settled  in  New
York,  and  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  ^he  Na-
tional academy  the  following  year.  Before  going
abroad  he  painted  the  portraits  of  Henry  W.  Long-
fellow, Charles  Fenno  Hoffman  (owned  by  the  New
York  historical  society),  William  Cullen  Bryant,
and  other  well-known  authors.  His  portrait  of
Hawthorne  has  been  engraved.  Other  works  by
him  are  "  The  Guardian  Angels."  "  Prospero  and
Miranda,"  "  St.  Peter  delivered  from  Prison,"  and
"  Spring  and  Autumn." — His  two  sons,  who  died
before  him,  were  Hubert  Ogden,  commissioner
of  public  works,  New  York  city,  and  Edmund
Francis,  captain  in  the  U.  S.  army. — Another  son
of  Cephas,  Jerome,  b.  in  Middleborough,  Mass.,  30
Jan.,  1814;  d.  in  Glen  Gardner,  N.  J.,  1  May,  1886,
had  also  little  or  no  regular  instruction  in  art.  He
displayed  artistic  tastes  at  an  early  age,  painted
portraits  for  several  years  at  Cape  Cod,  and  at  the
age  of  seventeen  went  to  New  York,  where  he  after-
ward lived  and  always  had  his  studio.  In  1852  he
went  to  Europe,  where  he  remained  two  years. He

Eainted  both  landscapes  and  figures  with  success,
is  best -known  works  being  "Reminiscences  of
Mount  Mansfield,"  "The  Old  Oaken  Bucket,"
"  Home,  Sweet  Home,"  "  Woodman,  spare  that
Tree,"  "  Hiawatha's  Homeward  Journey  with
Minnehaha,"  "The  Home  of  My  Childhood,"  "Com-
in'  thro'  the  Rye,"  "The  Land  of  Beulah,"  and
"The  Voice  of  the  Great  Spirit."  Most  of  his
works  were  never  exhibited  by  him,  but  several
of  them  have  become  well  known  to  the  public
through  engravings  and  chromos.  Some  of  the
finest  of  his  latest  works  are  in  Paris,  and  others
are  in  England.


THOMPSON,  Charles  C.  B.,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Virginia  in  1786 ;  d.  in  Hot  Springs,  Va.,  2  Sept.,
1832.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  22
Dec,  1802,  and  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  15  Feb.,.
1809.  During  the  war  of  1812  he  rendered  distin-
guished service  in  the  defence  of  New  Orleans,,
where  he  commanded  the  ship  "  Louisiana,"  8  Jan.,.
1815.  He  was  promoted  to  master-commandant,  27
April,  1816,  served  at  Philadelphia  navy-yard  in
1816-'17,  commanded  the  frigate  "  Guerriere  "  in  the
Mediterranean  squadron  in  1818-'20,  and  was  on
shore  duty  at  Philadelphia  and  Boston  in  1821-'6.
He  was  promoted  captain,  3  March.  1825,  and  com-
manded the  Pacific  squadron  in  1828-'31.

THOMPSON,  Charles  Lemuel,  clergyman,  b.
in  Cooperstown,  Lehigh  co.,  Pa.,  18  Aug.,  1839.
He  was  graduated  at  Carroll  college,  Wis.,  in  1858,.
and  at  McCormick  theological  seminary,  Chicago,
in  1861,  after  spending  two  years  (1859-'60)  in
Princeton  seminary.  He  then  entered  the  Pres-
byterian ministry,  and  after  holding  pastorates  in
Juneau  and  Janesville,  Wis.,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,.
Chicago,  111.,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  Kansas  City,  Mo.r
was  called  in  1888  to  the  Madison  avenue  church
in  New  York  city.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Monmouth  college,  111.,  in  1876,  and  in  May,
1888,  was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly  of  his
church  in  Philadelphia.  Dr.  Thompson  was  editor
of  "  Our  Monthly  "  in  Cincinnati  in  1870-'l,  and
in  1879-'82  of  "The  Interior"  at  Chicago,  with
which  he  is  still  connected  as  an  editorial  writer.
Besides  contributions  in  prose  and  verse  to  current
literature,  he  has  published  "  Times  of  Refreshing:
a  History  of  American  Revivals  "  (Chicago,  1877).

THOMPSON,  Charles  Oliver,  educator,  b.  in
East  Windsor  Hill,  Conn.,  25  Sept.,  1836;  d.  in
Terre  Haute,  Ind.,  17  March,  1885.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1858,  and  then  taught  in  the
Peacham  academy  for  six  years  except  during  a-
part  of  1860-'l,  when  he  devoted  himself  to  prac-
tical work  as  a  surveyor  and  civil  engineer  in
Piermont,  N.  Y.  Tn  1864  he  became  principal  of
the  Cotting  public  high-school  in  Arlington,  Mass.
He  was  chosen  principal  of  the  Worcester  free  in-
stitute of  industrial  science  in  1868.  and,  besides
holding  the  chair  of  chemistry,  was  charged  with
the  development  of  a  scientific  and  practical  course
of  instruction  which  had  no  recognized  type  in
this  country.  After  spending  eight  months  in
Europe  in  visiting  similar  institutions  he  returned
to  Worcester  and  established  the  course  that  has
since  prevailed  in  that  institution.  In  founding
the  Rose  polytechnic  institute,  the  different  tech-
nical schools  of  the  country  were  carefully  studied
by  its  founder,  Chauncey  Rose,  and  the  plan  of  the
Worcester  institute  was  given  the  preference.  Ac-
cordingly, in  1883  Mr.  Thompson  was  called  to  the
presidency  of  the  new  institute,  and  continued  to
hold  that  place  until  his  death.  The  degree  of
Ph.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  in  1870  by  Dartmouth,
and  he  was  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  includ-
ing the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science  and  the  American  institute  of  mining
engineers.  He  was  the  author  of  numerous  papers
on  technical  instruction.

THOMPSON,  Daniel  Pierce,  author,  b.  in
Charlestown  (now  a  part  of  Boston),  Mass.,  1  Oct.,
1793 ;  d.  in  Montpelier,  Vt.,  6  June,  1868.  He  was
the  grandson  of  Daniel,  who  was  a  cousin  of  Ben-
jamin Thompson,  Count  Rumford,  and  was  killed
at  the  battle  of  Lexington.  He  was  brought  up
on  a  farm,  prepared  himself  for  college  under
difficulties,  taught  for  one  winter,  and  then  en-
tered Middlebury  college,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1820. Going  to  Virginia  as  a  family  tutor,  he


THOMPSON


THOMPSON


89


studied  law  there,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1823,  after  which  he  returned  to  Vermont  and
settled  in  Montpelier.  He  was  register  of  probate
in  1824,  and  clerk  of  the  legislature  in  1830-'3,  and
was  then  appointed  to  compile  the  "Laws  of
Vermont  from  1824  down  to  and  including  the
Year  1834  "  (Montpelier,  1835).  He  was  judge  of
probate  from  1837  till  1840,  from  1843  till  1845
clerk  of  the  supreme  and  county  courts,  and  from
1853  till  1855  secretary  of  state.  From  1849  till
1856  he  edited  a  weekly  political  paper  called  the
"  Green  Mountain  Freeman."  He  was  a  popular
lecturer  before  lyceums  and  orator  on  public  occa-
sions. Mr.  Thompson  began  to  contribute  poems
and  sketches  to  periodicals  while  he  was  in  college,
and  continued  to  write  frequently  for  the  news-
papers and  magazines,  besides  publishing  political
pamphlets.  He  took  part  in  the  anti  -  Masonic
controversy,  and  published  a  satirical  novel  on  the
subject,  entitled  "  The  Adventures  of  Timothy
Peacock,  Esq.,  or  Freemasonry  Practically  Illus-
trated," which  appeared  under  the  pen-name  of  "  A
Member  of  the  Vermont  Bar  "  (Middlebury,  1835).
In  1835  he  wrote  for  the  "  New  England  Galaxy,"
of  Boston,  a  prize  tale  called  "  May  Martin,  or  the
Money-Diggers,"  which  was  issued  in  book-form
(Montpelier.  1835),  and  reprinted  in  London.  Next
appeared  "  The  Green  Mountain  Boys,"  a  romance,
in  which  the  principal  men  connected  with  the  his-
tory of  Vermont  in  the  Revolutionary  period  are
brought  into  the  plot  (Montpelier,  1840;  repub-
lished in  Boston  and  London) ;  "  Locke  Amsden,  or
the  Schoolmaster  "  (Boston.  1845);  "Lucy  Hosmer,
or  the  Guardian  and  the  Ghost "  (1848) ;  and  "  The
Rangers,  or  the  Tory's  Daughter  "  (1851).  His  later
romances  are  "  Tales  of  the  Green  Mountains "
(1852);  "Gaut  Gurlev,  or  the  Trappers  of  Lake
Umbagog"  (1857);  "The  Doomed  Chief,  or  Two
Hundred  Years  Ago,"  based  on  the  story  of  King
Philip  (Philadelphia,  1860) ;  and  "  Centeola,  and
other  Tales  "  (New  York,  1864^.  He  was  also  the
author  of  a  "  History  of  Montpelier,  1781-1860,
with  Biographical  Sketches"  (Montpelier,  1860).
In  later  life  he  published  monographs  on  topics
of  American  history  and  on  biographical  subjects
in  various  magazines.  A  novel,  with  the  title  of
"  The  Honest  Lawyer,  or  the  Fair  Castaway,"  was
left  unfinished.

THOMPSON,  David,  Canadian  explorer,  b.  in
the  parish  of  St.  John,  Westminster,  England,  30
April,  1770;  d.  in  Longueil,  near  Montreal,  16  Feb.,
1857.  He  was  educated  at  Christ's  hospital  school,
London,  and  at  Oxford,  and  when  he  was  nineteen
years  old  entered  the  service  of  the  Hudson  bay
company.  He  was  afterward  employed  in  explora-
tion, and  on  27  April,  1798,  discovered  Turtle  lake,
which  he  claimed  to  be  the  source  of  the  Missis-
sippi, as  it  is  from  this  spot  that  the  river  takes  its
most  direct  course  to  the  sea.  His  course  in  reach-
ing the  head-waters  of  this  river  is  well  delineated
on  his  "  Map  of  the  Northwest  Territory  of  the
Province  of  Canada,  made  for  the  Northwest  Com-
pany in  1813-14."  He  also  surveyed  the  south
shore  of  Lake  Superior  in  1798,  in  June,  1807,
crossed  the  Rocky  mountains  by  what  is  now  known
as  the  Howse  pass,  and  in  the  spring  of  1811  as-
cended Columbia  river  from  the  junction  of  Canoe
river  to  its  source,  and  then  descended  it  to  its
mouth,  where  he  arrived  on  16  July  the  same  year.
On  27  May,  1812,  he  reached  Red  Deer  lake,  or  Lac
la  Biehe,  which  Schoolcraft,  who  visited  it  in  1832,
claimed  to  be  the  true  source  of  the  Mississippi,
and  the  same  year  resurveyed  the  north  shore  of
Lake  Superior  to  Sault  Ste.  Marie.  He  left  the
service  of  the  Hudson  bay  company,  23  May,  1797,


and  entered  that  of  the  Northwest  company,  in
which  he  was  for  many  subsequent  years  a  partner.
From  1816  till  1826  he  was  engaged  in  surveying
and  defining  the  boundary-line  on  the  part  of  Great
Britain  between  Canada  and  the  United  States,
being  employed  in  1817  on  the  St.  Lawrence.  Pro-
ceeding westward  around  the  shores  of  the  great
lakes,  he  reached  the  Lake  of  the  Woods  in  1825.
In  1834  he  surveyed  Lake  Francis,  in  1837  he  made
a  survey  of  the  canoe  route  from  Lake  Huron  to
Ottawa  river,  and  a  few  years  later  a  survey  of
Lake  St.  Peter.  His  last  years  were  spent  either
in  Glengarry  county,  Ont.,  or  in  Longueil.  Of  the
early  explorers,  few  rendered  more  valuable  services
or  estimated  their  achievements  more  modestly.

THOMPSON,  David,  Canadian  member  of  par-
liament, b.  in  Wainfleet,  Welland  co.,  Ont.,  7  Dec,
1836.  His  father,  the  son  of  a  Scotchman,  repre-
sented Haldiinand  from  1841  till  1851.  The  son
was  educated  at  Upper  Canada  college,  and  became
a  flour  and  grain  merchant.  He  represented  Hal-
dimand  in  the  Canada  assembly  from  1863  till  the
union,  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament  in
1867,  re-elected  by  acclamation  in  1872  and  1874,
and  chosen  again  in  1878  and  1882.  He  is  actively
connected  with  various  financial  and  industrial  or-
ganizations, is  major  of  volunteers,  a  Liberal  in
politics,  and  favors  a  prohibitory  liquor  law.

THOMPSON,  Edward  R.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Pennsylvania  about  1808 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
12  Feb.,  1879.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midship-
man on  1  Dec,  1826,  became  a  lieutenant  on  8
March,  1837,  served  during  the  Mexican  war  on
the  brig  " Porpoise "  and  the  frigate  "Potomac"
in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  cruised  on  the  coast  of
Africa  in  the  "  Porpoise  "  in  1851-'2,  and  in  com-
mand of  the  "  Dolphin  "  in  1856-'7,  having  been
promoted  commander  on  14  Sept.,  1855.  He  had
charge  of  the  steamer  "  Seminole "  in  the  early
part  of  the  civil  war,  but,  being  unfit  for  further
active  service,  was  placed  on  the  retired  list  on  3
Dec,  1861.  On  4  April,  1867,  his  rank  was  raised
to  that  of  commodore.

THOMPSON,  Edwin,  reformer,  b.  in  Lynn.
Mass.,  in  July,  1809 ;  d.  in  East  Walpole,  Mass.,  22
May,  1888.  He  was  of  Quaker  descent,  and  early
interested  himself  in  the  anti-slavery  movement.
At  the  suggestion  of  Wendell  Phillips,  he  became
a  public  speaker  in  its  furtherance,  travelling
through  the  state,  often  on  foot,,  lecturing  in
churches  and  school-houses,  and  winning  a  reputa-
tion as  an  orator  by  his  fluency  and  great  fund  of
anecdotes.  While  speaking  in  New  Bedford,  he
roused  Frederick  Douglass  to  take  up  active  work
in  behalf  of  his  race.  He  was  also  interested  from
an  early  period  in  the  temperance  reform,  which  he
did  much  to  promote.  Mr.  Thompson  was  ordained
as  a  Universalist  clergyman  in  1840,  and  afterward
resided  at  East  Walpole.

THOMPSON,  Egbert,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  6  June,  1820 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
5  Jan.,  1881.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midship-
man, 13  March,  1837,  served  in  Com.  Charles
Wilkes's  exploring  expedition  in  1838-'42,  and  be-
came a  passed  midshipman,  29  June,  1843.  As  ex-
ecutive officer  of  the  schooner  "  Bonita,"  in  the.
Gulf  squadron  during  the  Mexican  war,  he  partici-
pated in  the  expedition  against  Frontera,  and  the
capture  of  Tobasco,  Tampico,  Vera  Cruz,  and  Tus-
pan.  His  vessel  covered  the  landing  of  Gen.  Win-
field  Scott's  army  at  Vera  Cruz,  and  captured  sev-
eral prizes  during  the  war.  He  served  in  the
steamer  "  Michigan "  on  the  lakes  in  1847-50,  and
at  Philadelphia  navy-yard  in  1850-1.  He  was
commissioned  a  lieutenant,  27  Sept.,  1850,  and  was


90


THOMPSON


THOMPSON


in  the  steamer  "  Fulton  "  in  1859  when  she  was
wrecked.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was  at-
tached to  the  steamer  "  Powhatan,"  which  went  to
Pensacola  navy-yard,  and  contributed  to  the  relief
of  Fort  Pickens.  He  commanded  the  river  iron-
clad steamer  "  Pittsburg,"  in  the  Mississippi  flotilla,
in  which  he  participated  in  the  battle  of  Fort
Donelson,  when  he  was  obliged  to  run  her  ashore
to  keep  from  sinking.  He  was  commended  for
gallantry  in  running  the  batteries  of  Island  No.  10,
for  which  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  navy  de-
partment, and  he  took  part  in  the  attacks  on  Fort
Madrid  and  Fort  Pillow,  and  the  battle  with  the
Confederate  rams.  He  was  commissioned  a  com-
mander, 16  July,  1862,  served  at  the  rendezvous
at  Philadelphia"  in  1863-'4,  and  commanded  the
steamer  "  McDonough "  in  the  South  Atlantic
blockade  in  1864-'5,  and  the  steamer  '•  Dacotah,"
of  the  South  Pacific  squadron,  in  1866-'7.  He  was
commissioned  captain,  26  July,  1867,  and  was  com-
mandant of  the  naval  station  at  Mound  City,  111.,
in  1869-'71.  He  commanded  the  steam  sloop
"  Canandaigua,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  squadron,
in  1871-2,  and  was  retired  on  6  Jan.,  1874.

THOMPSON,  Elizabeth,  philanthropist,  b.  hi
Lyndon,  Vt.,  21  Feb.,  1821.  She  is  the  daughter
of  Samuel  Rowell,  a  poor  farmer,  and  at  the  age
of  nine  went  to  aid  in  the  household  duties  of
a  neighbor's  family  as  a  maid  of  all  work,  receiv-
ing as  wages  twenty-five  cents  a  week.  Her  edu-
cation was  chiefly  self-acquired,  but  she  was  re-
markably handsome,  and,  while  on  a  visit  to  Bos-
ton in  1843,  so  impressed  Thomas  Thompson,  a
well-known  millionaire  of  that  city,  that  he  sought
her  acquaintance.  Early  in  1844  they  were  mar-
ried, and  until  his  death  in  1869  spent  much  of
their  income  for  charitable  purposes.  The  use  of
the  entire  income  of  his  immense  estate  was  then
left  to  Mrs.  Thompson.  She  has  given  large  sums
to  the  cause  of  temperance,  and  "  Figures  of  Hell,"
a  tract  written  by  her  and  filled  with  much  sta-
tistical information, has been  widely  circulated.

Mrs.  Thompson
has  given  more
than  $100,000  to-
ward providing
with  business  pur-
suits the  heads  of
families,  hundreds
of  whom  have
been  enabled  to
establish  them-
selves by  her  boun-
ty. Among  her
many  charities  is
the  gift  of  $10,000
which  was  expend-
ed by  a  commis-
sion authorized  by
-€^  <?€£L~>^Ll*s  congress  to  inves-
tigate the  yellow
fever.  She  found-
ed the  town  of  Long  Mont,  at  the  foot  of  the
Rocky  mountains,  and  gave  640  acres  of  land  with
$300  to  each  colonist  in  Saline  county,  Kan.  Mrs.
Thompson  contributed  largely  to  the  purchase  of
the  Vassar  college  telescope,  and  gave  to  the  Con-
cord school  of  philosophy  the  building  in  which  its
summer  assemblies  are  held.  She  suggested  the
idea  of  a  song-service  for  the  poor,  and  incurred
large  expense  in  putting  it  into  practical  operation
in  many  of  the  large  cities  of  this  country.  Fran-
cis B.  Carpenter's  painting  of  the  "  Signing  of  the
Emancipation  Proclamation  by  Lincoln  in  the  Pres-
ence of  his  Cabinet "  was  purchased  by  her  and


presented  to  congress.  In  consequence  of  this  she
was  granted  the  freedom  of  the  floor  of  the  house,
a  right  which  no  other  woman,  not  even  the  presi-
dent's wife,  possesses.  She  gave  $1,000  to  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence in  1883,  and  was  made  its  first  "patron.  In
1885  she  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  board  of  trustees,
chosen  for  that  purpose,  $25,000,  to  be  devoted  to
the  advancement  and  prosecution  of  scientific  re-
search in  its  broadest  sense.  This  trust,  known  as
the  "Elizabeth  Thompson  science  fund,"  is  to  be
controlled  by  the  International  scientific  congress.
Mrs.  Thompson  has  agitated  the  question  of  the
possibility  of  an  international  republic,  or  a  world
governed  by  laws  emanating  from  an  intelligent
community.  The  value  of  this  idea  has  been  rec-
ognized by  statesmen  at  home  and  abroad.  The
publication  of  a  journal  in  England  advocating  her
views  has  been  announced  by  George  J.  Holyoake.

THOMPSON,  George,  English  reformer,  b.  in
Liverpool,  England,  18  June,  1804;  d.  in  Leeds,
England,  7  Oct.,  1878.  He  entered  actively  into  the
agitation  against  slavery  in  the  British  colonies,
and  contributed  largely  to  its  downfall,  and  subse-
quently to  that  of  the  apprentice  system.  After-
ward he  joined  the  Anti-corn-law  league,  and  also
took  an  active  part  in  forming  the  India  associ-
ation. In  1834,  at  the  request  of  William  Lloyd
Garrison  and  others,  he  came  to  the  United  States
to  speak  in  behalf  of  the  abolition  of  slavery.  He
addressed  meetings  in  various  parts  of  the  north-
ern states,  and  his  efforts  led  to  the  formation  of
more  than  150  anti-slavery  societies ;  but  he  was
often  threatened  by  mobs,  and  finally  in  Boston,
Mass.,  escaped  death  only  by  fleeing  in  a  small
row-boat  to  an  English  vessel  and  going  to  St.
John,  New  Brunswick,  whence  he  sailed  for  Eng-
land in  November,  1835.  Mr.  Thompson's  visit
created  such  excitement  that  President  Jackson
denounced  him  in  a  message  to  congress.  He  made
a  second  visit  to  this  country  in  1851,  and  another
during  the  civil  war,  when  a  public  reception  was
given  to  him  in  the  house  of  representatives,  at
which  President  Lincoln  and  his  cabinet  were  pres-
ent. He  aided  greatly  in  preventing  the  recogni-
tion of  the  southern  Confederacy  by  the  British
government.  Mr.  Thompson  was  also  concerned
in  the  work  of  the  National  parliamentary  reform
association.  In  1847  he  was  chosen  a  member  of
parliament  for  the  Tower  Hamlets.  About  1870  a
testimonial  fund  was  raised  for  him  by  his  ad-
mirers in  this  country  and  England.

THOMPSON,  George  Washington,  lawver,
b.  in  St.  Clairsville,  Ohio,  14  May,  1806 ;  d.  near
Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  24  Feb.,  1888.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  in  1824,  studied  law
in  Richmond,  Va.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  in  his  native  town,  but  afterward  re-
moved to  western  Virginia.  He  was  U.  S.  district
attorney  in  1849,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat  in  the  following  year,  serving  from  1
Dec,  1851,  till  30  July,  1852,  when  he  resigned  to
accept  a  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  circuit  court  of
his  state.  He  was  re-elected  in  1860,  but,  declining
to  take  the  test  oaths  that  were  required  by  the
reorganized  government  of  Virginia,  retired  from
public  life.  He  had  previously  served  on  the  com-
mission that  was  appointed  to  determine  the  boun-
dary between  Virginia  and  Ohio.  He  was  a  fre-
quent contributor  to  the  Boston  "Quarterly  Re-
view" in  1839-'42,  and,  besides  numerous  legal,
political,  and  educational  addresses,  has  published
"Dissertation  on  the  Historical  Right  of  Virginia
to  the  Territory  Northwest  of  the  Ohio  " :  "  Life  of
Linn  Boyd";  "The  Living  Forces  of  the  Universe"


THOMPSON


THOMPSON


91


frtodi  Jht£&>r  i//L<my/i*t


(Philadelphia,  1866) ;  and  "  Deus  Semper."  When
he  was  eighty  years  old  he  wrote  "  The  Song  of
Eighty,"  a  poem  (printed  privately,  1886).

THOMPSON,  Hugh  Miller,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  County  Londonderry,  Ireland,  5  June,  1830.
While  he  was  yet  a  child  his  parents  removed  to
the  United  States  and  settled  in  Ohio.  He  re-
ceived his  aca-
demical education
in  the  schools  of
Cleveland,  and  his
theological  course
was  taken  at  Nash-
otah  House,  Wis.
He  was  ordered
deacon  at  Nasho-
tah,  6  June,  1852,
by  Bishop  Kem-
per, and  priest,  in
St.  John's  church,
Portage,  Wis.,  31
Aug.,  1856.  Dur-
ing his  diacon-
ate  he  had  charge
of  Grace  church.
Madison,  Wis.  He
removed  in  1853
to  Maysville,  Ky.,
but  remained  only  one  year.  In  August,  1854,  he
took  charge  of  mission  work  in  Portage  and  Bara-
boo,  Wis.,  and  immediately  on  his  ordination  to
the  priesthood  he  became  rector  of  St.  John's
church,-  Portage.  At  Easter,  1857,  he  engaged  in
mission  work  in  the  city  of  Milwaukee,  and  organ-
ized the  Church  of  the  Atonement.  In  1858  he
was  elected  rector  of  St.  Matthew's  church,  Keno-
sha, and  after  one  year  removed  to  Galena,  111.,  and
became  rector  of  Grace  church.  In  1860  he  was
made  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  at  Nasho-
tah,  and  founded  Kemper  hall.  In  the  same  year  he
became  editor-in-chief  of  "  The  American  Church-
man "  at  Chicago,  and  he  continued  in  this  office
until  the  paper  was  merged  into  "  The  Church-
man" at  Hartford,  Conn.  In  1871  he  became
rector  of  St.  James's  church,  Chicago,  which  was
burned  in  the  great  fire.  In  January,  1872,  he  re-
moved to  New  York  and  took  the  rectorship  of
Christ  church  and  the  editorship  of  "  The  Church
Journal  and  Gospel  Messenger."  In  1875  he  be-
came rector  of  Trinity  church,  New  Orleans,  La.,
where  he  remained  until  he  was  consecrated  assist-
ant bishop  of  Mississippi,  24  Feb.,  1883.  Four  years
later,  on  the  death  of  Bishop  Green,  he  succeeded
to  his  office.  Bishop  Thompson  attended  the  third
Pan-Anglican  conference  in  London  in  1888,  and
in  August  of  that  year  delivered  in  Westminster
Abbey  the  funeral  sermon  of  Bishop  Harris  of
Michigan.  Hobart  conferred  upon  him  the  degree
of  S.  T.  D.  in  1863.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Unity  and
its  Restoration  "  (New  York,  1860) ;  "  Sin  and  its
Penalty"  (1862);  " First  Principles"  (1868);  "Ab-
solution "  (1872) ;  •"  Copy  "  (1872) ;  "  Is  Romanism
the  Best  Religion  for  the  Republic  V  (1873);
"The Kingdom  of  God"  (1873) ;  "The  World  and
the  Logos,"  a  volume  of  lectures  (1885) ;  and  "  The
World  and  the  Kingdom  "  (1888).

THOMPSON,  Jacob,  cabinet  officer,  b.  in  Cas-
well county,  N.  C,  15  May,  1810 ;  d.  in  Memphis,
Tenn.,  24  March,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  North  Carolina  in  1831,  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1834,  and  settled  in  the  Chickasaw
country,  Miss.,  where  he  practised  law  with  success.
In  1838  he  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
and  he  served  by  continued  re-election  from  1839
till  1857, advocating  the  repudiation  by  Missis-


sippi of  part  of  the  state  bonds  and  opposing  the
compromise  measures  of  1850,  on  the  ground  that
they  were  not  favorable  enough  to  the  south.
While  he  was  in  congress  he  held  for  some  time
the  chairmanship  of  the  committee  on  Indian
affairs,  and  in  1845  he  refused  an  appointment
that  was  tendered  him  by  the  governor  of  Missis-
sippi to  a  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.  senate.  President
Buchanan  made  him  secretary  of  the  interior  in
1857,  and  he  held  that  office  till  8  Jan.,  1861,  when
he  resigned,  giving  as  his  reason  that  troops  had
been  ordered  to  re-enforce  Fort  Sumter  contrary
to  an  agreement  that  this  should  not  be  done
without  the  consent  of  the  cabinet.  In  acknowl-
edging his  letter  the  president  reminded  him  that
the  matter  had  been  decided  in  a  cabinet  meeting
six  days  before.  In  December,  1860,  while  still  in
office,  he  had  been  appointed  by  the  legislature  of
Mississippi  a  commissioner  to  urge  on  North  Caro-
lina the  adoption  of  an  ordinance  of  secession.
In  1862-'4  he  was  governor  of  Mississippi,  and
afterward  he  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Beau-
regard. In  the  summer  of  1864  he  was  sent  as  a
Confederate  commissioner  to  Canada,  where  he
promoted  the  plan  to  release  the  prisoners  of  war
at  Camp  Douglas,  near  Chicago,  and  to  seize  that
city.  He  has  also  been  charged  with  instigating
plots  to  burn  northern  cities  and  commit  other
outrages.  After  the  war  he  returned  to  the  United
States.  At  his  death  an  order  of  Sec.  Lucius  Q.  C.
Lamar  to  fly  the  National  flag  at  half-mast  over
the  buildings  of  the  interior  department  caused
much  excitement  at  the  north.

THOMPSON,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Middlesex,
Butler  co.,  Pa.,  1  Oct.,  1806;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
28  Jan.,  1874.  After  receiving  a  good  education,
he  began  life  as  a  printer,  subsequently  studied
law,  and  in  1829  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He
was  chosen  to  the  legislature  in  1832,  1833,  and
1834,  during  the  latter  year  serving  as  speaker  of
the  house,  although  he  was  the  youngest  member.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1836,  voting  for
Martin  Van  Buren,  in  1838  a  delegate  to  the  Con-
stitutional convention  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in
1839  was  appointed  president-judge  of  the  6th
judicial  district  of  the  state,  in  which  office  he
served  until  1844.  when  he  was  elected  by  the
Democrats  to  congress,  being  re-elected  in  1846
and  1848.  In  1855,  against  his  desire,  he  was
again  elected  to  the  legislature,  where  he  remained
one  term,  and  after  that  declined  nominations  for
both  the  legislature  and  congress.  In  1857  he
was  elected  to  the  supreme  court  of  the  state,  and
served  nine  years  as  justice  and  six  years  as  chief
justice.  On  the  expiration  of  his  term  he  was  re-
nominated by  the  Democrats,  but  failed  of  an  elec-
tion, though  running  ahead  of  his  ticket.  He
mingled  with  his  judicial  qualities  warm  affections
and  genial  manners.  His  judicial  opinions  are
found  in  the  supreme  court  reports,  from  vol.  xxx.
to  vol.  lxxii.  inclusive.  After  his  retirement  he  re-
sumed the  practice  of  law  in  Philadelphia,  and  his
death  occurred  suddenly  while  he  was  engaged  in
arguing  a  cause  before  the  same  court  over  which
he  had  so  recently  presided,  his  opponent  in  the
cause  being  his  predecessor  in  the  office  of  chief
justice,  George  W.  Woodward.

THOMPSON,  John,  political  writer,  b.  in
1777;  d.  in  Petersburg,  Va.,  in  1799.  He  was  the
author  of  articles  signed  "  Casca  "  and  "  Gracchus  "
in  the  Petersburg  "  Gazette,"  in  which  he  attacked
John  Adams's  administration,  and  also  of  letters
signed  "Curtius,"  addressed  to  Chief-Justice  John
Marshall  in  1798,  which  were  issued  in  book-form
(1804). His  life  was  written  by  George  Hay.


92


THOMPSON


THOMPSON


THOMPSON,  John  Burton,  senator,  b.  near
Harrodsburg,  Ky.,  14  Dec,  1810;  d.  in  Harrods-
burg,  7  Jan.,  1874.  His  ancestor  came  to  Virginia
from  England  as  a  captain  in  the  royal  navy.
John  was  educated  at  private  schools,  studied  law
under  his  father,  and  succeeded  to  his  extensive
practice  at  Harrodsburg.  He  served  as  common-
wealth's attorney,  was  chosen  to  the  legislature  in
1835  and  1836,  and  in  1840  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig  to  fill  a  vacancy,  serving  from  7  Dec,
1840,  till  3  March,  1843.  He  raised  a  company  of
cavalry  for  the  Mexican  war,  but  more  than  the
necessary  number  of  volunteers  from  his  state
offered  themselves,  and  it  was  not  accepted.  He
served  again  4n  congress  in  1847-'51,  and  in  the
latter  year,  when  Archibald  Dixon  was  nominated
by  the  Whigs  for  governor,  Thompson,  who  had
been  a  candidate  for  the  office,  was  given  second
place  on  the  ticket.  Dixon  was  defeated,  but
Thompson  was  elected  by  a  large  majority,  and  in
1853  was  sent  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  served
a  full  term.  In  that  body  he  was  a  member  of
the  committees  on  private  land-claims  and  pen-
sions. Mr.  Thompson  was  especially  eminent  as  a
jury  lawyer,  and  was  also  a  successful  orator.  His
most  noted  political  speech  was  that  on  the  Cuban
question.  He  was  a  man  of  broad  culture,  quiet
and  even  reserved  in  manner.  In  politics  he  was
a  Clay  Whig  till  the  disruption  of  the  party  just
before  the  civil  war,  when  he  became  a  Unionist.

THOMPSON,  John  Reuben,  author,  b.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  23  Oct.,  1823;  d.  in  New  York
city,  30  April,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia  in  1844,  afterward  studied  law
there,  and  settled  in  Richmond,  with  everv  pros-
pect of  success  in  his  profession.  But  he  had  al-
ways been  a  lover  of  literature  and  a  keen  student
of  it,  and  these  proclivities  became  more  domi-
nating after  he  had  completed  his  education.  Ac-
cordingly, in  1847,  he  accepted  the  editorship  of
the  "  Southern  Literary  Messenger."  This  maga-
zine was  a  power  in  its  day,  and  did  no  little  to
foster  a  literary  spirit  among  the  younger  race  of
southern men. Mr.  Thompson  brought  a  great

deal  of  zeal  and
energy  into  the  ed-
itorial chair,  and
during  the  twelve
years  in  which  he
successfully  car-
ried forward  his
literary  work  in
connection  with
this  monthly  he
imparted  to  it  such
a  character  as  no
southern  maga-
zine has  ever  had
before  or  since.
He  did  much  to
bring  southern  tal-
ent to  light,  and
in  the  pages  of  the
"  Southern  Mes-
senger" Donald  G.  Mitchell  first  published  his
"  Reveries  of  a  Bachelor "  and  "  Dream  Life."
Here  too  appeared  the  early  writings  of  John
Esten  Cooke.  Philip  Pendleton  Cooke,  Paul  H.
Hayne,  and  Henry  Timrod.  In  1854  Mr.  Thomp-
son went  to  Europe  in  search  of  health.  During
this  absence  he  wrote  papers  for  the  "  Southern
Messenger,"  which  long  afterward  he  collected  in
book-form.  One  copy  had  been  sent  to  the  author,
and  the  edition,  except  this,  was  burned  in  the  pub-
lishing-house. His  health  continued  so  delicate


/h*/L:JL


csl>^./*.


that  in  1859  he  resigned  his  editorship  in  Rich-
mond and  went  to  Augusta,  Ga.,  where  he  edited
the  "Southern  Field  and  Fireside."  In  1863  he
went  abroad  again  in  such  delicate  health  that  his
friends  did  not  expect  him  to  reach  the  farther
shore  alive  ;  but  the  sea-voyage  revived  him,  and  he
rapidly  improved.  He  chose  London  as  his  resi-
dence, where  he  was  regularly  engaged  on  the
staff  of  the  "  London  Index,"  and  contributed  to
"  Blackwood's  Magazine."  Some  time  after  the
civil  war  he  returned  home  in  broken  health  and
dispirited.  Finding  it  impossible  to  do  anything
in  the  way  of  literature  in  the  south,  he  became
literary  editor  of  the  "  -New  York  Evening  Post,"
continuing  as  such  for  several  years,  until  his  health
failed  again.  He  made  a  last  effort  to  restore  it  by
going  to  Colorado  in  1872,  where  he  spent  the
winter,  returning  in  the  spring,  only  to  die.  Mr.
Thompson  was  a  polished  and  graceful  writer,  both
of  prose  and  verse,  but  he  did  his  most  effective
work  as  a  literary  editor.  Many  of  his  lyrics  are
household  words  in  the  south,  especially  in  his
native  state,  and  his  influence  in  fostering  the  tal-
ents of  writers  that  have  since  distinguished  them-
selves was  decided.  He  was  greatly  beloved  for
his  genial  and  refined  nature.  Among  his  most
admired  poems  are  "  The  Burial  of  Latane,"  "  The
Death  of  Stuart,"  and  "  The  Battle  Rainbow."

THOMPSON,  Sir  John  Sparrow  David,  Cana-
dian jurist,  b.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  10  Nov.,
1844.  His  father  was  a  native  of  Waterford,  Ireland,
for  some  time  queen's  printer,  and  subsequently
superintendent  of  the  money-order  system  of  Nova
Scotia.  The  son  was  educated  at  the  common
school  and  at  Free-church  academy,  Halifax,  stud-
ied law,  was  called  to  the  bar  in  July,  1865,  and
appointed  a  queen's  counsel  in  May,  1879.  He
was  counsel  on  behalf  of  the  U.  S.  government,
acting  with  the  American  lawyers  before  the  fish-
ery commission  at  Halifax  under  the  Washington
treaty.  He  was  made  a  member  of  the  executive
council  and  attorney-general  of  Nova  Scotia  on
22  Oct.,  1878,  and  was  premier  and  attorney-gen-
eral of  the  same  province  from  25  May  until  25
July,  1882,  when  he  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the
supreme  court.  He  resigned  on  25  Sept.,  1885,
and  was  made  minister  of  justice  and  attorney-gen-
eral of  Canada.  He  was  a  member  of  the  house  of
assembly  of  Nova  Scotia  from  December,  1877,  un-
til July,  1882.  Mr.  Thompson  was  elected  to  the
Dominion  parliament  on  16  Oct.,  1885,  and  re-
elected in  February,  1887.  He  was  attached  to  the
British  commission,  which  arranged  the  fishery
treaty  at  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1888,  and  was
knighted  for  his  services  on  that  occasion.

THOMPSON,  Jonathan,  merchant,  b.  in  Sag-
tikos  Manor,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  7  Dec,  1773 ;  d
in  New  York  city,  30  Dec,  1846.  He  was  the
eldest  son  of  Judge  Isaac  Thompson  and  Mary,
daughter  of  Col.  Abraham  Gardiner.  He  was  a
merchant  in  the  city  of  New  York  in  1795,  of  the
firm  of  Gardiner,  Thompson  and  Co.,  in  partnership
with  his  cousin,  Nathaniel  Gardiner,  an  officer  in
the  Revolutionary  army.  They  were  engaged  in
the  West  India  business,  and  had  extensive  ware-
houses in  Brooklyn.  Mr.  Thompson  had  great  in-
fluence in  the  councils  of  the  Democratic  party,
being  the  chairman  of  its  general  committee  for
ten  years.  He  was  collector  of  direct  taxes  and
internal  revenue  for  the  state  of  New  York  during
the  war  of  1812-'15,  and  afterward,  when  that
office  was  abolished,  was  appointed  collector  of  cus-
toms of  the  port  of  New  York,  and  served  from
1820  to  1829.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
president  of  the  Bank  of  the  Manhattan  company.


THOMPSON


THOMPSON


93


He  was  widely  known  socially,  and  numbered
among  his  friends  nearly  all  the  statesmen  and
politicians  of  the  country.

THOMPSON,  Joseph  Parrish,  scholar,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7  Aug.,  1819;  d.  in  Berlin,
•Germany,  20  Sept.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1838,  studied  theology  for  a  few  months  in
Andover  seminary,  and  then  at  Yale  from  1839  till
1840,  when  he  was  ordained  as  a  Congregational
minister.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Chapel  street
church  in  New  Haven  from  that  time  till  1845,
and  during  this  period  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  '•  New  Englander."  From  1845  till  his  resig-
nation in  1871  he  had  charge  of  the  Broadway
tabernacle  in  New  York  city.  Dr.  Thompson  de-
voted much  time  to  the  study  of  Egyptology,  in
which  he  attained  high  rank.  In  1852-'3  he  visited
Palestine,  Egypt,  and  other  eastern  countries,  and
from  that  time  he  published  continual  Contribu-
tions to  this  branch  of  learning  in  periodicals,  the
transactions  of  societies,  and  cyclopaedias.  He
lectured  on  Egyptology  in  Andover  seminary  in
1871,  and  in  1872-9  resided  in  Berlin,  Germany,
occupied  in  oriental  studies,  took  an  active  part  in
the  social,  political,  and  scientific  discussions,  and
was  a  member  of  various  foreign  societies,  before
which  he  delivered  addresses,  and  contributed  es-
says to  their  publications.  These  have  been  issued
under  the  title  of  "  American  Comments  on  Euro-
pean Questions"  (New  York,  1884).  In  1875  Dr.
Thompson  went  to  England  to  explain  at  public
meetings  "the  attitude  of  Germany  in  regard  to
Ultramontanism,"  for  which  service  he  was  re-
warded by  the  thanks  of  the  German  government,
■expressed  in  person  by  Prince  Bismarck,  and  Dr.
Thompson  originated  the  plan  of  the  Albany  Con-
gregationalist  convention  in  1852,  and  was  a  mana-
ger of  the  American  Congregational  union  and  the
American  home  missionary  society.  He  also  aided
in  establishing  the  New  York  "  Independent."
Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1856,
•and  the  University  of  New  York  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1868.  He  published  "Memoir  of  Timothy
Dwight "  (New  Haven,  1844) ;  "  Lectures  to  Young
Men  "  (New  York,  1846) :  "  Hints  to  Employers
(1847) ;  "  Memoir  of  David  Hale  "  (1850) ;  "  Foster
•on  Missions,  with  a  Preliminary  Essay "  (1850) ;
"  Stray  Meditations "  (1852 ;  revised  ed.,  entitled
"  The  Believer's  Refuge,"  1857) ;  "  The  Invaluable
Possession  "  (1856) ;  "  Egypt,  Past  and  Present  "
•(Boston,  1856):  "The  Early  Witnesses"  (1857);
"Memoir  of  Rev.  David  T.  Stoddard"  (New  York,
1858) ;  "  The  Christian  Graces  "  (1859) ;  "  The  Col-
lege as  a  Religious  Institution "  (1859) ;  "  Love
and  Penalty"  (1860);  "Bryant  Gray"  (1863);
"Christianity  and  Emancipation"  (1863);  "The
Holy  Comforter "  (1866) ;  "  Man  in  Genesis  and
Geology"  (1869);  "Theology  of  Christ,  from  His
Own  Words"  (1870);  "Home  Worship"  (1871);
"  Church  and  State  in  the  United  States  "  (1874) ;
"Jesus  of  Nazareth:  His  Life,  for  the  Young"
•(1875) ;  "  The  United  States  as  a  Nation,"  lectures
(1877);  and  "The  Workman:  his  False  Friends
•and  his  True  Friends  "  (1879).

THOMPSON,  Joseph  Peter,  A.  M.  E.  Zion
bishop,  b.  in  Winchester,  Va.,  20  Dec,  1818.  He
acquired  a  common-school  education,  and  at  the
age  of  twenty  was  licensed  as  a  local  preacher.  In
1843  he  joined  the  New  York  annual  conference  of
the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  Zion  church,  and
he  was  ordained  deacon  in  1845  and  elder  in  1847.
After  serving  as  a  missionary  in  Nova  Scotia  and
holding  pastorates  in  and  near  New  York  city,  he
was  elected  and  ordained  a  bishop  on  4  July,  1876,
.in  the  general  conference  in  Louisville,  Ky. Bish-


op Thompson  organized  a  conference  in  the  Baha-
ma islands  in  1878,  and  in  1882  was  a  delegate  to
the  Methodist  ecumenical  council  in  London.  He
has  studied  and  practised  medicine  successfully,
having  received  his  medical  degree  from  Jefferson
university  in  Philadelphia  in  1858.

THOMPSON,  Launt,  sculptor,  b.  in  Abbeyleix.
Queen's  co.,  Ireland,  8  Feb.,  1833.  At  the  age  of
fourteen  he  went  to  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  there
entered  the  office  of  a  professor  of  anatomy.
While  there  he  occupied  his  leisure  hours  with
drawing,  but  later  entered  a
medical  college.  When  Eras-
tus  D.  Palmer,  the  sculptor,
offered  to  receive  him  as  his
pupil,  he  gladly  availed  him-
self of  the  opportunity,  and
abandoned  medicine  for  art.
He  worked  in  Palmer's  studio
for  nine  years,  producing  sev-
eral portrait-busts  and  ideal
heads  of  some  merit,  and  in
1858  removed  to  New  York
city.  Here,  having  shown  a
remarkable  talent  for  medal-
lion portraits,  he  found  ample
employment.  He  became  an
associate  of  the  Academy  of
design  in  1859,  and  three  years
later  his  bust,  "  The  Trapper,"
secured  his  election  as  an  acade-
mician. In  1868-'9  he  was  in
Rome,  and  in  1875  he  went  again  to  Italy,  remain-
ing until  1881,  in  which  year  he  returned  to  New
York.  In  1874  he  was  vice-president  of  the  Nation-
al academy.  Among  his  works  are  "Elaine,"  a
bust ;  "  Morning  Glory,"  a  medallion  ;  statues  of
Abraham  Pierson,  at  Yale  college  (1874),  repre-
sented in  the  accompanying  illustration  ;  Napoleon
I.,  at  Milford,  Pa. ;  Gen.  John  Sedgwick,  at  West
Point  (1869) ;  Winfleld  Scott,  at  the  Soldiers'  home,
Washington,  D.  C. ;  Charles  Morgan,  in  Clinton,
Conn,  (about  1871) ;  and  Ambrose  E.  Burnside.  an
equestrian  statue,  at  Providence,  R.  I.  (1887) ;  "  The
Color- Bearer,"  at  Pittsfield,  Mass. ;  a  medallion  por-
trait of  John  A.  Dix,  made  for  the  sanitary  fair ;
and  portrait-busts  of  William  C.  Bryant,  in  the
Metropolitan  museum.  New  York ;  James  Gordon
Bennett,  the  elder ;  Robert  B.  Minturn ;  Capt.
Charles  H.  Marshall ;  Edwin  Booth  as  "  Hamlet " ;
Stephen  H.  Tyng  (1870);  and  Charles  L.  Elliott
and  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse  (1871).  Yale  conferred  on
him  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1874.

THOMPSON;  Lewis  0,  clergyman,  b.  in
Bergen,  Norway,  13  March,  1839;  d.  in  Henry,
111.,  16  July,  1887.  He  came  with  his  parents  in
boyhood  to  Chicago,  111.,  was  graduated  at  Beloit
in  1863,  and  at  Union  theological  seminary,  New
York city,  in 1866,  and  after  being  licensed  to

8 reach,  and  becoming,  in  1866,  a  professor  at
orthwestern  university,  Watertown,  Wis.,  he  was
ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Presbyterian
church,  28  Jan.,  1869.  In  the  spring  of  that  year
he  became  president  of  Northwestern  university,
and  in  1875  he  became  pastor  of  a  church  in  Pe-
oria, 111.,  but  in  July,  1882,  failing  health  forced
him  to  resign.  After  1886  he  was  in  charge  of  a
church  at  Henry,  111.,  till  his  death  by  drowning.
He  published  "  The  Presidents  and  their  Admin-
istrations" (Indianapolis,  Ind..  1873);  "Nothing
Lost"  (New  York,  1876):  "The  Prayer-Meeting
and  its  Improvement"  (Chicago,  1878):  "How  to
conduct  Prayer-Meetings"'  (Boston.  1879);  and
"Nineteen  Christian  Centuries  in  Outline"  (Chica-
go, 1882) ;  and  left  several  uncompleted  works.


94


THOMPSON


THOMPSON


THOMPSON,  Maurice,  author,  b.  in  Fairfield,
Ind.,  9  Sept.,  1844.  His  parents,  who  were  south-
erners, removed  to  Kentucky,  and  thence  to  the
hill-region  of  northern  Georgia.  The  son  was  edu-
cated by  private  tutors,  and  early  became  interested
in  the  study  of  out-door  life.  He  served  through
the  civil  war  in  the  Confederate  army,  and  at  its
close  went  to  Indiana,  became  a  civil  engineer  on
a  railway  survey,  and  in  due  season  rose  to  be  chief
engineer.  He  "then  studied  law,  and  opened  an
office  at  Crawfordsville.  He  was  elected  in  1879  to
the  legislature,  and  appointed  in  1885  state  geolo-
gist of  Indiana  and  chief  of  the  department  of  natu-
ral history.  He  has  written  much  for  periodicals,
and  has  published  in  book-form  "  Hoosier  Mosaics  "
(New  York,  1875) ;  "  The  Witchery  of  Archery "
(1878) ;  "  A  Tallahassee  Girl  "  (Boston,  1882) ;  "  His
Second  Campaign  "  (1882) ;  "  Songs  of  Fair  Weath-
er" (1883);  "At  Love's  Extremes"  (1885);  "By-
ways and  Bird  Notes"  (1885);  "The  Boys'  Book
of  'Sports  "  (1886) ;  "  A  Banker  of  Bankersville  "
(1886);  "Sylvan  Secrets"  (1887);  "The  Story  of
Louisiana,"  in  the  "  Commonwealth  Series  "  (1888) ;
and  "A  Fortnight  of  Folly"  (New  York,  1888).

THOMPSON,  Merriwether  Jeff,  soldier,  b.  in
Harper's  Ferry,  Va.,  22  Jan.,  1826 ;  d.  in  St.  Joseph,
Mo.,  in  July,  1876.  He  was  educated  in  the  com-
mon schools,  was  mayor  of  the  city  of  St.  Joseph,
Mo.,  in  1859,  and  was  appointed  brigadier-general
in  the  Missouri  state  guards  early  in  1861,  and  in
the  Confederate  army  in  October  of  that  year.  He
was  a  most  successful  scout  and  partisan  officer,
and  achieved  frequent  successes  by  strategy  and
daring  against  greatly  superior  forces.  He  was
held  in  high  regard  by  Gen.  Sterling  Price  and
Gen.  Leonidas  Polk,  under  both  of  whom  he  served.
He  recruited  his  command  personally,  and,  as  a
rule,  clothed,  armed,  and  subsisted  them  without
expense  to  the  Confederate  government.  He  was
the  inventor  of  a  hemp-break,  which  is  now  in  gen-
eral use,  and  an  improved  pistol-lock.  He  sur-
veyed, as  civil  engineer,  the  greater  part  of  the
Hannibal  and  St.  Joseph  railroad  and  parts  of  the
Kansas  and  Nebraska  road.

THOMPSON,  Richard  Wigginton,  secretary
of  the  navy,  b.  in  Culpeper  county,  Va.,  9  June,
1809.  He  received  a  good  education,  and  removed
in  1831  to  Kentucky,  whence,  after  serving  as  a

store-keeper's  clerk
in  Louisville,  he
went  to  Lawrence
county,  Ind.  There
he  taught  for  a  few
months,  and  then
returned  to  mer-
cantile business,  at
the  same  time  stud-
ying law  at  night.
He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1834,
began  to  practise
in  Bedford,  Ind.,
and  served  in  the
lower  house  of  the
legislature  in  1834-
'6,  and  in  the  upper
house  in  1836-'8.
He  was  for  a  short
time  president,  pro
tempore,  of  the  state
senate,  and  acting
lieutenant-governor.  He  was  a  presidential  elector
on  the  Harrison  ticket  in  1840,  zealouslv  supporting
Gen.  Harrison  in  public  speeches  and  by  his  pen,
served  in  congress  in  1841-'3,  having  been  chosen


/IXtwA^rnyZAMyt/


as  a  Whig,  and  was  a  defeated  candidate  for  elec-
tor on  the  Clay  ticket  in  1844.  He  served  again  in
congress  in  1847-'9,  declining  a  renomination,  and
also  refused  the  Austrian  mission,  which  was  of-
fered him  by  President  Taylor,  the  recordership  of
the  land-office,  which  Fillmore  tendered  him,  and
a  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  court  of  claims,  which
President  Lincoln  urged  him  to  accept.  He  was
again  a  presidential  elector,  on  the  Republican
ticket,  in  1864,  and  delegate  to  the  National  con-
ventions of  that  party  in  1868  and  1876.  In  the
latter  he  nominated  Oliver  P.  Morton  for  the  presi-
dency. In  1867-9  he  was  judge  of  the  18th  circuit
of  the  state.  On  12  March,  1877,  Mr.  Thompson
entered  President  Hayes's  cabinet  as  secretary  of
the  navy,  and  he  served  nearly  through  the  admin-
istration, resigning  in  1881  to  become  chairman  of
the  American  committee  of  the  Panama  canal  com-
pany. He  is  also  a  director  of  the  Panama  rail-
road. He  has  written  many  political  platforms,
and  obtained  a  reputation  for  his  ability  in  formu-
lating party-principles.  He  has  published  "  The
Papacy  and  the  Civil  Power"  (New  York,  1876),
and  a  " History  of  the  Tariff"  (Chicago,  1888).

THOMPSON,  Robert  Ellis,  educator,  b.  in
Lurgan,  Ireland,  in  the  spring  of  1844.  Coming  to
this  country  in  his  thirteenth  year,  he  settled  with
his  parents  in  Philadelphia,  and.  entering  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania,  was  graduated  in  1865,
and  in  1868  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  In  1867
he  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Reformed  presby-
tery of  Philadelphia,  and  in  1868  was  chosen  pro-
fessor of  Latin  and  mathematics  in  the  University
of  Pennsylvania.  He  became  professor  of  social
science  in  1871,  and  in  1881  professor  of  history
and  English  literature,  which  chair  he  still  holds.
Since  1870  he  has  given  instruction  in  political
economy,  and  he  is  well  known  as  an  advocate  of
protection  to  home  industry.  In  1884-'5  he  lec-
tured at  Harvard  on  protection  and  the  tariff,  and
in  1886-'7  he  delivered  a  similar  course  at  Yale.
In  1870  he  became  editor  of  the  "  Penn  Monthly,"
then  newly  established,  and  continued  such  for  ten
years.  In  1880  a  weekly  supplement  of  notes  on
current  events  was  begun,  which  in  October  of  that
year  was  expanded  into  "  The  American,"  a  weekly
journal  of  literature,  science,  the  arts,  and  public
affairs,  which  is  still  published  in  Philadelphia  un-
der his  editorship.  In  1883-'5  he  edited  the  first
two  volumes  of  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Americana,"  a
supplement  to  the  ninth  edition  of  the  "  Encyclo-
paedia Britannica,"  but,  his  health  failing,  he  was
obliged  to  resign  the  remaining  two  volumes  to
other  hands.  In  1870  Hamilton  college  conferred
on  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.,  and  in  1887  he  re-
ceived that  of  S.  T.  D.  from  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania. Prof.  Thompson  is  the  author  of  "  Social
Science  and  National  Economy "  (Philadelphia,
1875 ;  revised  ed.,  1876 ;  partly  rewritten,  under  the
title  of  "Elements  of  Political  Economy,"  1882),
and  "  Protection  to  Home  Industry,"  his  Harvard
lectures  (New  York,  1886).

THOMPSON,  Smith,  jurist,  b.  in  Stanford,
Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  17  Jan.,  1768;  d.  in  Pough-
keepsie,  N.  Y.,  18  Dec,  1843.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1788,  studied  law  with  Chancellor
James  Kent  in  Poughkeepsie,  teaching  part  of  the
time,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1792.  He
practised  for  some  time  in  Troy,  but,  on  the  re-
moval of  Chancellor  Kent  from  Poughkeepsie  to
New  York,  Mr.  Thompson  returned  to  the  former
place.  In  1800  he  was  chosen  to  the  legislature,
and  in  1801  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  consti-
tutional convention.  In  the  latter  year  he  was
appointed  attorney  for  the  middle  district  of  New


THOMPSON


THOMPSON


95


m^W&Tt


York,  but  declined.  From  1802  till  1814  he  was
associate  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court,  mean-
while declining  the  mayoralty  of  New  York  city,
and  in  the  latter  year
he  became  chief  jus-
tice, which  post  he
held  till  he  was  called
in  1818  to  the  port-
folio of  the  navy  in
President  Monroe's
cabinet.  In  1823  he
was  raised  to  the
bench  of  the  U.  S.
supreme  court,  to
succeed  Judge  Brock-
hoist  Livingston,
where  he  remained
till  his  death.  Judge
Thompson  was  inter-
ested in  many  benev-
olent enterprises,  and
at  the  time  of  his
death  was  the  oldest
vice-president  of  the
American  Bible  society.  He  made  a  reputation  for
sound  legal  learning  on  the  bench  of  his  native
state,  which  he  sustained  in  the  U.  S.  supreme
court.  His  funeral  sermon,  which  was  delivered  by
Rev.  A.  M.  Mann,  in  the  Reformed  Dutch  church,
Poughkeepsie,  was  published  in  pamphlet-form
(Poughkeepsie,  1844).  The  vignette  of  Judge
Thompson  is  copied  from  the  original  painting  by
Asher  B.  Durand.  Yale  and  Princeton  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1824  and  Harvard  in  1835.
THOMPSON,  Thomas,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  27  Aug.,  1798 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
28  March,  1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1817,  and  studied  divinity  under  William  Ellery
Channing,  but  abandoned  it  to  devote  himself  to
the  fine  arts.  His  first  collection  of  pictures,  which
was  said  to  be  the  finest  in  Boston  at  that  time  and
valued  at  $92,000,  was  destroyed  in  the  burning  of
Tremont  Temple  in  1852.  He  gathered  another
collection  worth  $500,000,  and,  besides  this,  pos-
sessed property  valued  at  nearly  $1,000,000.  He
had  bequeathed  this  to  form  a  fund  the  income  of
which  should  be  used  to  aid  poor  needle-women  of
Boston,  but  because  his  property  was  taxed  in  that
city  at  what  he  thought  an  exorbitant  rate,  he  re-
moved to  New  York  about  1860,  cancelled  his  will,
and  made  another  in  favor  of  the  needle-women
of  Brattleboro',  Vt.,  and  Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.  Mr.
Thompson's  mode  of  life  was  eccentric,  and  it  is
said  that  before  his  removal  from  Boston  he  had
never  travelled  on  a  steamboat  or  a  railroad.

THOMPSON,  Thomas  W,  senator,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  15  March,  1766 ;  d.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,
1  Oct.,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1786,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
practised  in  Salisbury  from  1790  till  1810,  when
he  removed  to  Concord.  He  was  a  member  of  the
state  house  of  representatives,  and  its  speaker  in
1813— '14,  served  in  congress  in  1805-'7,  and  was
treasurer  of  his  state  in  1809.  He  was  appointed
U.  S.  senator  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Nicholas
Oilman,  deceased,  and  served  from  19  Sept.,  1814,
till  3  March,  1817. — His  grandson,  John  Leverett,
soldier,  b.  in  Plymouth,  N.  H.,  2  Feb.,  1835 ;  d.  in
Chicago,  111.,  31  Jan.,  1888,  was  the  son  of  William
C.  Thompson.  He  studied  at  Dartmouth  and
Williams,  and  read  law  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  and
Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  and  then  at  Harvard  law-
school,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1858.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  at  Worcester,  and  continued
his  studies  in  Berlin,  Munich,  and  Paris. In  1860


he  settled  in  Chicago,  and  at  the  opening  of  the
civil  war  enlisted  as  a  private  of  artillery.  He  rose
to  be  corporal,  and  was  made  lieutenant  in  the  1st
Rhode  Island  cavalry,  in  which  he  was  commis-
sioned captain,  3  Dec,  1861 ;  major,  3  July,  1862 ;
lieutenant-colonel  on  11  July;  and  colonel  on  4
Jan.,  1863.  In  March,  1864,  he  took  command  of
the  1st  New  Hampshire  cavalry.  He  served  first
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  in  1864  with
Sheridan  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  taking  part  in
many  engagements,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  re-
ceived the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.
In  1866  he  formed  a  law-partnership  with  Norman
Williams.  Gen.  Thompson  was  connected  with
the  work  of  the  Citizens'  association,  and  was  presi-
dent of  the  Union  league  club  of  Chicago.

THOMPSON,  Waddy,  lawyer,  b.  in  Pickens-
ville,  S.  C,  8  Sept.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Tallahassee,  Fla.,
23  Nov.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  South  Caro-
lina college  in  1814  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1819.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  from
1826  till  1830,  when  he  became  solicitor  of  the  west-
ern circuit.  During  the  nullification  excitement
in  1835  he  was  elected  by  the  legislature  brigadier-
general  of  militia.  From  1835  till  1841  he  was  a
member  of  congress,  and  was  active  in  debate  as  a
leader  of  the  Whig  party,  and  serving  in  1840  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  military  affairs.  In
1842  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Mexico.  Dur-
ing his  mission,  he  made  two  important  treaties,
and  procured  the  liberation  of  more  than  200
Texan  prisoners,  many  of  whom  were  sent  home
at  his  own  charge.  On  his  return  he  published
"  Recollections  of  Mexico,"  which  is  valuable  as  a
calm  estimate  of  that  country  written  on  the  eve
of  the  war  with  the  United  States  (New  York,  1846).
He  was  a  cotton-planter  in  Florida,  but  spent  most
of  his  time  after  his  return  from  Mexico  on  his
estate  near  Greenville,  S.  C.

THOMPSON,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1725;  d.  near  Carlisle,  Pa.,  4  Sept..  1781.
He  emigrated  to  Pennsylvania,  and  in  the  French
and  Indian  war  was  captain  of  a  troop  of  mounted
militia.  When  a  battalion  of  eight  companies  was
recruited  in  Pennsylvania,  after  the  fight  at  Lex-
ington, he  was  placed  in  command,  with  the  rank
of  colonel.  They  were  the  first  troops  that  were
raised  on  the  demand  of  the  Continental  congress,
and  they  arrived  at  the  camp  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
before  14  Aug.,  1775.  On  10  Nov.  this  regiment
drove  back  a  British  landing-party  at  Lechmere
point.  Thompson  was  made  a  brigadier-general
on  1  March,  1776,  and  on  19  March  he  relieved
Gen.  Charles  Lee  of  the  command  of  the  forces  at
New  York.  In  April  he  was  ordered  to  Canada  to
re-enforce  Gen.  John  Thomas  with  four  regiments,
which  were  afterward  increased  to  ten.  He  met
the  remnant  of  the  Northern  army  on  its  retreat
from  Quebec,  and  assumed  the  chief  command
while  Gen.  Thomas  was  sick,  yielding  it  up  on  4
June  to  Gen.  John  Sullivan,  by  whose  orders,  two
days  later,  he  made  a  disastrous  attack  on  the
enemy  at  Trois  Rivieres.  He  was  there  taken  pris-
oner, and  in  August  returned  to  Philadelphia  on
parole,  but  was  not  exchanged  for  two  years.

THOMPSON,  William  Tappan,  humorist,  b.
in  Ravenna,  Ohio,  31  Aug.,  1812;  d.  in  Savannah,
Ga.,  24  March,  1882.  His  father  was  a  Virginian
and  his  mother  a  native  of  Dublin,  Ireland,  and
the  son  was  the  first  white  child  that  was  born  in
the  Western  Reserve.  He  lost  his  mother  at  the
age  of  eleven,  and  removed  to  Philadelphia  with
his  father,  who  died  soon  afterward,  and  the  lad
entered  the  office  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Chronicle."
This  he  left  to  become  secretary  to  James  D.  Wes-


96


THOMPSON


THOMSON


■cott,  territorial  governor  of  Florida,  with  whom  he
.also  studied  law,  but  in  1835  he  went  to  Augusta,
■Ga„  and  became  associated  with  Judge  Augustus
B.  Longstreet  in  editing  the  "  States  Rights  Senti-
aiel."  He  served  as  a  volunteer  against  the  Semi-
noles  in  1835-'6,  and  in  the  autumn  of  the  latter
year  established  at  Augusta  the  "  Mirror,"  the  first
purely  literary  paper  in  the  state.  It  was  not  a
financial  success,  and  was  merged  in  the  "  Family
Companion "  at  Macon,  whither  Mr.  Thompson
Temoved.  Afterward  he  conducted  the  "Miscel-
lany" in  Madison,  Ga.,  to  which  he  contributed  his
•"  Major  Jones  Letters,"  which  first  won  him  a  repu-
tation, and  which  were  afterward  collected  in  book-
form  as  "Major  Jones's  Courtship"  (Philadelphia,
1840 ;  unauthorized  ed.,  entitled  "  Rancy  Cottem's
•Courtship,  by  Major  Joseph  Jones  ").  In  1845  he
became  associated  with  Park  Benjamin  in  the  pub-
lication at  Baltimore  of  the  "Western  Continent,"
&  weekly,  of  which  he  was  afterward  sole  editor  and
proprietor,  but  he  sold  it  in  1850,  and,  removing  to
Savannah,  founded  the  "Morning  News,"  with
which  he  remained  connected  till  his  death.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  was  aide  to  Gov.  Joseph  E.
Brown,  and  in  1864  he  served  in  the  ranks  as  a  vol-
unteer He  was  at  one  time  one  of  the  wardens  of
the  port  of  Savannah,  sat  in  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  of  1877,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
National  Democratic  convention  of  1868.  His  po-
litical editorials  were  forcible  and  often  bitter,  but
in  private  life  he  was  simple  and  genial.  His  hu-
morous works  at  one  time  were  widely  popular.
Besides  the  one  mentioned  above,  they  include
"Major  Jones's  Chronicles  of  Pineville"  (1843:
new  and  unauthorized  ed.,  entitled  "  Major  Jones's
■Georgia  Scenes ") ;  "  Major  Jones's  Sketches  of
Travel "  (1848) ;  "  The  Live  Indian,"  a  farce ;  and  a
dramatization  of  "  The  Vicar  of  Wakefield,"  which
was  produced  with  success  in  this  country  and
abroad.  He  also  edited  "  Hotchkiss's  Codification
of  the  Statute  Laws  of  Georgia"  (1845).  After  his
death  another  collection  of  his  sketches  was  pub-
lished by  his  daughter,  Mrs.  May  A.  Wade,  with
the  title  "  John's  Alive,  or  the  Bride  of  a  Ghost,
.and  other  Sketches"  (Philadelphia,  1883).

THOMPSON,  Zadoc,  naturalist,  b.  in  Bridge-
water,  Vt.,  23  May,  1796 ;  d.  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  19
Jan.,  1856.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
-of  Vermont  in  1823,  and  became  a  tutor  there  in
1825.  In  addition  to  his  teaching,  he  edited  in
1828  the  "  Iris  and  Burlington  Literary  Gazette,"
and  in  1832  "  The  Green  Mountain  Repository."
He  issued  an  almanac  as  early  as- 1819,  and  subse-
quently made  the  astronomical  calculations  for  the
"Vermont  Registers,"  also  for  thirty-four  years
those  of  "  Walton's  Registers."  He  removed  in
1833  to  Hatley,  Canada,  and  then  to  Sherbrooke,
where  he  taught,  and,  after  studying  theology,  was
in  1835  made  a  deacon  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  He  returned  to  Burlington,  Vt.,  in  1837,
and  was  given  a  chair  in  the  Vermont  Episcopal
seminary.  Subsequently  in  1845-'8  he  held  the  of-
fice of  state  geologist  of  Vermont  and  gathered  in
Burlington  a  collection  of  more  than  3.000  speci-
mens of  the  productions  of  the  state,  which  on  his
death  became  the  property  of  the  university.  In
1851  he  was  called  to  the  professorship  of  chemis-
try and  natural  history  in  the  University  of  Ver-
mont, and  in  1853  he  was  directed  to  make  a  survey
of  the  state,  including  its  physical  geography,
geology,  mineralogy,  botany,  and  general  zoology.
upon  which  he  was  engaged  at  the  time  of  his
•death.  He  was  sent  as  a  commissioner  from  Ver-
mont to  the  World's  fair  in  London  in  1851,  and
-exhibited  a  collection  of  American  woods,  classified


according  to  their  useful  properties,  for  which  he
received  a  bronze  medal.  In  June,  1850,  he  deliv-
ered the  annual  address  before  the  Boston  society
of  natural  history  on  the  "  Geology  of  Vermont."
Besides  several  text-books,  Prof.  Thompson  pub-
lished "  Gazetteer  of  the  State  of  Vermont "  (Mont-
pelier,  1824) ;  "  History  of  the  State  of  Vermont  to
1832  "  (Burlington,  1833);  "History  of  Vermont,
Natural,  Civil,  and  Statistical  "  (1841-'53) ;  "  Guide
to  Lake  George,  Lake  Champlain,  Montreal,  and
Quebec  "  (1845) ;  and  the  "  Geography  and  Geology
of  Vermont "  (1848).

THOMSON,  Alexander,  jurist,  b.  in  Frank-
lin county.  Pa.,  12  Jan.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Chambersburg,
Pa.,  2  Aug.,  1848.  He  was  the  son  of  Archibald
Thomson,  a  soldier  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution.
His  parents  having  died  when  he  was  a  child,  he
was  apprenticed  at  the  age  of  fifteen  to  his  uncle,
Andrew  Thomson,  a  sickle-maker.  Meanwhile  he
found  time  for  private  study,  and  at  the  end  of  his
apprenticeship  had  a  fair  knowledge  of  Latin  and
Greek,  and  English  literature.  His  attainments
came  under  the  notice  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Grier,  father
of  Justice  Robert  C.  Grier  of  the  U.  S.  supreme
court,  whose  family  he  entered  as  tutor,  at  the  same
time  pursuing  his  own  studies.  At  the  end  of  three
years  he  left  Northumberland  for  Bedford,  where
he  taught,  and  studied  law.  After  his  admission
to  the  bar  he  rose  rapidly  in  his  profession,  was
elected  to  the  Pennsylvania  house  of  representa-
tives, and  afterward  chosen  to  congress  to  fill  a  va-
cancy, serving  from  December,  1824,  till  his  resig-
nation in  May,  1826.  During  his  term  he  gave
much  attention  to  the  interests  of  the  District  of
Columbia,  in  recognition  of  which  his  portrait  was
placed  in  the  Washington  city-hall.  After  his  res-
ignation he  was  appointed  city  judge  of  Lancas-
ter, and  soon  afterward  president-judge  of  the
16th  judicial  district,  which  post  he  occupied  un-
til 1838.  Judge  Thomson  was  also  professor  in
the  law-school  of  Marshall  college,  Lancaster,  Pa.
— His  son,  William,  surgeon,  b.  in  Chambersburg,
Pa.,  28  Jan.,  1833,  was  educated  in  the  Academy
of  Chambersburg  and  under  private  tutors,  and
was  graduated  at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1855.
Soon  afterward  he  had  a  lucrative  practice  at  Lower
Merion,  near  Philadelphia,  which  he  relinquished
in  1861  in  order  to  enter  the  regular  army  as  assist-
ant surgeon.  He  was  with  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac throughout  the  civil  war,  either  in  the  field  or
at  Washington.  For  his  services  after  the  battle  of.
South  Mountain  he  received  the  thanks  of  Presi-
dent Lincoln.  He  originated  two  reforms  for  im-
proving the  medical  field  service:  the  system  of
brigade  supplies,  and  the  division  hospital  system.
Both  these  reforms  were  extended  to  all  the  armies
by  the  war  department.  He  was  raised  to  the  post
of  medical  inspector  of  the  Department  of  Wash-
ington in  1864,  received  two  brevets,  and  after  the
war  was  sent  to  Louisiana,  but  he  resigned  from  the
army,  25  Feb.,  1866.  Dr.  Thomson  introduced  the
local  use  of  carbolic  acid  as  a  disinfectant  in  the
treatment  of  wounds,  published  an  article  on  the
treatment  of  hospital  gangrene  by  bromine,  and
was  the  first,  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  William  F.
N orris,  successfully  to  apply  the  negative  process
of  photography  by  wet  collodion  in  clinical  micros-
copy. The  Army  medical  museum  has  been  large-
ly indebted  to  Dr.  Thomson  for  its  success,  and  in
its  catalogue  he  is  mentioned  as  the  largest  con-
tributor both  of  papers  and  specimens.  Since  his  re-
tirement from  the  armv  Dr.  Thomson  has  practised
his  profession  in  Philadelphia. He  was  elected  vice-

? resident  of  the  ophthalmological  section  of  the
international  medical  congress  that  met  in  Philadel-


THOMSON


THOMSON


97


phia  in  1876,  has  lectured  at  Wills  hospital  on  dis-
eases of  the  eye  for  many  years,  and  was  elected
its  emeritus  surgeon  in  1877.  He  has  been  clinical
lecturer  on  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear  in  Jefferson
medical  college  since  1873,  and  ophthalmic  sur-
geon to  the  college  hospital  since  1877.  Among
his  important  contributions  to  medical  literature
are  a  series  of  papers  published  in  the  "  American
Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences,"  in  conjunction
with  Dr.  S.  Weir  Mitchell,  on  the  use  of  the  ophthal-
moscope in  the  diagnosis  of  intracranial  tumors,
and  clinical  reports  of  cases  of  severe  and  pro-
longed headache,  dependent  upon  astigmatism,
which  have  been  relieved  by  the  correction  of  opti-
■cal  defects.  He  revised  the  section  on  diseases  and
injuries  of  the  eye  in  Dr.  Samuel  D.  Gross's  "Sys-
tem of  Surgery,"  and  has  invented  a  new  method
•of  diagnosing  and  correcting  ametropia  by  means
of  a  simple  instrument,  which  is  now  in  general
use  among  ophthalmological  surgeons  in  this  coun-
try and  Europe. — Alexander's  youngest  son,  Frank,
railway  superintendent,  b.  in  Chambersburg,  Pa.,
5  July,  1841,  was  educated  at  Chambersburg  acad-
emy, and  in  1858  began  to  learn  the  railway  busi-
ness in  the  Pennsylvania  railroad  company's  shops
at  Altoona.  Col.  Thomas  A.  Scott  appointed  him
to  a  responsible  position  in  the  U.  S.  military  rail-
way system  early  in  1861,  and  he  was  sent  to  Alex-
andria, Va.,  where  he  assisted  in  rebuilding  bridges
and  restoring  shops,  machinery,  and  rolling  stock.
On  1  July,  1862,  he  was  transferred  to  Gen.  Don
Carlos  Buell's  army,  but,  after  accompanying  it
during  its  march  through  Kentucky,  he  returned
to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  then  en-
gaged in  directing  the  lines  of  railroad  that  played
an  important  part  in  the  Antietam  campaign,  and
was  subsequently  made  assistant  superintendent  of
the  lines  south  of  Acquia  creek.  He  co-operated
with  Col.  Scott  in  removing  the  11th  and  12th
corps,  with  their  full  equipment  of  artillery  and
wagons,  to  Chattanooga,  and  was  afterward  given
control  of  the  lines  south  of  Nashville,  which  he
rendered  capable  of  transmitting  sufficient  re-en-
forcements and  supplies  to  relieve  the  National
army  from  its  embarrassments,  and  enable  it  to
assume  the  offensive.  He  resigned  from  the  mili-
tary service  in  1864,  and  on  1  June  of  that  year
became  superintendent  of  the  eastern  division  of
the  Philadelphia  and  Erie  railroad.  While  hold-
ing this  office  he  organized  a  system  of  track-in-
spection which  was  adopted  by  the  entire  road,
and  made  improvements  in  the  construction  of  the
roadway.  In  1873  he  was  made  superintendent  of
motive  power  on  the  Pennsylvania  railroad,  and  in
1874  became  its  general  manager.

THOMSON,  Charles,  patriot,  b.  in  Maghera,
County  Derry,  Ireland,  29  Nov.,  1729 ;  d.  in  Lower
Merion,  Montgomery  co.,  Pa.,  16  Aug.,  1824.  He
was  brought  to .  this  country  with  three  other
brothers  by  his  father  in  1740.  The  father  died
just  in  sight  of  land,  and  the  young  Thomsons
were  thrown  on  their  own  resources  when  they
landed  at  New  Castle,  Del.  An  elder  brother,  who
had  emigrated  before  them,  gave  them  such  aid  as
he  could,  and  persuaded  a  countryman.  Dr.  Francis
Allison,  to  take  Charles  into  his  seminary  in  New
London,  Pa.  Here  he  made  rapid  progress,  and  while
yet  little  more  than  a  boy  he  was  chosen  to  con-
duct a  Friends'  academy  at  New  Castle.  He  often
visited  Philadelphia,  met  Benjamin  Franklin  there,
and  was  brought  to  the  notice  of  many  other  emi-
nent men.  His  reputation  for  veracity  was  spread
even  among  the  Indian  tribes,  and  when  the  Dela-
wares  adopted  him  into  their  nation  in  1756  they
called  him  in  their  tongue  "man  of  truth." Rev.

vol.  vi. — 7


^A^Jtyrurryvd


0-ru


Ashbel  Green,  in  his  autobiography,  says  that  it
was  common  to  say  that  a  statement  was  "  as  true
as  if  Charles  Thomson's  name  was  to  it."  He  was
one  of  the  first  to  take  his  stand  with  the  colonists,
and  he  exercised  immense  influence,  owing  to  the
confidence  of  the  peo-
ple in  his  ability  and
integrity.  He  travel-
led through  the  coun-
try ascertaining  the
wishes  of  the  farmers,
and  trying  to  learn
whether  they  would
be  equal  to  the  ap-
proaching crisis.  "He
was  the  Sam  Adams
of  Philadelphia,"  said
John  Adams,  "  the  life
of  the  cause  of  liber-
ty." He  had  just  come
to  Philadelphia  in
September,  1774,  with
his  bride,  a  daughter  of
Richard  Harrison,  of
Pennsylvania,  when
he  learned  that  he
had  been  unanimously

chosen  secretary  of  the  1st  Continental  congress.
"  He  was  the  soul  of  that  political  body,"  says
Abbe  Robin,  the  chaplain  of  Rochambeau.  He
would  receive  no  pay  for  his  first  year's  services,
and  congress  presented  his  wife  with  a  silver  urn,
which  is  still  preserved  in  the  family.  He  remained
in  this  post  under  every  congress  up  to  1789,  not
only  keeping  the  records  but  taking  copious  notes
of  its  proceedings  and  of  the  progress  of  the  Revo-
lution. When  he  retired  into  private  life  he  made
these  notes  the  basis  of  a  history  of  the  Revolution,
but  he  destroyed  the  manuscript  some  time  before
his  death,  as  he  feared  that  a  description  of  the
unpatriotic  conduct  of  some  of  the  colonists  at  that
period  would  give  pain  to  their  descendants.  Mr.
Thomson  wrote  "An  Enquiry  into  the  Causes  of
the  Alienation  of  the  Delaware  and  Shawaneese
Indians,  etc..  with  Notes  by  the  Editor  on  Indian
Customs"  (London,  1759),  and  "The  Holy  Bible,
containing  the  Old  and  New  Covenant,  commonly
called  the  Old  and  New  Testament;  translated
from  the  Greek  [the  Old  Covenant  from  the  Septu-
agint] "  (4  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1808).  This  work  is
now  very  rare.  It  contained  the  first  English  ver-
sion of  the  Septuagint  that  had  been  published  at
the  time,  and  was  considered  by  biblical  scholars
in  Great  Britain  to  have  reflected  high  honor  on
American  scholarship  His  own  copy  of  this  trans-
lation, with  his  last  manuscript  corrections,  is  in
the  Philadelphia  library.  He  also  published  "A
Synopsis  of  the  Four  Evangelists,  or  a  Regular
History  of  the  Conception,  Birth,  Doctrine,  Mira-
cles, Death,  Resurrection,  and  Ascension  of  Jesus
Christ,  in  the  Words  of  the  Evangelists"  (Phila-
delphia, 1815),  and  left  in  manuscript  "Critical
Annotations  on  Gilbert  Wakefield's  Works,"  which
were  presented  in  1832  by  John  F.  Watson  to  the
Massachusetts  historical  society.  —  His  relative,
William,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsylvania  in  1727;  d.
in  Sweet  Springs,  Va.,  22  Nov.,  1796,  is  said  in
some  Irish  biographies  to  be  the  brother  of  Charles,
to  have  been  born  in  Maghera,  Ireland,  about  1726,
and  about  fourteen  years  old  when  he  arrived  in
this  country.  He  was  taken  to  South  Carolina  by
some  friends  of  his  family,  was  brought  up  as  a
frontiersman,  and  became  famous  in  the  district
for  his  skill  with  the  rifle.  He  fought  against  the
Regulators  in  1771,  at  the  head  of  a  regiment  under


98


THOMSON


THOMSON


Gov.  William  Tryon.  He  was  sheriff  of  Orange-
burg in  1772,  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the  first
provincial  legislature,  and  the  first  state  conven-
tion. He  was  appointed  colonel  in  1775  of  the  3d
South  Carolina  regiment,  which  was  known  as  the
Rangers.  His  soldiers  were  all  skilful  marksmen,
and  he  dispersed  the  guerillas  of  Gen.  Robert
Cunningham,  the  Tory  leader.  He  fought  at  its
head  at  Charleston  in  1776,  driving  the  English
back  from  the  eastern  side  of  Sullivan's  island,  and
was  formally  thanked  for  this  service  by  Gov.  John
Rutledge  and  congress.  He  also  served  with  Gen.
Robert  Howe  in  Georgia,  was  engaged  with  his
command  in  the  attack  on  Savannah  under  Count
d'Estaing  and  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln,  and  was
taken  prisoner  after  the  capture  of  Charleston.  He
served  afterward  under  the  command  of  Gen.
Nathanael  Greene.  He  displayed  the  greatest
bravery  during  the  war,  and  at  the  end  of  it  was
broken  both  in  health  and  fortunes.  He  was  elected
sheriff  of  Orangeburg  a  second  time,  and  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention.
Thomson  was  engaged  in  the  occupation  of  an
indigo-planter  until  1786,  when,  seeking  to  benefit
his  declining  health,  he  visited  the  mineral  springs
in  Virginia,  where  he  died.

THOMSON,  Charles  West,  poet,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1798;  d.  in  York,  Pa.,  17  April,  1879.
He  was  of  Quaker  parentage,  but  became  a  minis-
ter of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  in
1849  he  was  appointed  rector  of  the  church  in
York,  Pa.,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1866.  His
principal  works  are  "  The  Limner,"  prose  sketches
(Philadelphia,  1822);  "The  Phantom  Barge,  and
other  Poems  "  (1822) ;  "  Ellinor,  and  other  Poems  "
(1826);  "The  Sylph,  and  other  Poems  "(1828);  and
"  The  Love  of  Home,  and  other  Poems "  (1845).
He  was  also  a  contributor  to  periodicals.

THOMSON,  Edward,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Portsea,
part  of  Portsmouth,  England,  12  Oct.,  1810 ;  d.  in
Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  21  March,  1870.  When  he  was
seven  years  old  his  parents  emigrated  to  the  United
States  and  settled  in  Wooster,  Ohio.  His  father
was  a  druggist,  and  this  directed  Edward's  atten-
tion to  the  study  of  medicine,  which  he  pursued  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He  united  with
the  Methodist  church,  29  April,  1832,  the  next
year  was  licensed  to  exhort,  and  in  the  following
July  was  recommended  for  admission  into  the  an-
nual conference.  He  was  received  in  September
and  united  with  his  former  pastor  upon  the  Nor-
walk  circuit.  From  the  first  his  great  abilities
were  apparent.  In  1836  he  was  stationed  at  De-
troit, where  Lewis  Cass,  governor  of  the  state,
though  a  Presbyterian,  was  among  his  hearers.
While  there  he  married  a  daughter  of  Mordecai
Bartley,  member  of  congress,  and  afterward  gov-
ernor of  the  state.  In  1837  he  became  principal
of  a  seminary  at  Norwalk,  where  his  success  was
so  great  that  in  1843  he  was  offered  the  chancellor-
ship of  Michigan  university,  and  the  presidency
of  Transylvania  college.  In  1844  he  was  elected
editor  of  the  "  Ladies'  Repository  "  by  the  general
conference.  He  was  re-elected  to  this  post  in  1848.
but  was  immediately  called  to  the  presidency  of
Ohio  university,  where  he  remained  until  1860,
when  he  was  elected  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Advo-
cate." Here  he  remained  for  four  years,  success-
ful in  spite  of  much  opposition.  In  1864  he  was
elected  bishop,  which  office  he  filled  until  his  death.
He  attained  high  rank  as  a  lecturer  and  editor,
and  wrote  much  for  periodicals  and  papers.  He  p
was  a  profound  student,  very  absent-minded,  and
preferred  the  seclusion  of  a  college  to  the  episcopal
office;  but,  notwithstanding  this,  he  was  among


the  most  eminent  of  those  that  have  filled  it.
Indiana  Asbury  (now  De  Pauw)  university  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1846,  and  Wesleyan
that  of  LL.  D.  in  1855.  Bishop  Thomson  pub-
lished "  Educational  Essavs  "  (new  ed.,  Cincinnati,
1856);  "Moral  and  Religious  Essays"  (1856);
"Biographical  and  Incidental  Sketches"  (1856);
"  Letters  from  Europe  "  (1856) ;  and  "  Letters  from
India,  China,  and  Turkey  "  (2  vols.,  1870).

THOMSON,  Elihu,  electrician,  b.  in  Manches-
ter, England,  29  March,  1853.  He  came  to  this
country  in  1858,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Central
high-school  in  Philadelphia  in  1870.  He  studied
chemistry  in  an  analytical  laboratory,  but  was
soon  called  to  assist  in  the  chemical  department  of
the  high-school,  which  place  he  held  until  1876,
when  he  was  made  full  professor  of  chemistry  and
physics  in  that  institution.  Meanwhile,  in  1875,  he
had  been  chosen  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  Ar-
tisan's night-school  in  Philadelphia,  and  during
the  winter  of  1876-7  he  began  a  series  of  lectures
on  electricity  at  the  Franklin  institute.  For  sev-
eral years  he  studied  very  closely  the  subject  of
electricity,  with  its  special. application  to  artificial
illumination,  and  in  1880  he  was  appointed  elec-
trician to  the  American  electric  company  of  New
Britain,  Conn.  He  at  once  devoted  himself  to  in-
venting, and  nearly  200  patents  relating  to  arc
lighting,  incandescent  lighting,  motor  work,  induc-
tion systems,  and  similar  applications  have  resulted.
For  the  development  of  these  inventions  the  Thom-
son-Houston electric  company  was  organized,  and
located  its  plant  in  Lynn,  Mass.  Prof.  Thomson
has  also  invented  the  system  of  electric  welding,
which  he  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  corporation,  and
it  has  now  become  an  established  industry.  He  is
a  member  of  the  American  philosophical  society
and  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,
and  vice-president  of  the  American  institute  of
electrical  engineers,  and  has  contributed  technical
papers  to  the  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member.

THOMSON,  Frederick  Bordine,  missionary,
b.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  5  Nov.,  1809 ;  d.  in
Berne.  Switzerland,  3  March,  1847.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Rutgers  in  1831,  and  at  New  Brunswick
theological  seminary  in  1834,  and  in  1837  sailed
for  Singapore  as  a  missionary  of  the  Dutch  Re-
formed church.  He  remained  there  till  1839,  was
then  in  Batavia,  Java,  till  1841,  and  afterward  in
Karangan,  Borneo,  till  1846,  when  feeble  health
forced  him  to  leave  his  post.  He  published  a
"  Dyak  Hymn-Book,"  the  first  printed  book  in  that
language  (1844),  and  "Brown's  Catechism  "  in  Dyak
(1845),  and  translated  into  the  same  tongue  the
gospel  of  St.  Matthew  and  the  first  twenty  chap-
ters of  Genesis.  He  left  an  unfinished  work  on
"  The  Economy  of  Missions."

THOMSON,  James  Bates,  educator,  b.  in
Springfield,  Vt.,  21  May,  1808;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  22  June,  1883.  He  worked  on  his  father's
farm  in  summer,  attending  a  district  school  in
winter,  till  1824,  when  he  began  to  teach.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1834,  and  was  principal  of  an
academy  at  Nantucket,  Mass.,  from  1835  to  1842.
He  then  went  to  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  and  at  the  request
of  President  Day,  of  Yale,  published  an  abridg-
ment of  Day's  algebra  for  the  use  of  schools.  He
began  in  1843  to  organize  and  extend  teachers'
institutes  and  similar  gatherings,  and  was  actively
engaged  in  this  work  for  the  next  four  or  five
years.  In  1845  he  assisted  in  the  organization  of
the  New  York  state  teachers'  association,  and  was
elected  its  president.  He  removed  to  the  city  of
New  York  in  1846,  and  resided  there  and  in  Brook-
lyn till  1868,  when  he  took  up  his  permanent  resi-


TITOMSON


THOMSON


99


dence  in  the  latter  city.  ITe  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  Hamilton  college  in  1853,  and  from
the  University  of  Tennessee  inj.882.  Mr.  Thomson
attained  considerable  reputation  as  a  conchologist.
He  published  a  very  successful  series  of  mathemati-
cal works,  his  arithmetical  works  alone  having  a
sale  of  about  100,000  copies  annually.  His  books
include  '•  School  Algebra "  (New  Haven,  1843) ;  a
series  of  arithmetics  (New  York,  1845-52);  and
"  Arithmetical  Analysis  "  (1854).

THOMSON,  John  Edgar,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Springfield,  Delaware  co.,  Pa.,  10  Feb.,  1808 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  May,  1874.  He  was  the  son
of  John  Thomson,  the  engineer  who  planned  the
first  experimental  railroad  in  the  United  States,  and
was  thoroughly  trained  and  educated  in  the  pro-
fession by  his  father.  In  1827  he  began  his  own
career  in  the  engineering  corps  that  was  employed
upon  the  original  surveys  of  the  Philadelphia  and
Columbia  railroad,  having  received  his  appoint-
ment from  the  secretary  of  the  board  of  canal  com-
missioners of  Pennsylvania,  and  three  years  later
he  entered  the  service  of  the  Camden  and  Amboy
railroad  as  principal  assistant  engineer  of  the  east-
ern division.  In  1832  he  was  appointed  chief  en-
gineer of  the  Georgia  railroad,  which  then  con-
trolled the  longest  line  under  a  single  company  in
this  country,  and  later  he  was  its  general  manager.
In  1847  he  became  chief  engineer  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania railroad,  and  in  1852  he  was  made  its  presi-
dent, which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  Mr.
Thomson  took  chief  charge  of  the  road  before  it
was  finished,  and  during  the  twenty-eight  years  of
his  administration  dividends  were  regularly  paid
on  the  stock  with  the  exception  of  a  single  semi-
annual dividend  in  1857.  When  his  presidency
began,  the  Pennsylvania  company  owned  246  miles
of  road  and  had  a  capital  of  $13,000,000;  and  it
has  since  become  a  corporation  controlling  2,346
miles  of  railroad  and  66  miles  of  canal,  with  a  capi-
tal of  $150,000,000.  Mr.  Thomson  possessed  re-
markable engineering  ability  and  executive  skill.
He  was  connected  with  other  railroad  enterprises  in
various  parts  of  the  country,  and  was  a  director  in
many  companies.

THOMSON,  John  Renshaw,  senator,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25  Sept.,  1800;  d.  in  Princeton,
N.  J.,  13  Sept.,  1862.  He  studied  for  some  time  at
Princeton,  but  left  without  taking  his  degree,  in
order  to  pursue  a  commercial  career.  He  went  to
China  in  1817,  and  in  1820  had  regularly  estab-
lished himself  in  the  Chinese  trade,  and  opened  a
house  in  Canton,  where  President  Monroe  appoint-
ed him  U.  S.  consul  in  1823.  He  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1825,  married  a  sister  of  Com.
Robert  F.  Stockton,  and  resided  at  Princeton.  He
was  appointed  a  director  of  the  Camden  and  Am-
boy railroad  in  1835,  which  office  he  held  during
his  lifetime.  He  canvassed  the  state  in  1842  in
support  of  the  Constitutional  convention  that  met
in  1844,  and  was  nbminated  the  same  year  for  gov-
ernor by  the  Democratic  party,  but  was  defeated.
On  the  resignation  of  Com.  Stockton  as  U.  S.  sena-
tor in  1853,  Mr.  Thomson  was  elected  for  the  re-
mainder of  the  term,  and  he  was  re-elected  in  1857
for  six  years.  His  second  wife  was  a  daughter  of
Gen.  Aaron  Ward,  and  after  Mr.  Thomson's  death
she  married  Gov.  Thomas  Swann  of  Maryland.

THOMSON,  Mortimer,  humorist,  b."  in  Riga,
Monroe  co.,  N.  Y.,  2  Sept.,  1832 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  25  June,  1875.  He  was  taken  to  Ann  Arbor,
Mich.,  by  his  parents  in  childhood,  and  entered  the
University  of  Michigan,  but  was  expelled,  with
about  forty  others,  for  belonging  to  college  secret
societies. After  going  on  the  stage,  and  then  travel-


ling as  a  salesman  for  a  New  York  firm,  he  adopted
journalism  as  a  profession.  He  was  first  brought
into  notice  by  his  letters  from  Niagara  Falls,  in  the
New  York  "  Tribune,"  and  he  also  wrote  rhymed
police-court  reports,  and  a  series  of  sketches  of  New
York  fortune-tellers,  which  was  afterward  pub-
lished in  book-form  as  "  The  Witches  of  New
York  "  (New  York,  1859).  His  report  of  the  Pierce-
Butler  sale  of  slaves  at  Savannah,  Ga.,  about  1859,
occupied  several  pages  of  the  "  Tribune,"  and  was
reprinted  in  the  other  daily  papers,  translated  into
several  foreign  languages,  and  circulated  by  the
Anti-slavery  society  as  a  tract.  During  about  eight
years  he  delivered  many  popular  lectures,  includ-
ing one  in  rhyme  on  "  Pluck  "  and  one  on  "  Cheek  "
in  prose.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Mrs.  Parton,
"  Fanny  Fern."  Thomson's  books,  as  well  as  most
of  his  fugitive  writings,  appeared  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Q.  K.  Philander  Doesticks,  P.  B.,"  which
had  been  given  him  by  the  editor  of  a  university
magazine  to  which  his  earliest  contributions  were
made.  Thomson  afterward  asserted  that  it  signi-
fied "  Queer  Kritter,  Philander  Doesticks,  Perfect
Brick."  His  works  include  "  Doesticks — What  he
Says  "  (New  York,  1855) ;  "  Plu-ri-bus-tah :  a  Song
that's  by  No  Author,"  a  travesty  of  Longfellow's
"  Hiawatha  "  (1856) ;  "  History  and  Records  of  the
Elephant  Club,"  with  "Knight  Russ  Ockside,
M.  D."  (Edward  F.  Underhill) ;  "  Nothing  to  Say,
being  a  Satire  on  Snobbery  "  (1857) ;  and  several
smaller  humorous  collections.

THOMSON,  Samuel,  phvsician,  b.  in  Alstead,
N.  H.,  9  Feb.,  1769;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1843.
He  was  the  originator  of  the  so-called  Thomso-
nian  system  of  medicine.  He  published  "  Materia
Medica  and  Family  Physician  "  (Albany) ;  "  New
Guide  to  Health,  and  Family  Physician  "  (new  ed.,
London,  1849) ;  and  his  "  Life  and  Medical  Dis-
coveries "  (Boston,  1825 ;  enlarged  ed.,  1832).

THOMSON,  William  McClnre,  clergyman,  b.
in  Springfield  (now  Spring  Dale)  near  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  31  Dec,  1806.  He  was  graduated  at  Miami
university,  Ohio,  in  1826,  studied  at  Princeton  theo-
logical seminary  in  1826-'7,  and  was  ordained  as
an  evangelist  by  the  presbytery  of  Cincinnati  on
12  Oct.,  1831.  He  was  sent  as  a  missionary  to
Syria  and  Palestine  in  1833,  remained  there  until
1849,  and  was  afterward  again  in  the  Holy  Land
from  1850  till  1857  and  from  1859  till  1876.  He
is  at  present  a  resident  of  New  York  city.  Dr.
Thomson  is  accepted  as  an  authority  in  the  de-
partment of  archaeological  research,  to  which  he  has
devoted  himself.  His  works,  besides  being  great
aids  to  the  verification  of  facts  that  are  related  in
the  Scriptures,  and  giving  evidence  of  profound
learning  and  critical  acumen,  have  a  decided  liter-
ary value  from  his  skill  in  reproducing  the  local
color  and  types  and working  them  into  artistic

Eictures  of  the  past  and  present  life  of  the  Holy
iand.  He  has  written  u  The  Land  and  the  Book,
or  Biblical  Illustrations  drawn  from  the  Manners
and  Customs,  the  Scenes  and  Scenery  of  the  Holy
Land"  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1859;  London,  1860;
new  ed.,  with  the  results  of  recent  explorations,  3
vols.,  1880-6), and  " The  Land  of  Promise :  Travels
in  Modern  Palestine,  illustrative  of  Biblical  His-
tory, Manners,  and  Customs "  (New  York,  1865),
and  has  contributed  articles  to  the  "  Bibliotheca
Sacra  "  and  the  "  American  Biblical  Repository."
—His  cousin,  Samuel  Harrison,  clergyman,  b.
in  Nicholas  countv,  Kv.,  26  Aug.,  1813;  d.  in
Pasedena,  Cal.,  2  'Sept.,  1882,  was  graduated  at
Hanover  college,  Ind.,  in  1837,  and  was  elected
professor  of  mathematics  there  in  1844.  In  1857
he  was  ordained a  minister  in  the  Presbyterian


100


THORBURN


THOREAU


church,  and  the  rest  of  his  life  was  devoted  to
teaching  in  the  colleges  of  his  denomination  or  to
literary  pursuits.  He  published  "  The  Mosaic  Ac-
count of  the  Creation"  (1852);  "Geology  an  Inter-
Ereter  of  Scripture";  and  pamphlets  on  "Human
•epravitv  "  (1874)  and  "  Our  Fall  in  Adam  "  (1876).

THORBURN,  Grant,  merchant,  b.  in  Dalkeith,
near  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  18  Feb.,  1773;  d.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  21  Jan.,  1863.  He  early  en-
tered his  father's  business  of  nail-making,  and  be-
came so  expert  that  he  is  said  to  have  made  with
his  own  hands  in  a  single  day.  between  6  a.  m.
and  9  p.  m.,  3,221  nails.  In  1792  he  became  in-
volved in  a  political  movement  concerning  parlia-
mentary reforms,  and  was  charged  with  treason,
but  he  was  released  on  bail  and  soon  afterward
emigrated  to  New  York,  where  he  arrived  on  16
June,  1794.  At  first  he  continued  his  old  trade  of
nail-making,  but  in  1801  he  engaged  in  the  grocery
trade,  and  he  finally  established  himself  in  the  seed
business  in  Newark,  N.  J.  This  proved  unsuccess-
ful, but,  on  removing  his  business  to  New  York
city,  he  acquired  a  handsome  fortune.  In  1854  he
retired  from  active  trade  and  settled  at  first  in
Astoria,  N.  Y.,  and  then  in  Winsted,  Conn.  The
house  he  founded  is  continued  under  the  style  of
James  M.  Thorburn  and  Co.  He  was  noted  for
his  charity,  and  during  the  epidemic  of  yellow
fever  in  1798  he  and  his  wife  remained  in  the  city,
devoting  themselves  to  the  care  of  the  victims.  Un-
der the  pen-name  of  Lawrie  Todd  he  contributed
to  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"  the  "  New  York
Mirror,"  and  more  than  twenty  other  papers,  prin-
cipally concerning  his  reminiscences  of  New  York
city  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  His
publications  in  book-form  included  "  Forty  Years'
Residence  in  America  "  (Boston,  1834) ;  "  Men  and
Manners  in  Great  Britain"  (New  York,  1834);
"  Fifty  Years'  Reminiscences  of  New  York  "  (1845) ;
"  Lawrie  Todd's  Hints  to  Merchants,  Married  Men,
and  Bachelors  "  (1847) ;  "  Lawrie  Todd's  Notes  on
Virginia,  with  a  Chapter  on  Puritans,  Witches,  and
Friends"  (1848);  "Life  and  Writings  of  Grant
Thorburn  "  (1852) ;  and  "  Supplement  to  the  Life
of  Grant  Thorburn  "  (1853).  His  experiences  fur-
nished the  novelist  John  Gait  with  the  incidents
described  in  his  "  Lawrie  Todd,  or  Settlers  in  the
New  World"  (London,  1830).  See  "A  Bone  to
Gnaw  for  Grant  Thorburn,"  by  William  Carver
(New  York,  1836).

THORBURN,  James,  Canadian  physician,  b.
in  Queenston,  Ont.,  21  Nov.,  1830.  His  father
was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  Dominion
parliament.  The  son  was  educated  at  Toronto
university  and  at  Edinburgh  university,  where  he
was  graduated  as  a  physician  in  1855.  He  has
practised  in  Toronto,  where  he  is  surgeon-major
of  the  Queen's  own  rifles,  and  professor  of  phar-
macology and  therapeutics  in  Toronto  university.
He  is  also  consulting  surgeon  of  Toronto  general
hospital,  physician  of  the  boys'  hospital,  and  con-
nected with  other  institutions,  both  charitable  and
financial,  in  his  capacity  as  a  physician.  He  has
contributed  articles  on  medical  and  other  subjects
to  journals,  and  published  "Manual  of  Life  In-
surance Examination  "  (Toronto,  1887).

THORBURN,  John,  educator,  b.  near  Biggar,
Lanarkshire,  Scotland,  10  Oct.,  1830.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Edinburgh  university  in  1855,  became
classical  master  in  the  Western  institution  in  that
city,  and  came  to  Canada  in  1856.  In  1860  he  was
appointed  principal  of  St.  Francis  college,  Rich-
mond, and  its  professor  of  classics,  and  in  1862  he
became  head  master  of  the  grammar-school  (now
the  collegiate  institution)  at  Ottawa,  which  post  he


s&ewuy  *&  57^&T€cL4es.


held  for  about  twenty  years.  In  1882  he  was  ap-
pointed librarian  to  the  geological  and  natural
history  survey  of  Canada,  and  the  same  year  he
was  appointed  by  the  government  a  member  of  the
board  of  civil-service  examiners.  He  was  president
of  the  Ottawa  literary  and  scientific  society,  pre-
pared for  the  department  of  militia  a  scheme  for
entrance  examination  into  the  military  college  at
Kingston,  and  has  been  active  in  other  respects  as
an  educator.  He  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  from
McGill  university  in  1860,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from
Queen's  universitv,  Kingston,  in  1880.

THOREAU,  Henry  David,  author,  b.  in  Con-
cord, Mass.,  12  July,  1817:  d.  there,  6  May,  1862.
His  grandfather,  John  Thoreau,  came  from  St.
Helier,  a  parish  in  the  island  of  Jersey,  about  1773,
and  moved  from
Boston  to  Concord
in  1800.  Henry,
the  third  of  four
children,  went  to
school  in  Boston
for  a  little  more
thana  year,  then  at-
tended the  schools
in  Concord,  fitted
for  college  at  a
private  school,  en-
tered Harvard  in
1833,  and  was  grad-
uated in  1837,  a
fair  scholar  but
not  eminent.  The
family  being  in
humble  circum-
stances, the  father
was  assisted  in  paying  his  small  expenses  by  the
boy's  aunts,  his  elder  sister,  who  was  then  teaching,
the  beneficiary  fund  of  the  college,  and  Henry's
own  exertions  at  school-keeping.  Thoreau  after-
ward led  a  literary  life,  writing,  lecturing,  reading,
and  meeting  his  modest  physical  needs  by  surveying,
pencil-making,  engineering,  and  carpentering.  He
was  never  married,  and  never  left  Concord  except
for  a  lecturing-tour,  or  a  pedestrian  excursion.
Cities  he  disliked  ;  civilization  he  did  not  believe  in.
Nature  was  his  passion,  and  the  wilder  it  was  the
more  he  loved  it.  He  was  a  fine  scholar,  especially
in  Greek,  translated  two  of  the  tragedies  of  .JSschy-
lus,  was  intimate  with  the  Greek  anthology,  and
knew  Pindar,  Simonides,  and  all  the  great  lyric
poets.  In  English  poetry  he  preferred  Milton  to
Shakespeare,  and  was  more  familiar  with  the  writers
of  the  17th  century  than  with  modern  men.  He
was  no  mean  poet  himself;  in  fact,  he  possessed
the  essential  quality  of  the  poet — a  soaring  imagi-
nation. He  possessed  an  eye  and  an  ear  for
beauty,  and  had  he  been  gifted  with  the  power  of
musical  expression,  would  have  been  distinguished.
No  complete  collection  of  his  pieces  has  ever  been
made  or  could  be,  but  fragments  are  exquisite.
Emerson  said  that  his  poem  on  "  Smoke "  sur-
passed any  by  Simonides.  That  Thoreau  was  a
man  of  aspiration,  a  pure  idealist,  reverent,  spirit-
ual, is  plain  from  his  intimacy  with  Bronson  Al-
cot  and  Emerson,  the  latter  of  whom  spoke  these
words  at  his  funeral :  "  His  soul  was  made  for  the
noblest  society ;  he  had  in  a  short  life  exhausted
the  capabilities  of  this  world ;  wherever  there  is
knowledge,  wherever  there  is  virtue,  wherever  there
is  beauty,  he  will  find  a  home."  His  religion  was
that  of  the  transcendentalists.  The  element  of
negation  in  it  was  large,  and. in  his  case  conspicu-
ous and  acrid.  Horace  Greeley  found  fault  with  his
"  defiant  pantheism,"  and  an  editor  struck  out  the


THOREAU


THORFINN


101


following  passage  from  a  contribution:  "It  [the
pine-tree]  is  as  immortal  as  I  am,  and,  perchance,
will  go  to  as  high  a  heaven,  there  to  tower  above
me  still."  His  doctrine  was  that  of  individualism.
Therein  he  differed  from  Emerson,  who  was  sympa-
thetic and  began  at  the  divine  end.  Thoreau  began
with  the  ground  and  reasoned  up.  H  e  sa w  beauty  in
ashes,  and  "  never  chanced  to  meet  with  any  man
so  cheering  and  elevating  and  encouraging,  so  in-
finitely suggestive,  as  the  stillness  and  solitude  of
the  Well-meadow  field."  He  aimed  at  becoming
elemental  and  spontaneous.  He  wrote  hymns  to
the  night  quite  in  the  pagan  fashion.  His  very
aptitudes  brought  him  in  contact  with  the  earth.
His  aspect  suggested  a  faun,  one  who  was  in  the
secret  of  the  wilderness.  Mr.  Sanborn,  his  friend
and  biographer,  thus  describes  him  :  "  He  is  a  little
under  size,  with  a  huge  Emersonian  nose,  bluish-
gray  eyes,  brown  hair,  and  a  ruddy  weather-beaten
face,  which  reminds  one  of  some  shrewd  and  hon-
est animal's — some  retired  philosophical  woodchuck
or  magnanimous  fox."  Another  friend  mentions
his  sloping  shoulders,  his  long  arms,  his  large  hands
and  feet.  "  I  fancy,"  he  wrote,  "  the  saying  that
man  was  created  a  little  lower  than  the  angels
should  have  been  a  little  lower  than  the  animals."
He  built  a  hut  on  the  shore  of  Walden  pond  in  1845,
and  lived  there,  with  occasional  absences,  about  two
years  and  a  half.  He  built  on  Emerson's  land,
though  he  had  wished  to  build  elsewhere.  The  house
had  no  lock  to  the  door,  no  curtain  to  the  window.
It  belonged  to  nature  as  much  as  to  man,  and  to
all  men  as  much  as  to  any  one.  When  Thoreau
left  it,  it  was  bought  by  a  Scotch  gardener,  who
carried  it  off  a  little  way  and  used  it  as  a  cottage.
Then  a  farmer  bought  it,  moved  it  still  farther
away,  and  converted  it  into  a  tool-house.  A  pile  of
stones  marks  the  site  of  Thoreau's  hut.  He  went
into  the  woods,  not  because  he  wished  to  avoid  his
fellow-men,  as  a  misanthrope,  but  because  he  want-
ed to  confront  Nature,  to  deal  with  her  at  first
hand,  to  lead  his  own  life,  to  meet  primitive  con-
ditions ;  and  having  done  this,  he  abandoned  the
enterprise,  recommending  no  one  to  try  it  who  had
not  "  a  pretty  good  supply  of  internal  sunshine.
...  To  live  alone  comfortably,  he  must  have  that
self-comfort  which  rays  out  of  Nature — a  portion
of  it  at  least."  At  Walden  he  labored,  studied,
meditated,  edited  his  first  book,  the  "  Week,"  and
gauged  his  genius.  He  redeemed  and  consecrated
the  spot.  The  refusal  to  pay  taxes,  and  his  conse-
quent imprisonment,  were  due  to  a  more  specific
cause  —  namely,  his  dissent  from  the  theory  of
human  government  and  from  the  practice  of  the
American  state,  which  supported  slavery.  He  stood
simply  and  plainly  on  the  rights  and  duty  of  the
individual.  The  act  was  heroic  as  he  performed
it,  and,  when  read  by  the  light  of  his  philosophy,
was  consistent.  Thoreau  was  anything  but  sour,
surly,  or  morose.  He  could  sing,  and  even  dance,
on  occasion.  He  was  sweet  with  children ;  fond  of
kittens ;  a  sunbeam  at  home :  the  best  of  brothers,
gentle,  patient,  helpful.  Those  he  loved  he  gave
his  heart  to,  and  if  they  were  few  it  was  perhaps
because  his  affections  were  not  as  expansive  as  they
were  deep.  But  he  showed  little  emotion,  having
learned,  like  the  Indian,  to  control  his  feelings.
He  cultivated  stoicism.  He  had  the  pride  as  well
as  the  conceit  of  egotism,  and  while  the  latter  gave
most  offence  to  those  who  did  not  know  him  well,
the  former  was  the  real  cause  of  his  conduct.  Tho-
reau had  no  zeal  of  authorship,  yet  he  wrote  a  great
deal,  and  left  a  mass  of  manuscripts,  mostly  in
prose,  for  he  produced  very  few  verses  after  he  was
thirty  years  old. The  "  Dial,"  the  "  Democratic  Re-


view," "  Graham's  Magazine,"  "  The  Union  Maga-
zine," "  Putnam's  Magazine,"  the  "  Atlantic  Month-
ly," the  "Tribune,"  all  contained  contributions
from  him.  Every  volume  of  the  "  Dial "  had  some-
thing ;  the  third  volume  many  articles.  The  essay
on  "  Resistance  to  Civil  Government "  was  printed
in  "  ^Esthetic  Papers."  Only  two  of  the  seven  vol-
umes of  his  printed  works  appeared  in  his  lifetime —
"  A  Week  on  the  Concord  and  Merrimac  Rivers "
(Boston,  1849)  and  "  Walden,  or  Life  in  the  Woods"
(1854).  The  others  are  "  Excursions  in  Field  and
Forest,"  with  a  memoir  by  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson
(1863) ;  "  The  Maine  Woods  "  (1864) ;  »  Cape  Cod  "
(1865) ;  "  Letters  to  Various  Persons,"  with  nine
poems  (1865) :  and  "  A  Yankee  in  Canada,"  with
anti-slavery  and  reform  papers  (1866).  His  life
has  been  written  by  William  Ellery  Channing  un-
der the  title  "  The  Poet-Naturalist "  (1873),  and  by
Franklin  B.  Sanborn  in  the  "  American  Men  of
Letters  "  series  (1882).  The  former  is  a  rhapsody
rather  than  a  biography,  and  is  largely  composed
of  extracts  from  Thoreau's  journals,  which  had
never  seen  the  light  before.  It  also  contains  a  full
list  of  his  publications.

THORFINN,  Scandinavian  navigator,  b.  in
Norway:  d.  in  Glcembceland,  Iceland,  after  1016.
He  was  surnamed  Karlsefn,  which  signifies  one
that  is  destined  to  become  a  great  man.  He  was
one  of  the  wealthiest  and  most  powerful  nobles  of
the  three  northern  kingdoms,  and  several  of  his
ancestors  had  been  kings.  He  went  to  Greenland
from  Norway  in  1006,  bringing  with  him  two  ves-
sels. Here  he  married  Gudrida,  the  widow  of
Thorstein,  who  persuaded  him  to  organize  an  ex-
pedition to  Vinland.  With  three  ships  and  160
men  and  women,  besides  a  supply  of  cattle,  Thor-
finn  and  his  companions  set  sail  from  Ericsfiord
in  the  spring  of  1007,  and  finally  were  driven  by
the  polar  current  and  a  north  wind  toward  Hel-
luland  (probably  Newfoundland).  They  next  came
in  sight  of  Markland  (Nova  Scotia),  and  then  of
an  island  (probably  Anticosti),  on  which  some
of  them  landed  and  killed  a  bear.  Therefore  they
called  it  Bjarnar,  or  Bearsland.  The  sagas  are
somewhat  vague  as  to  the  route  that  they  fol-
lowed afterward,  but  it  is  probable  that  in  their
search  after  the  grave  of  Thorvald  they  sailed
along  the  New  England  coast.  They  touched  at
Cape  Kjalarnes,  for  mention  is  made  of  the  keel
which  was  set  up  there  three  years  before ;  but
they  did  not  discover  the  tomb  of  the  son  of  Eric,
although  some  of  his  companions  must  have  been
among  the  crew  of  Thorfinn.  After  leaving
Kjalarnes  they  sailed  past  Cape  Cod,  which  they
called  Furdustrandir,  or  Wonderstrands,  becaup.
they  saw  there  sand-hills  and  long  and  narrow
shores,  and  it  was  "  long  to  sail  by."  Thorfinn
soon  put  two  scouts  on  shore,  who  were  ordered  to
explore  the  country  to  the  southwest.  They  re-
turned after  three  days,  bringing  some  bunches  of
grapes  and  ears  of  wheat.  Next  the  Northmen
anchored  in  a  deep  bay,  which  they  called  Straumf-
jord,  on  account  of  "its  currents,  and  they  then
reached  an  island  frequented  by  eider-ducks  in
great  numbers.  They  named  it  Straumey,  and  it
is  supposed  to  be  either  Martha's  Vineyard  or  Nan-
tucket. They  wintered  at  Straumfjord,  and,  re-
solving to  plant  their  settlement  on  its  shores,
landed  their  flocks,  built  booths,  and  spent  the
spring  in  cultivating  the  land,  fishing,  and  explor-
ing the  country.  But  when  the  next  winter  came
their  resources  were  nearly  exhausted,  and  Thor-
finn was  deserted  by  some  of  his  companions.
With  his  two  remaining  vessels  he  sailed  for  Leifs-
budir,  probably  in  Mount  Hope  bay,  and  estab-


102


THORFINN


TIIORNDIKE


lished  there  the  settlement  of  Thorfinnsbudir.  One
morning,  about  a  fortnight  afterward,  lie  saw  the
bay  crowded  with  little  boats,  containing  men  of  a
blackish  color,  with  flat  faces  and  big  eyes.  They
were  the  Skraelings  (Esquimaux),  say  the  sagas.
They  raised  aloft  long  poles  with  which  they  made
a  hissing  sound  by  moving  them  rapidly  in  the
air.  '•  What  do  you  think  of  this  f  "  said  Thorfinn
to  Snorre.  "  I  think  it  means  peace,  and  the
white  shield  should  be  held  up.  So  the  white
shield  of  peace  was  raised.  The  Esquimaux  ap-
proached, gazed  curiously  a  moment  on  the  North-
men, and  then  disappeared  behind  the  promon-
tory. But  they  returned  in  the  spring  of  1009
in  such  numbers  that  the  bay  looked  to  their
eyes  as  if  covered  with  lumps  of  coal.  The  whites
traded  with  the  natives,  bartering  red  cloth  for
skins  and  furs,  and,  when  the  cloth  was  gone,
Thorfinn  directed  the  women  to  offer  the  savages
milk  porridge,  which  pleased  them  so  well  that
they  no  longer  wished  for  any  other  food,  "and
so,  says  the  saga  of  Thorfinn,  '"they  carried  in
their  bellies  the  results  of  a  barter  that  the  Scan-
dinavians put  carefully  aside  to  load  their  ships
with."  Meanwhile,  to  be  ready  for  a  surprise,  he
surrounded  the  little  colony  with  a  palisade.  In
the  autumn  there  was  born  to  Thorfinn  a  son,  who
was  named  Snorre,  and  was  in  all  probability  the
first  child  of  European  parentage  born  within  the
limits  of  the  present  United  States.  The  Skrae-
lings did  not  return  until  the  beginning  of  winter,
but  they  came  then  in  larger  numbers  than  usual,
and  laid  down  their  merchandise  before  receiving
the  price  of  it,  contrary  to  their  custom.  As  soon
as  the  milk  porridge  was  brought  to  them  they

took  up  their
bundles  and
flung  them
over  the  pali-
sade. Profit-
ing by  the  con-
fusion that
ensued,  they
rushed  in  and
attempted  to
seize  the  arms
of  the  Scandi-
navians ;  but
as  soon  as  they
saw  one  of
their  number  slain  they  took  to  flight,  abandon-
ing both  merchandise  and  porridge.  They  re-
turned in  still  larger  numbers  soon  afterward,  and
the  Northmen  raised  the  red  shield  of  war  in  reply
to  their  fierce  cries.  There  was  trouble  with  the
natives  in  the  ensuing  winter,  hostilities  began,  and
the  Northmen,  after  fighting  bravely  for  a  time,
fled,  believing  that  they  saw  a  host  m  their  rear.
They  soon  recognized  that  they  had  been  the  vic-
tims of  mirage,  which,  according  to  Prof.  Edward
Hitchcock,  in  his  "  Report  on  the  Geology  of  Mas-
sachusetts" (Amherst,  1833),  still  occurs  on  that
coast ;  but  Thorfinn  resolved  to  leave  the  country.
First  he  explored  the  coast  in  the  neighborhood  of
Mount  Hope  bay,  visiting  several  harbors  and
making  inquiries  as  to  the  productions  of  the  soil.
He  is  believed  by  some  to  have  ascended  the  Poto-
mac. He  then  passed  the  winter  in  Straurafjord,
when  the  turbulence  of  his  followers  forced  him  to
sail  homeward.  One  ship  was  lost,  so  that  of  the
three  vessels  that  left  Encsfjord  in  1007  only  that
of  Thorfinn  returned  in  1011.  He  carried  his  mer-
chandise to  Norway,  where  he  was  received  with
great  distinction,  but  in  1016  he  sailed  for  Glcem-
bceland,  in  Iceland,  where  he  spent  the  rest  of  his


days.  The  illustration  represents  a  ship  of  that
period.  The  remains  of  such  a  ship  were  discov-
ered in  1880  in  a  mound  at  Gogstad,  Norway,  and
are  now  to  be  seen  in  a  good  state  of  preservation
at  Christiania.  The  erection  of  the  tumulus  is
ascribed  by  antiquarians  to  the  most  ancient  iron
age,  or  the  10th  century  of  our  era — most  proba-
bly to  the  age  of  Harold  the  haired,  founder  of  the
Norwegian  state.

THORN,  Frank  Manly,  superintendent  of  the
coast  survey,  b.  in  Collins  (now  North  Collins),
N.  Y.,  7  Dec,  1836.  He  was  educated  at  common
schools  in  Erie  county  and  at  the  Fredonia  acade-
my. After  studying  law  he  held  the  office  of  clerk
of  the  surrogate's  court  in  Erie  county,  N.  Y.,  in
1857-'60.  Subsequently  he  was  occupied  with  pro-
fessional work  and  as  a  journalist  until  1871,  when
he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  county  board  of
supervisors,  continuing  as  such  until  1880,  except
during  1876.  In  July,  1885,  he  was  appointed  chief
clerk  in  the  bureau  of  internal  revenue  in  Wash-
ington, and  a  few  weeks  later  was  made  superin-
tendent of  the  U.  S.  coast  and  geodetic  survey,
which  office  he  still  fills.

THORNBOROUGH,  Sir  Edward,  English  na-
val officer,  b.  in  England  in  1758;  d.  3  April,  1834.
He  held  the  rank  of  1st  lieutenant  on  board  "  The
Falcon,"  one  of  the  vessels  that  took  part  in  the
attack  on  Bunker  Hill  in  1775.  He  afterward  en-
deavored to  take  a  schooner  out  of  Cape  Ann  har-
bor, but  was  wounded  in  the  attempt.  He  was  on  the
"  Flora  "  frigate,  which  captured  "  La  Nymphe  "  in
1780,  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  commander  for
his  gallantry  on  the  occasion,  and  became  post-cap-
tain in  the  following  year.  He  was  wrecked  in
1782  in  the  "Blonde"  while  bringing  a  captured
vessel  into  Halifax.  He  distinguished  himself  in
subsequent  campaigns,  was  thanked  by  the  British
parliament,  and  became  admiral  of  the  white.

THORNBURGH,  Thomas  T.,  soldier,  b.  hi
Tennessee  about  1843 ;  d.  near  White  river  agency,
Wyoming,  29  Sept.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy,  and  promoted  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  2d  artillery  in  1867.  At  the  open-
ing of  the  civil  war  and  prior  to  his  admission  to
West  Point  he  enlisted  in  the  6th  east  Tennes-
see volunteers  in  1861,  and  passed  rapidly  through
the  grades  of  private,  sergeant-major,  lieutenant,
and  adjutant.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Mill
Spring,  Morgan's  retreat  to  the  Ohio,  and  of  Stone
River.  As  an  officer  of  artillery  he  served  in  gar-
rison in  California  (excepting  a  tour  of  duty  at  the
artillery-school)  until  1870,  and  as  professor  of
military  science  at  East  Tennessee  university  till
1873,  having  been  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  April,
1870.  In  April,  1875,  he  was  appointed  paymaster
with  rank  of  major,  serving  in  that  department
until  May,  1878,  when  he  exchanged  into  the  4th
U.  S.  infantry,  with  the  same  rank.  He  command-
ed the  post  of  Fort  Fred  Steele,  Wyoming,  until
1879,  when  he  was  killed  while  in  command  of  an
expedition  against  the  Ute  Indians.

THORNDIKE,  George  Quincy,  artist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  about  1825 :  d.  there  in  December,
1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1847,  and
then  went  abroad,  studying  for  some  time  in  Paris.
After  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  settled  in
Newport,  R.  I.  He  was  made  an  associate  of  the
National  academy  in  1861.  His  landscapes  showed
many  of  the  characteristics  of  the  French  school,
and  James  J.  Jarves  wrote  of  him  :  "  Thorndike  is
so  thoroughly  French  in  style  and  motive  that  his
pictures  require  naturalization  before  being  popu-
larly welcomed  at  home."  His  better-known  works
include  "  The  Wayside  Inn,"  "  Swans  in  Central


THORNDIKE


THORNTON


103


Park,"  "  The  Lily  Pond."  "  The  Dumplings,  New-
port," and  "  View  near  Stockbridge,  Mass."

THORNDIKE,  Israel,  merchant,  b.  in  Bever-
ly. Mass.,  in  1757;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  10  May,
1832.  He  was  educated  in  the  common  schools,
on  30  Oct.,  1776,  was  appointed  captain  of  the
privateer  "  Warren  "  by  the  government  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  made  several  captures  during  the
Revolutionary  war.  When  peace  was  concluded
he  engaged  extensively  in  commerce  with  China
and  the  East  Indies,  and  also  in  manufacturing.
His  enterprises  were  all  skilfully  planned,  and  he
soon  became  wealthy.  He  was  elected  to  the
Massachusetts  convention  that  ratified  the  consti-
tution of  the  United  States,  and  for  many  years
sat  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature.  He  settled
in  Boston  in  1810,  and  in  1818  purchased  for  the
use  of  Harvard  the  library  of  Prof.  Christoph
Daniel  Ebeling,  of  Hamburg,  which  consists  of
4,000  volumes,  and  is  remarkably  rich  in  works  on
American  history  and  antiquities.

THORNE,  Charles  R.,  actor,  b.  in  New  York
city,  11  June,  1840;  d.  there,  10  Feb.,  1883.  When
a  child  he  made  journeys  with  his  father  and
mother,  who  were  popular  actors,  and  managed
travelling  theatrical  companies.  The  son  made
his  first  appearance  on  the  stage  in  San  Francisco
at  the  age  of  twelve.  He  was  afterward  sent  to
learn  a  trade,  but  soon  returned  to  the  stage,  and
in  1862  began  to  acquire  popularity.  He  was
in  China  subsequently,  and  erected  a  theatre  at
Shanghai,  which  was  moderately  successful.  Af-
ter a  visit  to  Egypt  and  a  tour  thence  round  the
world,  he  returned  to  New  York  in  1873  and  be-
came a  member  of  the  Union  square  company.
One  of  his  best  characters  was  Daniel  Rochat,  in
Sardou's  play  of  that  name.

THORNTON,  Anthony,  soldier,  b.  in  the  fam-
ily homestead,  Ormsby,  Caroline  co.,  Va.,  1  Feb.,
1748;  d.  in  Paris,  Bourbon  co.,  Ky.,  21  Dec,
1828.  He  was  a  thorough  patriot  during  the
Revolutionary  war,  and  commanded  a  regiment
of  minute-men  in  the  contest,  being  present  at
the  head  of  his  regiment  at  the  siege  of  Yorktown.
His  brother  Presley  commanded  a  company  of
horsemen,  and  another  brother  was  an  aide  to
Gen.  Washington.  Col.  Anthony  raised  a  large
family,  whose  descendants  are  scattered  through-
out the  United  States.  His  sword  which  he  used
during  the  Revolutionary  war  is  still  preserved
by  his  grandchildren  at  Paris,  Bourbon  co.,  Ky.,
to  which  place  he  moved  with  his  family  in  1808
and  engaged  in  agriculture. — His  grandson,  James
Bankhead,  b.  in  Mount  Zephyr,  Caroline  co.,  Va.,
28  Aug.,  1806;  d.  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,  12  Oct.,
1867,  was  the  son  of  James  B.  Thornton.  He  rep-
resented his  district  in  the  Virginia  senate  in
1838-'40,  and  was  one  of  the  prime  movers  in  the
establishment  of  the  Military  institute  at  Lexing-
ton, Va.  He  was  educated  at  William  and  Mary
college,  and  subsequently  studied  law,  located  at
Warrenton,  Fauquier  co.,  afterward  at  Bowling
Green,  Caroline  co.,  and  in  1847  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,
where  he  continued  to  practise  his  profession.  He
was  the  author  of  a  "  Digest  of  the  Conveyancing,
Testamentary,  and  Registry  Laws  of  the  States  of
the  Union  "  (Philadelphia,  1847),  and  a  work  on  "As-
signments," the  manuscript  of  which  was  burned
accidentally  before  its  publication.  While  engaged
in  active  practice  he  contributed  to  current  litera-
ture. In  politics  he  was  a  Democrat,  and  in  the
civil  war  he  was  identified  with  the  southern  cause.
— James  Bankhead's  son,  Gustavus  Brown,  sani-
tarian, b.  in  Bowling  Green,  Va.,  22  Feb.,  1835,
was  graduated  at  the  Memphis  medical  college  in


1858,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  New  York  in  1860.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  served  as  a  surgeon  in  the  Con-
federate army,  and  in  1862-'5  was  chief  surgeon  of
a  division.  In  1868  he  was  appointed  physician  in
charge  of  the  Memphis  city  hospital,  and  continued
so  until  in  1879,  when  he  became  president  of  the
Memphis  board  of  health ;  also  since  1880  he  has
been  a  member  of  the  Tennessee  state  board  of
health,  both  of  which  appointments  he  still  holds.
Dr.  Thornton  acquired  reputation  by  his  heroism
and  skill  during  the  three  great  yellow-fever  epi-
demics in  Memphis  in  1873-8  and  1879.  He  is  a
member  of  various  sanitary  and  medical  societies,
and  was  in  1882  president  of  the  Tennessee  state
medical  society.  In  addition  to  his  official  reports
as  president  of  the  Memphis  board  of  health,  he
has  contributed  numerous  memoirs  on  sanitary
subjects  to  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  American
Public  Health  Association  "  and  to  the  transactions
of  other  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member.  These
include  "Yellow  Fever,  Pathology  and  Treatment "
(1880) ;  "  Memphis  Sanitation  and  Quarantine  in
1879  and  1880*'  (1880);  "The  Negro  Mortality  of
Memphis  "  (1882) ;  "  Sanitation  of  the  Mississippi
Valley  "  (1884) ;  "  Gulf  Coast  Quarantine  "  (1884) ;
and  "  Six  Years'  Sanitary  Work  in  Memphis  "  (1886).

THORNTON,  Sir  Edward,  British  diplomatist,
b.  in  London,  England,  17  July,  1817.  He  is  the
son  of  Sir  Edward  Thornton,  minister  to  Portugal,
who  was  created  Count  de  Cassilhas  by  the  Portu-
guese monarch,  John  VI.  The  son  was  graduated
at  Cambridge  in  1840,  and  became  an  honorary
fellow  of  Pembroke  college,  became  a  member  of
the  diplomatic  service  in  1842  at  Turin,  was  paid
attache  in  Mexico  in  1845,  succeeded  to  the  Portu-
guese title  in  1850,  and  in  1851  was  appointed  sec-
retary of  legation  to  the  republic  of  Mexico.  He
was  secretary  to  the  special  mission  to  the  river
Plate,  under  the  late  Sir  Charles  Ilotham,  from
April,  1852,  till  October,  1853,  and  in  May,  1854,
became  charge  d'affaires  and  consul-general  in
New  Grenada,  but  was  transferred  to  Uruguay  in
September  following.  He  became  minister  to  the
Argentine  Confederation  in  1859,  and  was  engaged
on  a  special  mission  to  the  court  of  Brazil  in  July,
1865,  wher.e  he  was  appointed  minister  in  the  Au-
gust ensuing.  In  September,  1867,  he  was  selected
to  represent  England  at  the  court  of  Portugal,  but
before  he  could  take  possession  of  the  office  he  was
transferred  in  December  to  Washington.  He  was
made  a  companion  of  the  Bath  (civil  division)  on
9  Feb..  1863,  knight  commander  on  9  Aug.,  1870,
and  a  privy  councillor,  19  Aug.,  1871.  He  was  a
member  of  the  joint  high  commission  on  the  "  Ala-
bama" claims  in  1871,  and  an  arbitrator  of  the
American  and  Mexican  claims  commission  in  1873,
also  of  the  boundaries  of  Ontario  in  1878.  He  was
transferred  as  ambassador  to  St.  Petersburg,  in
May,  1881,  and  to  Turkey  in  December,  1884,  and
was  made  a  G.  C.  B.  on  21  Aug.,  1883.  The  degree
of  D.  C.  L.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Oxford  in
1877,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Harvard  in  1879.  On
1  Jan.,  1887,  he  was  retired  with  a  pension.

THORNTON,  Eliza  B,  poet.  b.  in  North
Hampton,  N.  H.,  23  July.  1795;  d.  in  Saco,  Me.,
27  July,  1854.  She  was  a  direct  descendant  of  Gen.
Daniel  Gookin,  and  married  James  B.  Thornton,  of
Scarboro.  Me.,  on  20  Jan.,  1817.  Mrs.  Thornton
was  for  manv  vears  a  contributor  of  poetry  to  the
"Southern  Literary  Messenger,"  the  "Christian
Mirror,"  and  other  periodicals.  Her  best-known
piece  is  "The  Mayflower."— Her  son.  John  Win-
gate,  historian,  b.'in  Saco,  Me.,  12  Aug.,  1818;  d.
there,  6  June,  1878,  was  graduated  at  the  Harvard


104


THORNTON


THORNTON


law-school  in  1840,  and  practised  in  Boston,  Mass.
He  was  a  founder  of  the  New  England  historic-
genealogical  society,  and  has  been  vice-president  of
the  American  statistic  association  and  of  the  Prince

{mblication  society.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Genea-
ogical  Memoir  of  the  Gilbert  Family  in  both  Old
and  New  England "  (printed  privately,  Boston,
1850) ;  "  Lives  of  Isaac  Heath  and  John  Bowles,
and  of  Rev.  John  Eliot,  Jr."  (printed  privately,
Roxbury,  1850) ;  "  Mementoes  of  the  Swett  Family  "
(printed  privately,  1851) ;  "  The  Landing  at  Cape
Anne,  or  the  Charter  of  the  First  Permanent  Colony
on  the  Territory  of  the  Massachusetts  Company,
now  Discovered  and  first  Published  from  the  Origi-
nal Manuscript,  with  an  Inquiry  into  its  Authority,
and  a  History  of  the  Colony,  1624-1628  "  (Boston,
1854) ;  "  Ancient  Pemaquid :  an  Historical  Review  "
(printed  privately,  Portland,  1857) ;  "  Peter  Oliver's
'  Puritan  Commonwealth '  Reviewed "  (Boston,
1857) ;  "  The  First  Records  of  Anglo-American
Colonization:  their  History"  (printed  privately,
Boston,  1859) ;  "  The  Pulpit  of  the  American  Revo-
lution, or  the  Political  Sermons  of  the  Period  of
1776,  with  an  Historical  Introduction,  Notes,  and
Illustrations  "  (Boston,  1860) ;  "  Colonial  Schemes
of  Popham  and  Gorges,"  being  a  speech  at  the
Popham  celebration  (Boston,  1863);  and  "The  His-
torical Relation  of  New  England  to  the  English
Commonwealth  "  (printed  privately,  Boston,  1874).

THORNTON,  James  Shepard,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Merrimack,  N.  H.,  25  Feb.,  1826 ;  d.  in  German-
town,  Pa.,  14  May,  1875.  He  entered  the  navy  as
a  midshipman,  15  Jan.,  1841,  served  in  the  sloop
"  John  Adams  "  in  the  Gulf  squadron  during  the
Mexican  war,  and  became  a  passed  midshipman,  10
Aug.,  1846.  He  resigned  from  the  navy,  9  May,
1850,  but  was  reinstated  in  1854,  promoted  to
master,  14  Sept.,  1855,  and  to  lieutenant  the  next
day.  During  the  civil  war  he  served  in  the  brig
"  Bainbridge  "  on  the  Atlantic  coast  in  1861,  was
executive  officer  of  the  flag-ship  "  Hartford  "  at  the
passage  of  the  forts  and  batteries  below  New  Or-
leans, and  in  the  engagement  with  the  Confederate
fleet,  with  the  ram  "  Arkansas  "  and  the  batteries
at  Vicksburg,  during  which  he  served  with  great
credit.  He  was  promoted  to  lieutenant-commander,
16  July,  1862,  and  had  charge  of  the  steam  gun-
boat "  Winona "  in  engagements  at  Mobile,  where
he  made  a  reconnaissance  of  Fort  Gaines  in  sound-
ing approaches  under  fire,  and  destroyed  several
Confederate  steamers.  He  was  the  executive
officer  of  the  "  Kearsarge  "  in  the  fight  with  the
"  Alabama,"  off  Cherbourg,  and  was  given  a  vote
of  thanks,  and  advanced  thirty  numbers  in  his
grade  for  his  gallantry  in  this  victory.  He  served
at  the  navy-yard  at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in  1866-'7,
was  promoted  to  commander,  25  July,  1866,  and
commissioned  captain,  24  May,  1872.

THORNTON,  Matthew,  signer  of  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence,  b.  in  Ireland  about  1714;  d.
in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  24  June,  1803.  When  he
was  two  or  three  years  old  his  father,  James,  emi-
grated to  New  England,  residing  for  a  few  years
at  Wiscasset,  Me.,  and  afterward  at  Worcester,
Mass.,  where  the  son  received  a  classical  education.
He  studied  medicine  in  Leicester,  practised  in
Londonderry,  N.  H.,  and  soon  became  wealthy.  He
accompanied  the  New  Hampshire  troops  in  the  ex-
pedition against  Louisburg  in  the  capacity  of  sur-
geon. He  was  appointed  a  justice  of  the  peace,
and  before  the  Revolution  was  a  colonel.  Taking
an  active  part  in  the  overthrow  of  the  royal  govern-
ment in  New  Hampshire,  Dr.  Thornton  was  chosen
president  of  the  Provincial  convention  when  it  as-
sembled in  1775. He  was  chief  justice  of  the  court


of  common  pleas,  and  from  1776  till  1782  a  judge
of  the  superior  court  of  New  Hampshire.  He  was
elected  speaker  of  the  assembly  on  5  Jan.,  1776,
and  on  12  Sept.  the  legislature  chose  him  as  a
delegate  to  the
Continental  con-
gress. As  in  the
case  of  the  dele-
gates from  Penn-
sylvania, he  was
allowed  to  affix
his  name  to  the
engrossed  copy
of  the  Declara-
tion of  Indepen-
dence, although
he  was  elected
after  its  passage,
and  did  not  take
his  seat  till  4
Nov.,  1776.  In
December  he  was
again  chosen  to
represent  New
Hampshire  in  congress  for  another  year.  He  re-
moved to  Exeter  in  1779,  and  shortly  afterward
settled  on  a  farm  at  Merrimack,  relinquishing
medical  practice.  He  was  elected  a  member  of
the  general  court,  then  a  state  senator,  and  in  1785
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  council.  From
the  adoption  of  the  state  constitution  till  his  death
he  was  a  justice  of  the  peace.  He  wrote  political
articles  for  the  newspapers,  even  after  the  age  of
eighty,  and  in  his  last  days  composed  a  meta-
physical work  on  the  origin  of  sin,  which  was
never  published.  In  1887  the  legislature  of  New
Hampshire  voted  $1,000  for  a  monument  to  be
placed  over  his  grave  in  Merrimack.

THORNTON,  Seth  Barton,  soldier,  b.  near
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  in  1814 ;  d.  in  San  Augustin,
Mexico,  18  June,  1847.  He  was  educated  at  the
common  schools,  was  of  an  active  and  adventurous
nature,  and  after  a  narrow  escape  from  death  by
shipwreck  was  appointed  in  June,  1836,  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  2d  U.  S.  dragoons,  serving  with  credit
in  Florida  against  the  Seminoles,  becoming  1st  lieu-
tenant in  1837  and  captain  in  1841.  In  command
of  his  squadron  he  exchanged  the  first  shots  with
the  enemy  in  the  Mexican  war  at  La  Rosia,  25
April,  1846,  and  was  severely  wounded  and  cap-
tured with  the  greater  part  of  his  force  after  a  gal-
lant resistance  by  40  dragoons  against  500  lancers.
At  the  close  of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott's  campaign,
while  at  the  head  of  his  squadron  in  advance  of
Worth's  division  at  the  village  of  San  Augustin,
near  the  city  of  Mexico,  Thornton  was  struck  in
the  breast  by  a  round  shot  and  instantly  killed.

THORNTON,  Thomas  C,  clergyman,  b.  in
Dumfries,  Va.,  12  Oct.,  1794;  d.  in  Mississippi,  23
March,  1860.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  place,
became  an  exhorter  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  and  was  received  into
the  Baltimore  conference  three  years  later.  In
1841  he  was  appointed  president  of  a  college  in
Mississippi.  He  left  the  Methodist  church  in  1845,
and  attached  himself  to  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  but  returned  to  his  former  connection  in
1850,  and  in  1853  was  readmitted  to  the  Mississippi
conference.  He  was  the  author  of  "Inquiry  into
the  History  of  Slavery  in  the  United  States"
(Washington,  1841),  in  which  he  replied  to  the  anti-
slavery  arguments  of  William  E.  Channing,  and  of
"  Theological  Colloquies."

THORNTON,  William,  superintendent  of  the
patent-office,  b.  in  Tortola,  W.  I. ;  d.  in  Washing-


THORNTON


THORPE


105


ton,  D.  C,  in  1827.  He  was  educated  as  a  physi-
cian, and  lived  for  many  years  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  was  well  known  in  the  circle  of  scientific
men,  being  chosen  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society  on  19  Jan.,  1787.  He  was  a
skilled  architect,  and  designed  the  Philadelphia
library  building,  which  was  completed  in  1790.
He  removed  to  Washington,  D.  C,  when  the  seat
of  government  was  transferred  to  that  place,  and
drew  the  plans  and  superintended  the  erection  of
the  first  capitol  building  in  its  early  stages.  He
was  one  of  the  first  to  act  as  commissioner  of  pub-
lic buildings,  and  was  the  first  head  of  the  patent-
office,  being  appointed  superintendent  in  1802,  and
serving  till  the  time  of  his  death.  He  published
"  Cadmus,  or  the  Elements  of  Written  Language  "
(Philadelphia,  1793).

THORNTON,  Sir  William,  English  soldier,  b.
in  England  about  1775 ;  d.  near  Han  well,  Eng-
land, 6  April,  1840.  He  was  commissioned  as
ensign  in  the  British  army  on  21  March,  1796,
and  had  risen  to  the  rank  of  major  in  August,
1807,  when  he  was  appointed  military  secretary  to
Sir  James  H.  Craig,  lieutenant-governor  of  Lower
Canada.  He  returned  to  England  in  1811,  and  in
1813  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  85th
regiment.  He  served  in  Spain  and  southern  France,
took  part  in  the  battle  of  the  Nive,  was  afterward
sent  to  this  country,  in  May,  1814,  commanded  the
brigade  of  light  infantry  that  formed  the  advance-
guard  of  Gen.  Robert  Ross's  expedition  up  the
Chesapeake,  and  was  seriously  wounded  and  made
prisoner  at  Bladensburg.  Being  exchanged  for
Com.  Joshua  Barney,  he  went  with  the  army  that
was  sent  against  New  Orleans  in  the  following
October,  commanded  the  advance  on  the  landing
of  the  troops,  took  part  in  the  chief  operations,  and
in  the  general  attack  on  the  American  lines  com-
manded a  detached  force  on  the  west  bank  of  the
Mississippi,  and  was  severely  wounded.  He  at-
tained the  rank  of  lieutenant-general  in  1838.

THORNTON,  William  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  state  in  1803 ;  d.  on  Governor's  island,  New
York  harbor,  6  April,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1825,  and  assigned
to  the  artillery.  He  was  made  captain  of  ordnance
on  7  July,  1838,  commanded  the  ordnance  depot  in
New  York  and  the  Watervliet  and  St.  Louis  ar-
senals, served  on  boards  for  the  trial  of  small  arms
and  cannon,  and  was  inspector  of  contract  arms  in
1858-'61.  He  was  promoted  major  on  28  May,  1861,
and  was  commander  of  Watervliet  arsenal  till  1863,
and  subsequently  inspector  of  contract  arms  and
ordnance  till  his  death,  being  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel  of  ordnance  on  3  March,  1863,  colonel  on
15  Sept.,  1863,  and  brigadier-general  by  brevet  on
13  March,  1865.  During  the  last  year  of  his  life
he  was  commandant  of  the  New  York  arsenal  on
Governor's  island.

THORN  WELL,  James  Henley,  clergyman,  b.
in  Marlborough  district,  S.  C,  in  1812 ;  d.  in  Char-
lotte, N.  C,  1  Aug.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at
South  Carolina  college  in  1829,  and  entered  upon
the  study  of  the  law.  which  he  soon  abandoned  to
devote  himself  to  the  ministry  in  the  Presbyterian
church.  He  was  chosen,  in  1836,  professor  of  logic
and  belles-lettres  in  South  Carolina  college,  in
1842  professor  of  the  evidences  of  Christianity  and
chaplain,  and  in  1852  its  president.  In  1856  he
became  a  professor  in  the  Presbyterian  theological
seminary  at  Columbia.  For  a  short  time  he  was
pastor  of  the  Globe  street  Presbyterian  church  in
Charleston.  Dr.  Thornwell  was  one  of  the  ablest
men  that  the  south  has  ever  produced.  To  logical
and  metaphysical  faculties  of  a  high order he


added  a  fine  literary  style,  and  an  easy  and  effect-
ive address.  He  was  an  uncompromising  cham-
pion of  the  old-school  Presbyterian  theology,  and
in  politics  advocated  extreme  southern  views.  He
was  the  author  of  several  published  sermons  and
addresses,  "Arguments  of  Romanists  Discussed
and  Refuted  "  (New  York,  1845) ;  "  Discourses  on
Truth  "  (1854) ;  "  Rights  and  Duties  of  Masters  "
(1861) ;  "  The  State  of  the  Country  "  (1861) ;  and
numerous  articles  in  defence  of  slavery  and  seces-
sion in  the  "  Southern  Presbyterian  Review."  His
collected  works  were  edited  by  Rev.  John  B.  Adger
(2  vols.,  Richmond,  1874).

THORPE,  Rose  Hartwick,  poet.  b.  in  Misha-
waka,  Ind.,  18  July,  1850.  When  she  was  ten
years  old  her  parents  settled  in  Litchfield,  Mich.,
where  she  received  a  common-school  education.
Her  most  popular  poem,  the  ballad  entitled  "  Cur-
few Must  not  Ring  To-Night,"  was  written  while
she  was  a  school-girl.  When  it  was  published  in
a  Detroit  paper  in  1870  it  obtained  a  wide  cir-
culation. An  illustrated  edition  has  been  issued
(Boston,  1882).  She  married  Edmund  C.  Thorpe
in  September,  1871.  In  1881  she  edited  three  Sun-
day-school papers  in  Chicago,  111.  Subsequently
she  settled  with  her  family  in  Pacific  Beach,  San
Diego  co.,  Cal.  Mrs.  Thorpe  has  been  a  contribu-
tor to  journals  and  magazines  since  1880.  She  has
written  "  The  Station-Agent's  Story,"  "  Remember
the  Alamo,"  and  other  popular  poems.  Her  pub-
lications include  "  Fred's  Dark  Days,"  a  story  for
children  (Chicago,  1881) ;  "  The  Yule  Log,"  a  book
of  poems  (1881) ;  "  The  Fenton  Family  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1884) ;  "  Nina  Bruce  "  (1886) ;  "  The  Chester
Girls  "  (1887) ;  "  Temperance  Poems  "  (Pent  Water,
Mich.,  1887) ;  and  "  Ringing  Ballads  "  (Boston,  1887).

THORPE,  Thomas  Bangs,  author,  b.  in  West-
field,  Mass.,  1  March,  1815 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in
October,  1878.  He  was  for  three  years  at  Wesley-
an  university,  and
while  at  college
gave  evidence  of
literary  and  artis-
tic talent.  One  of
his  earlv  paint-
ings, "The  Bold
Dragoon  ."adapted
from  Washington
lrving's  story,  was
highly  commend-
ed. After  leaving
college  on  account
of  his  health,  Mr.
Thorpe  made  a
tour  of  the  south-
west, and  finally
settled  in  Louisi-
ana in  1836.  His
first  literary  production  of  note,  "Tom  Owen,  the
Bee-Hunter,"  was  widely  quoted,  and  his  next
contribution  to  periodical  literature — the  mirth-
provoking  sketch  entitled  "  The  Big  Bear  of  Ar-
kansas "—placed  him  in  the  foremost  rank  of
early  American  humorists.  He  was  for  a  time
editor  of  a  Whig  newspaper  in  New  Orleans.  In
1844  he  edited  the  "  Concordia  Intelligencer,"  and
in  1846  established  "  The  Conservator "  at  Baton
Rouge,  but  sold  the  paper  a  few  years  later,  and
in  1859  became  the  editor  and  publisher  of  the
New  York  "Spirit  of  the  Times."  Mr.  Thorpe
served  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  attained  the  rank
of  colonel.  His  contributions  to  periodical  litera-
ture, particularly  "  Blackwood's.'  the  "  Knicker-
bocker," and  "  Harper's  Magazine,"  show  versa-
tile  talent  of  a high  order,  and several of  his


c^Ccr^  yC/.  c/z£oy£e.


106


THORVALD


THROCKMORTON


paintings,  notably  "  Niagara  as  it  Is,"  display
ability.  His  published  works  include  "  Our  Army
of  the  Rio  Grande"  (Philadelphia,  1846);  "Mys-
teries of  the  Backwoods "  (1846) ;  "  Our  Army
at  Monterey"  (1847);  "Lynde  Weiss,  an  Autobi-
ography" (1854);  "The  Hive  of  the  Bee-Hunter"
(New  York,  1854);  "A  Voice  to  America"  (1855);
"Scenes  in  Arkansaw"  (1858);  and  "Reminis-
cences of  Charles  L.  Elliott."

THORVALD.  Ericsson,  Scandinavian  navi-
gator, d.  in  Massachusetts  in  1004.  He  was  the
brother  of  Leif,  the  son  of  Eric  the  Red,  who  per-
suaded him  to  visit  Vinland,  giving  him  the  ship
that  he  had  bought  from  Biarn  Hermlfson,  and
many  wise  directions  as  to  his  course.  Thorvald
selected  thirty  men,  and  sailed  westward  in  1002.
He  reached  what  has  been  thought  to  be  the  coast
of  Rhode  Island,  and  passed  the  winter  in  Leifs-
budir  (Leif's  house),  some  wooden  huts  which  Leif
is  supposed  to  have  built  at  the  mouth  of  Pocasset
river,  near  the  present  site  of  Providence.  In  the
spring  of  1003  he  went  on  a  voyage  of  discovery
along  the  southern  coast.  His  men  saw  a  lovely
country  covered  with  forests,  which  were  separated
from  the  shore  only  by  a  thin  border  of  white  sand.
The  sea  was  enaAelled  with  little  islands,  in  one  of
which  they  discovered  a  wooden  barn.  The  others
appeared  without  any  trace  of  men  or  animals.
After  obtaining  a  glimpse  of  an  island  that  lay
toward  the  west,  supposed  to  be  Long  Island,  they
returned  in  the  autumn  to  Leifsbudir.  In  the  fol-
lowing summer  Thorvald  determined  to  explore
the  northern  coast,  but  a  violent  storm  damaged
the  keel  of  his  ship.  He  stopped  for  some  time,
refitting  in  the  neighborhood,  and  when  about  to
put  to  sea  he  said  to  his  companions:  "Let  us
raise  on  this  point  of  land  the  keel  of  a  ship,  and
let  us  call  it  Kialarnes  "  (Keel  cape).  Rafn,  Kohl,
and  other  scholars  that  are  interested  in  the  ante-
Columbian  discovery  of  the  American  continent,
think  that  the  Kialarnes  of  Thorvald  is  Cape  Cod.
Then  Thorvald  sailed  westward  and  anchored  near
a  promontory,  which  has  been  supposed  to  be
Gurnet  point  or  Cape  Alderton.  The  country  ap-
peared so  beautiful  that  after  landing  he  said :
"  This  country  is  very  fine ;  I  would  like  to  build
my  house  here."  After  returning  to  the  vessel,  the
Northmen  saw  three  dark  points  on  the  beach  that
looked  like  hillocks.  They  were  three  "  carabos  "
(canoes  of  wickerwork,  covered  with  skins),  each
containing  three  men.  The  Northmen  seized  and
killed  eight  of  the  savages,  but  the  ninth  escaped.
Thorvald  then  landed,  explored  the  promontory,
and  discovered  elevations,  which  he  took  for  hu-
man habitations.  The  Northmen  returned  to  their
vessel  at  nightfall,  but  they  were  soon  awakened
from  their  sleep  by  cries  of  vengeance.  The  vessel
was  surrounded  by  a  crowd  of  canoes  that  came
to  exact  reparation  for  the  assassinations  of  the
morning.  They  were  manned  by  the  Skrsellings,
or  Esquimaux,  who  appear  to  have  dwelt  at  that
time  farther  south  than  they  did  in  the  16th  cen-
tury. These  savages  discharged  a  shower  of  ar-
rows on  the  Northmen,  and  fled.  Thorvald  asked
his  companions  if  they  were  wounded,  and  all  re-
plied in  the  negative.  "  But  I  am,"  he  said ;  "  this
arrow,  after  rebounding  from  my  buckler,  entered
under  the  armpit.  I  advise  you  to  depart  quickly
from  this  land  and  leave  me  on  the  promontory
where  I  wished  to  build  my  house.  I  have  pro-
phesied my  destiny,  for  there  shall  I  dwell.  You
shall  bury  me  in  this  place,  and  put  two  crosses
on  my  tomb,  one  at  my  head  and  the  other  at  my
feet,  so  that  henceforward  this  promontory  shall
be  called  Krossarnes  "  (Promontory  of  the  Crosses).


A  skeleton  was  discovered  late  in  the  18th  cen-
tury on  Rainsford  island,  and  with  it  the  hilt  of
an  iron  sword.  Some  antiquarians  have  conclud-
ed that  the  skeleton  was  that  of  an  ancient  Scan-
dinavian, and  that  the  workmanship  of  the  hi!t
proved  it  to  be  not  later  than  the  15th  century.
After  the  burial  of  Thorvald,  the  Northmen  re-
turned to  Leifsbudir,  and  in  1005  sailed  for  Green-
land. See  "  Decouverte  de  1'Amerique  par  les  Nor-
mands  au  Xe  siecle,"  by  Gabriel  Gravier  (Paris,
1874) ;  "  Antiquitates  Americana?,"  by  Carl  Chris-
tian Rafn  (Copenhagen,'  1837);  "  Denkmaler  Gron-
lands,"  by  the  same  (3  vols.,  1838-'45) ;  "  Etude  sur
les  rapports  de  1'Amerique  et  de  l'ancien  continent
avant  Christophe  Colomb,"  by  M.  Gaffarel  (Paris,
1869) ;  "  Historia  Vinlandiae  Antiquae,"  by  Th.
Torfaeus  (Copenhagen,  1711);  "  The  Heimskringla
of  Snorre  Sturlesons,  or  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of
Norway,"  translated  into  English  by  Samuel  Laing
(London,  1844) ;  and  "  Discovery  of  America  by
Northmen,"  by  Eben  N.  Horsford  (Boston,  1888).

THRASHER,  John  S.,  journalist,  b.  in  Port-
land, Me,,  in  1817;  d.  in  Galveston,  Tex.,  10  Nov.,
1879.  While  he  was  a  youth  his  parents  removed
to  Havana,  Cuba,  where  he  followed  for  some  time
a  successful  mercantile  career,  but  abandoned  it
for  journalism,  purchasing,  in  1849,  the  "  Faro  In-
dustrial," which  was  then  the  only  Liberal  news-
paper. In  September,  1851,  his  paper  was  sup-
pressed, and  he  was  condemned  by  court-martial  to
ten  years'  imprisonment  with  hard  labor  at  Ceuta
and  perpetual  banishment  from  Cuba.  After  sev-
eral months  the  U.  S.  minister  at  Madrid  secured
his  release.  He  afterward  established  in  New  Or-
leans a  Sunday  journal  called  the  "  Beacon  of  Cuba,"
and  in  1853-'5  was  an  active  member  of  the  junta
that  organized  a  filibustering  expedition  to  be  led
by  Gen.  John  A.  Quitman.  When  the  U.  S.  au-
thorities prevented  the  departure  of  this  expedi-
tion, Thrasher  went  to  New  York  city.  For  sev-
eral years  he  travelled  in  Central  and  South  Ameri-
ca as  a  newspaper  correspondent,  and  edited  the
"  Noticioso  de  Nuevo  York,"  a  journal  devoted  to
the  interests  of  Spanish- American  countries.  Mar-
rying a  lady  whose  property  was  in  Texas,  he  re-
moved to  the  south,  and  remained  there  during
the  civil  war,  acting  as  agent  for  the  associated
press  at  Atlanta.  After  the  war  he  edited  for
several  years  Frank  Leslie's  "  Ilustracion  Ameri-
cana "  in  New  York  city,  and  afterward  resided  in
Galveston.  He  published  a  translation  of  Alexan-
der von  Humboldt's  "  Personal  Narrative  of  Trav-
els," with  notes  and  an  introductory  essay  (New
York,  1856),  also  many  essays  on  the  social,  com-
mercial, and  political  conditions  of  Cuba.

THROCKMORTON,  James  Webb,  governor
of  Texas,  b.  in  Sparta,  Tenn.,  1  Feb.,  1825.  He
accompanied  his  father  to  Texas  in  1841,  became
a  lawyer,  and  entered  the  legislature  in  1851,  serv-
ing continuously  in  one  branch  or  the  other  till
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  was  a  member
of  the  convention  that  passed  the  ordinance  of  se-
cession, against  which  he  voted,  with  six  others,
but  he  joined  the  Confederate  army  in  the  spring
of  1861,  and  served  as  a  captain,  and  afterward  as
a  major  till  November,  1863,  when  he  resigned  in
order  to  take  his  seat  again  in  the  state  senate.  In
1864  he  was  appointed  a  brigadier-general  of  state
troops,  and  in  May,  1864,  was  placed  by  the  state
military  authorities  in  command  on  the  north-
western border  of  Texas,  where  he  made  treaties
with  the  Comanches,  Cheyennes,  and  other  tribes,
returning  from  the  plains  in  June,  1865,  after  Lee's
surrender  at  Appomattox.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Constitutional  convention  that  was  called  in


THROOP


THRUSTON


107


accordance  with  President.  Johnson's  proclamation
in  1865,  and  was  elected  its  president.  In  1866  he
was  chosen  governor  for  four  years,  but  in  1867
he  was  removed  from  office  by  Gen.  Philip  H.
Sheridan's  orders.  He  was  elected  to  congress,
taking  his  seat  on  6  Dec,  1875,  and  served  through
two  terms.  On  3  Dec,  1883,  he  re-entered  the
house,  and  in  1885  he  was  re-elected.

THROOP,  Enos  Thompson  (troop),  governor
of  New  York,  b.  in  Johnstown,  Montgomery  co.,
N.  Y.,  21  Aug.,  1784 ;  d.  on  his  estate  of  Willow-
brook,  near  Auburn.  N.  Y*.,  1  Nov.,  1874.  lie  re-
ceived a  classical  education,  studied  law  at  Al-
bany, and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1806.  Dur-
ing his  residence  at
Albany,  he  became
acquainted  with  Mar-
tin Van  Buren,  then
also  a  law-student,
and  this  acquaint-
ance ripened  into
friendship.  After  ad-
mission tothe  bar,  Mr.
Throop  began  prac-
tice at  Auburn,  soon
became  active  in  poli-
tics as  a  member  of
the  Republican  par-
ty, and  was  appoint-
ed postmaster  of  the
village,  and  in  1811
county  clerk  of  Ca-
yuga county.  In  1814
he  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  congress,  as  a
supporter  of  the  war  measures  of  the  administra-
tion. He  took  part  in  the  debates  upon  the  impor-
tant measures  to  which  the  close  of  the  war  and  the
grostration  of  public  and  private  credit  gave  rise.
[e  also  supported  and  voted  for  the  act  changing
the  compensation  of  congressmen  from  six  dollars  a
day  to  $1,800  per  annum,  a  course  which  temporari-
ly clouded  his  political  fortunes.  Popular  dissatis-
faction with  his  action  was  such  that  he  was  defeated
at  the  election  of  1816,  which  was  held  in  April  of
that  year,  and  thereupon  resigned  his  seat  for  the
remainder  of  his  unexpired  term.  In  April,  1823,
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  eight  circuit  judges
for  which  the  constitution  of  1821  provided. In

1828,  induced  chiefly  by  the  solicitation  of  Martin
Van  Buren,  Judge  Throop  consented  to  be  placed
upon  the  state  ticket,  as  the  Democratic  candidate
for  lieutenant-governor,  with  Mr.  Van  Buren  as
the  candidate  for  governor,  a  step  which  rendered
it  necessary  for  him  to  resign  his  judicial  office.  It
was  expected  that  Andrew  Jackson  would  be  elect-
ed president  at  the  same  election,  in  which  event
Van  Buren  would  be  made  secretary  of  state  ;  and
the  latter  desired  to  leave  the  office  of  governor  and
the  leadership  of  the  party  in  the  hands  of  a  friend.
These  expectations  were  fulfilled,  and  Mr.  Throop
succeeded  to  the  office  of  governor  on  12  March,

1829.  He  was  re-elected  governor  in  1830.  Dur-
ing his  first  term  the  construction  of  the  Chenango
canal  became  one  of  the  chief  questions  of  state
policy.  He  declared  himself,  in  his  message  to  the
legislature,  unalterably  opposed  to  the  plan.  This
step  raised  such  a  vehement  opposition  to  him  in
the  localities  through  which  the  proposed  canal
would  pass,  that  in  1832  he  declined  to  be  present-
ed as  a  candidate  for  a  third  term.  In  1833  he
was  appointed  by  President  Jackson  naval  officer
at  the  port  of  New  York,  which  office  he  held  un-
til 1838,  when  President  Van  Buren  appointed  him
charge  d'affaires  of  the  United  States  to  the  king-


dom of  the  Two  Sicilies  (Naples),  where  he  remained
until  he  was  superseded  in  1842.  After  spend-
ing two  years  in  Paris,  he  returned  to  the  United
States,  and  resided  upon  an  estate  on  the  banks  of
Owasco  lake  near  Auburn,  N.  Y.  In  1847  he
removed  to  Michigan,  where  he  purchased  a  farm
of  800  acres,  and  became  noted  among  agricul-
turists. Advancing  years  compelled  him  to  give
up  farming,  and  in  1857  he  returned  to  his  former
home,  removing  in  1868  to  New  York  city,  but  a
few  years  later  again  returning  to  his  residence
near  Auburn.— His  nephew,  Montgomery  Hunt,
lawyer,  b.  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,  1827,  was
educated  in  Geneva,  Switzerland,  and  Naples,  Italy,
and  at  Hobart  college ;  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1848.  He  practised  in  Utica,
N.  Y.,  from  1851  till  1864,  first  in  partnership  with
his  uncle,  Ward  Hunt,  and  after  1856  with  Roscoe
Conkling,  then  in  New  York  city  till  1870,  when
he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  to  revise  the
statutes  of  the  state.  He  acted  as  chairman  of
the  commission,  which  prepared  the  New  York
code  of  civil  procedure  that  was  enacted  partly  in
1877  and  partly  in  1880.  Since  1878,  when  the
codification  was  ended,  Mr.  Throop  has  devoted
himself  to  legal  authorship,  changing  his  residence
in  1880  from  New  York  city  to  Albany.  He  has
published  "  The  Future :  a  Political  Essay  "  (New
York,  1864) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Validity  of  Verbal
Agreements  "  (Albany.  1870) ;  "  Annotated  Code  of
Civil  Procedure  "  (1880) ;  "  The  New  York  Justice's
Manual  "  (1880) ;  "  Digest  of  the  Decisions  of  the
Supreme  Judicial  Court  of  Massachusetts  "  (1887) ;
and  "  Revised  Statutes  of  the  State  of  New  York  "
(8th  ed.,  1888).

THRUSTON,  Charles  Mynn  (throo'-ston),  sol-
dier, b.  in  Gloucester  county,  Va.,  in  1738;  d.  near
New  Orleans,  La.,  in  1812.  He  was  educated  at
William  and  Mary  college,  and  after  prosecuting
his  theological  studies  in  England  was  ordained  to
the  ministry  of  the  Episcopal  church  in  Gloucester
county.  Subsequently  he  removed  to  Clarke  coun-
ty, and  officiated  in  a  church,  near  Shenandoah
river,  that  is  still  standing.  At  the  beginning  of
the  Revolution  he  raised  a  company,  was  commis-
sioned as  captain,  and  badly  wounded  at  Trenton.
On  his  recovery  he  was  appointed  colonel,  being
known  as  the  "  warrior  parson."  After  the  war  he
was  a  judge  and  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and
in  1808  removed  to  Louisiana. — His  son,  Buckner,
jurist,  b.  near  Winchester,  Va.,  in  1763 :  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  30  Aug.,  1845,  received  a  classical
education,  emigrated  in  early  life  to  Kentucky,
and  there  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  practised  in  Frankfort,  taking  an  active  part
in  public  affairs,  and  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  in
1805,  declining  the  post  of  U.  S.  judge  of  the  terri-
tory of  Orleans,  to  which  he  had  been  appointed
immediately  before.  On  1  July,  1809,  he  resigned
his  seat  in  the  senate  to  accept  the  appointment
of  U.  S.  judge  for  the  District  of  Columbia,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death.  —  Buckner's  son,
Charles  Mynn,  soldier,  b.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  22
Feb.,  1789;  d.  in  Cumberland,  Md.,  18  Feb.,  1873,
entered  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1813,  and  in
July,  1814,  was  commissioned  as  lieutenant  of  ar-
tillery, and  assigned  to  duty  on  Governor's  island,
New  York  harbor,  where  he  was  engaged  in  erect-
ing fortifications  till  the  close  of  the  war  with
Great  Britain.  He  became  adjutant  of  his  regi-
ment in  1821,  and  during  the  Florida  war  in  1835-6
was  acting  adjutant-general  of  the  Florida  army.
Resigning  on  31  Aug.,  1836,  he  settled  on  a  farm
at  Cumberland,  Md.  He  became  president  of  a  bank
in  1838,  and  mayor  in  1861. At  the  beginning  of


108


THURMAX


THURSBY


the  civil  war  he  entered  the  volunteer  service  as
brigadier-general,  and  served  in  guarding  the  Bal-
timore and  Ohio  railroad  till  April,  1862,  when  he
resigned. — Buckner's  grandson,  dates  Phillips,
soldier,  b.  in  Dayton,  Ohio,  11  June,  1835,  was
graduated  at  Miami  university  in  1855,  studied
law,  and  began  practice  in  Dayton,  where  he  en-
tered the  volunteer  service  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  as  a  captain  in  the  1st  Ohio  infantry.  He
was  promoted  major  and  assistant  adjutant-general
on  4  Sept.,  1863,  and  subsequently  lieutenant-colo-
nel, for  special  acts  of  gallantry  at  Shiloh  and
Stone  River,  and  was  brevetted  colonel  and  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  for  gallantry  at  Chicka-
mauga.  Since  the  war  he  has  followed  his  profes-
sion at  Xashville,  Tenn.  He  is  corresponding  sec-
retary of  the  Tennessee  historical  society,  has  con-
tributed articles  on  military  history  and  other
subjects  to  northern  and  southern  magazines,  and
has  in  preparation  an  illustrated  work  on  the
mound-builders,  describing  recent  discoveries  in
the  vicinity  of  Xashville  and  elsewhere.

THURMAN,  Allen  Granbery,  statesman,  b.
in  Lynchburg,  Va.,  13  Xov.,  1813. His  father  was
the  Rev. Pleasant  Thurman,  a  minister  of the
Methodist  church,  and  his  mother  the  only  daugh-
ter of  Col.  Xathan-
iel Allen, nephew
and  adopted  son  of
Joseph  Hewes,  one
of  the  signers  of  the
Declaration  of In-
dependence. His
parents  removed  to
Chillicothe  in  1819,
and  he  made  that

Elace  his  home  until
e  settled  in  Colum-
bus, in  1853,  where
he  has  since  resided.
His  education  was
in  the  Chillicothe
academy,  and  at  the
hands  of  his  mother.
At  the  age  of  eight-
een he  assisted  in
land-surveying  and
at  twenty-one  he  was  private  secretary*  to  Gov.
Lucas,  studied  law  with  his  uncle,  Gov.  William
Allen,  afterward  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835,
and  in  a  few  years  was  employed  in  almost  every
litigated  case  in  Ross  county.  In  1844  he  was
elected  by  the  Democrats  to  congress,  and  he  en-
tered that  body,  1  Dec,  1845,  as  its  youngest  mem-
ber. Preferring  the  practice  of  the  law,  he  de-
clined a  renomination  to  congress,  and  remained
at  the  bar  until  1851,  when  he  was  elected  to  the
supreme  bench  in  Ohio.  From  December,  1854,
till  February,  1856,  he  served  as  chief  justice,  and
on  the  expiration  of  his  term  he  refused  a  re-
nomination.  His  opinions,  contained  in  the  first
five  volumes  of  the  state  reports,  are  remarkable
for  the  clear  and  forcible  expression  of  his  views
and  the  accuracy  of  his  statements  of  the  law.
In  1867  he  was  the  choice  of  his  party  for  gov-
ernor of  Ohio.  Rutherford  B.  Hayes,  his  oppo-
nent, was  elected  by  a  majority  of  fewer  than
3,000  votes,  though  the  Republican  majority  in
1866  was  more  than  43,000.  Mr.  Thurman  was
then  elected  to  the  senate  to  succeed  Benjamin  F.
Wade.  He  took  his  seat,  4  March,  1869,  and  from
the  first  was  recognized  as  the  leader  of  the  Demo-
cratic minority.  He  was  a  member  of  the  commit-
tee on  the  judiciary  and  on  the  accession  of  his
party  to  power,  in  the  46th  congress,  he  was  made


C&/J&,


lscsxs*n<&ri'


its  chairman,  and  also  chosen  president,  pro  tem-
pore, of  the  senate,  owing  to  the  illness  of  Vice-
President  Wheeler.  In  1874  he  was  elected  to  the
senate  for  a  second  term,  and  in  his  twelve  years
of  service,  ending  4  March,  1881,  he  won  a  reputa-
tion for  judicial  fairness  and  readiness,  dignity  and
power  in  debate,  especially  upon  questions  of  con-
stitutional law.  Besides"  his  labor  in  the  judi-
ciary committee  he  rendered  valuable  service  in
the  committee  on  private  land  claims.  He  was
the  author  of  the  act  to  compel  the  Pacific  rail-
road corporations  to  fulfil  their  obligations  to  the
government,  since  known  as  the  "  Thurman  act,"
the  passage  of  which  he  forced  in  spite  of  the
combined  influence  of  those  companies.  His  ar-
guments against  the  constitutionality  of  the  civil-
rights  bills  have  since  been  sustained  by  the  U.  S.
supreme  court  in  language  that  is  almost  identical
with  that  of  his  speeches.  Efforts  to  secure  for
the  rebellious  states  the  most  favorable  recon-
struction legislation,  in  which  he  vigorously  per-
sisted while  in  the  senate,  led  to  a  charge  that  he
had  disapproved  the  war  for  the  integrity  of  the
Union.  His  true  position  he  thus  defined  in  a
letter  to  a  friend :  "  I  did  all  I  could  to  help  to
preserve  the  Union  without  a  war,  but  after  it  be-
gan I  thought  there  was  but  one  thing  to  do,  and
that  was  to  fight  it  out.  I  therefore  sustained  all
constitutional  measures  that  tended,  in  my  judg-
ment, to  put  down  the  rebellion.  I  never  believed
in  the  doctrine  of  secession."  Mr.  Thurman  re-
tired from  the  senate  not  alone  with  the  high  re-
spect of  his  partisan  associates,  but  also  with  that
of  senators  of  opposite  political  views,  one  of
whom,  James  O.  Blaine,  with  whom  he  often  con-
tended in  debate,  says,  in  his  "  Twenty  Years  of
Congress  "  :  "  Mr.  Thurman's  rank  in  the  senate
was  established  from  the  day  he  took  his  seat,  and
was  never  lowered  during  the  period  of  his  service.
He  was  an  admirably  disciplined  debater,  was  fair
in  his  method  of  statement,  logical  in  his  argument,
honest  in  his  conclusions.  He  had  no  tricks  in
discussion,  no  catch-phrases  to  secure  attention,  but
was  always  direct  and  manly.  .  .  .  His  retire-
ment from  the  senate  was  a  serious  loss  to  his  par-
ty— a  loss,  indeed,  to  the  body."  Gen.  Garfield,
before  his  election  to  the  presidency,  had  been
chosen  to  succeed  Mr.  Thurman  in  the  senate;
but  the  contest  had  not  interrupted  friendly  rela-
tions of  many  years'  standing,  and,  as  a  mark  of
his  regard,  the  new  president,  soon  after  his  inau-
guration, associated  Mr.  Thurman  with  William
M.  Evarts,  of  Xew  York,  and  Timothy  O.  Howe,
of  Wisconsin,  on  the  commission  to  the  Interna-
tional monetary  conference  to  be  held  in  Paris.  In
the  Democratic  national  convention  of  1876  Mr.
Thurman  received  some  votes  as  a  presidential
candidate.  In  1880  the  first  ballot  gave  him  the
entire  vote  of  the  Ohio  delegation,  with  consider-
able support  from  other  states.  In  1884  he  was  a
delegate-at-large  to  the  Xational  convention,  was
again  put  in  nomination  for  the  presidency,  and
stood  next  to  Cleveland  and  Bayard  upon  the  first
ballot.  In  the  convention  of  1888  he  was  nominat-
ed for  vice-president  by  acclamation.  See  "  Lives
and  Public  Services  of  Grover  Cleveland  and  Allen
G.  Thurman,"  by  W.  U.  Hensel  and  George  F.
Parker  (Xew  York,  1888).

THURSBY,  Emma  Cecilia,  singer,  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, X.  Y..  21  Feb.,  1857.  She  had  her  first  in-
struction of  Julius  Meyer,  and  subsequently  studied
with  Achille  Errani  and  Erminia  Rudersdorff.
In  1873  she  went  to  Italy,  where  she  studied  for  a
short  time  under  Francesco  Lamperti  and  San
Giovanni. On  her  return  she  sang  in  the  Broad-


THURSTON


THURSTON


109


way  tabernacle,  New  York.  In  1876  she  made  her
first  concert-tour  with  Patrick  S.  Gilmore's  orches-
tra, and  in  1877  she  travelled  with  Theodore
Thomas.  In  the  same  year  Maurice  Strakosch
signed  a  six-years'  engagement  with  her,  and  un-
der his  management  she  made  several  tours  in  the
United  States  and  in  Europe,  meeting  with  great
success.  Miss  Thursby  has  appeared  only  in  con-
cert and  oratorio,  and  has  rejected  the  most  flat-
tering offers  that  were  made  her  while  abroad  to
appear  in  opera.  Her  forte  is  sacred  music,  and
in  rendering  the  soprano  parts  of  Handel's  and
Havdn's  oratorios  she  is  unexcelled.

THURSTON,  Asa,  missionary,  b.  in  Fitchburg,
Mass.,  12  Oct.,  1787;  d.  in  Honolulu,  Hawaii,  11
March,  1868.  He  worked  at  the  trade  of  scythe-
making  till  he  was  twenty-two  years  old,  then  fit-
ted himself  for  college,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1816,  and  passed  through  the  course  of  theological
instruction  at  Andover  seminary.  On  his  gradua-
tion in  1819  he  was  ordained  as  a  missionary,  and
on  23  Oct.  sailed  with  his  wife  for  the  Sand-
wich islands.  He  established  himself  at  Kailua,
Hawaii,  where  he  resided  for  more  than  forty  years,
retiring  to  Honolulu  when  incapacitated  by  paraly-
sis for  continued  active  work.  He  was  a  pioneer
among  the  missionaries  to  the  Sandwich  islands,  and
instructed  two  of  the  kings  while  they  still  resided
at  Kailua.  He  also  translated  a  large  part  of  the
Bible  into  the  Hawaiian  language. — His  wife,  Lucy
Ooodale,  b.  in  Marlborough,  Mass.,  29  Oct.,  1795 ;
d.  in  Honolulu,  Hawaii,  13  Oct.,  1876,  was  edu-
cated at  the  academy  in  Bradford,  Mass.,  and
taught  until  she  married  and  went  to  the  Sand-
wich islands.  She  left  an  autobiography  which
was  completed  by  Persis  G.  Taylor,  her  daughter,
and  Rev.  Walter  Freer,  and  published  under  the
title  of  "  Life  and  Times  of  Mrs.  Lucy  G.  Thurston  "
{Ann  Arbor,  1876). — Their  son.  Thomas  Gairdner,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1862,  studied  theology,
and  returned  to  Hawaii,  where  he  preached  until
the  time  of  his  death  in  1884.

THURSTON,  John  Mellen,  lawyer,  b.  in
Montpelier,  Vt.,  21  Aug.,  1847.  In  1854  his  family
removed  to  Madison,  and  two  years  later  to  Beaver
Dam,  Wis.  He  was  graduated  at  Wayland  uni-
versity in  1867,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1869,  and  in  the  same  year  removed  to
Omaha,  Nebraska.  He  was  appointed  city  attor-
ney in  1874,  and,  while  holding  that  office,  was
elected  in  1875  to  the  legislature,  in  which  he  acted
as  chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee.  He  re-
signed the  attorneyship  in  1877  to  become  assist-
ant attorney  of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad  company,
of  which  he  became  general  attorney  in  1888.  In
1875  he  was  defeated  as  a  candidate  for  the  district
judgeship.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1880,
and  in  1884  chairman  of  the  delegation  to  the  Na-
tional Republican  convention. ,  He  was  again  at
the  head  of  the  delegation  in  1888,  and  was  select-
ed by  the  convention  at  Chicago  for  temporary
chairman.  His  address  in  calling  that  body  to  or-
der won  him  a  national  reputation  as  an  orator.

THURSTON,  Laura  M.,  poet,  b.  in  Norfolk,
Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,  in  December,  1812 ;  d.  in
New  Albany,  Ind.,  21  July,  1842.  Her  maiden
name  was  Hawley.  She  was  educated  for  the  pro-
fession of  teaching  at  the  Hartford  female  semi-
nary, and  taught  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and  New
Milfo'rd  and  Hartford,  Conn.,  removed  to  New  Al-
bany in  order  to  take  charge  of  an  academy,  and
in  September,  1839,  married  Franklin  Thurston,  a
merchant  of  that  place. She  contributed  to  news-

{>apers  and  magazines  over  the  signature  of  "  Yio-
a." Her  poems,  some  of  which  were  descriptive


of  nature  and  some  didactic,  were  highly  esteemed,
and  many  of  them  are  preserved  in  Rufus  W.  Gris-
wold's  and  other  collections  of  American  poetrv.

THURSTON,  Robert  Lawton,  mechanical* en-
gineer, b.  in  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  13  Dec,  1800 ;  d.
in  Providence,  R.  I.,  13  Jan.,  1874.  He  early  de-
veloped talent  as  a  mechanic,  and  on  attaining  his
majority  began  to  learn  the  trade  of  a  machinist.
His  skill  attracted  the  attention  of  John  Babcock,
who  invited  his  assistance  in  the  manufacture  of
an  experimental  steam-engine  which  was  placed
in  a  small  ferry-boat  for  use  near  Fall  River.  Its
success  led  to  the  construction  of  engines  for  the
"  Rushlight "  and  the  "  Babcock,"  which  ran  be-
tween Providence  and  New  York.  He  then  en-
tered the  iron  business  in  Fall  River,  but  in  1830
returned  to  Providence,  where,  with  the  son  of
John  Babcock,  he  founded  in  1834  the  first  steam-
engine  building  establishment  in  New  England,
known  as  the  Providence  steam-engine  company.
They  purchased  the  Sickles  patent  for  the  "  drop
cut-off"  for  steam-engines,  and  were  the  first  either
in  America  or  in  Europe  to  manufacture  a  stand-
ard form  of  expansion  steam-engine.  For  a  series
of  years  they  were  engaged  in  litigation  with  George
H.  Corliss,  against  whom  they  brought  suit  for  in-
fringement of  the  Sickles  patent.  This  case,  which
was  one  of  the  most  noted  patent  suits  that  was
ever  tried,  called  for  the  services  of  several  of  the
most  eminent  lawyers  and  mechanical  experts  of
the  time.  The  Greene  engine,  which  they  intro-
duced, is  now  claimed  by  many  engineers  to  be
one  of  the  best  of  modern  steam-engines.  In  1863
the  unsettled  condition  of  affairs  resulting  from
the  civil  war,  with  incidental  lack  of  business,  led
to  Mr.  Thurston's  withdrawal. — His  son,  Robert
Henry,  mechanical  engineer,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  25  Oct.,  1839,  received  his  early  training  in
the  workshops  of  his  father  and  was  graduated  in
the  scientific  course  at  Brown  in  1859.  After  two
years'  experience  with  his  father's  company,  he  en-
tered the  U.  S.  navy  as  third  assistant  engineer,
and  served  on  various  vessels  during  the  civil  war.
He  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Port  Royal  and  at
the  siege  of  Charleston,  and  was  attached  to  the
North  and  South  Atlantic  squadrons  until  1865,
when  he  was  detailed  as  assistant  professor  of  natu-
ral and  experimental  philosophy  at  the  U.  S.  na-
val academy  in  Annapolis,  where  he  also  lectured
on  chemistry.  In  1870  he  visited  Europe  for  the
purpose  of  studying  the  British  iron  manufactur-
ing districts,  and  on  1  April,  1872,  he  resigned
from  the  navy,  after  attaining  the  rank  of  1st  as-
sistant engineer.  Meanwhile,  in  1871,  he  had  been
called  to  the  chair  of  mechanical  engineering  at
the  Stevens  institute  of  technology,  where  he  re-
mained until  1885,  when  he  was  appointed  director
of  the  Sibley  college  of  Cornell  university  with  the
professorship  of  mechanical  engineering.  In  1871,
on  behalf  of  a  committee  of  the  American  insti-
tute, he  made  a  series  of  experiments  on  steam-
boilers,  in  whicih  for  the  first  time  all  losses  of  heat
were  noted,  and.  by  condensing  all  the  steam  that
was  generated,  the" quantity  of  water  "entrained  "
by  the  steam  was  measured.  Prof.  Thurston  was
appointed  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  commission  to
the  World's  fair  in  Vienna  in  1873.  and.  besides
serving  on  the  international  jury,  edited  the  "  Re-
ports of  the  United  States  Commissioners  to  the  In-
ternational Exhibition,  Vienna,  1873"  (4  vols.,
Washington,  1875-'6),  which  includes  his  own  spe-
cial "Report  on  Machinery  and  Manufactures."
He  was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  commission  on  the
causes  of  boiler-explosions,  and  of  the  U.  S.  board
to  test  iron,  steel,  and  other  metals. His  exten-


110


THURY


TICI1ENOR


sive  knowledge  of  matters  connected  with  mechan-
ical engineering  has  led  to  his  being  called  upon
frequently  to  testify  in  court  on  disputed  points  as
an  expert.  The  degree  of  doctor  of  engineering
was  conferred  on  him  by  Stevens  institute  of  tech-
nology in  1885,  and  he  is  a  regular,  honorary,  or
corresponding  member  of  various  scientific  and
technical  societies  at  home  and  abroad.  He  was
vice-president  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science  in  1877-'8  and  1884,  vice-
president  of  the  American  institute  of  mining  en-
gineers in  1878-9,  and  president  of  the  American
society  of  mechanical  engineers  in  1880-'3.  Prof.
Thurston  has  invented  a  magnesium  burning-lamp,
an  autographic-recording  testing-machine,  a  new
form  of  steam-engine  governor,  an  apparatus  for
determining  the  value  of  lubricants,  and  various
other  devices.  He  is  the  author  of  about  250  pa-
pers, including  contributions  to  "  The  Popular  Sci-
ence Monthly,"  "  Journal  of  the  Franklin  Institute,"
"Van  Nostrand's  Magazine,"  "Science,"  "The
Forum,"  and  like  periodicals,  and  addresses  before
scientific  and  other  societies.  His  books  are  "  His-
tory of  the  Growth  of  the  Steam-Engine "  (New
York,  1878) ;  "  Friction  and  Lubrication  "  (1879) ;
"Materials  of  Engineering"  (3  vols.,  1884-'6);
"  Friction  and  Lost  Work  in  Machinery  and  Mill
Work "  (1884) ;  "  Text-Book  of  the  Materials  of
Construction  "  (1885) :  "  Stationary  Steam-Engines
for  Electric  Lighting  Purposes  "  (1884) ;  "  Steam-
Boiler  Explosions  in  Theory  and  in  Practice"
(1887);  and  "A  Manual  of  Steam  Boilers:  their
Design,  Construction,  and  Management "  (1888).

THURY,  Pierre  (tu-ry),  French  missionary,  b.
in  BayeiiXj  France,  about  1650 ;  d.  in  the  Penob-
scot mission.  Me.,  or  in  Nova  Scotia,  3  June,  1699.
He  studied  for  the  priesthood  in  France,  and,  hav-
ing volunteered  for  the  American  missions,  went
to  Quebec,  where  he  was  ordained  on  21  Dec,  1677.
In  1684  he  was  sent  by  Bishop  Laval  to  labor
among  the  Indians  of  Acadia.  After  devoting  a
year  to  the  exploration  of  the  country,  he  founded
the  mission  of  St.  Croix  in  1685.  In  1688  he  was
transferred  to  the  Penobscot,  where  he  gathered
together  an  Indian  colony  at  Panawaniske.  His
converts  became  noted  for  the  fervor  of  their  piety
and  devotion  to  the  French,  and  in  1689  did  the
latter  good  service  at  the  attack  on  Fort  Pemaquid.
He  prepared  prayers  and  hymns  for  their  use  in
the  Abnaki  language.  He  was  afterward  sent  to
instruct  the  Indians  of  Nova  Scotia.  He  returned
to  Maine  and  died  there,  according  to  some  ac-
counts, but  others  assert  that  he  spent  the  rest
of  his  life  in  Nova  Scotia.  See  John  G.  Shea's
"American  Catholic  Missions"  (New  York,  1854);
Shea's  "  The  Church  in  the  Colonies "  (1887) ;  and
Diereville's  "  Voyage  "  (Paris,  1708).

THWAITES,  Reuben  Gold,  antiquary,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  15  May,  1853.  In  1866  he  removed
to  Oshkosh,  Wis.,  where  he  studied  in  the  intervals
of  farm-work,  and,  after  teaching  for  a  year,  be-
came editor  of  a  newspaper  in  1872.  Subsequently
he  took  a  post-graduate  course  at  Yale.  From
1877  till  1886  he  was  connected  with  the  "  Wiscon-
sin State  Journal "  as  associate  and  afterward  as
managing  editor,  and  conducted  a  news  bureau  at
Madison.  Having  given  much  attention  to  the
study  of  western  history,  especially  that  of  Wis-
consin, he  was  elected  in  1887  corresponding  secre-
tary of  the  Wisconsin  historical  society,  and  editor
of  its  publications.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Historic
Waterways:  Six  Hundred  Miles  of  Canoeing  down
Rock,  Fox,  and  Wisconsin  Rivers"  (Chicago,  1888).

THWING,  Charles  Franklin  (twing),  clergy-
man, b.  in  New  Sharon,  Me.,  9  Nov.,  1853. He  was


graduated  at  Harvard  in  1876  and  at  Andover  theo-
logical seminary  in  1879,  and  was  pastor  of  a  Congre-
gational church  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  till  1886.  when
he  took  charge  of  the  Plymouth  church  in  Minneap-
olis, Minn.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Chicago  theological  seminary  in  1888.  Dr.  Thwing,
who  is  associate  editor  of  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra,"
has  been  a  contributor  to  magazines,  and  has  pub-
lished many  sermons,  and,  in  book-form,  "  Ameri-
can Colleges :  their  Students  and  Work "  (New
York,  1878);  "Reading  of  Books:  its  Pleasures,
Profits,  and  Perils"  (Boston,  1883) ;  in  collaboration
with  Mrs.  Carrie  F.  Butler-Thwing,  "  The  Familv :
an  Historical  and  Social  Study  "  (1886) ;  and  "  The
Working  Church"  (New  York,  1888).

T1BBITS,  George,  merchant,  b.  in  Warwick,
R.  I.,  14  Jan.,  1763;  d.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  19  July,
1849.  He  established  himself  in  business  at  Lan-
singburg,  N.  Y.,  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  and  in
1797  removed  to  Troy.  He  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  in  1800,  and  two  years  later  was
elected  to  congress,  serving  from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till
3  March,  1805.  From  1815  till  1818  he  sat  in  the
state  senate,  and  he  was  the  author  of  the  financial
plan  that  was  adopted  for  raising  means  to  build
the  Erie  canal.  In  1816  he  was  defeated  as  the
Federalist  candidate  for  lieutenant-governor.  In
1824  he  was  a  member  of  a  commission  on  state
prisons  which  reported  in  favor  of  the  Auburn  sys-
tem, and  during  the  next  five  years  he  acted  on  the
commission  that  had  charge  of  the  construction
of  Sing  Sing  prison,  and  remedied  abuses  in  the
management  of  penitentiaries.  From  1830  till  1836
he  was  mayor  of  Troy.  He  delivered  addresses  on
agricultural  subjects,  and  was  one  of  the  earliest
American  advocates  of  the  economical  policy  of
protection  in  essays  that  appeared  in  the  Philadel-

Bhia  "Inquirer"  over  the  signature  of  "Cato."
[e  published  also  "Memoir  on  Home  Markets"
(Philadelphia,  1827)  and  "Finances  of  the  Canal
Fund  of  the  State  of  New  York  Examined  "  (Al-
bany, 1829).  —  His  grandson,  William  Badger,
soldier,  b.  in  Hoosick,  N.  Y.,  31  March,  1837;  d.  in
Troy,  N.  Y.,  10  Feb.,  1880,  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1859,  began  the  study  of  law,  and  engaged  in
manufacturing.  At  President  Lincoln's  first  call
for  troops  he  recruited  a  company,  and  was  mus-
tered into  the  service  as  captain  on  14  May,  1861.
He  was  engaged  at  Big  Bethel,  Fair  Oaks,  Malvern
Hill,  Bristow  Station,  and  the  second  battle  of  Bull
Run,  was  promoted  major  of  the  2d  New  York  vol-
unteer infantry  on  13  Oct.,  1862,  participated  in
the  battles  of  Fredericksburg  and  Chancellorsville,
and,  when  his  term  of  service  expired,  raised  a  regi-
ment that  was  called  the  Griswold  light  cavalry,  of
which  he  was  made  colonel,  his  commission  dating
from  20  Nov.,  1863.  He  served  under  Gen.  Julius
Stahel,  first  encountering  the  enemy  at  New  Mar-
ket on  15  May,  1864.  He  was  present  at  Piedmont
on  5  June,  was  constantly  engaged  during  the
following  three  months,  taking  part  in  numerous
actions,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  on  17  Nov.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he
was  ordered  to  the  west  with  his  command.  He
was  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers  on  13
March,  1865,  commissioned  as  brigadier-general  on
18  Oct.,  1865,  and  mustered  out  on  15  Jan.,  1866,
returning  to  Troy  with  health  impaired  by  injuries
received  in  the  service.

TICHENOR,  Isaac,  jurist,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
8  Feb.,  1754 ;  d.  in  Bennington,  Vt,  11  Dec,  1838.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1775,  began  the
study  of  law  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1777
was  appointed  assistant  commissary-general  and
stationed  at  Bennington. He  remained  there,  was


TICKNOR


TICKNOR


111


admitted  to  the  bar,  practised  law,  and  took  an
active  part  in  public  affairs,  serving  as  a  member
of  the  Vermont  house  of  representatives  in  1781-'4,
agent  of  the  state  to  congress  in  1782,  a  state  coun-
cillor in  1787-'92,  a  commissioner  for  the  arrange-
ment of  the  territorial  dispute  with  New  York  in
1791,  and  a  member  of  the  state  board  of  censors
from  1792  till  1813.  In  1791  he  was  appointed  a
judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Vermont,  becoming
chief  justice  in  1795.  In  the  following  year  he  re-
signed to  take  his  seat  in  the  United  States  senate
on  6  Dec,  1796.  He  was  elected  governor  of  Ver-
mont, retiring  from  the  senate  on  10  Nov..  1797,
and  was  continued  in  that  office  by  re-election  till
1807.  In  1808  he  was  again  elected  governor  and
served  one  more  term.  In  1815  he  was  sent  to  the
United  States  senate  a  second  time,  taking  his  seat
on  4  Dec.  of  that  year  and  serving  till  3  March,
1821.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Dartmouth  in  1789.

TICKNOR,  Caleb  B.,  physician,  b.  in  Salisbury,
Conn.,  in  1805  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  19  Sept.,  1840,
He  was  educated  for  his  profession  in  the  Berk-
shire medical  institution,  and  adopted  the  homoeo-
pathic system  of  medicine.  In  addition  to  many
medical  papers,  he  published  "  The  Philosophy  of
Living,  or  the  Way  to  Enjoy  Life  and  its  Comforts  "
(New  York,  1836) ;  "  Popular  Treatise  on  Medical
Philosophy "  (Andover,  1838) ;  and  "  Guide  to
Mothers  and  Nurses  "  (1839). — His  brother,  Bena-
jah,  also  studied  medicine,  and  was  a  surgeon  in
the  U.  S.  navy  from  10  July,  1824,  till  his  death,
which  occurred  20  Sept.,  1857.

TICKNOR,  Elisha,  educator,  b.  in  Lebanon,
Conn.,  25  March,  1757;  d.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  22
June,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1783,  and  was  connected  with  various  schools,  be-
coming in  1788  head  master  of  Franklin  grammar-
school,  Boston.  After  filling  this  post  for  several
years,  he  resigned  on  account  of  his  health.  He
made  one  of  the  earliest  efforts  to  improve  female
education  in  Massachusetts,  and  originated  the
scheme  for  primary  schools  in  Boston,  proposing
them  at  a  town-meeting  in  1818.  He  became  a
successful  merchant  in  Boston,  and  founded  the
first  insurance  company  and  the  first  savings-bank
in  the  city.  In  1818  he  presented  a  plan  to  pre-
vent the  causes  and  perfect  the  cure  of  pauperism
in  Boston. — His  son,  George,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1791 ;  d.  there,  26  Jan.,  1871.  From
a  very  early  age  he
showed  a  passion  for
reading,  which,  under
the  judicious  nurture
that  he  received  at
home,  became  still
stronger  as  he  grew  in
years.  While  yet  a
boy  he  passed  his  ex-
amination for  admis-
sion into  Dartmouth,
where  he  took  his  de-
gree in  1807.  On  re-
turning home  he  gave
three  years  more  to
his favorite studies.

When  he  was  nineteen

\^r  h?  r~«.  years  old,  Mr.  Ticknor
.  O  vQ/tVvAcnQ  entered  the  office  of  a
lawyer  in  Boston,  and
after  the  usual  term  of  preparation  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1813.  But  he  was  satisfied  that  his
vocation,  or  at  least  his  taste,  lay  in  the  direction
of  letters  rather  than  of  law.  His  father's  circum-
stances were,  fortunately,  such  as  to  enable  the


young  student  to  consult  his  taste  in  the  selection
of  his  profession.  In  1815  he  went  to  Europe  for
study.  Two  years  he  passed  at  Gottingen,  attend-
ing the  lectures  of  the  university  and  devoting
himself  to  philological  studies,  especially  to  the
ancient  classics.  Two  years  longer  he  remained
in  Europe,  chiefly  on  the  continent,  passing  most
of  his  time  in  the  capitals,  as  affording  obvious
advantages  for  a  critical  study  of  the  national
literatures.  During  his  absence  he  was,  in  1817,
appointed  to  fill  the  chair  of  modern  languages
and  literature  in  Harvard.  In  1819  he  returned
to  the  United  States,  bringing  with  him  a  valu-
able library.  This  in  time  grew  to  be  one  of  the
largest  private  collections  in  the  country,  and,  for
the  rarity  and  importance  of  the  books,  was  unsur-
passed, in  some  of  its  departments.  This  is  espe-
cially true  of  the  collection  of  Spanish  literature,
which  rivalled  the  best  private  ones  in  Europe.
Mr.  Ticknor,  during  his  connection  with  the  univer-
sity, gave  long  and  elaborate  courses  of  lectures  on
French  and  Spanish  literature.  He  also  entered
into  a  critical  analysis  of  such  writers  as  Dante.
Goethe,  Milton,  and  Shakespeare.  The  audience  of
the  lectures,  instead  of  being  confined  to  students,
was  increased  by  persons  without  the  walls  of  the
college,  who  were  attracted  not  merely  by  the  in-
terest of  the  subject,  but  by  the  skill  of  the  critic,
his  luminous  and  often  eloquent  diction,  and  his
impressive  delivery.  After  holding  his  office  for
fifteen  years,  Mr.  Ticknor  resigned  it  in  1835,  pre-
paratory to  another  visit  to  Europe,  where  he  pro-
posed to  spend  several  years  with  his  family.  His
labors  had  been  attended  with  signal  benefit  to
the  university.  He  was  the  first  professor  on  the
Smith  foundation,  and  the  duty  devolved  on  him
of  giving  a  complete  organization  to  the  depart-
ment, which  includes  several  teachers.  Moreover,
during  his  connection  with  Harvard,  he  suggested
valuable  improvements  in  the  system  of  discipline,
for  which  he  had  derived  the  hints  from  the  Ger-
man universities.  Finally,  he  had  greatly  extend-
ed the  range  of  intellectual  culture  among  the
students  at  the  university,  where  literary  instruc-
tion had  hitherto  been  confined  to  the  classics.
Mr.  Ticknor  was  a  founder  of  the  Boston  public
library,  and  president  of  its  board  of  trustees  in
1864-'6,  and  gave  to  it  his  Spanish  library.  Mr.
Ticknor  spent  three  years  in  his  second  visit  to
Europe,  and  after  his  return  set  about  the  prepa-
ration of  his  great  work.  At  the  close  of  1849  the
"  History  of  Spanish  Literature  "  made  its  appear-
ance in  England  and  the  United  States.  Hum-
boldt, in  a  letter  dated  19  June,  1850,  shortly  after
its  publication,  pronounced  its  panegyric  in  a  sin-
gle sentence,  declaring  it  "  a  masterly  work."  The
judgment  of  the  illustrious  German  was  speedily
confirmed  both  in  Europe  and  in  this  country.
The  nature  of  the  subject,  it  might  be  thought,
would  have  restricted  the  demand  for  the  book  to
a  comparatively  small  number  of  readers.  But
the  extent  of  the  sales  proved  the  contrary,  con-
firming the  remark  of  the  "Edinburgh  Keview"
(October,  1850),  that,  perhaps  of  all  compositions  of
the  kind,  Mr.  Ticknor's  work  has  the  most  success-
fully combined  popularity  of  style  with  sound
criticism  and  extensive  research  within  its  own
department.  The  edition  that  was  published  in
England  met  with  the  most  cordial  reception  from
the  scholars  of  that  country,  while  in  Germany
and  in  Spain  translations  soon  appeared,  under  the
auspices  of  eminent  men  of  letters,  who  have  added
to  the  value  of  their  labors  by  their  own  annota-
tions. Although  purporting  to  be  simply  a  history
of  literature,  the  work  exhibits  vividly  the  social


112


TICKXOR


TIDBALL


civilization  of  the  peninsula;  and,  independently
of  its  stores  of  bibliographical  information  for  the
use  of  the  scholar,  it  will  be  no  less  serviceable
to  the  student  of  history  who  would  acquaint
himself  with  the  character  and  condition  of  the
Spaniard,  and  see  in  what  manner  they  have  been
affected  by  the  peculiar  institutions  of  the  country.
The  first  edition  of  the  "  History  of  Spanish  Litera-
ture" (3  vols.,  New  York  and*  London,  1849)  was
followed  by  a  second  (3  vols.,  1854)  and  by  a  third
American  edition,  corrected  and  enlarged  (3  vols.,
Boston,  1863).  A  fourth  edition,  containing  Mr.
Ticknor's  last  revisions,  has  appeared  since  his
death.  To  these  are  to  be  added  the  following
translations :  "  Historia  de  la  Literatura  Espa-
fiola,  por  M.  G.  Ticknor;  traducida  al  Castellano,
con  Adiciones  y  Notas  criticas,  por  Don  Pascual  de
Gayangos  y  Don  Enrique  de  Vedia"  (4  vols.,  Mad-
rid, 1851-'7);  *'  Geschichte  der  schonen  Literatur
in  Spanien,  von  Georg  Ticknor ;  Deutsch  mit
Zusatzen,  herausgegeben  von  Nicholaus  Heinrich
Julius"  (2  vols.,  Leipsic,  1852).  Mr.  Ticknor's
great  work  was  preceded  by  several  minor  publica-
tions, including  "Syllabus  of  a  Course  of  Lectures
on  the  History  and  Criticism  of  Spanish  Litera-
ture "  (Cambridge,  1823) ;  "  Outline  of  the  Principal
Events  in  the  Life  of  General  Lafayette  "  (Boston,
1825 ;  London,  1826 ;  in  French,  Paris,  1825) ;  "  Re-
marks on  Changes  lately  proposed  or  adopted
in  Harvard  University "  (Cambridge,  1825);  "Re-
port of  the  Board  of  Visitors  on  the  United  States
Military  Academy  at  West  Point  for  1826  " ;  "  The
Remains  of  Nathan  Appleton  Haven,  with  a  Me-
moir of  his  Life  "  (1827) ;  and  other  publications.
He  also  published  a  "Life  of  William  Hickling
Prescott  (Boston,  1864).  See  his  "  Life,  Letters,
and  Journals"  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1876).

TICKNOR,  George,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  14  April,  1822 :  d.  in  Keene,  N.  H.,  25  Dec,
1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1847,
studied  law  in  Franklin,  N.  H.,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1850,  and  began  practice  in  Hanover,
but  in  the  following  year  removed  to  Claremont.
He  was  solicitor  for  Sullivan  county  from  1855  till
1859,  and  about  1860  settled  in  Keene  and  pur-
chased a  large  interest  in  the  "New  Hampshire
Sentinel,"  which  he  edited  during  the  remainder
of  his  days.  He  published  "Gazetteer  and  Bio-
graphical Sketches  of  New  Hampshire."

TICKNOR,  William  Davis,  publisher,  b.  in
Lebanon,  N.  H.,  6  Aug.,  1810 :  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  10  April,  1864.  In  youth  he  was  employed  in
the  office  of  his  uncle,  Benjamin,  a  money-broker,
and  he  afterward  became  teller  in  the  old  Colum-
bian bank  of  Boston.  He  began  the  business  of  a
Sublisher  in  Boston  in  1832,  in  connection  with
ohn  Allen,  under  the  firm-name  of  Allen  and
Ticknor,  successors  of  the  old  publishing-house  of
Carter,  Hendee,  and  Co.  In  the  following  year  Mr.
Allen  retired,  leaving  Mr.  Ticknor  to  carry  on  the
business  for  twelve  years.  This  he  did  under  his
own  name,  which  will  be  found  on  the  title-pages
of  the  early  American  editions  of  Tennyson  and
many  New  England  authors.  In  1845  John  Reed
and  James  T.  Fields  became  his  partners,  and  the
imprint  was  changed  to  Ticknor,  Reed,  and  Fields,
but  the  legal  firm-name  remained  William  D.
Ticknor  and  Co.  during  Mr.  Ticknor's  lifetime.
On  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Reed,  in  1854,  the  style
became  Ticknor  and  Fields,  continuing  as  such  for
about  ten  years.  During  this  period  the  last-named
firm  purchased  and  continued  to  publish  the  "At-
lantic Monthly"  and  the  "North  American  Re-
view." On  the  death  of  Mr.  Ticknor  his  interest
was  continued  in  behalf  of  his  son,  Howard  M.,  and


James  R.  Osgood.  Among  the  important  events
of  this  epoch  were  the  establishment  of  "Our
Young  Folks  "  (1864),  edited  by  Howard  M.  Tick-
nor, and  of  "Every  Saturday"  (1866),  edited  by
Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich.  In  1868  the  younger
Ticknor  retired,  and  a  new  copartnership  was
formed  among  the  other  members,  under  the  firm-
name  of  Fields,  Osgood,  and  Co.  In  1870  Benja-
min H.  Tick-
nor was  ad-
mitted, and
in  1871  Mr.
Fields  with-
drew, when
the  firm  be-
came James
R.Osgood and
Co.  In  1885
it  became
Ticknor  and
Co.,  consist-
ing of  Benja-
min H.  and
Thomas B.

Ticknor  and  George  F.  Godfrey.  From  the  be-
ginning the  publications  of  the  house  were  char-
acterized by  intrinsic  merit  and  by  the  neatness
and  correctness  of  their  typography.  The  interests
of  American  writers  met  with  unusual  considera-
tion, and  it  became  a  mark  of  distinction  for  young
writers  to  have  secured  them  as  publishers.  Will-
iam D.  Ticknor  was  one  of  the  first  of  American
publishers  to  make  payment  for  the  works  of  for-
eign authors,  beginning  with  £100  to  Tennyson  in
1842.  The  house  always  continued  this  custom,
and  it  is  probably  not  too  much  to  say  that  its  ex-
ample did  more  than  any  other  one  thing  to  estab-
lish a  principle  that  is  now  so  generally  recognized
and  acted  upon.  For  three  decades  the  curtained
office  of  their  establishment  in  the  quaint  old  build-
ing at  the  corner  of  Washington  and  School  streets,
seen  in  the  illustration,  was  the  resort  of  Dickens,
Emerson,  Hawthorne,  Holmes,  Longfellow,  Lowell,
Sumner,  Thackeray,  Whipple,  and  Whittier.  This
building  (the  oldest  but  one  now  standing  in  Bos-
ton), one  of  the  landmarks  of  the  city,  was  built
immediately  after  the  great  fire  of  1711,  and  was
occupied  for  various  domestic  and  mercantile  pur-
poses, at  one  time  being  an  apothecary-shop  kept
by  the  father  of  James  Freeman  Clarke,  until  in
1828  it  became  the  book-store  of  Carter,  Hendee,
and  Co.,  from  whom  it  passed  to  Allen  and  Tick-
nor. It  remained  in  the  hands  of  William  D.
Ticknor  and  his  immediate  successors  until  1866,
when  increasing  business  required  their  removal  to
Tremont  street ;  but  it  is  still  a  book-store.

TIDBALL,  John  Caldwell,  soldier,  b.  in  Ohio
county.  Va.  (now  W.  Va.),  25  Jan.,  1825.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1848,
being  assigned  to  the  3d  artillery.  He  served  at
the  various  stations  of  his  regiment  until  1861,
when,  having  attained  the  rank  of  captain,  he  was
placed  in  command  of  a  battery,  and  engaged  in
the  principal  actions  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
from  the  battle  of  Bull  Run  until  and  including
the  battle  of  Gettysburg  in  1863.  During  the  lat-
ter part  of  the  campaign  in  Pennsylvania  Capt.
Tidball  commanded  a  brigade  of  horse  artillery.
He  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  4th  New  York
volunteer  artillery,  28  Aug.,  1863,  and  commanded
the  artillery  of  the  2d  corps  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  during  the  Richmond  campaign,  includ-
ing the  battles  of  the  Wilderness  and  the  siege  of
Petersburg.  He  was  commandant  of  cadets  at
West  Point  from  10  July  till  22  Sept.,  1864,  and


TIEBOUT


TIFFANY


113


led  the  artillery  of  the  9th  corps  from  9  Oct.,  1864,
till  2  April,  1865,  in  the  operations  that  terminated
in  the  surrender  of  Lee  at  Appomattox.  After  he
was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service  he  com-
manded his  battery  at  the  presidio  of  San  Fran-
cisco until  his  promotion  in  February,  1867,  to
major  of  the  2d  artillery,  thence  serving  in  com-
mand of  the  district  of  Astoria  and  Alaska,  and
the  post  of  Raleigh,  N.  C,  and  as  superintendent
of  artillery  instruction  at  the  U.  S.  artillery-school
at  Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  till  January.  1880.  He  was
then  appointed  aide-de-camp  to  the  general  of  the
army,  with  rank  of  colonel,  serving  until  8  Feb.,
1884.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d  ar-
tillery, 30  June,  1882,  and  colonel  of  the  1st  artil-
lery, 22  March,  1885,  and  has  commanded  the  ar-
tillery-school and  post  of  Fort  Monroe  since  1  Nov.,
1883.  In  1889  he  will  be  retired  from  active  service.
He  has  received  the  brevets  of  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  for  gallant  and  distinguished  services
at  Spottsylvania,  major-general  of  volunteers  for
services  at  Fort  Sedgwick,  major  in  the  regular
army  for  Gaines's  Mills,  lieutenant-colonel  for  An-
tietam,  colonel  for  gallantry  at  Fort  Stedman,  and
brigadier-general,  13  March,  1865,  for  gallant  and
meritorious  services  during  the  rebellion.  Gen.
Tidball  is  the  author  of  a  "  Manual  of  Heavy  Ar-
tillery Service "  which  has  been  adopted  by  the
war  department  (Washington,  1880).

TIEBOUT,  Cornelius,  engraver,  b.  in  New
York  in  1777 ;  d.  in  Kentucky  about  1830.  At  an
early  age  he  exhibited  a  taste  for  drawing,  and
while  an  apprentice  with  a  silver-smith  made  some
attempts  at  engraving  on  copper.  In  1794  he  en-
graved several  heads  for  William  Duidap's  "  Ger-
man Theatre."  The  next  year  he  went  to  London
to  receive  instruction  in  the  art  from  James  Heath,
being  the  first  American  to  go  abroad  to  study
engraving,  and  returned  at  the  end  of  two  years
very  much  improved.  He  chose  Philadelphia  for
his  residence,  and  there  he  published  his  chief
works.  He  worked  in  the  stipple  or  chalk  man-
ner, and  was  an  artist  of  no  mean  merit.  Among
his  folio  plates  are  portraits  of  Washington,  Gen.
Horatio  Gates,  John  Jay,  and  Bishop  White,  after
Gilbert  Stuart ;  and  Thomas  Jefferson,  after  Rem-
brandt Peale.  After  accumulating  some  property,
Tiebout  engaged  in  business  ventures  for  which
he  was  not  fitted  by  experience  or  education,  and
lost  all. He  then  removed  to  Kentucky.

TIERNAN,  Luke,  merchant,  b.  in  County
Meath,  Ireland,  in  1757 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  10
Nov.,  1839.  He  came  in  1787  to  the  United  States,
and  settled  first  at  Hagerstown,  Md.,  but  soon  re-
moved to  Baltimore,  where  he  engaged  in  the
shipping  business,  being  the  first  in  that  city  to
engage  in  the  direct  trade  between  Baltimore  and
Liverpool.  He  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  pros-
perity of  his  adopted  city  and  in  politics.  He  was
a  Whig,  and  a  warm  personal  friend  of  Henry
Clay,  who  frequently  visited  his  house,  and  spoke
of  him  as  the  patriarch  of  the  Whig  party  in  Mary-
land. He  was  a  presidential  elector,  voting  for
John  Quincy  Adams  in  1824,  and  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  Hibernian  society  of  Maryland,  and  for
many  years  its  president.  In  1826-'7  he  was  one
of  a  committee  to  urge  upon  the  legislature  of
Maryland  the  incorporation  of  the  Baltimore  and
Ohio  railroad  company,  the  first  railroad  company
incorporated  in  this  country,  and  he  was  also  a
member  of  the  committee  of  the  Washington
monument  of  Baltimore.

TIFFANY,  Alexander  Ralston,  jurist,  b.  in
Niagara.  Upper  Canada,  16  Oct.,  1796;  d.  in  Pal-
myra, Mich.,  14  Jan.,  1868.  He  learned  the  print-
vol.  vi. — 8


er's  trade  in  the  office  of  the  "  Canadian  Constella-
tion." published  by  his  father,  Sylvester,  and  re-
moved with  him  to  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  previous
to  the  war  of  1812.  He  studied  law.  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  practised  at  Palmyra,  Wayne  co..
N.  Y.,  and  became  associate  judge  of  the  'county.
He  removed  to  Palmyra,  Mich.,  in  1832,  became
prosecuting  attorney  of  Lenawee  county  in  1834,
was  elected  judge  of  probate  in  1836  and  in  1840,
county  judge  of  Lenawee  county  in  1844,  re-elected
in  1848,  and  served  until  this  court  was  abolished
by  the  constitution  of  1850.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Constitutional  convention  of  1850,  and  of  the
legislature,  where  he  was  chairman  of  the  judiciary
committee  in  1855.  He  published  "The  Justice's
Guide"  (Detroit,  1855);  "Criminal  Law"  (1860);
and  "  Form-Book  for  Attorneys  in  Michigan"  (1860).
TIFFANY,  Charles  Louis,  jeweler,  b.  in  Kil-
lingly,  Conn.,  15  Feb.,  1812.  He  received  an  aca-
demic education,  and  then  entered  the  cotton-mill
of  his  father.  In  1837  he  came  to  New  York  city
without  means,  and  established  with  John  B.  Young
a  fancy-goods  and  stationery  store  at  259  Broad-
way. The  capital  for  the  enterprise,  $1,000,  was
lent  to  the
voung  men  by
Mr.  Tiffany's
father.  They
invested  their
money  in  va-
rious novel
goods,  in-
cluding Chi-
nese curiosi-
ties. Success
favored  the
new  house,
and  in  1841
the  firm  be-
came Tiffany,
Young,  and
Ellis,  by  the

admission  of  the  latter  as  a  partner.  During  the
same  year  Mr.  Young  was  sent  abroad  to  select
novelties  and  establish  closer  relations  with  Euro-
pean houses.  The  firm  moved  to  271  Broadway
in  1847,  and  then  began  the  manufacture  of  gold
jewelry.  During  the  disturbances  in  Europe  in
1848,  diamonds  declined  fifty  per  cent,  in  Paris,
and,  taking  advantage  of  this,  they  made  large
purchases.  In  1851  they  began  the  manufacture
of  sterling  silver  ware.  Various  changes  in  the
firm  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  a  Paris
branch,  and  the  firm-name  in  New  York  became
Tiffany  and  Co.  The  salesrooms  were  moved  to
550  Broadway  in  1851,  and  during  the  civil  war  a
large  business  was  carried  on  in  the  manufacture
of  swords  and  similar  articles.  At  the  World's
fair  in  Paris  in  1867  their  exhibit  received  the
first  award.  The  building  which  they  now  occupy
on  Union  square  was  erected  for  their  accommo-
dation in  1867,  and  the  firm  was  incorporated  as
a  stock  company  in  1868.  The  products  of  their
manufacture  received  the  highest  honors  at  the
World's  fairs  in  Philadelphia  in  1876,  and  again
in  Paris  in  1878.  Mr.  Tiffany  has  been  honored
with  testimonials  by  foreign  powers,  and  he  has
been  decorated  by  the  French  and  Russian  gov-
ernments. He  is  active  in  the  affairs  of  New
York  city,  and  is  a  liberal  patron  of  art.  His  resi-
dence, among  the  finest  in  the  country,  is  situ-
ated on  Madison  avenue  near  Central  park,  and
is  represented  in  the  accompanying  illustration.
—His  son.  Louis  Comfort,  artist,  b.  in  New
York,  18  Feb.,  1848,  studied  under  George  Inness.


114


TIFFANY


TILDEN


and  Samuel  Colman,  subsequently  under  Leon
Bailly  in  Paris,  and  during  five  years  travelled  and
sketched  in  Europe  and  Africa.  In  1870  he  be-
came a  member  of  the  Water-color  society ;  the
following  year  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the
National  academy,  and  he  became  an  academician
in  1880.  He  is  also  a  member  of  the  Society  of
American  artists.  Among  his  works  in  oil  are
" Fruit- Vender,  under  the  Sea- Wall  at  Nassau"
(1870);  "Market -Day,  Morlaix,"  and  "  Duane
Street,  New  York"  (1878);  and  "Bow-Zarea,  Al-
giers." His  water  -  colors  include  "  Meditation  "
(1872):  "Shop  in  Switzerland,"  "Old  and  New
Mosques  at  Cairo,"  and  "  Lazy  Life  in  the  East  "
(1876);  "  Algiers "  (1877) ;  and  "Cobblers  at  Bori-
farik "  (1878).  He  devotes  much  time  to  decora-
tive work,  and  has  furnished  many  cartoons  and
designs  for  windows  for  the  Tiffany  glass  company,
of  which  he  is  the  founder.  The  interior  work  of
his  father's  house  in  New  York  was  executed  under
his  supervision.

TIFFANY,  Osmond,  author,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  16  July,  1823.  He  was  educated  at  Baltimore
and  studied  at  Harvard  in  1840-'2,  but  was  not
graduated.  He  afterward  engaged  in  mercantile
and  literary  work,  was  ordnance  clerk  at  the  U.  S.
armory  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  in  1862-'3,  and  pay-
master's clerk  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  1863-'4,  and
has  been  custom-house  liquidating  clerk  at  Balti-
more since  1869.  He  has  contributed  to  periodi-
cals and  published  "The  Canton  Chinese,  or  the
Americans'  Sojourn  in  the  Celestial  Empire  "  (Bos-
ton, 1849) ;  "  Brandon,  a  Tale  of  the  American
Colonies  "  (New  York,  1851) ;  and  "  Sketch  of  the
Life  of  Gen.  Otho  H.  Williams  "  (Baltimore,  1851).
He  has  edited  "  Patriarchs  and  Prophets  of  Bibli-
cal Story  "  (Springfield,  Mass.,  I860).

TIFFIN,  Edward,  statesman,  b.  in  Carlisle,
England,  19  June,  1766 ;  d.  in  Chillicothe,  Ohio,
9  Aug.,  1829.  After  receiving  an  ordinary  Eng-
lish education,  he  began  the  study  of  medicine,
and  continued  it  after  his  removal  to  Charlestown,
Va.,  in  1784,  receiving  his  degree  at  the  University
;>f  Pennsylvania  in  1789.  In  the  same  year  he
married  Mary,  sister  of  Gov.  Thomas  Worthington.
In  1790  he  united  with  the  Methodist  church,  and
soon  afterward  he  became  a  local  preacher,  being
ordained  deacon,  by  Bishop  Asbury,  19  Nov.,  1792.
In  1796  he  removed  to  Chillicothe,  Ohio,  where  he
continued  both  to  preach  and  to  practise  medicine.
At  Deer  Creek,  twelve  miles  distant,  he  organized
a  flourishing  congregation,  long  before  that  part
of  the  country  was  visited  by  travelling  preachers.
In  1799  he  was  chosen  to  the  legislature  of  the
Northwest  territory,  of  which  he  was  elected
speaker,  and  in  1802  he  was  president  of  the  con-
vention that  formed  the  constitution  of  the  state
of  Ohio.  He  was  elected  the  first  governor  of  the
state  in  1803,  and  re-elected  two  years  later.  Dur-
ing his  second  term  he  arrested' the  expedition  of
Aaron  Burr,  near  Marietta,  Ohio.  After  the  ex-
piration of  his  service  he  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,
to  succeed  his  brother-in-law,  Thomas  Worthing-
ton. and  took  his  seat  in  December,  1807,  but  early
in  the  following,  year  his  wife  died,  and  on  3  March,
1809,  he  resigned  from  the  senate  and  retired  to
private  life.  Shortly  afterward  he  married  again,
and  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  serving  two
terms  as  speaker.  In  the  autumn  of  1810  he  re-
sumed the  practice  of  medicine  at  Chillicothe,  and
in  1812,  on  the  creation  by  act  of  congress  of  a  com-
missionership  of  the  general  land-office,  he  was
appointed  by  President  Madison  as  its  first  incum-
bent. He  removed  to  Washington,  organized  the
system  that  has  continued  in  the  land-office  till  the


present  time,  and  in  1814  was  active  in  the  removal
of  his  papers  to  Virginia,  whereby  the  entire  con-
tents of  his  office  were  saved  from  destruction  by
the  British.  Wishing  to  return  to  the  west,  he
proposed  to  Josiah  Meigs,  surveyor-general  of  pub-
lic lands  northwest  of  Ohio  river,  that  they  should
exchange  offices,  which  was  done,  after  the  con-
sent of  the  president  and  senate  had  been  obtained.
This  post  he  held  till  1  July,  1829,  when  he  re-
ceived, on  his  death-bed,  an  order  from  President
Jackson  to  deliver  the  office  to  a  successor.  Dr.
Tiffin  continued  to  preach  occasionally  in  his  later
years.  Three  of  his  sermons  were  published  in  the
"  Ohio  Conference  Offering  "  in  1851.  In  a  letter
of  introduction  to  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair,  Gen.
Washington  speaks  of  Dr.  Tiffin  as  being  "  very
familiar  with  law."

TILDEN,  ,  poet,  b.  in  1686 ;  d.  about

1766.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Tilden's  Miscellane-
ous Poems  on  Divers  Occasions,  chiefly  to  animate
and  rouse  the  Soldiers"  (1756).  This  little  volume
of  thirty  pages  was  one  of  the  first  of  the  produc-
tions that  were  written  with  a  view  to  stimulate
the  soldiers  in  the  French  war.  A  copy  of  this
rare  book  was  in  the  library  of  George  Ticknor,  of
Boston,  and  the  whole  of  it  appeared  in  the  New
York  "Historical  Magazine"  for  November  and
December,  1859,  and  January,  1860.

TILDEN,  Samuel  Jones,  statesman,  b.  in  New
Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  9  Feb.,  1814;  d.  at  his  country-
house,  Graystone,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  Aug.,
1886.  The  name  of  an  ancestor,  Nathaniel  Tilden
of  Tenterden,  yeoman,  and  that  of  Lydia,  his  wife,
with  seven  chil-
dren and  seven
servants,  head  the
list  of  "  such  per-
sons as  embarked
themselves  in  the
good  ship  called
the  '  Hercules,'
...  to  be  therein
transported  to  the
plantation  called
New  England  in
America,"  from
the  port  of  Sand-
wich, England,  in
March,  1634.  This
Nathaniel  Tilden
had  been  mayor
of  Tenterden,  as

had  been  his  uncle  John  before  him.  and  as  was  his
cousin  John  after  him.  He  settled  with  his  family
at  Scituate,  whence  the  second  generation  of  Til-
dens  migrated  to  Lebanon,  Conn.  To  Isaac  Til-
den, the  great-grandfather  of  Samuel  J.,  was  born
at  this  place,  in  1729,  a  son  named  John,  who  set-
tled in  what  was  afterward  called  New  Lebanon,
Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.  Samuel  J.'s  father,  Elam,  the
youngest  of  John  Tilden's  seven  children,  was  born
in  1781,  and  in  1802  married  Polly  Y.  Jones,  a  de-
scendant of  William  Jones,  lieutenant-governor  of
the  colony  of  New  Haven.  Eight  children  were
born  of  this  union,  of  whom  Samuel  J.  was  the  fifth.
The  boy  early  developed  great  activity  of  mind  and
a  remarkable  command  of  language.  His  father,
a  farmer,  who  also  carried  on  a  mercantile  business,
was  an  intimate  friend  of  Martin  Van  Buren,  and
the  political  controversy  of  the  time  was  part  of  the
very  atmosphere  of  the  Tilden  household.  In  his
eighteenth  year  Samuel  prepared  an  address,  which
was  adopted  as  a  party  manifesto  by  the  Demo-
crats, in  regard  to  the  issues  of  the  pending  state
election. In  the  same  year  he  entered  Yale  col-


(yLn^l  Q.jZo&zle^


TILDEN


TILDEN


115


lege,  but  almost  at  the  outset  his  studies  were
interrupted  by  feeble  health.  He  resumed  them
in  1834,  when  he  entered  the  University  of  New
York.  Here  he  completed  his  academic  educa-
tion, and  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  law.
While  in  college  he  wrote  a  series  of  papers  in
defence  of  President  Van  Buren's  policy  in  re-
gard to  the  United  States  bank.  He  made  a  more
elaborate  plea  for  the  independent  treasury  sys-
tem, as  opposed  to  the  union  of  bank  and  state,  in
a  speech  delivered  to  his  neighbors  at  New  Leban-
on in  October,  1840.

On  his  admission  to  the  bar,  Mr.  Tilden  began
practice  in  New  York  city,  but  continued  to  take
an  active  part  in  politics.  He  was  elected  to  the
assembly  in  1845,  and  while  there  was  chairman
of  a  committee  appointed  to  inquire  into  the  causes
of  the  anti-rent  disorders,  and  the  masterly  report
on  the  whole  subject  of  the  great  leasehold  estates
and  their  tenants  was  almost  entirely  his  work.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention
of  1846.  The  three  most  memorable  cases  in  which
he  was  employed  as  a  lawyer  were  the  trial  of  the
contested  election  of  his  friend,  Azariah  C.  Flagg,
as  comptroller  of  New  York  city,  the  opposition
on  the  part  of  the  heirs  of  the  murdered  Dr.  Bur-
dell  to  Mrs.  Cunningham's  application  for  letters
of  administration  on  his  estate,  and  the  defence  of
the  Pennsylvania  coal  company  to  the  claim  of  the
Delaware  and  Hudson  canal  company  for  payment
of  extra  tolls.  The  hearing  of  the  last-named  con-
sumed seventy  days,  and  Mr.  Tilden's  argument  in
the  case  was  a  marvel  of  analytical  ingenuity  and
constructive  ability.  Prom  1855,  more  than  half  of
the  great  railway  corporations  north  of  the  Ohio  and
between  the  Hudson  and  Missouri  rivers  were  at
some  time  clients  of  Mr.  Tilden's.  He  was  the
author  of  many  of  the  plans  of  reorganization
that  were  rendered  necessary  by  the  early  financial
necessities  of  these  companies.  He  took  part  in
the  Free-soil  revolt  within  the  Democratic  party
in  1848.  In  1851  he  made  a  strong  plea  for  respect
to  the  constitution  in  dealing  with  the  question
of  improvements  on  the  state  canals.  In  1855  he
was  the  candidate  for  attorney-general  on  the
ticket  of  the  "  Soft-Shell "  Democrats.  Through-
out the  civil  war  he  maintained  that  the  struggle
against  the  Confederacy  could  be  successfully
waged  without  resorting  to  extra-constitutional
modes  of  action.  By  1868  Mr.  Tilden  had  definite-
ly assumed  the  leadership  of  the  Democratic  party
in  New  York  state.  To  the  enactment  of  what
was  known  as  "  the  Tweed  charter  "  of  1870,  which
confirmed  the  control  of  a  corrupt  ring  over  the
government  and  revenues  of  New  York  city,  Mr.
Tilden  offered  the  most  determined  opposition.
To  the  side-partners  of  Tweed,  the  almost  equally
notorious  persons  who  were  engaged,  by  the  aid  of
courts,  in  plundering  the  stockholders  of  the  Erie
railway,  Mr.  Tilden  had  made  himself  similarly
obnoxious.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Bar
association,  which  was  an  organized  protest  against
the  perversion  of  the  machinery  of  justice  accom-
plished by  judges  George  G.  Barnard  and  Albert
Cardozo  and  their  allies.  In  the  impeachment
proceedings  against  these  judges  in  1872  Mr.  Til-
den's was  the  directing  mind,  and  it  was  mainly
for  this  purpose  that  he  agreed  to  serve  as  a  member
of  the  assembly.  On  the  exposure  of  the  methods
of  plunder  of  the  Tweed  ring,  which  was  made  in
the  columns  of  the  New  York  "  Times "  in  July,
1871,  Mr.  Tilden  undertook,  through  an  examina-
tion of  the  bank-accounts  of  the  chief  members  of
the  combination,  a  legal  demonstration  of  the  share
of  the  spoil  received  by  each,  and  the  tables  pre-


sented with  his  affidavit  furnished  the  basis  of  the
civil  and  criminal  proceedings  brought  against  the
ring  and  its  agents.  He  threw  all  his  energy  into
the  prosecution  of  suits  in  the  name  of  the  state


against  the  men  who  had  seized  the  machinery  of
local  justice,  and  he  resisted  successfully  the  efforts
of  the  ring  and  the  politicians  in  its  service  to  re-
tain their  hold  on  the  state  Democratic  organiza-
tion in  the  autumn  of  1871.  In  1874  he  was  the
Democratic  candidate  for  governor,  and  was  elect-
ed by  a  plurality  of  50,000  over  Gov.  John  A.  Dix.
His  special  message  to  the  legislature  on  the  ex-
travagance and  dishonesty  that  had  characterized
the  management  of  the  canals  made  a  deep  im-
pression. During  his  administration  the  new  capi-
tol  building  at  Albany  was  begun  (see  illustration),
which  has  cost  $17,000,000,  but  is  not  finished.

In  June,  1876,  the  National  Democratic  conven-
tion, assembled  at  St.  Louis,  nominated  him  for  the
presidency.  (For  an  account  of  the  election  and
its  results,  see  Hayes,  Rutherford  B.)  As  finally
declared,  the  electoral  vote  was  185  for  Mr.  Hayes
and  184  for  Mr.  Tilden.  The  popular  vote,  as
counted,  gave  Tilden  4,284.265  ;  Hayes,  4,033,295 ;
Cooper,  81,737 ;  Smith,  9,522.  Mr.  Tilden  was  op-
posed to  the  electoral  commission,  declaring  his
belief  in  "  the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  the  two
houses  to  count  the  electoral  votes  by  their  own
servants  and  under  such  instruction  as  they  might
deem  proper  to  give."  From  that  time  till  the  end
of  his  life  he  was  first  among  the  leaders  of  the
national  Democracy,  and  the  pressure  for  his  re-
nomination  in  1880  became  so  great  that  his  friends,
who  knew  his  fixed  determination  not  to  be  a  can-
didate, appealed  to  him  for  a  formal  announce-
ment of  his  resolution,  addressed  to  the  delegates
from  his  own  state.  Four  years  later  this  declara-
tion had  to  be  repeated.  His  last  important  con-
tribution to  the  history  of  his  time  was  a  commu-
nication addressed  to  John  G.  Carlisle,  speaker  of
the  house  of  representatives,  in  regard  to  the  ur-
gent necessity  of  liberal  appropriations  for  such  a
system  of  coast  defences  as  would  place  the  United
States  in  a  position  of  comparative  safety  against
naval  attack.  Under  the  provisions  of  Mr.  Til-
den's will,  the  greater  portion  of  his  fortune  (which
was  estimated  at  $5,000,000)  was  devoted  to  public
uses,  the  chief  of  which  was  the  establishment  and
endowment  in  the  city  of  New  York  of  a  free  pub-
lic library;  but  the  will  was  contested  by  his  rela-
tives, lie  never  married.  His  life  was  written
by  Theodore  P.  Cook  (New  York,  1876),  and  his
writings  edited  by  John  Bigelow  (2  vols.,  1885). —
Mr.  Tilden's  elder  brother,  Moses  Y.  (1812-76),


116


TILGHMAN


TILGHMAN


was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1869,  and  be-
came known  by  his  persistent  opposition  to  the
Tweed  ring.  With  his  brother  he  built  the  Lebanon
Springs  railroad.

TILGHMAN,  James,  lawyer,  b.at  the  Hermit-
age, his  family-seat,  on  Chester  river,  Bid.,  6  Dec,
1716;  d.  in  Chestertown,  Md.,  24  Aug.,  1793.  He
was  the  grandson  of  Richard  Tilghman,  an  eminent
surgeon  of  London,  who  was  one  of  those  that  peti-
tioned for  the  life  of  King  Charles  I.  and  who  emi-
grated to  Maryland  in  1660  and  settled  the  Hermit-
age, which  has  ever  since  remained  in  the  posses-
sion of  his  descendants.  James  studied  law  and
entered  on  its  practice  at  Annapolis,  Md.,  whence
he  removed  to  Philadelphia  about  1760.  He  was
asked  by  John  Penn  in  1765  to  become  secretary
of  the  land-office  of  Pennsylvania.  Stipulating
for  a  salary  of  £300  besides  certain  fees,  he  ac-
cepted the  post  and  held  it  until  the  Revolution.
He  was  chosen  a  common  councilman  of  Philadel-
phia in  1764,  and  in  1767  became  a  member  of  the
provincial  council,  which  office  he  also  held  until
the  Revolution.  At  its  beginning  his  views  were
liberal.  He  wished  a  repeal  of  the  obnoxious  acts
of  parliament,  and  thought  the  Boston  port  bill  an
outrage,  but  condemned  the  "Boston  tea-party,"
and  finally  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  loyalist.  On
the  approach  of  the  British  toward  Philadelphia,
he  among  others  was  placed  under  arrest  by  the
authorities  of  the  state  and  gave  his  parole.  Per-
mission was  granted  him,  31  Aug.,  1777.  to  visit
his  family  in  Maryland  and  return  within  a  month,
before  the  end  of  which  the  British  occupied  Phila-
delphia, so  he  remained  in  Maryland.  On  16  May,
1778.  he  was  discharged  from  parole. — James's
brother,  Matthew,  patriot,  b.  at  the  Hermitage,
Queen  Anne  county,  Md.,  17  Feb.,  1718;  d.  there,  4
May,  1790,  in  1741  married  his  cousin.  Anne  Lloyd,
and  was  commissioned  commander  of  a  troop  of
horse  for  protecting  the  outlying  settlements  from
the  Indians,  and  also  one  "  of  the  worshipful,  the
commissioners  and  justices  of  the  peace  for  Talbot
county."  He  was  elected  delegate  to  the  general
assembly  of  Maryland  in  1751,  and  continued  to  be
a  member  of  the  house  of  delegates  until  the  pro-
vincial government  was  superseded  by  the  state
organization.  5  Feb..  1777.  He  was  a  member  of
the  committee  that  was  appointed  in  May,  1768,
by  the  general  assembly  oi  Maryland  to  draft  an
address  to  the  king  protesting  against  the  stamp-
act. He  was  speaker  of  the  house  of  delegates  in

1 773-'5  and  presi-
dent of  the  Revo-
lutionary conven-
tion which  from
1774  till  1777  con-
trolled the  prov-
ince and  directed
its  government.
He  was  the  chair-
man of  the  com-
mittee on  cor-
respondence that
was  appointed  in
December,  1774,
and  of  the  coun-
cil of  safety  of
July,  1775,  and
/  * — 7^-— -^zZ  was  chairman  of

'^A>^2^ TO" delegation
~/  J that  was  sent  by

the  convention  of
Maryland  to  the  Continental  congress.  In  June,
1776,  he  was  summoned  from  his  seat  in  congress
to  attend  the  convention  at  Annapolis,  and  was


president  of  the  convention  that  framed  the  first
constitution  for  the  new  state  of  Maryland.  This
circumstance  alone  prevented  him  from  attaching
his  name  to  the  Declaration  of  Independence,
which  he  advocated  both  at  Philadelphia  and  at
Annapolis.  He  continued  to  represent  his  state
in  congress  until  1777.  when  he  resigned  to  accept
the  post  to  which  he  had  been  elected  as  senator
from  Talbot  county  in  the  senate  of  Maryland.
He  was  re-elected  in  1781,  but  resigned  before  his
term  had  expired.  His  wisdom,  courage,  purity
of  character,  and  ability  won  for  him  the  name
of  the  patriarch  of  Maryland,  and  his  influence
was  second  to  that  of  no  man  in  forming  the  in-
stitutions and  organizing  the  government  of  the
new  state.  By  his  contemporaries  he  was  consid-
ered one  of  the  firmest  and  ablest  advocates  of  civil
and  religious  liberty  of  his  time. — James's  son,
William,  jurist,  b.  in  Talbot  countv,  Md.,  12  Aug.,
1756;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  30  April*,  1827,  studied
law  under  Benjamin  Chew,  after  the  family  had
removed  to  Philadelphia,  and  was  admitted  to. the
Maryland  bar  in  1783  and  sat  in  the  legislature  for
several  years  after  1788.  He  began  to  practise  in
Philadelphia  in  1793.  was  appointed  chief  judge  of
the  U.  S.  circuit  court,  3  March,  1801,  but  resumed
practice  when  the  law  establishing  the  office  was
repealed  in  the  following  year.  In  July,  1805,  he
was  appointed  president  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  in  the  first  district,  and  in  February,  1806,  he
became  chief  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court.
He  was  elected  president  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society  in  1824.  By  direction  of  the  legis-
lature he  prepared  in  1809  a  report  of  the  English
statutes  in  force  in  Pennsylvania.  He  published
"  Eulogium  in  Commemoration  of  Dr.  Caspar  Wis-
tar,"  delivered  before  the  Philosophical  society  of
Philadelphia  (1818),  and  "Address  before  the
Philadelphia  Society  for  Promoting  Agriculture  "
(1820). — Another  son  of  James,  Tench,  soldier,
b.  in  Talbot  county,  Md.,  25  Dec,  1744;  d.  in  Bal-
timore, Md.,  18  April,  1786,  began  life  as  a  mer-
chant in  Philadelphia,  but  at  the  beginning  of
the  Revolution  became  lieutenant  in  a  company
from  Philadelphia  that  was  known  as  the  Ladies'
light  infantry.  He  was  appointed  secretary  and
treasurer  to  the  commission  that  was  sent  by  con-
gress, 13  July,  1775,  to  treat  with  the  Six  Nations
and  other  northern  Indians,  joined  the  army  under
Washington  early  in  1776  as  captain  of  a  company
of  infantry  from  Pennsylvania,  and  in  August,
1776,  became  military  secretary  and  aide  upon  the
commander-in-chief's  staff.  He  served  in  this  post
to  the  end  of  the  war,  participating  in  all  the
principal  battles,  in  which  the  army  was  engaged.
On  30  May,  1781,  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant-
colonel,  to  take  rank  from  1  April,  1777,  having,
with  great  delicacy,  declined  to  rank  from  an  ear-
lier date  to  which  he  was  entitled,  because  he
would  thereby  take  precedence  of  his  seniors  in  the
service.  On  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis  he  was
selected  by  Washington  to  bear  his  despatch  to
congress  announcing  that  event.  Leaving  York-
town,  19  Oct.,  he  reached  Philadelphia  at  midnight
on  23  Oct.,  when  his  news  that  "Cornwallis  is
taken  "  was  immediately  proclaimed  by  the  watch-
man. He  was  voted  the  thanks  of  congress,  a  sword,
and  a  horse  with  accoutrements,  for  this  service.
After  the  war  he  became  a  merchant  in  Baltimore.
He  married  Anna  Maria,  daughter  of  his  uncle
Matthew. — William's  cousin,  Edward,  lawyer,  b.
in  Wye,  Md.,  11  Dec,  1750;  d.  1  Nov.,  1815,  was
educated  in  Philadelphia  and  studied  in  the  Mid-
dle Temple,  London,  in  1772-'4.  He  was  for  many
years  a  successful  practitioner  at  the  Philadelphia


TILLEY


TILLEY


117


bar,  and  on  the  death  of  Chief-Justice  Edward
Shippen  the  office  was  tendered  to  him.  He  de-
clined it,  but.  recommended  for  the  office  his  kins-
man. William. — Matthew's  great-grandson,  Lloyd,
soldier,  b.  in  Talbot  county,  Md.,  in  1816;  d.  near
Vicksburg,  Miss.,  16  May,  1863,  entered  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  was  graduated  in  1836,  and  as-
signed to  the  1st  dragoons.  He  became  full  2d
lieutenant,  4  July.  1836,  but  resigned  on  30  Sept.
and  entered  on  the  business  of  a  civil  engineer.  He
was  division  engineer  of  the  Baltimore  and  Sus-
quehanna railroad  in  1836-7,  of  the  Norfolk  and
Wilmington  canal  in  1837-'8,  the  Eastern  Shore
railroad  of  Maryland  in  1838-'9.  and  the  Baltimore
and  Ohio  railroad  in  1839-'40.  He  served  in  the
war  with  Mexico  as  volunteer  aide  to  Gen.  David
E.  Twiggs  at  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca
de  la  Palma,  and  was  captain  of  the  Maryland  and
District  of  Columbia  battalion  of  volunteers  from
14  Aug.,  1847,  until  it  was  disbanded,  13  July,  1848.
He  then  served  as  principal  assistant  engineer  of
the  Panama  division  of  the  Isthmus  railroad,  and
was  engineer  on  southern  railroads  till  1859.  He
joined  the  Confederate  array  in  1861,  was  commis-
sioned brigadier-general  in  1862,  and  surrendered
at  Fort  Henry  in  February  of  that  year.  He  was
exchanged  in  July,  and  killed  at  the  battle  of
Champion  Hill. — Tench,  soldier,  great-grandson  of
James's  brother  Richard,  b.  in  Plimhimraon,  Talbot
co.,  Md.,  25  March.  1810:  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  22
Dec,  1874,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1832,  and  was  assigned  to  the  4th  artil-
lery, but  resigned,  30  Nov.,  1833,  and  was  a  farmer
at  Oxford,  Md.,  till  his  death.  He  was  brigadier-
general  of  Maryland  militia  in  1837-'60  and  major-
general  in  1860-'l,  state  commissioner  of  public
works  in  1841-51,  and  superintendent  of  the  mili-
tary department  of  the  Maryland  military  acade-
my, Oxford,  in  1847-'57.  In  1849-'50  he  was  U.  S.
consul  at  Mayaguez,  Porto  Rico.  He  projected  the
Maryland  and  Delaware  railroad,  was  unwearied  in
his  efforts  to  build  it,  and  served  as  its  president  in
1855-'61.  In  1858-'60  he  was  president  of  the  Na-
tional agricultural  society.  Gen.  Tilghman  was
for  many  years  at  the  head  of  the  Maryland  Society
of  the  Cincinnati,  and  at  his  death  he  was  also
treasurer-general  of  the  order  in  the  United  States.
From  1857  till  1860  he  was  collector  of  customs  for
the  port  of  Oxford,  Md. — His  kinsman,  Richard
Lloyd,  naval  officer,  great-grandson  of  James's
brother,  William,  b.  in  Kent  county,  Md.,  20  April,
1810;  d.  in  1867,  entered  the  IT.  S.  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman. 27  Oct.,  1830,  promoted  to  lieutenant,  8
Sept.,  1841,  and  during  the  Mexican  war  served
with  Com.  Robert  F.  Stockton  in  the  Pacific  in  the
"  Congress  "  and  "  Cyane,"  and  participating  in  the
conquest  of  California,  the  capture  of  Mazatian,
Guaymas,  and  La  Paz,  and  in  the  operations  inci-
dent to  these  victories.  He  commanded  the  brig
"  Perry"  on  the  Brazil  station  from  1857  till  1860,
during  the  Paraguayan  war.  He  returned  home
during  the  excitement  before  the  civil  war,  on  23
April,  1861,  resigned  from  the  navy,  and  died  soon
after  the  close  of  the  war.

TILLEY,  Jean  Le  Gardeur,  Chevalier  de,
French  naval  officer;  b.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  in
1740;  d.  in  Canada  after  1792.  His  family  were
Canadian  pioneers,  and  had  served  with  credit  in
the  wars  against  the  Iroquois  and  the  English.  A
Le  Gardeur  de  Tilley  was  a  missionary  among  the
Illinois  in  1660,  and  another  was  a  member  of  the
council  of  Bishop  Laval  Montmorency.  A  mem-
ber of  another  branch.  Le  Gardeur  de  Saint  Pierre
(q.  v.)  was  on  Ohio  river  in  1753.  Tilley  entered
the  navy  early  in  life  and  rose  rapidly  in  the  ser-


vice, being  a  commander  at  the  beginning  of  the
war  for  independence.  He  served  from  1778  till
1783  under  De  Guichen,  De  Grasse,  La  Motte-Pic-
quet  and  Vaudreuil,  and  commanded  in  a  cruise
along  the  Canadian  coast,  securing  many  prizes.
In  1781  he  was  in  command  of  the  squadron  that
pursued  Benedict  Arnold  in  Chesapeake  bay,  and
he  took  the  "  Romulus "  and  several  transports.
He  was  promoted  knight  of  Saint  Louis  and
brigadier-general  of  the  naval  forces  after  the  con-
clusion of  peace,  and  rose  afterward  to  the  rank  of
chef  d'escadre,  commanding  in  1789  the  squad-
ron at  Rochefort.  In  1791  he  left  France  and  re-
turned to  Canada,  where  he  died.

TILLEY,  Sir  Samuel  Leonard,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Gagetown,  Queen's  co.,  New  Bruns-
wick, 8  May,  1818.  His  father  was  Thomas  Mor-
gan Tilley,  and  his  grandfather,  Samuel,  was  a
loyalist,  who,  at  the
close  of  the  American
Re  volution,  left  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  and  settled
in  New  Brunswick,
becoming  a  grantee  of
the  city  of  St.  John.
The  family  is  of  Dutch
extraction.  Young
Tilley  was  educated  at
the  county  grammar-
school,  but  at  the  age
of  twelve  he  was
obliged  to  leave  his
home  and  seek  em-
ployment. He  went
to  St.  John  and  en-
tered a  drug-store  as  ^"^  /
an  apprentice.  After  (^y^^P^'y
duly  serving  his  time  v>
he  went  into  business
on  his  own  account  with  Thomas  W.  Peters.  He
joined  a  debating  society,  and  became  a  warm  and
uncompromising  exponent  of  the  temperance  cause.
Throughout  his  life  he  has  remained  a  total  ab-
stainer. In  1849  Mr.  Tillev's  name  first  appears  in
connection  with  the  politics  of  his  native  province,
when,  espousing  the  side  of  the  protectionists  of
that  day,  he  nominated  and  aided  in  electing  a
candidate  for  the  legislature.  Toward  the  close
of  the  year  he  took  an  active  part  in  forming  the
New  Brunswick  railway  league,  which  had  for  its
object  the  construction  of  a  line  of  railway  from
St.  John  to  Shediac.  At  the  general  election  of
1850  he  was  nominated  a  candidate  for  St.  John
in  the  reform  interest.  In  June  he  was  elected  to
a  seat  in  the  house  of  assembly.  In  1851,  however,
the  Liberals  experienced  a  serious  reverse,  two  of
the  leading  members  of  their  party  having  desert-
ed to  the  other  side.  Mr.  Tilley  and  two  of  his
friends  resigned,  and  he  did  not  return  to  public
life  until  1854,  when  his  old  constituency  re-elected
him.  In  November  he  entered  the  cabinet  of  the
Liberal  administration,  and  from  that  day  to  the
present  time  (1888)  he  has  enjoyed,  save  in  two
periods  of  a  few  months'  duration,  uninterrupted
power  as  minister  or  governor.  In  1856  he  was
beaten  at  the  polls  on  the  prohibitory  liquor-law
question,  when  his  ministry  made  the  subject  a
direct  issue.  The  new  government  repealed  the
act,  but  was  unable  to  maintain  itself  in  office
longer  than  a  year,  when,  a  dissolution  occurring,
the  Liberals  we're  again  returned  to  power,  ami  Mr.
Tillev  was  reinstated  in  his  old  post  as  provincial
secretary.  Shortlv  afterward  he  became  premier.
From  June,  1857,'  till  March,  1865.  Mr.  Tilley  re-
mained leader. In  1864  he  went  to  Charlottetown,


118


TILLEY


TILLINGHAST


Prince  Edward  island,  to  attend  the  conference  of
maritime  parliamentarians,  with  a  view  to  forming
a  legislative  union  of  the  three  provinces  by  the
sea — Nova  Scotia,  New  Brunswick,  and  Prince
Edward  island.  Several  members  of  the  Canadian
government,  among  whom  was  Sir  John  A.  Mac-
donald, being  on  a  visit  to  the  lower  provinces  and
hearing  of  the  proposed  meeting,  expressed  a  de-
sire to  be  present.  Invitations  were  sent  to  them ;
they  attended,  and  succeeded  in  inducing  the  dele-
gates to  abandon  the  smaller  scheme  and  meet  later
in  the  year  at  Quebec,  where  a  grander  union  would
be  proposed  and  discussed.  The  greater  assembly
accordingly  met  on  10  Oct.,  and  sat  with  closed
doors  until  the  27th  of  the  month,  when  the  famous
"  Quebec  scheme  "  was  completed.  In  the  framing
of  those  resolutions,  which  now  form  the  basis  of
the  British  North  America  act,  Mr.  Tilley  took  an
active  part.  In  March,  at  the  general  elections,
Mr.  Tilley  submitted  the  question  to  the  people ;
but  he  and  his  party  suffered  defeat.  Notwith-
standing the  premier's  strong  personal  popularity
in  his  own  constituency,  the  majority  of  votes  cast
against  him  in  1865  was  very  large,  but  in  the  fol-
lowing year  the  new  government  resigned,  and
the  majority  was  reversed.  Delegates  from  Onta-
rio, Quebec,  Nova  Scotia,  and  New  Brunswick  were
sent  to  London  to  complete  the  terms  of  union,
and  at  this  conference  Mr.  Tilley  ably  represented
his  province.  For  his  services  he  was  made  a  com-
panion of  the  Bath  (civil)  by  the  queen,  and  on
resigning  his  seat  in  the  New  Brunswick  house  of
assembly  for  a  seat  in  the  house  of  commons  at
Ottawa  he  was  sworn  in  as  a  member  of  the  Cana-
dian privy  council,  and  appointed  minister  of  cus-
toms in  the  first  cabinet  of  the  Dominion.  From
November,  1868,  till  April,  1869,  he  was  acting
minister  of  public  works,  and  on  22  Feb.,  1873,  he
was  made  minister  of  finance  in  succession  to  Sir
Francis  Hincks.  This  important  portfolio  he  held
until  the  fall  of  the  Macdonald  government  on  5
Nov.  of  the  same  year.  Before  leaving  office  Sir
John  Macdonald  appointed  his  colleague  lieutenant-
governor  of  New  Brunswick,  which  office  he  filled
with  great  acceptance  until  11  July,  1878,  and
though  it  is  said  a  second  term  was  offered  to  him
by  the  MacKenzie  administration,  he  declined  it,
and  accepted  the  nomination  of  the  Conservative
party  for  a  seat  in  the  house  of  commons.  He  ran
in  his  old  constituency,  St.  John,  and  narrowly
escaped  defeat,  his  majority  being  but  nine  votes.
This  was  doubtless  due  to  the  stand  that  he  took
on  the  tariff  question,  which  was  declared  to  be  a
high  protective  one,  and  framed  to  protect  the
Canadian  manufactures.  The  platform  of  the  Con-
servatives obtained  throughout  the  country,  and
Sir  John  Macdonald,  on  being  asked  to  form  a  gov-
ernment, invited  Mr.  Tilley  to  resume  his  old  post.
On  presenting  himself  for  re-election,  he  was  re-
turned by  acclamation.  In  due  time  he  formulated
the  national  policy  of  the  ministry  on  the  floor  of
the  house  in  one  of  the  ablest  speeches  that  he  had
ever  made.  Though  the  measure  was  hotly  dis-
cussed, it  finally  passed,  and  has  ever  since  been
the  policy  of  the  country.  On  24  May,  Mr.  Tilley
was  created  a  knight  commander  of  St.  Michael
and  St.  George  by  the  Marquis  of  Lome,  then
governor-general  of  Canada  He  also  holds  a  pat-
ent of  rank  and  precedence  from  the  queen  as  an
ex-councillor  of  New  Brunswick.  He  held  the
office  of  finance  minister  of  the  Dominion  until
October,  1885,  when  his  health  failed,  and  he  re-
tired from  parliament  and  the  ministry  to  accept,
for  a  second  term,  the  less  laborious  office  of  lieu-
tenant-governor of  New  Brunswick,  which  post  he


still  holds.  As  a  speaker  he  is  fluent  and  elo-
quent. Many  important  public  measures  owe  their
inception  to  him,  chief  of  which,  however,  is  the
act  dealing  with  the  readjustment  and  reorgani-
zation of  the  customs  tariff.

TILLINGHAST,  Nicholas,  educator,  b.  in
Taunton,  Mass.,  22  Sept.,  1804;  d.  in  Bridgewater,
Mass.,  10  April,  1856.  He  was  the  son  of  Nicholas
Tillinghast,  who  was  several  times  representative
to  the  general  court  of  Massachusetts  between  1795
and  1816.  The  son  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1824,  and  entering  the  U.  S.
army  as  2d  lieutenant  in  the  7th  infantry,  served
for  two  years  on  garrison  duty  at  Fort  Gibson  in
the  Indian  territory.  Afterward  he  returned  to
the  military  academy,  where,  in  1827-34  he  was
successively  assistant  professor  of  chemistry,  min-
eralogy, and  geology,  and  of  geography,  history,
and  ethics.  He  was  promoted  captain  on  1  June,
1835,  and  joined  his  regiment  at  Fort  Gibson,  but
resigned  on  31  July,  1836.  Capt.  Tillinghast  then
settled  in  Boston,  where  he  received  pupils  in
mathematics.  In  1840  he  was  appointed  principal
of  the  state  normal  school  at  Bridgwater,  and  he
continued  to  fill  this  post  until  failing  health  com-
pelled his  resignation  in  July,  1853.  His  only
publications  were  "  Elements  of  Plane  Geometry  "
(Concord,  N.  H,  1841)  and  "  Prayers  for  Schools  "
(Boston,  1852). — His  son,  William  Hopkins,  b.  20
March,  1854,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1877,
and  since  1882  has  been  an  assistant  in  the  li-
brary of  Harvard  university.  He  has  published
a  translation,  with  additions,  of  Carl  Ploetz's  "  Epit-
ome of  Ancient,  Mediaeval,  and  Modern  History "
(Boston,  1884).

TILLINGHAST,  Pardon,  clergyman,  b.  in
Seven  Cliffs,  near  Beachy  Head  (now  Eastborn),
Sussex,  England,  in  1622 :  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,
19  Jan.,  1718.  He  was  a  soldier  under  Cromwell,
and  a  participant  in  the  battle  of  Marston  Moor.
He  settled  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  19  Nov.,  1645,  was
admitted  a  resident  of  the  town  with  a  quarter  in-
terest of  the  original  proprietors  of  the  Providence
purchase,  and  founded  a  numerous  family,  whose
members  are  now  found  in  nearly  every  state  and
territory  of  the  United  States.  He  was  pastor  of
the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Providence  from  1678
till  his  death,  preaching  and  officiating  in  that  ca-
pacity for  about  forty  years  without  remuneration.
At  his  own  expense,  in  1700,  he  built  the  first  meet-
ing-house of  this  religious  society,  the  oldest  in
America  of  its  denomination.  Mr.  Tillinghast  in
1711,  "  for  and  in  consideration  of  the  love  and  good-
will "  he  bore  the  church  over  which  he  was  then
pastor,  executed  "  to  them  and  their  successors  in
the  same  faith  and  order  "  a  deed  of  the  meeting-
house and  the  lot  on  which  it  stood.  In  the  deed
of  conveyance  he  describes  the  faith  and  order  of
the  church  by  quoting  Hebrews  vi.,  1, 2,  showing  it
to  be  the  same  as  that  now  held  by  the  Six  Princi-
ple Baptists.  In  addition  to  his  pastoral  duties
and  his  occupation  of  a  merchant,  he  found  time
to  serve  the  infant  colony  many  times  as  member
of  the  house  of  deputies,  and  the  town  of  Provi-
dence twenty-five  years,  in  various  posts  of  honor
and  trust. — His  great-grandson,  Thomas,  jurist,
b.  in  East  Greenwich,  R.  I.,  21  Aug.,  1742;  d.
in  East  Greenwich,  L.  I.,  26  Aug.,  1821,  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  from  1772  till  1780,  and
one  of  the  committee  that  it  appointed  in  1777  to
estimate  the  damage  done  by  the  British  soldiers
on  the  islands  of  Conanicut  and  Rhode  Island  dur-
ing the  war  of  the  Revolution.  In  1779  he  was
elected  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  for
Kent  county,  and  a  member  of  the  council  of  war.


TILLMAN


TILTON


119


In  September,  1780,  he  was  chosen  associate  justice  of
the  supreme  court,  which  post  he  held  by  annual  elec-
tions until  1787,  sitting  in  the  famous  paper-money
case  of  Trevett  vs.  Weeden.  His  firmness  and  de-
cision in  this  case,  notwithstanding  its  unpopularity
in  the  state  at  the  time,  ought,  says  a  writer,  "  to
cause  his  name  to  be  inscribed  in  letters  of  gold."
He  was  again  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  from
1791  until  his  resignation  in  December,  1797,  in
which  year  he  was  elected  a  member  of  congress,
serving  from  13  Nov.,  1797,  till  4  March,  1799,  and
in  1801-3. — Joseph  Leonard,  lawyer,  fifth  in
descent  from  Pardon,  b.  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  in  1790 ;
d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  30  Dec,  1844,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811.  In  1819  he
received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Brown,
of  which  he  was  elected  a  trustee  in  1833.  He
filled  many  other  public  stations,  was  for  many
years  a  member  of  the  general  assembly,  and  was
repeatedly  elected  speaker  of  the  house,  where  he
was  the  earnest  advocate  of  public  instruction  and
judicial  reform.  Elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,
he  served  from  4  Sept.,  1837,  till  3  March,  1843.
In  congress  he  was  one  of  the  most  useful  mem-
bers, few  men  equalling  him  in  the  extent  of  his
political  information.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he
published  in  the  Providence  "Gazette,"  over  the
signature  "  Dion,"  a  series  of  political  essays  that
attracted  wide  attention ;  and  he  also  contributed
poetry  to  journals  over  the  signature  of  "  Carroll."

TILLMAN,  Samuel  Dyer,  lawyer,  b.  in  Utica,
N.  Y.,  1  April,  1815 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  Sept.,
1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1834,  and  then
studied  law  in  Canandaigua,  where  he  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar.  Several  years  later  he  settled  in
Seneca  Palls,  N.  Y..  where  he  continued  in  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession,  and  also  was  repeatedly  elect-
ed president  of  the  town  council.  About  1850  he
retired  from  legal  practice  and  settled  in  New  York
city.  He  was  soon  elected  a  member  of  the  Ameri-
can institute,  by  which  organization  he  was  made
professor  of  science  and  mechanics.  Later  he  be-
came its  corresponding  secretary  and  edited  the
"  Transactions  "  of  the  institute,  published  by  the
state.  Prof.  Tillman's  knowledge  in  every  depart-
ment of  science  was  extensive.  He  invented  a  ro-
tating planisphere  to  serve  as  a  substitute  for  the
artificial  globe,  for  the  use  of  schools,  and  also  a
revolving  musical  scale,  called  the  tonometer,  de-
signed to  illustrate  the  theory  of  temperament  and
exhibiting  visibly  the  relations  between  the  true
and  tempered  notes  in  every  key.  The  degree  of
Ph.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Union  college  in
1875,  and  he  was  a  member  of  various  scientific
societies,  including  the  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  science.  His  writings  were
chiefly  essays  on  technical  subjects,  and  included
"  A  Treatise  on  Musical  Sounds  and  an  Explana-
tion of  the  Tonometer  "  (New  York,  1860).

TILLSON,  Davis,  soldier,  b.  in  Rockland.  Me.,
14  April,  1830.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1849,  but  two  years  later,  having  in-
jured his  foot  so  that  it  required  amputation,  he
resigned.  In  1857  he  was  elected  to  the  Maine
legislature,  and  in  1858  became  adjutant-general
of  the  state.  On  the  inauguration  of  President
Lincoln  he  was  appointed  collector  of  customs  of
the  Waldoboro  district,  which  place  he  resigned  in
1861  to  become  captain  of  the  2d  Maine  battery.
He  went  to  Washington  in  April,  1862  (having
been  detained  in  Maine  during  the  winter,  owing
to  the  threatened  difficulty  with  England  on  ac-
count of  the  "  Trent "  affair),  and  was  assigned  to
the  Army  of  the  Rappahannock  under  Gen.  Irvin
McDowell. On  22  May  he  was  promoted  major


and  made  chief  of  artillery  in  Gen.  Edward  O.  C.
Ord's  division.  After  the  battle  of  Cedar  Moun-
tain, 9  Aug.,  1862,  he  was  assigned  to  Gen.  McDow-
ell's staff  as  chief  of  artillery,  in  which  capacity  he
served  during  the  three  days'  artillery  fight  at
Rappahannock  Station,  and  then  at  the  second  bat-
tle of  Bull  Run.  Subsequently,  until  April.  1863.
he  was  inspector  of  artillery,  and  in  January  was
made  lieutenant-colonel,  and  on  29  March  was  or-
dered to  Cincinnati,  having  been  commissioned
brigadier-general  to  date  from  29  Nov.,  1862,  and
made  chief  of  artillery  for  fortifications  in  the  De-
partment of  the  Ohio.  He  had  charge  of  the  de-
fences of  Cincinnati  and  the  works  on  the  Louis-
ville and  Nashville  railroad,  and  raised  and  organ-
ized two  regiments  of  heavy  artillery.  In  Decem-
ber, 1863,  he  was  ordered  to  Knoxville,  Tenn.,
where  he  supervised  various  works  and  was  given
a  brigade  in  the  23d  army  corps,  which  he  com-
manded in  several  engagements  with  Confederate
cavalry  and  irregular  troops  during  the  winter  of
1863-'4.  He  continued  in  charge  of  the  works  in
this  district,  which  were  officially  commended  as
the  best  in  the  military  division  of  the  Mississippi,
and  also  organized  the  1st  U.  S.  heavy  artillery  of
colored  troops  and  the  3d  North  Carolina  mounted
infantry.  Subsequently  he  had  command  of  the
District  of  East  Tennessee  until  early  in  1865,  when
he  was  transferred  to  the  4th  division  of  the  De-
partment of  the  Cumberland,  and  held  that  com-
mand until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  then  offered
his  resignation ;  but  his  services  were  retained,  and
he  remained  on  duty  until  1  Dec,  1866,  in  charge
of  the  freedmen's  bureau  at  Memphis,  and  subse-
quently in  Georgia.  For  a  year  he  remained  in
Georgia  after  his  resignation,  engaged  in  cotton-
planting,  but  then  disposed  of  his  interests  there
and  returned  to  Rockland,  Me.,  where  he  has  since
been  engaged  in  the  granite  business.

TILTON,  James,  physician,  b.  in  Kent  county,
Del.,  1  June,  1745;  d.  near  Wilmington,  Del.,  14
May,  1822.  He  received  a  classical  education  at
Nottingham  academy,  Md.,  under  Rev.  Samuel
Finley,  who  was  afterward  president  of  Princeton.
On  leaving  school,  he  entered  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1771,  six  years  after  its  organiza-
tion. He  at  once  settled  at  Dover,  Del.,  where  he
remained  until  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary
war.  His  sympathies  being  warmly  enlisted  in
the  patriot  cause,  he  abandoned  a  lucrative  prac-
tice to  enlist,  and  became  1st  lieutenant  in  a  com-
pany of  light  infantry.  Subsequently  he  was  ap-
pointed surgeon  in  a  Delaware  regiment,  and  served
in  the  battles  of  Long  Island  and  White  Plains,
accompanying  the  army  in  its  retreat  to  the  Dela-
ware river.  In  1777  he  was  in  charge  of  the  mili-
tary hospital  at  Princeton,  N.  J.,  where  there  was
much  suffering  among  the  troops  in  consequence
of  the  system  of  placing  all  the  sick  in  one  hospital.
Dr.  Tilton  himself  narrowly  escaped  death  from
an  attack  of  fever  that  he  contracted  there.  In
the  winter  of  1779-80  the  sufferings  of  the  sick  in
the  tent  hospitals  was  very  great.  To  Dr.  Tilton,
then  stationed  at  Trenton,  ^.  J.,  has  been  ascribed
the  suggestion  of  the  erection  of  the  new  buildings
that  were  ordered  by  the  authorities  with  the  hap-
piest results.  These  were  log  huts,  roughly  built
so  as  to  admit  of  free  ventilation  through  the  crev-
ices, with  floors  of  hardened  clay,  each  being  in-
tended to  accommodate  not  more  than  six  patients.
In  September,  1781,  chiefly  through  the  exertions
of  Dr.  Tilton,  an  act  was  passed  by  congress  pro-
viding for  promotion  by  seniority  in  the  medical
corps. He  was  soon  afterward  elected  a  professor


120


TILTON


TIMM


in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  but  declined,
being  unwilling  to  leave  the  service.  In  1782,  af-
ter the  surrender  of  Cornwallis,  he  began  to  prac-
tise again  in  Dover.  In  1783-'5  he  was  a  delegate
to  the  Continental  congress,  and  he  sat  for  several
sessions  in  the  legislature.  He  removed  to  Wil-
mington for  his  health,  from  1785  till  1801  was
government  commissioner  of  loans,  and  on  the
declaration  of  war  with  Great  Britain  was  appoint-
ed surgeon-general  of  the  army.  He  found  the
hospitals  on  the  northern  frontier,  and  especially
the  one  at  Sackett's  Harbor,  filthy  and  neglected.
He  moved  the  latter  to  Watertown,  X.  Y.,  intro-
duced better  regulations  into  all  of  them,  and  was
rewarded  by  an  immediate  improvement  in  the
health  of  the  army.  Purchasing  a  farm  near  Wil-
mington, he  devoted  his  time  thereafter  chiefly  to
its  cultivation.  In  1857  his  remains  were  disin-
terred, and  now  lie  in  the  Wilmington  and  Brandy-
wine  cemetery  beneath  a  monument  erected  by  the
Delaware  state  medical  society.  Dr.  Tilton  pub-
lished his  graduation  essay,  "  De  Hydrope  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1771),  and  an  elaborate  plan  for  hospital
organization,  entitled  "  Economical  Observations
on  Military  Hospitals,  and  the  Prevention  and  Cure
of  Diseases  incident  to  the  Army"  (Wilmington,
1813).  His  papers  include  "  Observations  on  the
Yellow  Fever,"  "  Letter  to  Dr.  Duncan  on  Several
Cases  of  Rabies  Canina,"  "Observations  on  the
Curculio,"  "  On  the  Peach-Tree  and  its  Diseases,"
"  A  Letter  to  Dr.  Rush  approving  of  Bleeding  in
Yellow  Fever,"  and  an  oration  in  1790  as  presi-
dent of  the  Delaware  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.

TILTON,  John  Rollin,  artist,  b.  in  Loudon,
X.  H.,  in  1833;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,  22  March.  1888.
His  professional  life  was  spent  in  Italy,  and  he  was
a  close  student  of  the  Venetian  school  of  paint-
ing. Many  of  his  landscapes  are  in  private  col-
lections in  England  and  the  United  States.
Among  his  paintings  are  "  The  Palace  of  Thebes,"
which  was  shown  at  the  Royal  academy,  London,
in  1873  ;  "  Como  " ;  "  Venice  "  ;  and  "  Venetian
Fishing- Boats "  and  "  Rome  from  Mount  Aven-
tine,"  both  of  which  are  in  the  Corcoran  gallery,
Washington.  His  "Lagoons  of  Venice,"  and
"  Komombo  "  were  at  the  Philadelphia  exhibition
of  1876  Henry  T.  Tuckerman  says  of  him  that
"  while  some  critics  compare  him  with  Claude  and
Turner,  others,  like  Jarves,  unjustly  declare  him
a  '  weak  sentimentalist  in  color,  having  no  solid
foundation  of  knowledge  or  inventive  force. ' "

TILTON,  Theodore,  journalist,  b.  in  Xew  York
city,  2  Oct.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Col-
lege of  the  city  of  Xew  York  in  1855,  was  em-
ployed for  a  year  on  the  Xew  York  "  Observer,"
and  then  became  an  editor  of  the  "  Independent,"
continuing  on  the  staff  from  1856  till  1871,  the
latter  part  of  the  time  as  editor-in-chief.  He  edited
also,  about  six  months  of  the  last  year,  the  Brook-
lyn "  Union."  He  then  established  the  "  Golden
Age,"  an  independent  political  and  literary  weeklv,
but  retired  from  it  at  the  end  of  two  years,  fn
1874  he  charged  Henry  Ward  Beecher  with  crimi-
nal intimacy  with  his  wife  (see  Beecher),  and  the
case,  tried  by  Plymouth  church  and  the  public
courts,  attracted  wide  attention.  Mr.  Tilton  has
written  many  political  and  reformatory  articles,
which  have  been  reprinted  in  pamphlets.  He  has
gained  much  reputation  as  an  orator,  being  a  con-
stant and  eloquent  speaker  in  behalf  of  woman's
rights,  and,  before  the  civil  war,  in  opposition  to
slavery.  For  twenty  years  he  was  a  lyceum  lec-
turer, "speaking  in  nearly  every  northern  state  and
territory.  He  went  abroad  in  1883,  and  has  since
remained  there. Among  his  works  are  "  The  Sex-


ton's Tale,  and  other  Poems"  (Xew  York,  1867);
"  Sancta  Sanctorum,  or  Proof -Sheets  from  an  Edi-
tor's Table"  (1869);  " Tempest  Tossed," a  romance
(1873 ;  republished  in  1883) ;  "  Thou  and  I,"  poem&
(1880) :  and  "  Suabian  Stories,"  ballads  (1882).

TIMBY,  Theodore  Ruggles,  inventor,  b.  in
Dover,  X.  Y.,  5  April,  1822.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  spent  his  youth  on  a  farm.
At  an  early  age  he  developed  inventive  faculty,  and
in  1836  made  a  practicable  working  model  of  a  float-
ing dry-dock,  which  was  condemned  by  nautical
experts  as  impracticable  in  tidal  waters. "  The  first
sight  of  the  circular  form  of  Castle  Williams  on
Governor's  island,  in  the  harbor  of  Xew  York,  sug-
gested to  him  the  idea  of  the  revolving  plan  for  de-
fensive works,  and  in  April,  1841,  he  went  to  Wash-
ington and  exhibited  a  model  and  plans  of  a  revolv-
ing battery,  to  be  constructed  of  iron,  to  the  chief  of
engineers  and  chief  of  ordnance  of  the  U.  S.  army.
This  model  and  plans  were  also  submitted  to  John
C.  Calhoun  and  other  officials  in  Washington.  In
January,  1843,  he  made  a  model  of  a  marine  tur-
ret, and  at  that  time  filed  a  caveat  in  the  U.  S.
patent-office  for  a  metallic  revolving  fort,  to  be
used  on  land  or  water,  and  to  be  revolved  by  pro-
pelling engines  located  within  the  same,  acting
upon  suitable  mechanism.  From  January,  1841,
till  1861  Mr.  Timby  urged  the  importance  of  his
plans  upon  the  proper  authorities  at  Washington
and  elsewhere,  but  without  satisfactory  results,
although  in  1848  a  favorable  report  was  made  to-
the  secretary  of  war  and  indorsed  by  the  chief  of
the  ordnance  bureau.  Meanwhile,  in  1856,  he  ex-
hibited his  plans  to  Xapoleon  III.,  and  received
some  encouragement,  but  without  practical  result.
In  September,  1862,  after  developing  many  modifi-
cations of  his  original  idea,  he  took  out  letters-pat-
ent covering  the  broad  claim  for  "  a  revolving
tower  for  defensive  and  offensive  warfare,  whether
placed  on  land  or  water,"  and  in  the  same  year  he
entered  into  a  written  agreement  with  the  con-
tractors and  builders  of  the  original  "  Monitor "
for  the  use  of  his  patents,  covering  the  revolving
turret,  by  which  they  agreed  to  pay  him  a  royal-
ty of  $5,000  on  each  turret  that  they  constructed.
These  facts  show  beyond  a  doubt  that  Mr.  Timby
is  the  original  patentee  of  the  revolving  turrets,
and  that  he  was  recognized  as  such  by  John  Erics-
son, the  designer  of  the  "Monitor"  and  similar
iron-clad  vessels.  Among  the  elaborations  and  de-
velopments of  the  original  idea  of  the  revolving
tower  which  he  has  perfected  from  time  to  time
are  the  cordon  of  revolving  towers  across  a  chan-
nel (1861);  a  mole  and  tower  system  of  defence
(1880);  the  planetary  system  of  revolving  towers-
(1880) ;  the  subterranean  system  of  defence  (1881) ;
and  the  revolving  tower  and  shield  system  (1884),
all  of  which  he  has  patented  in  this  and  other
countries.  Mr.  Timby  invented  and  patented  in
1844  the  American  turbine  water-wheel,  which  was
a  success,  and  in  1861  he  devised  the  method,  now
in  universal  use,  of  firing  heavy  guns  by  electricity,
as  well  as  other  inventions  of  practical  utility.
The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Madison  university  in  1866.  and  that  of  S.  D.  by  the
L'niversity  of  Wooster,  Ohio,  in  1882.  Mr.  Timby
founded  in  February,  1888.  "  Congress."  a  monthly
journal,  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and  has  prepared
for  the  press  a  collection  of  didactic  and  philo-
sophical prose  and  verse  entitled  "Beyond."

TIMM,  Henry  C,  musician,  b.  in  Hamburg,
Germany,  11  July,  1811.  He  was  baptized  as
Christian  Heinrich.  but,  on  coming  to  the  United
States,  he  adopted  his  present  name.  He  had  some
instruction  on the piano  from Albert  Gottlieb


TIMON


TIMROD


121


Methfessel,  and  Jacob  Schmitt,  and  came  to  this
country  in  1835.  In  the  same  year  he  appeared
at  the  Park  theatre.  New  York,  as  a  pianist,  and
obtained  an  engagement  to  play  second  horn  in
the  orchestra,  and  occasional  piano  solos.  Dur-
ing this  time  he  was  also  organist  at  Grace  church.
About  a  year  later  he  became  musical  director  of
an  opera  troupe  at  the  Charleston  theatre.  In
1838  he  returned  to  New  York,  where  he  settled
permanently.  When  the  National  opera-house  was
built  he  became  chorus-master  and  trombone-
player;  but  the  theatre  was  soon  burned.  In  1843
he  became  president  of  the  Philharmonic  society,
which  post  he  held  for  sixteen  years.  During  his
presidency  he  frequently  appeared  as  the  piano
soloist  at  the  society's  concerts,  and  for  eight  years
was  trombone-player  in  the  orchestra.  He  became
well  known  as  an  excellent  piano-teacher,  and  his
services  as  an  accompanist  were  much  in  demand.
His  published  compositions  are  few,  the  most  nota-
ble being  the  second  piano  part  for  Johann  B.
Cramer's  eighty-four  '•  Etudes."

TIMON,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Conewago,
Pa.,  12  Feb.,  1797;  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  16  April,
1867.  In  1802  he  removed  with  his  family  to  Balti-
more. He  assisted  his  father,  who  was  a  merchant,
in  his  business,  and  was  engaged  in  trade  in  Balti-
more, Louisville,  and  St.  Louis  till  1823,  when  he
entered  the  Lazarist  seminary  at  the  Barrens  near
St.  Louis.  He  was  ordained  a  sub-deacon  in  1824,
and  accompanied  Father  (afterward  Archbishop)
Odin  in  a  missionary  journey  through  Texas.  He
was  raised  to  the  priesthood  the  following  year,
appointed  professor  in  the  Barrens,  and  became  a
member  of  the  Lazarist  order.  He  also  did  mis-
sionary work  throughout  a  large  district,  and  be-
came famous  as  a  controversialist,  sometimes  meet-
ing as  many  as  six  clergymen  of  other  creeds  in
public  debate.  But  his  great  achievement  was  es-
tablishing his  order  in  the  United  States.  Serious
differences  had  arisen  between  Bishop  Rosati  and
the  Lazarists  with  regard  to  the  tenure  of  property,
and  Father  Timon  showed  great  tact  in  bringing
about  a  settlement.  In  1835,  at  the  assembly  of
Lazarist  deputies  in  Paris,  it  was  decided  to  erect
the  American  mission  into  a  province  of  the  order,
and  Father  Timon  was  elected  its  first  visitor.  He
relieved  the  order  from  financial  embarrassment,
reduced  to  submission  many  members  who  had  be-
come disaffected,  prevailed  on  others  who  had  left
the  community  to  return,  and  acquired  property
of  great  value  in  St.  Louis  and  other  cities.  In
1838,  at  the  request  of  Bishop  Rosati,  he  took
charge  of  the  missions  in  Texas.  He  offered  the
first  mass  in  G-alveston.  and  erected  the  first  altar
in  Houston.  In  1839  he  was  appointed  coadjutor
bishop  of  St.  Louis,  but  earnestly  asked  the  court
to  be  allowed  to  decline,  and  the  nomination  was
cancelled.  In  1840  Texas  was  separated  from  the
Mexican  diocese  of  Monterey,  and  Father  Timon
was  appointed  prefect  apostolic  of  the  republic,
where.he  took  measures  to  secure  the  restoration  of
the  church  property  that  had  been  confiscated  by
the  Mexican  government.  He  went  to  Paris  in
1841  on  business  connected  with  the  Lazarists  of
the  United  States.  His  energy  appeared  to  increase
with  advancing  years.  Seminaries  were  given  into
his  charge  in  every  part  of  the  United  States,  which
he  supplied  with  professors  from  the  members  of
his  community.  A  narrative  of  the  length  of  the
journeys  that  "be  undertook  in  many  western  and
southern  states,  and  of  the  difficulties  that  he  over-
came, would  seem  incredible.  The  career  of  Father
Timon  was  marked  by  many  acts  of  courage  as  well
as  personal  sacrifice  and  charity. His  rescue  of  the


Sisters  of  the  Visitation  from  a  flood  in  Kaskaskia
had  all  the  elements  of  romantic  bravery.  When
he  was  appointed  bishop  of  Buffalo  in  1847  he
showed  reluctance  to  accept  the  office,  but  he
yielded  to  the  pressure  that  was  brought  to  bear
on  him,  and  was  consecrated  by  Bishop  Hughes
in  the  cathedral  of  New  York  on  17  Oct.,  1847.
At  the  beginning  of  his  administration  he  de-
manded the  transfer  of  the  title  of  the  property
of  St.  Louis's  church,  Buffalo,  to  himself.  This
being  refused  by  the  trustees,  they  were  excom-
municated, and  he  laid  the  church  under  an  in-
terdict. The  controversy,  after  being  the  subject
of  discussion  in  the  legislature,  was  finally  settled
by  his  submission  to  the  trustees  in  1855.  He  in-
troduced the  Sisters  of  Charity  in  1848,  began  St.
Joseph's  boys'  orphan  asylum  in  1851,  and  after-
ward the  New  Catholic  reformatory  for  boys.  He
began  the  Foundling  asylum  in  1853,  and  subse-
quently founded  the  Deaf  and  dumb  asylum,  St.
Mary's  German  orphan  asylum,  the  Providence
lunatic  asylum,  and  many  other  charities.  Among
the  educational  and  religious  institutions  that  he
founded  or  aided  in  establishing  are  the  Seminary
at  Suspension  Bridge,  the  College  and  convent  of
the  Franciscan  Fathers,  the  College  of  St.  Joseph,
the  Redemptorist  convent  of  St.  Mary,  the  Commu-
nity of  missionary  Oblate  Fathers,  and  several  sis-
terhoods. See  his  life  bv  C  E.  Deuther  (1868).  '
TIMROD,  Henry,  poet.  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.r
8  Dec,  1829 ;  d.  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  6  Oct.,  1867.
His  grandfather  was  a  German,  who  emigrated  to
this  country  before  the  Revolutionary  war  and
settled  in  Charleston.  His  father,  William  (1792-
1838),  was  a  me-
chanic, but  a  man
of  very  poetic
temperament,who
wrote  some  fine
lyrics.  He  com-
manded a  corps
in  the  Seminole
war,  composed  of
Germans  and  men
of  German  de-
scent residing  in
Charleston,  and
from  the  exposure
and  hardships  of
the  service  con-
tracted a  disease
that  resulted  final-
ly in  his  death.
Henry  was  edu-
cated at  the  Uni-
versity of  Georgia,  but  took  no  degree.  He  was  of
scholarly  tastes,  and  was  a  writer  of  verses  from  his
childhood.  After  leaving  the  university  he  studied
law  in  the  office  of  James  L.  Petigru,  but  his  enthu-
siasm for  literature  interfered  with  his  studies,  and
he  finally  abandoned  them  and  fitted  himself  for  a
college  professor.  William  Gilmore  Simms.  who
was  then  in  the  height  of  his  fame,  was  in  the  habit
of  gathering  round  him  those  of  the  young  men
of  Charleston  that  had  literary  proclivities,  and  lie
did  much  to  foster  the  genius  of  Timrod,  Paul  II.
Havne,  and  other  voting  southern  writers.  Tim-
rod's  first  volume 'of  poems  (Boston,  1860)  con-
tained such  fine  work  that  it  was  hailed  as  an
earnest  of  great  excellence.  In  1861  he  began  to
write  that  series  of  war  lyrics  which  made  his
name  popular  throughout  the  south.  In  1862  a
project  was  formed  for  having  a  volume  of  Tim-
rod's  poems  brought  out  in  London :  but  the
pressure  of  great  events  interrupted  this  scheme,


/  l/iswsv-ir&i.


122


TIMS


TINKER


and  it  was  never  put  into  execution.  His  deli-
cate health  forbade  active  service  in  the  field,  but
his  pen  was  never  idle.  He  was  at  the  battle  of
Shiloh  as  war-correspondent  of  the  Charleston
"  Mercury."  In  1864  he  went  to  Columbia,  the
capital  of  the.  state,  where  he  edited  the  "  South
Carolinian."  He  lost  everything  when  the  city
of  Columbia  was  burned  in  February,  1865.  He
said  of  himself  that  he  and  his  family  were  brought
to  beggary,  starvation,  and  almost  death' — that
they  had  eaten  up  all  the  family  silver  and  nearly
all  "their  furniture,  and  were  reduced  to  despair.
He  writes  in  1865 :  "  I  would  consign  every  line  I
have  written  to  eternal  oblivion,  for  one  hundred
dollars  in  hand."  But  the  struggle  against  such
fearful  odds,  with  his  failing  health,  proved  too
much  for  him ;  life  perceptibly  ebbed  away,  and
early  in  October,  1867,  he  died.  His  brother-poet
and  life-long  friend,  Paul  H.  Hayne,  afterward
published  a  volume  of  his  collected  works,  pref-
aced by  a  very  pathetic  sketch  of  his  life  (New
York,  1873).  The  south  has  probably  never  pro-
duced a  poet  of  more  delicate  imagination,  of
greater  rhythmic  sweetness,  of  purer  sentiment,
and  more  tender  emotion  than  this  young  man,
who  passed  away  before  he  had  time  or  opportu-
nity to  attain  that  high  standard  of  excellence
which  his  undoubted  genius  fitted  him  to  reach.
His  best-known  poem  is  a  short  ode  written  for
Memorial-day,  1867.

TIMS,  Thomas  Dillon,  Canadian  official,  b.  in
Castle  Pollard,  Ireland,  6  Jan.,  1825.  He  engaged
for  many  years  in  commercial  pursuits,  entered
the  civil  service  of  Canada  in  1858,  in  1863  was  ap-
pointed a  commissioner  to  inquire  into  prison-man-
agement at  Montreal,  and  in  1865  became  govern-
ment superintendent  of  the  engraving  and  print-
ing of  the  first  issue  of  legal-tender  notes.  He  vis-
ited Washington  the  same  year  on  official  business,
and  in  1867  reported  to  the  government  upon  a
financial  system  for  the  province  of  Quebec,  and
was  placed  in  charge  of  Dominion  affairs  at  Hali-
fax. With  other  commissioners  he  was  appointed
in  1868  to  inquire  into  the  management  of  govern-
ment railways  in  Nova  Scotia.  From  1868  till  1872
he  was  engaged  in  the  organization  of  the  financial
department  and  savings  banks  in  Nova  Scotia  and
New  Brunswick,  and  in  1872-'3  established  branches
of  the  finance  department  and  savings  banks  in
British  Columbia  and  Manitoba.  He  was  appoint-
ed financial  inspector  for  the  Dominion  in  1870,
and  is  inspector  of  Dominion  savings  banks,  and
sub-treasurer  and  auditor  of  government  railways.

TINCKER,  Mary  Agnes,  author,  b.  in  Ells-
worth, Me.,  18  July,  1833.  She  was  educated  at
the  high-school  in  Ellsworth,  and  at  Blue  Hill
academy,  embraced  the  Catholic  faith  at  the  age  of
twenty,  and  during  the  civil  war  nursed  the  sick
and  wounded  in  one  of  the  military  hospitals  at
Washington,  D.  C.  Since  1873  she  has  lived  in
Italy.  She  has  published  novels  entitled  "The
House  of  Yorke"  (New  York,  1872);  "  A  Winged
Word  "(1873);  "Grapes  and  Thorns"  (1874):  "Six
Sunny  Months"  (1878);  "Signor  Monaldini's
Niece."  in  the  "  No-Name  Series  "  (Boston,  1879) ;
"  By  the  Tiber  "  (1881) ;  "  The  Jewel  in  the  Lotus  "
(1884);  and  "  Aurora*'  (1885).

TINGEY,  Thomas  (pronounced  with  g  soft),
naval  officer,  b.  in  London,  England,  11  Sept.,  1750 ;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  23  Feb.,  1829.  He  served
in  the  British  navy,  but  came  to  this  country  be-
fore the  Revolutionary  war,  and  owned  ships  that
were  engaged  in  the  East  India  trade.  During
the  war  he  served  in  the  Continental  navy.  He
was  selected  as  one  of  the  six  captains  that  were


o^/oMi^


appointed  on  the  organization  of  the  U.  S.  navy  on
3  Sept.,  1798,  and  given  the  ship  "  Ganges,"  twenty-
four  guns,  with  the  "  Pinckney  "  and  "  South  Caro-
lina, forming  a  squadron,  'to  guard  the  Mona
fassage  in  the  West
ndies  during  the
war  with  France.
During  July,  1799,
he  captured  the
French  ships  "  Le
Vainqueur,"  "  Le
Rabateuse,"  "  L'Eu-
gene,"  and  "  L'Espe-
rance."  In  the  same
year,  while  off  Cape
Nicola  Mole,  he  was
boarded  by  a  boat
from  the  British  frig-
ate "Surprise,"  and
all  the  Englishmen
on  board  were  de-
manded and  also  per-
mission to  examine
the  protections  of  the
American  seamen.  Capt.  Tingey  answered :  "  A
public  ship  carries  no  protection  for  her  men  but
her  flag.  I  do  not  expect  to  succeed  in  the  con-
test with  you;  but  I  will  die  at  my  quarters  before
a  man  shall  be  taken  from  the  ship."  The  crew
gave  three  hearty  cheers,  hastened  with  alacrity
to  their  guns,  and  called  for  "  Yankee  Doodle.''
The  captain  of  the  "Surprise,"  on  hearing  the
determination  of  the  Americans,  chose  rather  to
pursue  his  course  than  to  battle  for  dead  men.
Capt.  Tingey  was  discharged  under  the  permanent
naval-establishment  act,  but  was  reinstated  on  23
Nov.,  1804,  after  which  he  had  command  of  the
navy-yard  at  Washington  until  his  death.  When
the  capital  was  captured  by  the  British,  in  the
summer  of  1814,  the  secretary  of  the  navy  ordered
Com.  Tingey  to  fire  the  navy-yard,  which,  with  the
sloop-of-war  "  Argus,"  five  armed  barges,  two  gun-
boats, and  all  the  naval  stores,  was  consigned  to
the  flames.  In  this  connection  he  writes  to  his
daughter,  under  date  of  17  Sept.,  1814 :  "  I  was  the
last  officer  who  quitted  the  city  after  the  enemy
had  possession  of  it,  having  fully  performed  all
the  orders  received,  in  which  was  included  that  of
myself  retiring,  and  not  to  fall  into  their  posses-
sion. I  was  also  the  first  who  returned  and  the
only  one  who  ventured  in  on  the  day  on  which
they  were  peaceably  masters  of  it."  For  fifty  years
he  was  connected  with  the  navy  of  this  country  and
for  nearly  thirty  years  had  command  of  the  Wash-
ington navy-yard.

TINKER,  Reuhen,  clergyman,  b.  in  Chester,
Mass.,  6  Aug.,  1799;  d.  in  Westfield,  Chautauqua
co.,  N.  Y.,  26  Oct.,  1854.  He  entered  a  mercantile
house  in  his  native  town  in  1813,  but  afterward  en-
tered Amherst  and  was  graduated  in  1827,  having
supported  himself  during  his  college  career  by
teaching  and  manual  labor.  He  became  a  student
in  Auburn  theological  seminary  the  same  year,  and
was  ordained  a  minister  of  the  Presbyterian  church
at  Chester  in  1830.  Resolving  to  devote  himself
to  foreign  missions,  he  sailed  for  the  Sandwich  isl-
ands in  December,  1830,  and  reached  Honolulu  on
28  June,  1831.  He  was  chaplain  for  seamen  at  La-
haina  until  June,  1832,  when  he  went  with  other
missionaries  on  an  exploring  expedition  to  the
Marquesas  islands,  with  the  view  to  founding  mis-
sions. In  1834  he  was  appointed  to  edit  a  semi-
monthly religious  journal  in  the  native  language,
which  he  did  up  to  1838.  In  1840  he  returned  to
the  United  States,  where  he  had  charge  of  a  con-


TIPTON


TLALHUICOLE


123


gregation  in  Madison,  Ohio,  for  four  years,  and
then  of  one  in  Westfield,  N.  Y.,  till  his  death.  See
"  Sermons  by  Rev.  Reuben  Tinker,  Missionary  at
the  Sandwich  Islands;  with  a  Biographical
Sketch  "  (Buffalo,  1856).

TIPTON,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Sevier  county,
Tenn.,  14  Aug.,  1786;  d.  in  Logansport,  Ind.,  5
April,  1830.  His  father,  Joshua,  removed  from
Maryland  to  eastern  Tennessee,  where  he  was  mur-
dered by  Indians  on  18  April,  1793.  The  duty  of
supporting  the  family  was  thus  thrown  on  John's
shoulders  at  an  age  when  he  should  have  been  at
school.  At  the  same  time  he  began  to  be  known
as  an  Indian  fighter,  believing  that  to  avenge  his
father's  murder  was  a  sacred  duty.  In  1807  he
removed  with  his  family  to  Indiana,  settling  on  a
farm  of  fifty  acres  on  Brinley's  Perry,  Harrison  co.,
which  he  paid  for  out  of  money  that  he  earned  by
splitting  rails  at  fifty  cents  a  hundred.  The  dis-
trict was  infested  by  counterfeiters  and  horse-
thieves,  but  Tipton  inspired  them  with  such  fear
that  they  abandoned  the  neighborhood.  In  1809
he  joined  the  "  Yellow  Jackets,"  a  military  com-
pany commanded  by  Capt.  Spier  Spencer,  and  soon
afterward  became  ensign,  serving  through  the  cam-
paign that  terminated  with  the  battle  of  Tippecanoe,
7  Nov.,  1811.  He  kept  a  journal  of  his  campaign
of  seventy-four  days,  which,  notwithstanding  its
singular  method  of  spelling,  is  said  to  be  the  fullest
and  most  vivid  narrative  of  those  operations.  The
"  Yellow  Jackets  "  lost  their  captain  and  their  two
lieutenants  at  Tippecanoe,  and  Tipton  took  com-
mand of  the  company.  After  this  he  reached  the
rank  of  brigadier-general  of  militia.  In  1815  he
was  elected  sheriff  of  Harrison  county,  and  held
this  office  by  re-election  until  1819,  when  he  was
sent  to  the  legislature.  He  was  one  of  the  com-
missioners that  were  appointed  by  that  body  in
1820  to  select  a  site  for  a  new  capital  for  Indiana,
and  it  was  on  his  motion  that  Fall  Creek  was
chosen.  He  wrote  a  journal  describing  minutely
his  trips  to  different  points  in  search  of  a  suitable
locality,  and  it  shows  a  marked  advance  in  spell-
ing and  style  over  the  one  in  which  he  relates  Har-
rison's campaign.  He  was  re-elected  in  1821.  and
soon  afterward  appointed  a  commissioner  to  deter-
mine with  another  commissioner  from  Illinois  the
boundary-line  between  the  two  states.  He  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  Indian  agent  for  the  Pottawattamie
and  Miami  tribes  in  March,  1823,  and  in  1826  made
arrangements  with  them  by  which  valuable  public
lands  were  thrown  open  to  settlers.  In  1831  he
was  elected  U.  S.  senator,  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused
by  the  death  of  Gen.  James  Noble,  and  he  was  re-
elected for  a  full  term  in  1833.  Although  his  po-  -
litical  opinions  were,  on  the  whole,  similar  to  those
of  Gen.  Jackson,  he  was  his  strenuous  opponent  on
the  U.  S.  bank  question.  He  was  specially  inter-
ested in  the  progress  of  Indiana,  organized  the  Eel
river  seminary  society  at  Logansport,  raised  money
for  teachers,  built  school-houses,  and  constructed
mills.  He  made  extensive  purchases  of  land  in
Bartholomew  county,  sixty  acres  of  which  he  gave
for  the  erection  of  public  buildings.  The  city  of
Columbus  was  built  on  this  property,  and  for  a
time  was  called  Tiptonia  in  his  honor.  It  received
its  present  name  when  his  political  opponents  were
elected  to  office  in  the  county.  Gen.  Tipton  held
high  office  in  the  Masonic  fraternity,  becoming
finally  grand-master.

TIPTON,  Thomas  W.,  senator,  b.  in  Cadiz,
Ohio,  5  Aug.,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  Madison
college,  Pa.,  became  a  lawyer,  and  was  elected  to  the
legislature  of  Ohio  in  1845,  but,  after  some  time,
settled  in  Nebraska. He  was  elected  a  delegate  to


the  Constitutional  convention  there,  and  became  in
1860  a  member  of  the  territorial  council.  Subse-
quently he  studied  for  the  ministry,  was  appointed
chaplain  in  the  National  army,  and  served  during
the  civil  war.  He  was  U.  S.  senator  from  Nebraska
from  4  March,  1867.  till  3  March,  1875.

TITCOMB,  Jonathan,  soldier,  b.  in  Newburv,
Mass.,  in  1728  ;  d.  there  in  1817.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  committee  of  safety  and  the  Provincial
congress  in  1774-'5,  colonel  of  a  regiment  in  the
Rhode  Island  expedition  in  1778,  and  a  member  of
the  State  convention  in  1780.  Some  time  afterward
he  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  militia.  He
was  naval  officer  of  the  port  of  Newburyport,  Mass.,
from  1789  till  1812.

TIZOC,  Mexican  king,  d.  in  1482.  He  suc-
ceeded his  brother  Axayacatl  on  the  throne  in
1477,  having  been  general  of  his  predecessor's
armies.  According  to  the  historical  paintings  of
his  time,  he  conquered  during  his  brief  reign  four-
teen cities,  some  in  the  valley  of  Toluca,  and  as-
sisted King  Netzahualpitl,  of  Texcoco,  to  subdue
the  revolution  of  his  brothers  allied  with  the  re-
public of  Huexotzingo.  Tizoe  began  the  magnifi-
cent temple  in  honor  of  Huitzilopochtli,  the  god
of  war,  but  before  its  conclusion  was  poisoned  by
instigation  of  Techotlalla,  cacique  of  Ixtapalapan,
who  was  afterward  executed  in  the  public  square
of  Mexico  in  presence  of  the  allied  kings.

TLALHUICOLE  (tlal-we-co'-lay),  Tlaxcaltec
warrior,  d.  in  1518.  He  was  regarded  as  the  most
formidable  hero  of  his  country,  and  commanded
the  Tlaxcaltec  forces  in  the  civil  war  in  1516  be-
tween the  partisans  of  Cacamatzin  and  Ixtlilxo-
chitl.  He  was  taken  prisoner  by  stratagem  by
Tlaxpanquizqui  and  brought  to  the  city  of  Mexico ;
but  his  bravery  and  character  had  made  such  an  im-
pression on  Montezuma  that  he  ordered  the  cap-
tive's release,  an  act  that  had  no  precedent  in  Mexi-
can history.  But  Tlalhuicole  refused  to  profit  by
the  monarch's  generosity.  He  said  to  Montezuma
that  it  would  be  infamous  for  him  to  return  to  his
country  after  being  conquered,  and  insisted  on
undergoing  the  fate  of  the  other  prisoners.  Monte-
zuma, wishing,  at  any  cost,  to  save  his  life,  offered
him  the  command  of  an  armv  about  to  be  sent  to
drive  back  the  Tarascos,  who  had  invaded  his
frontiers.  Tlalhuicole  accepted,  hoping  to  meet  a
glorious  death  in  the  ensuing  battle.  He  advanced
at  the  head  of  the  Mexican  troops  to  the  city,
Tangimoroa,  called  by  the  Mexicans  Tlaximaloyan,
cut  through  the  Tarascan  army,  which  made  a
desperate  resistance,  and  defeated  them  several
times.  He  returned  to  Mexico,  laden  with  spoils  and
accompanied  by  a  long  train  of  captives.  Monte-
zuma lavished  fresh  honors  on  him,  but  failed  to
persuade  him  to  accept  the  perpetual  office  of
commander-in-chief  or  to  return  to  his  native
country.  He  refused  constantly,  alleging  that  to
do  the  first  would  be  treason  to  his  country,  and
to  do  the  second  would  be  a  stain  on  his  glory.
At  last  Montezuma  consented  to  satisfy  the  desire
of  his  general,  and  ordered  him  to  be  tied  to  the
stone  of  the  gladiators.  He  was  armed  in  the  usual
fashion,  and  Montezuma,  with  all  his  court,  was
present  at  the  spectacle.  Eight  famous  warriors
of  Anahuac  attacked  him  one  after  the  other,  and
were  all  disabled:  the  ninth,  however, stunned  him
with  a  blovv,  and  he  was  then  put  to  death,  with
the  customary  ceremonies.  See  "  Histoire  des  na-
tions civilisees  du  Mexique  et  de  l'Amerique  Cen-
trale  durant  les  siecles  anterieurs  a  Christophe
Colomb,"  by  the  Abbe  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg  (4
vols.,  Paris,  1859),  and  "  Monarquia  Indiana,"  by
Juan  de  Torquemada  (Seville,  1615).


124


TLAXPAXyUIZQUI


TOCQUEVILLE


TLAXPAXQUIZQUI  (tlas  -  pan  -  keeth'  -  kee),
Mexican  soldier.  He  lived  in  the  latter  half  of
the  loth  and  the  first  half  of  the  16th  century.
During  the  struggle  between  Cacamatzin  and
Ixtlilxochitl  for  the  kingdom  of  Texcoco,  which
began  in  1516,  he  commanded  the  troops  of  his
native  state,  Huexotzingo,  now  in  support  of  one
claimant,  now  of  another.  He  had  been  convicted
of  adultery  with  the  wives  of  two  other  chiefs  of
high  rank.  This  was  an  almost  unknown  crime
in  the  annals  of  the  Aztecs,  and  was  punishable
with  death.  But  as  the  culprit  was  very  power-
ful, the  husbands  appealed  to  Montezuma,  who
promised  to  take  the  matter  in  hand.  This  oc-
curred at  the  time  when  the  republic  of  Huexot-
zingo, which  was  then  in  alliance  with  Montezuma
and  Cacamatzin,  was  invaded  by  the  Tlaxcal-
tecs,  who  favored  Ixtlilxochitl.  The  Tlaxcaltecs
were  commanded  by  Tlalhuicole,  their  greatest
hero.  Tlaxpanquizqui  profited  by  the  occasion  to
efface  the  stain  of  his  crime  by  a  glorious  feat  of
arms.  He  succeeded  in  drawing  Tlalhuicole  into
an  ambuscade  and  made  him  prisoner.  The  Tlax-
caltecs fled  in  a  panic,  and  the  victory  of  the
Huexotzingos  was  complete.  Their  leader  led  his
captive  to  Mexico  and  presented  him  to  Monte-
zuma, who  not  only  pardoned  the  conqueror,  but
loaded  him  with  favors.  See  "Histoire  des  na-
tions civilisees  du  Mexique  et  de  l'Amerique  Cen-
trale  durant  les  sieeles  anterieurs  a  Christophe
Colomb,"  by  the  Abbe  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg  (4
vols.,  Paris,  1859),  and  "  Monarquia  Indiana,"  by
Juan  de  Torquemada  (Seville,  1615).

TOBAR,  Juan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Tezcoco,  Mexi-
co, in  1543 :  d.  in  Mexico  in  1623.  He  was  canon
of  that  country  when  the  first  Jesuits  landed  in
the  kingdom,  and  entered  their  order  soon  after
their  arrival.  He  spent  more  than  fifty-three  years
in  efforts  to  convert  the  Indians.  He  wrote,  by
order  of  the  viceroy,  Martin  Enriquez  de  Almansa,
"  Historia  antigua  de  los  Reinos  de  Mexico,  Acol-
huacan,  y  Tlacopan."  Jose  de  Acosta  acknowledges
in  his  "Historia  natural  y  moral  de  las  Indias"
(Seville,  1590)  that  a  considerable  part  of  his  ma-
terial was  derived  from  the  work  of  Tobar.

TOCORXAL  Y  GREZ,  Manuel  Antonio  (to-
cor-nal),  Chilian  statesman,  b.  in  Santiago,  12  June,
1817 :  U  there  in  1867.  He  studied  law  in  the
Xational  institute,  and  in  1839  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  In  1841  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
University  of  Chili,  and  he  became  in  the  same
year  editor  of  "  El  Conservador,"  but  in  1842  re-
tired from  the  press.  In  1844  he  travelled  through
Europe,  and  in  the  last  year  was  elected  deputy
to  congress,  where  he  forced  the  government  to
recognize  ministerial  responsibility.  In  1848  he
opposed  the  severe  press  law,  and  in  1849  was
elected  deputy  by  the  opposition  for  Valparaiso,
and  called  to  form  part  of  the  new  cabinet  as  sec-
retary of  justice.  In  1851  he  accompanied  Gen.
liulnes  in  the  campaign  of  the  south  as  jiidge-ad-
vocate-general ;  but  on  the  accession  of  President
Manuel  Montt  he  retired,  refusing  a  nomination
as  minister  to  the  United  States,  a  seat  on  the
supreme  bench,  and  the  presidency  of  the  com-
mission to  revise  the  criminal  code.  He  continued
his  opposition  in  congress,  but  in  1857  was  defeat-
ed in  the  election  for  Santiago.  From  1862  till
1863  he  was  secretary  of  the  interior  under  Gen.
Perez,  but  he  resigned  when  war  began  between
Peru  and  Spain.  From  1865  till  liis  death  he  was
rector  of  the  university.

TOCQUEVILLE,  "Alexis  Charles  Henri
C16rel,  Count  de,  French  statesman,  b.  in  Paris,  29
July.  1805 ;  d.  in  Cannes,  16  April,  1859. He  passed


his  early  youth  at  his  father's  castle  of  Verneuil,
near  Mantes,  received  his  education  in  the  College
of  Metz,  and  studied  law  in  Paris  in  1823-6,  being
graduated  as  licencie  in  the  latter  year.  Through
the  influence  of  his  family  he  was  named,  5  April,
1827,  judge  auditor  at  the  tribunal  of  Versailles,
and  soon  afterward  assistant  judge.  Later  he  be-
came deputy  assistant  district  attorney  of  the  same
city,  and  made  the  acquaintance  of  Gustave  de
Beaumont,  with  whom  he  was  sent  in  1831  to  the
United  States  by  the  secretary  of  the  interior  to
study  the  penitentiary  system  of  the  country.  They
landed  at  Boston  on  12  May,  and  remained  in  the
United  States  till  March,  1832,  visiting  the  princi-
pal prisons.  They  returned  to  France  with  six
folio  volumes  of  documents.  Toequeville  published
a  few  weeks  later  "  Xote  sur  le  systeme  peniten-
tiaire  et  sur  la  mission  confiee  par  M.  le  Ministre
de  l'interieur  a  MM.  de  Beaumont  et  de  Toeque-
ville" (Paris,  1832),  which  attracted  considerable
attention.  Toequeville,  becoming  dissatisfied  with
his  legal  duties,  resigned  on  21  May,  1832,  and
opened  an  attornev's  office.  His  "  Du  systeme
penitentiaire  aux  Etats-Unis  et  de  son  application
en  France"  (Paris,  1832;  2d  ed.,  with  additions,
2  vols.,  1836)  was  written  in  association  with  Gus-
tave de  Beaumont,  and  translated  into  several
languages,  including  an  English  version  by  Francis
Lieber  (Philadelphia,  1833).  The  authors  approved
the  solitary  system  as  practised  in  the  penitentiary
of  Cherry  hill,  in  Philadelphia,  and  they  caused  the
penitentiary  system  of  France,  and  eventually  of
the  continent,  to  be  entirely  remodelled.  The
French  academy  awarded  them  a  Montyon  prize,
and  the  success  of  their  work  was  then  considered
as  unprecedented  in  the  annals  of  literature.  He
then  visited  England,  married  there  in  1835,  and
in  January  of  the  latter  year  published  the  first
part  of  his  "  De  la  Democrat ie  en  Amerique "  (2
vols.,  Paris.  1835),  which  procured  for  the  author
an  extraordinary  prize  of  eight  thousand  francs
from  the  French  academy.  In  the  report  of  award
it  is  called  "  one  of  the  most  remarkable  works  pub-
lished in  the  nineteenth  century,  and  such  as  the
academy  has  seldom  been  called  upon  to  crown."
It  was  followed  by  the  second  part  early  in  1840.
The  work  was  translated  into  several  languages,
including  an  English  version  by  Henry  Reeve,  en-
titled '•  Democracy  in  America,  with  a  preface  and
notes  by  John  Spencer  (4  vols..  Xew  York,  1839-'40).
Reeve's  translation  has  been  edited  by  Francis
Bowen  (2  vols.,  Cambridge,  1862),  and  there  is  also
an  abridgment,  entitled  "American  Institutions
and  their  Influence  "  (Xew  York,  1856).  The  au-
thor was  created  a  knight  of  the  Legion  of  honor,
6  June,  1837,  elected  a  member  of  the  French
academy  of  moral  sciences,  6  Jan.,  1838,  and  given
a  seat  in  the  Academie  Francaise,  23  Dec,  1841.
In  parliament,  where  he  served  in  1839-'48,  Toeque-
ville advocated  the  abolition  of  slavery,  and  urged
the  colonization  of  Algiers,  which  he  visited  in  1841
and  1846.  Being  returned  to  the  constituent  assem-
bly after  the  revolution  of  1848,  he  was  chosen  a
member  of  the  committee  on  legislation,  elected
vice-president  of  the  assembly  in  1849,  and,  after
attending  the  diplomatic  conferences  in  Brussels
upon  Italian  affairs,  was  secretary  of  foreign  rela-
tions from  2  June  till  31  Oct.,  1849,  and  strongly
supported  the  French  expedition  to  Rome.  He  was
arrested  at  the  coup  d'etat  of  2  Dec,  1851,  and
afterward  retired  to  private  life.  Besides  those
already  cited,  his  works  include  "Etat  social  et
politique  de  la  France,"  written  at  the  invitation
of  John  Stuart  Mill,  who  translated  and  published
it  in  the  "  Westminster  Review  "  for  April,  1836 ;


TOD


TODD


125


<•  Memoire  sur  le  pauperisme  "  (Cherbourg,  1836) ;
"  Lettre  sur  le  svsteme  penitentiaire  "  (Paris,  1838) ;
"  Lettre  a  Lord  Brougham  sur  le  droit  de  visite  "
(1843) ;  "  Le  droit  au  travail "  (1843) ;  and  "  L'aneien
regime  et  la  revolution "  (1856 ;  translated  into
English,  New  York,  1856).  Tocqueville's  inedited
works  and  correspondence  were  published  by  his
friend,  Gustave  de  Beaumont  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1861 ;
2  vols.,  English  translation,  Boston,  1861) ;  and  the
latter  also  published  a  complete  edition  of  Tocque-
ville's works  (9  vols.,  Paris,  1861-5).

TOD,  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Suffield,  Conn.,  11
Dec,  1773;  d.  in  Warren  county,  Ohio,  11  April,
1841.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1795,  and
settled  in  Georgetown,  Ohio,  in  1800.  He  was
■elected  state  senator  in  1804,  served  as  judge  of
the  state  supreme  court  from  1806  till  1809,  was
presiding  judge  of  the  3d  judicial  circuit  of  Ohio
from  1815  till  1834,  and  was  afterward  prosecuting
attorney  for  Warren  county.  He  was  appointed
lieutenant-colonel  in  the  war  of  1812.  and  served
with  credit  at  the  defence  of  Fort  Meigs  in  May,
1813. — His  son,  David,  statesman,  b.  in  Youngs-
town,  Mahoning  co.,  Ohio,  21  Feb.,  1805 ;  d.  there,
13  Nov.,  1868,  was  educated  by  his  father,  and
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1827.  He  practised  his  pro-
fession in  Warren  for  fifteen  years,  was  elected  to
the  state  senate  in  1838,  and  canvassed  the  state
for  Martin  Van  Buren  in  1840.  He  was  nominated
for  governor  in  1844,  but  was  defeated  by  1,000
votes.  He  was  appointed  by  President  Polk  min-
ister to  Brazil  in  1847,  and  represented  the  United
States  there  till  1852,  when  he  returned,  and  took
part  in  the  canvass  which  resulted  in  the  election
of  Franklin  Pierce.  In  1860  he  was  elected  a  dele-
gate to  the  Charleston  convention,  was  made  first
vice-president  of  that  body,  and  presided  over  it
when  the  southern  wing  of  the  Democratic  party
withdrew.  He  was  an  advocate  of  compromise  at
the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  but  was  a  firm  sup-
porter of  the  government,  and  in  1861  was  nomi-
nated for  governor  of  Ohio  by  the  Republicans,  and
elected  by  a  majority  of  55,000.  During  his  term
of  two  years,  beginning  1  Jan.,  1862,  he  gave  much
aid  to  the  National  administration.

TODD,  Alpheus,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1821 ;  d.  in  Ottawa,  Canada,  22  Jan.,  1884.
He  removed  to  Canada  in  1833,  and  prior  to  the
union  of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada  was  assistant
librarian  to  the  legislative  assembly  of  the  former
province.  He  was  continued  in  this  office  by  the
legislature  of  the  united  provinces  till  1858,  when
he  was  appointed  chief  librarian.  When  he  became
librarian  there  were  but  1,000  volumes  in  the  libra-
ry ;  now  (1888)  there  are  more  than  200,000,  most
of  which  were  collected,  arranged,  and  classified
under  his  supervision.  He  published  "  The  Prac-
tice and  Privileges  of  the  Two  Houses  of  Parlia-
ment" (Toronto,  1839);  "Brief  Suggestions  in
Regard  to  the  Formation  of  Local  Governments
for  Upper  and  Lower  Canada,  in  Connection  with
a  Federal  Union  of  the  British  North  American
Provinces,"  a  pamphlet  (Ottawa,  1866) ;  and  "  Par-
liamentary Government  in  England:  its  Origin,
Development,  and  Practical  Operation"  (2  vols.,
London,  1867-9).— His  brother,  Alfred,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1821 ;  d.  in  Ottawa,  6  June,  1874,  came  to
Canada  in  1833,  and  became  chief  clerk  of  the  pri-
vate-bill office  of  the  legislative  assembly  of  Cana-
da. He  published  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Proceedings
to  be  adopted  in  conducting  or  opposing  Private
Bills  in  the  Parliament  of  Canada*'  (Quebec,  1862).

TODD,  Charles  Bnrr,  author,  b.  in  Redding,
Conn.,  9  Jan.,  1849.  He  was  educated  at  the  com-
mon schools,  and  was  fitted  for  college,  but  failure


of  eyesight  prevented  him  from  entering.  After
teaching  for  some  time,  he  devoted  himself  to  lit-
erary pursuits,  and  has  contributed  to  American
magazines.  He  was  appointed  in  May,  1877,  com-
missioner for  erecting  a  monument  on  the  winter
quarters  of  Gen.  Israel  Putnam's  division  of  Con-
tinentals in  Redding,  Conn.,  which  was  authorized
by  act  of  the  Connecticut  legislature.  He  is  the
author  of  "A  General  History  of  the  Burr  Family
in  America "  (New  York,  1878) :  "  A  History  of
Redding,  Conn."  (1880);  "Life  and  Letters  of
Joel  Barlow  "  (1886) ;  and  "  The  Story  of  the  City
of  New  York  "  (1888).

TODD,  David  Peck,  astronomer,  b.  in  Lake
Ridge,  N.  Y.,  19  March,  1855.  He  entered  Colum-
bia, but  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1875,  and
appointed  chief  assistant  to  the  U.  S.  transit  of
Venus  commission  in  Washington.  For  three
years  he  was  engaged  in  reducing  the  observations
of  the  transit  of  1874.  and  his  result  for  the  paral-
lax of  the  sun — 8".883 — was  the  first  that  was  de-
rived from  the  American  photographs  of  that
transit.  When  at  Amherst  he  began  a  series  of
observations  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  which  was
assiduously  maintained  for  twelve  years,  or  during
an  entire  revolution  of  the  planet.  His  observa-
tions on  those  bodies  led  him  to  begin  theoretical
researches  on  their  orbits,  and  he  published  "A
Continuation  of  De  Damoiseau's  Tables  of  the  Sat-
ellites of  Jupiter  to  the  Year  1900 "  (Washington,
1876).  These  are  now  used  in  the  preparation  of
the  "American  Ephemeris,"  the  "Berliner  astro-
nomisches  Jahrbuch,"  and  elsewhere,  and  they  were
also  extended  backward  by  him  to  1665.  In  1877
he  began  to  study  the  possibility  of  an  extra-Nep-
tunian planet,  from  the  discrepancies  in  the  motion
of  Uranus ;  after  which  he  spent  several  months
in  the  optical  search  for  it,  and  he  is  at  present
examining  the  photographic  evidence  of  its  exist-
ence. In  1878  he  was  sent  to  Texas  in  charge  of
the  U.  S.  government  expedition  to  observe  the
total  eclipse  of  the  sun  on  29  July,  and  on  his  re-
turn was  appointed  assistant  to  Simon  Newcomb
in  the  preparation  of  the  "  American  Ephemeris
and  Nautical  Almanac,"  remaining  in  that  office
until  1881.  He  then  accepted  the  chair  of  as-
tronomy at  Amherst,  with  the  directorship  of  the
observatory,  which  appointment  he  still  'holds,
and  in  1881-7  he  was  professor  of  astronomy  and
higher  mathematics  at  Smith  college,  where  in
1885-7  he  was  intrusted  with  the  planning  and
construction  of  the  new  observatory.  Prof.  Todd
was  invited  by  the  trustees  of  the  James  Lick  es-
tate to  direct"  the  observations  of  the  transit  of
Venus  in  1882  from  the  Lick  observatory,  and  in
1887  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  expedition  to
Japan  under  the  auspices  of  the  National  academy
of  sciences  and  the  U.  S.  navy  department  to  ob-
serve the  total  solar  eclipse  of  19  Aug.  After  that
event  he  organized  an  expedition  to  the  summit  of
Fujiyama,  the  sacred  mountain  of  Japan,  12,500
feet  in  elevation.  Astronomical  and  meteorologi-
cal observations  were  made  from  the  summit,  which
have  an  important  bearing  on  the  occupation  of
such  peaks  for  scientific  purposes.  The  degree  of
Ph.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Washington  and
Jefferson  college  in  1888,  and  he  is  member  of  sci-
entific societies  both  at  home  and  abroad.  His
writings  include  contributions  to  the  transactions
of  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member  and  reports
to  the  government.

TODD,  Eli,  physician,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
22  July,  1769;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  17  Nov.,  1833.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1787.  and  sailed  for
the  West  Indies  shortly  afterward,  intending  to


126


TODD


TODD


travel  in  Europe  and  Asia,  but  was  prevented  by
sickness  at  Trinidad.  Having  lost  the  fortune  left
him  by  his  father,  he  was  obliged  to  prepare  for  a
profession,  and,  selecting  that  of  medicine,  he  be-
gan to  practise,  after  the  required  course  of  medi-
cal study,  in  Farmington,  Conn.  He  removed  to
New  York  about  1810,  but  returned  to  Farming-
ton,  and  remained  there  until  1819,  when  he  went
to  Hartford,  where  he  soon  became  the  chief  con-
sulting physician.  In  1821  there  was  a  notable
increase  in  the  number  of  insane  persons  in  Hart-
ford and  the  neighborhood.  Dr.  Todd  appreciated
the  difficulty  of  treating  them  in  private  practice,
and  it  was  principally  due  to  him  that  the  atten-
tion of  the  profession  and  public  was  awakened  to
the  necessity  of  having  a  special  institution  for
their  care.  He  was  principally  instrumental  in
founding  the  Retreat  for  the  insane  at  Hartford,
one  of  the  earliest  of  the  kind,  was  elected  its
superintendent,  and  presided  over  it  till  his  death.
Under  him  it  became  one  of  the  best-managed  in-
stitutions either  in  this  country  or  Europe.  Dr.
Todd  was  repeatedly  elected  president  and  vice-

g resident  of  the  Medical  society  of  Connecticut.
Le  was  the  author  of  several  professional  mono-
graphs and  some  occasional  addresses.

TODD,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Montgomery  county,
Pa.,  in  1750 ;  d.  at  the  Blue  Licks,  Ky.,  19  Aug.,
1782.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Point  Pleasant,
Va.,  in  1774,  as  adjutant-general  to  Gen.  Andrew
Lewis.  He  settled  as  a  lawyer  in  Fincastle,  Va.,
but,  with  his  brothers,  emigrated  to  Fayette  coun-
ty, Ky.,  in  1775,  took  part  in  the  organization  of
the  Transylvania  colonial  legislature  that  year  with
Daniel  Boone,  and  penetrated  southwest  as  far  as
Bowling  Green,  Ky.  In  1776  he  settled  near  Lex-
ington and  was  elected  a  burgess  to  the  Virginia
legislature,  being  one  of  the  first  two  representa-
tives from  Kentucky  county,  where  he  served  as
county  lieutenant  and  colonel  of  militia.  He  ac-
companied Gen.  George  Rogers  Clark  to  Vineennes
and  Kaskaskia,  and  succeeded  him  in  command  of
the  latter  place.  In  1777  he  was  commissioned  by
Gov.  Patrick  Henry,  of  Virginia,  to  be  colonel  and
commandant  of  Illinois  county,  and  served  two
years.  He  organized  the  civil  government  of  this
county,  which  afterward  became  the  state  of  Illi-
nois. *Col.  Todd  went  to  Virginia  in  1779,  and  was
a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1780,  where  he  pro-
cured land-grants  for  public  schools,  and  intro-
duced a  bill  for  negro  emancipation.  Afterward
he  returned  to  his  family  in  Kentucky.  While
there  he,  as  senior  colonel,  commanded  the  forces
against  the  Indians  in  the  battle  of  Blue  Licks,
where  he  was  killed. — Levi,  brother  of  John,  was  a
lieutenant  under  George  Rogers  Clark  in  the  expe-
dition of  1778,  and  one  of  the  few  survivors  of  the
Blue  Licks;  and  Levi's  son,  Robert  S.,  was  the
father  of  Mrs.  Abraham  Lincoln.

TODD,  John,  author,  b.  in  Rutland,  Vt.,  9  Oct.,
1800;  d.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  24  Aug.,  1873.  His
boyhood  was  passed  in  poverty,  but  he  fitted  him-
self for  college,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1822.
He  spent  the  following  year  in  teaching,  then  en-
tered Andover  theological  seminary,  and  in  1827
was  ordained  a  minister  of  the  Congregational
church  in  Groton,  Mass.  He  became  pastor  of  the
church  in  Northampton  in  1883,  of  the  1st  Con-
gregational church  in  Philadelphia  in  1836,  and  of
the  1st  Congregational  church  in  Pittsfield  in  1842.
Here  he  remained  as  pastor  until  May,  1872,  when
his  strength  was  impaired  by  old  age.  In  1845  he
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Williams.  Dr.
Todd  took  a  warm  interest  in  the  progress  of  edu-
cation, and  the  Holyoke  female  seminary  partly


Jfovo.  Jcdd


owes  its  existence  to  him.  He  was  a  voluminous
and  popular  writer.  Besides  his  contributions  to
the  "  Congregationalist "  and  other  religious  peri-
odicals, and  his  ser-
mons, lectures,  and
orations,  he  pub-
lished about  thirty
volumes,all  of  which
were  re  -  issued  in
England,  and  sever-
al of  them  have  been
translated  into  Ger-
man, French,  mod-
ern Greek,  Dutch,
Danish,  Italian,  Ara-
bic, Armenian,Turk-
ish,  and  Tamil.  His
'■  Lectures  to  Chil-
dren "  have  been
printed  in  raised
letters  for  the  blind,
and  used  as  a  school-
book  in  the  colony
of  Sierra  Leone ;  of
someof  hisbooks  sev-
eral hundred  thou-
sand copies  have
been  sold,  and  several  of  his  shorter  pieces,  notably
f  Hafed's  Dream,"  were  for  many  years  favorites
for  school  readers.  His  publications  include  "  Lec-
tures to  Children"  (Northampton,  1834;  2d  series,
1858);  "Student's  Manual"  (1835;  revised ed., un-
der the  title  "Student's  Guide,"  with  preface  by
Rev.  Thomas  Binnev,  London,  last  ed.,  1869) ;  "  In-
dex Rerum"  (1835);*"  Truth  made  Simple"  (1839);
"  Great  Cities  "  (1841) ;  "  The  Lost  Sister  of  Wyo-
ming" (1841);  "Hints  to  Young  Men"  (1843);
"Simple  Sketches"  (Pittsfield,  1843);  "Summer
Gleanings  "  (London,  1852) ;  "  Daughter  at  School "
(Northampton,  1854) ;  "  The  Angel  of  the  Iceberg,
and  other  Stories"  (1859) ;  "  Future  Punishment "
(New  York,  1863) ;  "  Mountain  Gems "  (4  vols.,
Boston,  1864) ;  "  The  Water- Dove,  and  other  Gems  "
(Edinburgh,  1868);  "Sketches  and  Incidents,  or
Summer  Gleanings "  (1866) ;  "  Nuts  for  Boys  to
Crack"  (New  York,  1866);  "Polished  Diamonds"
(Boston,  1866) ;  "  Hints  and  Thoughts  for  Chris-
tians "  (New  York,  1867) :  "  Serpents  in  the  Dove's
Nest "  (Boston,  1867) ;"  Woman's  Rights"  (1867),
which  elicited  from  Gail  Hamilton  a  reply  entitled
"  Woman's  Wrongs :  a  Counter-irritant  "  (1868) ;
"  Hints  and  Thoughts  for  Christians "  (London,
1869);  "The  Sunset  Land,  or  the  Great  Pacific
Slope"  (Boston,  1869):  "Missions"  (1869);  and
"Old-Fashioned  Lives"  (1870).

TODD,  John  Blair  Smith,  soldier,  b.  in  Lex-
ington, Ky.,  4  April,  1814 ;  d.  in  Yankton,  Dakota,
5  Jan.,  1872.  He  went  with  his  parents  to  Illinois
in  1827,  and  from  that  state  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1837  and  as-
signed to  the  6th  infantry.  He  was  made  1st  lieu-
tenant on  25  Dec,  served  with  his  regiment  in  the
Florida  war  from  1837  till  1840,  was  on  recruiting
service  during  part  of  1841,  and  in  active  service
in  the  Florida  war  during  the  remainder  of  that
year  and  part  of  1842.  He  was  made  captain  in
1843,  and  was  on  frontier  dutv  in  Indian  territory
and  Arkansas  until  1846.  lie  served  in  the  war
with  Mexico  in  1847,  taking  part  in  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz  and  the  battles  of  Cerro  Gordo  and
Amazoque.  He  was  on  garrison  and  frontier  duty
till  1855,  when  he  was  engaged  in  the  action  of
Blue  Water  against  the  Sioux  Indians.  He  re-
signed on  16  Sept.,  1856,  and  was  an  Indian  trader
at  Fort  Randall,  Dakota,  from  that  date  till  1861,


TODD


TOLEDO


127


when  he  took  his  seat  as  a  delegate  to  congress,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  He  served  in
the  civil  war  as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
from  19  Sept.,  1861,  till  17  July,  1802,  and  was  in
command  of  the  North  Missouri  district  from  15
Oct.  to  1  Dec,  1861.  He  was  again  a  delegate  in
congress  in  1863-5,  was  elected  speaker  of  the
house  of  representatives  of  Dakota  in  1867,  and
was  governor  of  the  territory  in  1869-'71.

TODD,  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  King  and  Queen
county,  Va.,  23  Jan.,  1765 ;  d.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  7
Feb.,  1826.  His  father  died  when  he  was  an  in-
fant, and  he  had  some  difficulty  in  obtaining  an
education.  He  abandoned  his  studies  to  serve  in
the  army  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Revolution,  and
entered  the  Manchester  troop  of  cavalry  during
the  invasion  of  Virginia  by  Arnold  and  Phillips.
In  1786  he  was  tutor  in  the  family  of  a  cousin  in
Danville,  Ky.,  studying  law  at  night.  He  began
the  practice  of  his  profession  toward  the  end  of  the
year,  took  part  in  the  agitation  that  had  for  its  ob-
ject the  admission  of  Kentucky  as  a  state,  and
was  appointed  clerk  of  all  the  conventions  that
preceded  that  event.  He  was  made  clerk  of  the
U.  S.  court  for  the  district  of  Kentucky,  and  when
it  became  a  state  in  1799  he  was  appointed  clerk
of  the  court  of  appeals.  He  was  made  fourth
judge  of  the  same  court  in  1801,  and  chief  justice
in  1806.  He  was  appointed  an  associate  of  the  U.  S.
supreme  court  on  7  Feb.,  1826.  While  he  was  an
appellate  judge  of  Kentucky  he  gave  great  atten-
tion to  its  peculiar  system  of  land  laws,  originally
an  act  of  the  assembly  of  Virginia,  and  his  labors,
both  in  the  state  court  and  the  supreme  court,  were
instrumental  in  establishing  them  on  principles  of
law  and  equity. — His  son,  Charles  Scott,  soldier,
b.  near  Danville,  Ky.,  22  Jan.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Baton
Rouge,  La.,  14  May,  1871,  was  graduated  at  Will-
iam and  Mary,  Va.,  in  1809,  began  the  study  of
law  under  his  father,  and  afterward  attended  lec-
tures at  Litchfield,  Conn.  He  opened  a  law-office
in  Lexington  in  1811,  but  volunteered  in  June,
1812,  for  military  service.  In  December  he  be-
came division  judge -advocate  of  the  Kentucky
troops,  and  in  this  capacity  was  sent  by  Gen.  Will-
iam Henry  Harrison  with  private  instructions  to
Gen.  James  Winchester.  On  his  return  to  Ken-
tucky he  was  recommended  for  a  captaincy  in  the
regular  army  by  Gen.  Harrison,  and  was  appointed
to  a  vacancy  in  the  17th  regiment  of  infantry  in
May.  1813.  He  was  soon  afterward  transferred  to
the  28th  infantry,  and  appointed  aide  to  Gen.  Har-
rison. He  was  mentioned  in  the  report  of  the
campaign  of  1813  as  one  of  the  four  aides  that  had
rendered  Harrison  "the  most  important  services
from  the  opening  of  the  campaign."  He  was  made
deputy  inspector  of  the  8th  military  district  on  1
Nov.,  1813,  and  he  also  acted  as  adjutant-general  in
the  summer  of  1814  under  Gen.  Duncan  McArthur,
who  in  his  report  of  the  expedition  into  Canada
attributed  much  of  its  fortunate  issue  "  to  the  mili-
tary talents,  activity,  and  intelligence  of  Major
Todd."  He  was  appointed  inspector-general  on  2
March,  1815,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  but  resigned
in  June,  and  opened  a  law-office  in  Frankfort,  Ky.
He  was  appointed  secretary  of  state  by  Gov.  Madi-
son in  1817,  but  resigned  and  sat  in  the  legislature
in  1817-'18.  In  1820  he  was  sent  on  a  confidential
mission  to  the  republic  of  Colombia.  He  returned
to  the  United  States  in  1821.  but  resumed  his  du-
ties in  South  America  in  1822,  taking  with  him  the
recognition  of  its  independence  by  his  government.
Declining  several  offices,  he  retired  for  a  time  to
his  farm  in  Shelby  county.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  Presbyterian  general  assembly  at  Philadelphia


in  1837-'8,  and  for  several  years  vice-president  of
the  State  agricultural  society.  He  was  a  friend  of
Henry  Clay,  and  sustained  his  claims  to  the  presi-
dency, but  on  his  withdrawal  as  a  candidate  in
1835  he  supported  Harrison :  and  in  1840,  on  the
invitations  of  the  states  of  Ohio  and  Kentucky,  he
prepared,  in  conjunction  with  Benjamin  Drake,  of
Cincinnati,  a  sketch  of  his  civil  and  military  career
(Cincinnati,  1840).  To  support  Harrison's  candi-
dature he  soon  afterward  took  charge  of  the  "  Cin-
cinnati Republican."  His  relations  with  Harrison,
who  designed  him  for  the  mission  to  Vienna,  were
confidential.  He  was  sent  as  U.  S.  minister  to
Russia  by  President  Tyler,  and  reached  St.  Peters-
burg in  November,  1841.  He  was  popular  with
the  court  and  people,  and  was  elected  a  member  of
the  Imperial  agricultural  society,  from  which  for-
eigners had  heretofore  been  carefully  excluded.

TOEBBE,  Augustus  Mary,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Meppen.  Hanover,  17  Jan.,  1829 ;  d.  in  Covington,
Ky.,  2  May,  1884.  He  was  educated  in  the  gym-
nasium of  Meppen,  and,  after  completing  his  col-
legiate course,  was  for  several  years  engaged  in
mercantile  pursuits.  He  emigrated  to  the  United
States  in  1851,  entered  the  theological  seminary
of  Mount  St.  Mary's,  Cincinnati,  in  1852,  was  or-
dained priest  in  1854,  and  in  the  following  year
became  pastor  successively  at  New  Richmond  and
Cumminsville,  Ohio.  He  was  appointed  in  1857
assistant  pastor  of  St.  Philomena's  church,  Cin-
cinnati, and  in  1865  pastor.  In  1866  he  was  a
member  of  the  council  of  theologians  in  Baltimore
to  prepare  matters  for  discussion  in  the  second  ple-
nary council.  He  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Cov-
ington, 9  Jan.,  1870.  Bishop  Toebbe  found  the
finances  of  his  diocese  in  a  state  of  disorder,  but
he  showed  great  administrative  ability,  and  gradu-
ally raised  the  debt  that  had  been  contracted  dur-
ing the  episcopate  of  his  predecessor.  He  intro-
duced the  Sisters  of  the  Good  Shepherd  and  the
Sisters  of  Notre  Dame.  His  death  was  owing  to  an
ailment  that  he  contracted  while  he  was  engaged  in
ministerial  labors  among  the  workingmen  on  the
Cincinnati  Southern  railroad.  During  his  episco-
pate the  number  of  churches  increased  from  thirty-
eight  to  fifty-two,  and  the  priests  from  thirty-
three  to  fifty-five.  He  founded  several  parochial
schools,  which  were  attended  by  6,225  children  at
the  time  of  his  death.

TOICT,  Nicolas  (twat),  clergyman,  b.  in  Lille,
France,  in  1611 ;  d.  in  Paraguay  in  1680.  He  is
called  Del  Techo  by  Spanish  writers  on  the  latter
country.  He  became  a  Jesuit  in  1630,  went  to
Paraguay  in  1649,  and,  on  account  of  his  zeal  and
ability,  was  made  superior  of  the  Jesuits  in  that
province.  He  wrote  "  Nicolai  del  Techo  Societatis
Jesu  Historia  Provincial  Paraguaria?"  and  "  Re-
latio  Triplex  de  Rebus  Indicis"  (Antwerp,  1654).

TOLEDO,  Antonio  Sehastian  de  (to-lay  -do),
Marquis  de  Mancera,  viceroy  of  Mexico.  He  was
a  grandee  of  Spain  and  chamberlain  to  the  queen,
and  had  been  ambassador  in  Venice  and  Germany,
when  in  1664  he  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Mexico,
and  took  possession  of  the  government  on  15  Oct.
of  that  year.  In  the  following  year  St.  Augustine,
of  Florida,  then  depending  from  the  viceroyalty
of  Mexico,  was  sacked  by  buccaneers  and  the
depredations  of  Sir  Henrv  Morgan  on  the  Spanish
colonies  began,  and  Toledo  hastened  to  send  means
to  Florida  for  providing  fortifications  and  to  re-
enforce  the  fleet.  He  sent  two  expeditions  to  Cali-
fornia, but  did  not  obtain  any  noteworthy  results.
In  1667  some  English  privateers  presented  them-
selves in  front  of  Vera  Cruz,  but,  finding  strong
fortifications, entered Alvarado river  and com-


128


TOLEDO


TOLSA


mitted  depreciations.  In  the  same  year  the  interior
of  the  cathedral  was  finished  after  ninety-five  years
■of  work,  and  the  building  was  consecrated  a  second
time.  Tired  of  the  responsibilities  of  his  office.
Toledo  solicited  his  relief  after  the  conclusion  of
his  usual  term  of  office  in  1670,  but  the  measures
that  he  had  adopted  during  his  government  found
such  approval  that  the  queen  regent  insisted  in
prolonging  his  term  for  three  years.  In  this,  time
the  final  subjugation  of  the  Tai'ahumaro  Indians
by  the  capture  of  the  principal  caciques  took  place.
•On  his  way  to  Spain  in  1673  Toledo  lost  his  wife  in
Tepeaca,  near  Mexico.

TOLEDO,  Fernando  Alvarez  de,  Spanish
soldier  and  author,  lived  in  the  last  half  of  the  16th
century  and  the  first  half  of  the  17th.  He  was  a
private  soldier,  but  by  feats  of  daring  rose  to  the
rank  of  captain  in  Chili.  He  wrote  a  poem  called
"  Puren  Indomito,"  which,  after  having  been  lost
for  more  than  two  centuries,  was  discovered  by
Diego  Barros  Arana  and  published  by  him,  forming
the  first  series  of  the  "  Bibliotheque  Americaine  "
(Paris,  1862).  The  work  deserves  attention  not  for
its  literary  qualities,  but  for  being  a  history  of  the
Spanish  soldiers  who  conquered  Chili,  by  one  of
themselves.  The  author  is  very  candid  in  his  pic-
tures of  the  corruption  and  cruelty  of  his  country-
men. Alfonso  de  Ovalle,  in  his  "  Historica  Relacion
•del  Reyno  de  Chile  "  (Rome,  1646),  quotes  the  poem
.as  an  authority.  He  adds  that  Diego  Rosales,  au-
thor of  a  voluminous  history  of  Chili,  written
about  1650,  has  followed  the  narrative  of  Toledo
page  by  page.  Gonzalez  Barcia,  in  his  "  Histori-
. adores  primitivos  de  Indias,"  quotes  the  "  Puren
Indomito "  in  the  chapter  that  is  devoted  to  the
histories  of  Chili ;  but  it  afterward  sank  into  oblivi-
on until  it  was  discovered  in  the  library  of  Madrid.

TOLEDO,  Francisco  de,  viceroy  of  Peru,  b.  in
Andalusia  about  1520;  d.  in  Seville  about  1583.
He  belonged  to  the  noble  family  of  Oropesa,  and
in  1569  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Peru,  taking
-charge  of  the  government  in  Lima  on  26  Nov.  of
that  year.  When  the  grandson  of  Huaina-Capac,
Tupac- Amaru,  who,  after  the  death  of  his  brother,
Sayri-Tupac,  was  considered  by  the  natives  as  the
heir  to  the  crown,  refused  to  surrender,  Toledo,
under  the  pretext  of  forwarding  re-enforcements
to  Chili,  sent  in  1572  an  expedition  of  250  men  into
the  mountains  of  Vilcabamba,  where  the  young
inca  was  in  hiding  with  some  followers.  Martin
-de  Loyola,  with  a  small  force,  surprised  the  prince,
who  was  carried  prisoner  to  Cuzco,  and,  after  a  mock
trial  by  the  judge,  Loarte,  was  judicially  murdered
by  order  of  the  viceroy.  Toledo  was  a  legislator  and
statesman  of  considerable  ability  and  industry,  and
future  viceroys  referred  to  his  enactments  as  au-
thority. He  arranged  that  the  Indians  should  be
governed  by  chiefs  of  their  own  race,  and  fixed  the
tribute  to  be  paid  by  them,  exempting  all  men
under  the  age  of  eighteen  and  over  fifty,  thus
putting  a  stop  to  arbitrary  demands.  He  virtually
abolished  the  old  system  of  mita,  or  forced  native
labor,  although,  in  deference  to  the  demands  of  the
colonists,  he  enacted  that  a  seventh  part  of  the
.adult  male  population  of  every  village  should  still
be  obliged  to  work  for  the  Spaniards,  but  limiting
the  distance  they  might  be  taken  from  their  homes
and  fixing  a  reward  for  their  services.  The  Indians
admitted  that  the  country  had  not  been  so  well
governed  since  the  time  of  Inca  Yupanqui.  He
was  recalled  in  1581,  and  on  23  Sept.  of  that  year
delivered  the  government  to  his  successor,  Martin
Enriquez  de  Almansa,  returning  to  Spain,  where
he  was  arrested  on  the  charge  of  malversation  of
public  funds,  and  died  in  prison.


TOLEDO,  Garcia  de,  Spanish  missionary.  1>.  in
Oropesa,  Spain,  about  1510;  d.  in  Talavera,  Spain,
about  1583.  He  accompanied  the  viceroy,  Mendoza,
to  Mexico  in  1535.  After  a  short  but  brilliant  ca-
reer as  statesman,  he  entered  the  convent  of  St.
Dominick  in  Mexico.  On  the  demand  of  his  fami-
ly he  was  sent  back  to  Spain,  where  he  became  the
spiritual  director  of  St.  Teresa,  and  his  frequent
conversations  with  this  eminent  woman  only  made
him  more  anxious  to  devote  his  life  to  the  service  of
the  Indians.  In  1569  his  cousin,  Francisco  de  To-
ledo, was  named  viceroy  of  Peru,  and  invited  the
Dominican  to  accompany  him  as  spiritual  adviser.
He  was  beginning  to  exercise  his  ministry  in  Lima
when  the  viceroy  asked  him  to  be  his  confidential
adviser  on  a  tour  of  the  provinces.  This  journey
was  followed  by  several  others,  during  one  of  which
he  converted  a  tribe  of  Indians,  among  whom  he
founded  a  city  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Oropesa.
Among  the  advantages  that  the  Peruvians  drew
from  these  visits  were  a  number  of  ordinances  ap-
proved by  the  great  council  of  the  Indies.  These
ordinances  were  drawn  up  by  him,  and  for  a  long
time  formed  the  basis  of  (he  civil  law  and  the  rule
of  Peruvian  society.  In  1577  he  was  elected  provin-
cial of  Peru.  In  spite  of  his  great  age  and  infirm-
ities, he  visited  every  part  of  his  province,  founded
several  convents,  and  repaired  old  ones.  He  was  in
a  certain  sense  the  second  founder  of  the  University
of  Lima.  He  obtained  from  his  cousin  the  funds
needed  for  the  construction  of  new  buildings,  as  the
old  ones  had  become  too  small  for  the  increasing
number, of  students. In  1581  he  returned  to  Spain.

TOLON,  Miguel  Teurbe  (to-lone),  Cuban  au-
thor, b.  in  Pensacola,  Fla.,  in  1820 ;  d.  in  Havana,
Cuba,  in  1858.  When  he  was  a  child  his  parents
went  to  Matanzas,  Cuba,  where  he  received  his
education  and  passed  a  great  part  of  his  life.  In
1847  his  comedy  "  Una  >i  oticia  "  was  performed  at
Matanzas,  and  in  the  following  year  he  produced
another,  "  Un  Caserio.'"  In  1848  he  was  forced  to
emigrate  to  New  York,  his  political  opinions  being
in  opposition  to  the  Spanish  government.  In
New  York  he  devoted  his  time  to  teaching  and  to
literary  labors,  contributing  to  several  newspa-
pers. He  returned  to  Cuba  in  1857,  where  he  died
soon  afterward.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Preludios,"
a  collection  of  poems  (Matanzas.  1841) ;  "  Aguinal-
des  Matanzeros  "  (1847) ;  "  El  Laud  del  Desterra-
do "  (New  York,  1852) ;  "  Elementary  Spanish
Reader  and  Translator "  (1852) ;  "  Leyendas  Cu-
banas  "  (1856) ;  and  "  Flores  y  Espinas,"  poems
(Havana,  1858).

TOLSA,  Manuel,  Spanish  engineer  and  sculptor,
b.  in  Enguera,  Valencia,  about  1750;  d.  in  Mexico
about  1810.  He  studied  architecture  and  sculpture
in  the  Academy  of  San  Carlos  of  Madrid,  and  became
a  member  of  the  Academy  of  fine  arts  of  San  Fer-
nando. In  1781  he  went  to  Mexico  as  government
architect,  and  as  such  he  has  left  numerous  marks  of
his  genius  in  various  public  buildings,  directing  the
erection  of  the  towers  of  the  cathedral  in  1787-'91,
and  of  the  College  of  mines,  for  which  he  made  the
plans  and  began  the  building  in  1797;  but  after-
ward he  had  to  modify  the  plan,  to  add  a  second
story,  which  was  begun  in  1799.  In  1798  he  be-
came director  of  the  Academy  of  San  Carlos ;  but
his  chief  fame  rests  on  the  equestrian  statue  of
Charles  IV.,  ordered  in  1795  by  the  viceroy,  Mar-
quis de  Branciforte,  of  which  a  temporary  model
in  plaster  was  erected  in  1796.  After  the  working
model  was  completed  by  Tolsa,  the  statue  was  cast,
under  his  own  direction,  on  4  Aug..  1802,  with-
out an  accident,  notwithstanding  that  it  contains
thirty  tons  of  bronze. The  statue  is  15J  feet  high,


TOM


TO-MO-CHI-CHI


129


and  was  erected  on  a  2(H-foot  stone  pedestal,  on
the  queen's  birthday,  9 Dec,  1803,  in  the  main

square  of  Mexico.
In  1822  it  was  re-
moved to  the  uni-
versity, and  since
1852  it  has  stood
on  the  Paseo  de
Bucareli,  at  the
crossing  of  the
Calzada  de  la  Re-
forma.  It  is  one
of  the  finest  in
America,  and,  ac-
cording to  Hum-
boldt, second  only
to  the  statue  of
Marcus  Aurelius
in  Rome.  When
England  declared
war  againstFrance
and  Spain  in  1803,
Tolsa  established  a
foundry  in  Mexico  where  many  cannon  for  coast
defence  were  successfully  cast.

TOM  (known  as  Blind  Tom),  musical  prodi-
gy, b.  near  Columbus,  Muscogee  co.,  Ga.,  25  May,
1849.  He  is  of  pure  negro  blood.  His  parents
were  slaves,  and  called  him  by  the  name  of  a  mem-
ber of  their  former  owner's  family,  Thomas  Greene
Bethune.  He  was  born  blind,  and  the  only  sign
■of  intelligence  he  gave  in  infancy  was  the  interest
he  showed  in  sounds,  such  as  the  cries  of  animals,
the  moaning  of  the  wind,  the  rushing  of  waters,
and  the  pattering  of  rain.  He  could  speak  at  an
earlier  age  than  other  children,  and  with  greater
distinctness;  but  his  words  had  no  meaning  for
him,  and  while  he  was  able  to  repeat  entire  conver-
sations, he  expressed  his  own  wants  by  inarticulate
sounds.  When  he  was  four  years  old  a  piano  was
brought  to  his  master's  house  for  the  use  of  the
young  ladies  of  the  family,  and  one  night  they
were  awakened  by  hearing  him  play  one  of  their
pieces.  This  was  his  first  effort,  yet  he  played
with  both  hands,  using  the  black  and  white  keys.
After  this  he  was  allowed  the  use  of  the  instru-
ment, and  in  a  short  time  he  was  able  to  render
with  accuracy  all  the  airs  he  heard.  He  also  made
some  essays  in  original,  or  rather  imitative,  compo-
sition. He  would  run  about  the  yard  or  fields,  re-
turn to  the  piano,  and,  when  asked  what  he  was
playing,  would  reply :  "  What  the  birds  said  to
me,"  or  "  What  the  trees  said  to  me."  He  has
sometimes  been  compared  to  Mozart  in  childhood,
but  there  is  no  instance  recorded  in  musical  his-
tory comparable  to  Blind  Tom's  attainments  in
phonetics  and  the  power  of  reproduction  and  re-
tention of  sound  at  the  same  early  age.  Tom  was
brought  to  the  north  by  his  master,  and  made  his
first  appearance  in  New  York,  at  Hope  chapel,  15
■Jan.,  1861,  since  which  time  he  has  travelled  widely
in  this  country  and  Europe.  His  musical  feats,
whether  they  are  the  result  of  mnemonic  and  imi-
tative powers,  or  a  genius  for  music,  are  astonish-
ing. He  plays  one  air  with  his  right  hand,  accom-
panies it  by  another  air  in  another  key  with  his
left,  and  sings  a  third  air  in  a  third  key  at  the
same  time ;  and  he  can  name  any  combination  of
notes  that  he  hears  struck  on  the  piano,  no  matter
how  disconnected  and  puzzling  the  intervals.  Not
only  can  he  play  from  memory  any  piece  of  music,
however  elaborate,  after  a  single  hearing,  but  he
imitates  the  improvisation  of  another,  note  by
note,  then  gives  his  own  idea  of  it,  and  accompa-
nies that  with  variations.  His  capacity  for  the
vol.  vi. — 9


most  difficult  musical  performances  since  he  was
first  brought  to  the  north  by  his  master  has  been
subjected  to  the  severest  tests.  He  can  only  play
what  he  hears  or  improvises ;  but  he  has  about  5,000
pieces  at  the  disposal  of  his  memory,  embracing
the  most  difficult  selections  from  Bach,  Beethoven,
Chopin,  Gottschalk,  and  Thalberg.  During  his  per-
formances he  indulges  in  curious  antics,  and  he  ap-
plauds himself  at  the  end  by  clapping  his  hands.
He  recites  with  ease  in  Greek,  Latin,  French,  and
German,  besides  imitating  numberless  musical  in-
struments and  all  sorts  of  sounds.  He  has  par-
tially acquired  the  power  of  vision,  and  can  now
see  a  luminous  object  within  a  very  small  space.
But  while  Tom's  powers  of  memory,  manual  dex-
terity, and  imitative  faculties  are  great,  his  render-
ings are  devoid  of  color  and  individuality.

TOMES,  Robert,  physician,  b.  in  New  York
city,  27  March,  1817;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  28
Aug.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Washington
(now  Trinity)  college  in  1835,  and,  after  spending
some  time  in  the  medical  schools  of  Philadelphia,
went  to  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  where  he
received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  in  1840.  He  then
studied  in  Paris,  and  on  his  return  to  the  United
States  settled  in  the  practice  of  his  profession  in
New  York,  but  after  a  few  years  was  appointed
surgeon  on  a  vessel  belonging  to  the  Pacific  mail
steamship  company,  and  made  several  voyages  be-
tween Panama  and  San  Francisco.  In  1865  he  was
appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Rheims,  France,  which
office  he  filled  until  1867.  Returning  to  the  United
States,  he  spent  most  of  his  life  in  literary  occupa-
tion. He  wrote  for  journals  and  magazines,  and
his  series  of  papers  in  "Harper's  Magazine"  on
American  manners  and  society  were  widely  popu-
lar. He  published  "  The  Bourbon  Prince  "  (New
York,  1853) ;  "  Richard  the  Lion-Hearted  "  (1854) ;
"Oliver  Cromwell"  (1855);  "Panama  in  1855"
(1855) ;  "  The  Americans  in  Japan  "  (1857) ;  "  The
Battles  of  America  by  Sea  and  Land"  (3  vols.,
1861) ;  "  The  Champagne  Country  "  (1867) ;  and
"  The  War  with  the  South  :  a  History  of  the  Great
American  Rebellion"  (3  vols.,  1864-'7;  German
translation,  2  vols.,  1864-'7).  Dr.  Tomes  also  trans-
lated works  from  the  French  and  German.

TOMLINSON,  Gideon,  senator,  b.  in  Strat-
ford, Conn.,  31  Dec,  1780 ;  d.  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,
8  Oct.,  1854.  His  grandfather  was  an  officer  at
the  capture  of  Ticonderoga.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1802,  became  a  lawyer,  and  practised  at
Fairfield.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  congress
in  1818,  serving  from  1819  till  1827.  He  was  chosen
governor  of  Connecticut  in  that  year,  and  con-
tinued in  this  office  till  1831,  when  he  resigned
and  was  elected  U.  S.  senator,  serving  till  1837.

TO-MO-CHI-CHI,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  Georgia
about  1642;  d.  there,  5  Oct.,  1739.  He  was  the
chief  of  a  tribe  of  Creeks  that  dwelt  near  Yama-
craw  bluff,  the  site  of  Savannah.  He  met  Gen.
James  Oglethorpe  in  1733  at  the  fort  that  the  lat-
ter built  on  Savannah  river,  and  with  the  aid  of  an
interpreter  satisfactory  arrangements  were  made
with  the  neighboring  tribes  by  which  the  English
acquired  sovereignty  over  the  country  that  lies  be-
tween Savannah  and  Altamaha  rivers  and  extends
westward  as  far  as  the  tide-waters.  The  Creek
chief  is  represented  as  ninety-one  years  old  at  the
time,  dignified  and  grave  in  manner.  Although
he  had  been  expelled  by  the  lower  Creeks,  he  was
still  very  influential  throughout  the  confederacy,
and  this  influence  he  exercised  then,  and  during
the  remainder  of  his  life,  in  favor  of  the  English
settlers.  He  presented  Oglethorpe  with  a  buffalo-
skin  on  which  the  head  and  feathers  of  an  eagle


130


TOMPKINS


TOMPKINS


were  painted,  and  explained  that  these  symbols
were  significant  of  the  swiftness,  strength,  love  for
the  Indian,  and  power  to  protect  him,  which  were
English  characteristics. He  visited  England  in

1734  in  company
with Oglethorpe,
five  other  chiefs,
and members  of
his  family. As
they  were  the  first
Indians  in Lon-
don since  the  ap-
fearance of the
roquois chiefs
with  Peter  Schuy-
ler in  1710,  they
were objects of
wonder  and  admi-
ration, and  were
treated  with  great
distinction. To-
mo  -  chi  -  chi and
his  queen  were  robed  in  scarlet  and  gold,  and  were
conveyed  to  an  audience  with  King  George  in  a
coach  drawn  by  six  horses. He  was  received  gra-
ciously, and  assured  of  the  friendship  and  protec-
tion of  the  English  monarch. After  a  stay  of  four
months,  during  which  he  received  many  costly
presents,  he  was  conveyed  with  his  family  in  royal
carriages  to  the  ship  on  which  he  embarked  for
Savannah. His  funeral  ceremonies  were  very  im-
posing. His  body  was  accompanied  to  the  tomb
by  a  long  train  of  Indians,  magistrates,  and  inhab-
itants of  Savannah  amid  discharges  of  musketry.
A  pyramid  of  stone  was  ordered  to  be  erected  over
his  grave  in  the  centre  of  the  city  by  Oglethorpe.

TOMPKINS,  Daniel  D.,  vice-president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  Fox  Meadows  (now  Scarsdale),
Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  21  June,  1774 ;  d.  on  Staten
island,  N.  Y.,  11  June,  1825.  His  father  was  Jona-
than G.  Tompkins,  a  farmer,  who  performed  ser-
vices useful  to  his  country  during  the  Revolution-
ary conflict.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Columbia
in  1795,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
New  York  city  in  1797,  gained  rapid  success  in  his

Erofession,  and  soon  began  to  take  part  in  politics,
eing  elected  to  the  State  constitutional  conven-
tion of  1801,  and  in  the  same  year  to  the  assembly.
He  was  a  leader  of  the  Republican  party  in  his
state,  and  in  1804  was  elected  to  the  National  house
of  representatives,  but  resigned  on  2  July,  before
the  meeting  of  congress,  in  order  to  take  his  seat
on  the  bench  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  York,
having  been  nominated  an  associate  justice  on  the
promotion  of  James  Kent  to  the  chief  justiceship.
On  9  June,  1807,  he  resigned  in  order  to  become
the  candidate  for  governor  of  the  Democratic  wing
of  his  party  in  opposition  to  Morgan  Lewis.  He
was  elected  by  a  majority  of  4,000  votes,  and  found
himself  in  accord  with  the  legislature  in  his  sup-
port of  the  foreign  policy  of  the  Jefferson  admin-
istration. He  was  continued  in  the  office  by  the
reunited  Republican  factions  at  the  elections  of
1809  and  1811.  In  1812,  in  order  to  prevent  the
establishment  of  the  Bank  of  North  America  in
New  York  city  as  the  successor  to  the  defunct
United  States  bank  of  Philadelphia,  he  resorted  to
the  extraordinary  power  of  proroguing  the  legisla-
ture that  the  constitution  then  gave  him.  which
no  governor  ever  used  except  himself  in  this  in-
stance. The  charter  of  the  bank  had  been  approved
by  the  house,  a  part  of  the  Republicans  voting  with
the  Federalists,  and  when  the  legislature  reassern-
bled  it  was  at  once  passed.  In  the  election  of  1813
his  majority  was  reduced  from  10,000  to  4,000,  and


there  was  a  hostile  lower  house  in  the  next  legisla-
ture. Nevertheless,  his  bold  act  made  him  very
popular  with  the  common  people,  and  his  active-
patriotism  during  the  war  with  Great  Britain  in-
creased their  admiration.  He  placed  the  militia
in  the  field,  and  did  more  than  the  Federal  gov-
ernment for  the  success  of  the  operations  on  the
Canadian  border,  pledging  his  personal  and  official
credit  when  the  New  York  banks  refused  to  lend
money  on  the  security  of  the  U.  S.  treasury  notes-
without  his  indorsement.  He  advanced  the  means^
to  maintain  the  military  school  at  West  Point,  to
continue  the  recruiting  service  in  Connecticut,  and
to  pay  the  workmen  that  were  employed  in  the
manufactory  of  arms  at  Springfield.  He  bought
the  weapons  of  private  citizens  that  were  delivered
at  the  arsenal  in  New  York  city,  and  in  a  short
time  40,000  militia  were  mustered  and  equipped
for  the  defence  of  New  York,  Plattsburg,  Sackett's
Harboivand  Buffalo.  When  Gen.  John  Armstrong
retired  from  the  secretaryship  of  war  after  the
sacking  of  Washington,  President  Madison  invited
Tompkins  to  enter  the  cabinet  as  secretary  of  state
in  the. place  of  James  Monroe,  who  assumed  charge
of  the  war  department;  but  he  declined  on  the
ground  that  he  could  be  of  more  service  to  the
country  as  governor  of  New  York.  He  was  re-
elected in  1815,  and  in  April,  1816,  was  nominated
for  the  vice-presidency  of  the  United  States.  His
talents  and  public  services  were  more  conspicuous-
than  those  of  James  Monroe,  but  the  northern
Democrats  were  not  strong  enough  to  command
the  first  place  on  the  ticket.  Before  resigning  the
governorship  and  entering  on  the  office  of  vice-
president,  to  which  he  was  elected  by  183  out  of
217  votes,  he  sent  a  message  to  the  legislature,  dated
28  Jan.,  1817,  recommending  that  a  day  be  fixed
for  the  abolition  of  slavery  within  the  bounds  of
the  state,  and  the  assembly,  acting  on  his  sugges-
tion, decreed  that  all  slaves  should  be  free  on  and
after  4  July,  1827.  He  was  re-elected  vice-presi-
dent by  215  of  the  228  votes  that  were  cast  in  1820,
and  in  the  same
year  was  proposed
by  his  friends  as  a
candidate  for  gov-
ernor ;  but  his  pop-
ularity had  dimin-
ished, and  charges
of  dishonesty  were
made  in  connection
with  his  large  dis-
bursements during
the  war  with  Great
Britain.  He  was
a  delegate  to  the
State  constitution-
al convention  of
1821.  The  suspi-
cion of  embezzle-
ment, which  were
due  to  a  confusion
in  his  accounts,  un-
balanced his  mind
and  brought  on  a
melancholy  from  which  he  sought  escape  in  intoxi-
cating drinks,  thereby  shortening  his  life.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  York  historical
society,  one  of  the  corporators  of  the  city  schools,
and  a  regent  of  the  State  university.  —  Daniel's
nephew,  Daniel  D.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  in
1799;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  26  Feb.,  1863,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1820,
entered  the  ordnance  corps,  and  on  the  reorgani-
zation of  the  array  was  made  2d  lieutenant  of


TOMPSON


TONE


131


artillery,  the  ordnance  department  being  at  that
time  merged  in  the  artillery,  with  commission  dat-
ing from  1  July,  1821  He  was  promoted  1st  lieu-
tenant on  1  March,  1825,  and  captain  on  31  Dec,
1835,  and  in  the  Florida  war  against  the  Seminole
Indians  distinguished  himself  in  the  skirmish  at
San  Velasco,  in  the  battle  of  Wahoo  Swamp,  and
in  other  actions,  and  was  brevetted  major  on  11
Sept.,  1836.  He  was  appointed  captain  and  assist-
ant quartermaster  on  7  July,  1838,  became  a  major
on  the  staff  on  22  July,  1842,  and  during  the  Mexi-
can war  had  charge  of  the  forwarding  of  supplies
from  Philadelphia,  receiving  the  brevet  of  lieuten-
ant-colonel on  30  May,  1848,  for  meritorious  per-
formance of  duties  connected  with  the  prosecution
of  the  war.  He  was  made  a  full  lieutenant-colonel
on  16  Sept.,  1851,  and  colonel  and  assistant  quar-
termaster-general on  22  Dec,  1856,  and  from  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  till  the  time  of  his
death  he  served  as  depot  quartermaster 'in  New
York  city,  furnishing  supplies  to  the  armies  in  the
field. — A  son  of  the  second  Daniel  D.,  Charles
H.,  soldier,  b.  in  Fort  Monroe,  Va.,  12  Sept.,  1830,
was  educated  at  Kinsley's  school  at  West  Point,
N.  Y.,  and  for  two  years  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy, but  resigned  without  completing  the  course.
He  entered  the  service  in  1856  in  the  dragoons,  and
after  an  enlistment  of  three  years  on  the  frontier,
during  which  he  passed  through  the  principal  non-
commissioned grades,  he  was  appointed  2d  lieuten-
ant in  the  2d  U.  S.  cavalry,  23  March-,  1861,  and
was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  April  of  the  same
year.  While  commanding  a  squadron  of  his  regi-
ment, the  5th  cavalry,  within  the  defences  of  Wash-
ington, he  made  a  dashing  reconnoissance  in  the
direction  of  Fairfax  Court-House,  Va.,  31  May,
1861.  It  was  at  night  and  resulted  in  the  capture
of  two  outposts  of  the  enemy,  with  an  estimated
loss  of  twenty-five  Confederates.  Lieut.  Tompkins
charged  three  times  through  the  town,  losing  sev-
eral men  and  horses,  including  two  chargers  which
were  shot  under  him.  As  one  of  the  first  cavalry
affairs  of  the  war,  it  attracted  wide  attention.  Sub-
sequently he  served  in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run  and
upon  the  staff  of  Gen.  George  Stoneman.  He  was
appointed  captain  and  assistant  quartermaster,
served  for  a  few  months  as  colonel  of  the  1st  Ver-
mont cavalry,  as  lieutenant-colonel  and  quarter-
master of  volunteers  in  1865-'6,  and  colonel  and
quartermaster  in  1866-'7.  He  was  made  deputy
quartermaster-general  in  the  regular  army  in  1866,
and  assistant  quartermaster-general  with  rank  of
colonel,  24  Jan.,  1881.  He  participated  in  the
operations  of  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  and  Gen.
John  Pope  in  the  Shenandoah  campaign,  and  was
recommended  for  the  appointment  of  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  for  conspicuous  services  at
the  battle  of  Cedar  Creek,  Va.  He  has  served  from
1865  till  1888  as  chief  quartermaster  of  the  prin-
cipal military  divisions  of  the  army,  and  was  at  the
last-named  date  chief  quartermaster  of  the  divis-
ion of  the  Atlantic.  He  was  brevetted  major  for
Fairfax  Court-House,  lieutenant-colonel  for  the
Shenandoah  campaign,  and  colonel  and  brigadier-
general,  13  March,  1865,  for  meritorious  services
during  the  war.

TOMPSON,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lan-
cashire, England,  in  1598 ;  d.  in  Braintree,  Mass.,
10  Dec,  1666.  He  emigrated  to  this  country  about
1634,  and  became  first  pastor  of  the  church  at
Braintree  (now  Quincy).  He  went  on  a  mission  to
Virginia  in  1642,  but  was  silenced  for  non-conform-
ity and  compelled  to  return  to  New  England.  He
was  an  acceptable  preacher,  and  described  by  Cot-
ton Mather  as  a  "pillar  of  the  American  church  " ;


but  he  was  subject  to  fits  of  depression,  and  in  one
of  them  committed  suicide.  His  contemporaries
describe  him  as  "an  author  of  reputation,"  but,
with  the  exception  of  several  prefaces  to  the  books
of  others,  his  publications  have  all  perished. — His
son,  Benjamin,  educator,  b.  in  Braintree,  Mass.,
14  July,  1642 ;  d.  13  April,  1714,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1662,  became  master  of  the  Boston
Latin-school  in  1667,  and  three  years  later  took
charge  of  the  Cambridge  school,  preparatory  to
Harvard,  which  post  he  held  for  nearly  forty  years.
He  probably  died  in  Cambridge,  but  is  buried  in
Roxbury.  The  inscription  on  his  tombstone  de-
scribes him  as  "  a  learned  school-master  and  phy-
sician, and  ye  renowned  poet  of  New  England."
He  wrote  an  "  Elegy  on  the  Rev.  Samuel  Whit-
ing, of  Lynn,  Mass.,"  which  is  printed  in  Cotton
Mather's  "  Magnalia,"  and  a  poem  of  some  merit
descriptive  of  King  Philip's  war,  entitled  "  New
England's  Crisis  "  (Cambridge,  1675). — Benjamin's
son,  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  20
April,  1665  ;  d.  in  Marshfield,  Mass.,  10  March,
1705,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1684,  taught
for  several  years  at  Newbury,  and  from  14  Oct.,
1696,  until  his  death  was  pastor  of  the  church  at
Marshfield,  Mass.  On  his  tombstone  is  inscribed :
"  Here  in  a  tyrant's  hand  doth  captive  lie
A  rare  synopsis  of  divinity."
His  last  sermons,  entitled  "  Heaven  the  Best  Coun-
try," were  published  (1712).

TONE,  William  Theobald  Wolfe,  soldier,  b.
in  Dublin,  Ireland,  29  April,  1791 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  10  Oct.,  1828.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  the
Irish  patriot  and  French  general,  Theobald  Wolfe
Tone.  After  the  tragic  death  of  his  father  he
was  declared  an  adopted  child  of  the  French  re-
public by  the  Directory,  and  educated  with  his
younger  brother  in  the  Prytaneum  and  Imperial
lyceum  at  the  national  expense.  During  this
period  he  wrote  a  work  on  the  legislation  of  the
Goths  in  Italy,  which  was  favorably  noticed  by
the  institute.  He  was  appointed  a  cadet  in  the
Imperial  school  of  cavalry  on  3  Nov.,  1810,  and
remained  there  until  January,  1813,  when  he  was
promoted  to  be  sub-lieutenant  in  the  8th  regiment
of  chasseurs.  He  distinguished  himself  in  the
engagements  of  that  year,  and  received  six  lance
wounds  at  the  battle  of  Leipsic  He  was  then
made  lieutenant  on  the  staff,  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
Bagneres,  and  member  of  the  Legion  of  honor.
After  the  fall  of  Napoleon  he  gave  himself  to
literary  and  antiquarian  studies.  But,  when  Louis
XVIII.  left  the  kingdom,  he  considered  himself  ab-
solved from  his  allegiance,  and  served  again  under
Napoleon,  and  was  employed  by  him  in  organizing
defensive  forces  on  the  Rhine  and  on  the  Spanish
frontier.  He  left  the  French  army  after  the  battle
of  Waterloo,  and  came  to  the  United  States  in
1816.  He  studied  law  for  some  time,  and  wrote
papers  on  military  tactics.  He  was  appointed  2d
lieutenant  of  light  artillery  on  12  July,  1820,  and
was  transferred  to  the  1st  artillery  on  1  June,
1821,  but  resigned  on  31  Dec,  1826,  and  mar-
ried a  daughter  of  William  Sampson.  He  pub-
lished "L'Etat  civil  et  politique  de  l'ltalie  sous
la  domination  des  Goths  v  (Paris,  1813) ;  "  Life  of
Theobald  Wolfe  Tone,  written  by  Himself  and  con-
tinued by  his  Son :  with  his  Political  Writings,
etc. ;  edited  bv  his  Son,  William  Theobald  Wolfe
Tone,  with  a  Brief  Account  of  his  own  Education
and  Campaigns  under  the  Emperor  Napoleon"
(2  vols.,  Washington,  1826;  London,  1827);  and
"  School  of  Cavalry,  or  a  System  for  Instruction,
etc.,  proposed  for  the  Cavalry  of  the  United  States  "
(Georgetown,  D.  C,  1824).


132


TONER


TONYN


TONER,  Joseph  Meredith,  physician,  b.  in
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  30  April,  1825.  He  received  his  clas-
sical education  at  Western  Pennsylvania  university
and  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  was  graduated  at
Vermont  medical  college  in  1850  and  Jefferson
medical  college  in  1853,  and,  after  a  short  resi-
dence in  Summitsville,  Pa.,  and  Harper's  Ferry,
Va.,  settled  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1855.  He  was
a  founder  of  Providence  hospital  and  of  St.  Ann's
infant  asylum,  to  which  he  is  a  visiting  physician,
and  since  1856  has  been  the  attending  physician  to
St.  Joseph's  orphan  asylum.  Aware  of  the  per-
ishable character  of  much  of  the  early  medical  lit-
erature of  this  country,  he  devised  a  scheme  for  a
repository  of  medical  works  that  should  be  under
the  control  of  that  profession  in  the  United  States
and  located  at  Washington,  D.  C.  His  resolution
on  that  subject  was  adopted  by  the  American  medi-
cal association  in  1868,  and  resulted  in  the  estab-
lishment of  the  library  of  the  American  medical
association.  The  collection  is  placed  in  the  Smith-
sonian institution,  and  has  reached  the  number  of
6,000  volumes,  including  pamphlets.  In  1871  he
founded  the  Toner  lectures  by  placing  $3,000  (which
has  grown  to  $5,000)  in  the  hands  of  trustees,  who
are  charged  with  the  duty  of  annually  procuring
two  lectures  that  contain  some  new  fact  valuable
to  medical  science,  the  interest  on  the  fund,  save
ten  per  cent,  which  is  added  to  the  permanent
fund,  being  paid  to  the  authors  of  the  essays.
These  lectures  are  included  in  the  regular  list  of
the  publications  of  the  Smithsonian  institution.  It
is  the  first  attempt  that  has  been  made  in  this
country  to  endow  a  course  of  lectures  on  such  con-
ditions. He  gave  in  1875  and  three  subsequent
years  the  Toner  medal  at  Jefferson  medical  college,
to  be  awarded  to  the  best  thesis  that  embodies  the
results  of  original  investigation.  For  many  years
he  has  given  a  similar  medal  to  the  University  of
Georgetown.  He  was  president  of  the  American
medical  association  in  1873  and  of  the  American
health  association  in  1874,  a  vice-president  of  the
International  medical  congress  in  1876,  and  a  vice-
president  and  registrar  of  the  International  medi-
cal congress  in  1887.  Dr.  Toner  has  devoted  much
time  and  research  to  early  American  medical  litera-
ture, and  has  collected  over  1,000  treatises  pub-
lished before  1800,  and,  besides  publishing  numer-
ous monographs,  has  in  preparation  a  "  Biographi-
cal Dictionary  of  Deceased  American  Physicians,"
of  which  more  than  4,000  sketches  are  completed.
He  is  an  authority  in  the  medical,  biographical,
and  local  history  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  and
has  devised  a  system  of  symbols  of  geographical
localities,  which  has  been  adopted  by  the  U.  S.
post-office  department.  In  1882  he  gave  his  entire
library,  including  manuscripts,  to  the  U.  S.  gov-
ernment. It  consisted  of  26,000  books  and  18,000
pamphlets.  He  is  a  member  of  numerous  medical,
historical,  and  philosophical  associations,  has  pub-
lished more  than  fifty  pamphlets,  which  include
"  Maternal  Instinct "  (Baltimore,  1864) ;  "  Compul-
sory Vaccination  "  (1865) ;  "  Medical  Register  of  the
District  of  Columbia  "  (1867) ;  "  Necrological  No-
tices of  Deceased  Surgeons  in  the  Rebellion  "  (Wash-
ington, 1870) ;  "  Medical  Register  of  the  United
States  "  (Philadelphia,  1874) ;  "  Dictionary  of  Ele-
vations and  Climatic  Register  of  the  United  States  "
(New  York,  1874);  "Annals  of  Medical  Progress
and  Medical  Education  in  the  United  States "
(1874);  "Medical  Men  of  the  Revolution "  (Phila-
delphia, 1876) ;  "  Rocky  Mountain  Medical  Associa-
tion "  (1877) ;  and  "  Memorial  Volume,  with  a  Biog-
raphy of  its  Members"  (Washington,  1877).  See
life  by  Thomas  Antisell  (Washington,  1878).


TONTY,  or  TONTI,  Chevalier  Henry  de,  Ital-
ian explorer,  b.  in  Gaeta,  Italy,  about  1650 :  d.  in  Mo-
bile, La.  (now  Ala.),  in  September,  1 704.  His  father,
Lorenzo,  was  the  inventor  of  the  system  of  annui-
ties that  is  called  the  Tontine.  Henry  took  part
in  several  naval  and  military  engagements  when
quite  young,  in  one  of  which  he  lost  a  hand.  Its
place  was  supplied  by  an  iron  one,  which  he  used
skilfully.  On  the  recommendation  of  the  Prince
de  Conti,  the  Sieur  de  La  Salle  took  him  into  his
service,  and  he  embarked  with  the  latter  for  Que-
bec on  14  July,  1678.  He  completed  the  fort  at
Niagara,  which  had  been  designed  by  La  Salle,  and
garrisoned  it  with  thirty  men.  In  1679  he  visited
several  of  the  Indian  tribes,  went  to  Detroit  in  ad-
vance of  La  Salle,  having  first  taken  steps  to
strengthen  and  provision  his  garrison,  and  ad-
vanced into  the  country  of  the  Illinois,  whom  he
won  to  the  side  of  the  French ;  but  this  alliance
proved  unfortunate  for  the  Illinois,  who  were  at-
tacked by  the  Iroquois  on  account  of  it  and  de-
feated with  loss  almost  under  the  eyes  of  Tonti.
In  1680  he  was  ordered  by  La  Salle  to  build  a  fort
on  the  river  of  the  Illinois,'  but,  learning  that  Fort
Crevecceur  was  threatened  by  the  Iroquois,  he
marched  to  its  aid.  There  he  met  the  Indians  and
had  some  parleying  with  them,  during  which  he
was  wounded  by  an  Onondaga  warrior.  Believing
that  the  fort  was  not  defensible,  he  retired  in  Sep-
tember with  the  five  men  that  constituted  its  gar-
rison. He  sailed  up  the  Illinois,  experiencing  some
losses  in  the  voyage,  and  wintered  in  the  Bay  of
Lake  Michigan  (Green  bay)  in  1681.  He  was  sent
by  La  Salle  the  same  year  to  finish  the  fort  on  the
Illinois  which  was  begun  the  preceding  year,  to
which  he  gave  the  name  of  St.  Louis.  He  de-
scended the  Mississippi  with  La  Salle,  but  on  15
May,  1682,  was  despatched  by  the  latter,  who  had
fallen  sick,  to  Mackinaw  for  assistance.  In  1684
he  was  at  Fort  St.  Louis  and  repelled  an  attack  of
the  Iroquois.  In  1686  he  went  to  the  mouth  of
Mississippi  river  by  way  of  Chicago  and  Fort  Louis
to  seek  tidings  of  La  Salle,  and  on  his  return  to
Montreal  he  was  sent  to  the  Illinois  country  to  col-
lect a  large  force  of  Illinois  Indians  for  the  Seneca
campaign.  He  was  able  to  bring  only  eighty  to
Detroit,  with  whom  he  took  part  in  the  expedition
of  Denonville.  Disheartened  by  the  death  of  La
Salle  and  of  almost  all  the  companions  of  his  early
adventures,  he  spent  the  last  years  of  his  life
among  the  Illinois,  who  became  much  attached  to
him.  He  was  discovered  there  by  Iberville  in  1700,
supporting  himself  by  hunting  and  trading  in  furs.
A  work  purporting  to  be  Tonti's  memoirs  was  pub-
lished in  Paris  in  1697,  entitled  "Dernieres  de-
couvertes  de  la  Salle  dans  l'Amerique  septentri-
onale  "  (English  translation,  London,  1698 ;  New
York,  1814).  Tonti  declared  to  Iberville  as  well  as
to  Father  Marest  that  he  had  no  hand  in  this  work,
which  is  full  of  errors  and  exaggerations.  The
real  memoirs  of  Tonti  have  been  published  by  Pierre
Margry  in  "  Origines  Francaises  des  pays  d'outre-
mer  '  (Paris,  1877-9).  Vol.  i.  contains  "Voyages
et  etat  des  Francs  sur  les  lacs  et  le  Mississippi
sous  les  ordres  de  MM.  de  la  Salle  et  de  Tonty  ae
1678  a  1684,"  and  vol.  iii.  "  Lettres  de  Henri  de
Tonty  sur  ce  qu'il  a  appris  de  M.  de  la  Salle,  le
voyage  qu'il  a  fait  pour  l'aller  chercher  et  son  de-
part prochain  pour  marcher  contre  les  Iroquois,
1686-1689."  Tonti  wrote  in  1693  a  memoir  ad-
dressed to  Count  de  Pontchartrain,  which  is  also
published  in  Margry's  "  Origines  "  (1867).

TONYN,  Patrick,  British  soldier,  b.  in  1725;
d.  in  London,  England,  30  Dec,  1804.  He  became  a
captain  in  the  6th  dragoons  in  1751,  with  which  regi-


TOOKE

ment  he  served  in  Germany  in  1758,  was  made
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  104th  regiment  in  1761,
and  in  1775-'83  was  governor  of  East  Florida.  On
1  Jan.,  1798,  he  became  general.

TOOKE,  John  Home,  English  politician,  b.  in
Westminster,  England,  25  June,  1736 ;  d.  in  Wim-
bledon, England,  18  March,  1812.  He  changed  his
name  from  Home  to  take  an  estate  that  was  be-
queathed him  by  William  Tooke  in  1782.  He  was
a  minister  of  the  established  church,  a  follower  of
John  Wilkes,  and  in  1768  a  founder  of  the  Society
for  the  support  of  the  bill  of  rights.  He  bitterly
opposed  the  coercion  of  the  American  colonies,  and,
after  the  battles  of  Lexington  and  Concord,  adver-
tised for  a  subscription  for  "  the  widows  and  or-
phans of  the  American  soldiers  who  were  murdered
by  the  king's  troops."  The  ministry  prosecuted
him  for  libel,  and  he  was  tried  at  Guilford  hall  in
July,  1777.  He  conducted  his  own  defence,  that  he
might  personally  attack  the  government,  and  was
condemned  to  one  year's  imprisonment,  and  to  pay
a  fine  of  £200.  While  in  jail  he  published  his  cele-
brated "  Letter  to  Mr.  Dunning,"  in  which  he  criti-
cally explained  the  case  of  the  King  vs.  Lawley,
which  had  been  used  as  a  precedent  against  him-
self on  his  trial.  He  served  in  parliament  in  1801-'2,
and  was  an  important  factor  in  the  Liberal  party.
His  numerous  publications  are  included  in  "  Me-
moirs of  John  Home  Tooke,  together  with  his  valu-
able Speeches  and  Writings,  by  John  A.  Graham
(New  York,  1828).  See  "  Memoirs  of  John  Home
Tooke,  with  Original  Documents,"  by  Alexander
Stephens  (2  vols.,  1813).

TOOMBS,  Robert,  senator,  b.  in  Wilkes  countv,
Ga.,  2  July,  1810 ;  d.  in  Washington,  Ga.,  15  Dec.,
1885.  He  studied  at  the  University  of  Georgia,
was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1828,  attended

lectures  in  the  law
department  of  the
University  of  Vir-
ginia the  next  year,
and  in  1830,  by  a
special  act  of  the
legislature,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar
before  he  had  at-
tained his  majority.
He  then  settled  in
his  native  county,
subsequently  attain-
ingareputationsuch
as  few  lawyers  ever
enjoyed  in  the  state.
When  the  war  with
the  Creek  Indians
began  in  1836  he
raised  a  company  of
volunteers,  led  them
as  their  captain,  and  served  under  Gen.  Winfield
Scott  until  the  close  of  hostilities.  He  was  in  the
legislature  in  1837-40,  and  in  1842-'3  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  politics,  and  was  a  leader  of  the  so-called
"  State-rights  Whigs."  He  supported  William  H.
Harrison  for  the  presidency  in  1840,  and  Henry
Clay  in  1844,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  chosen  to
congress  as  a  Southern  Whig.  His  first  speech  in
the  house  of  representatives  was  on  the  Oregon
question,  and  placed  him  among  the  first  debaters
and  orators  in  that  body.  He  was  active  in  the
compromise  measures  in  1850,  and  greatly  con-
tributed to  their  passage.  After  eight  years'  ser-
vice in  the  house  he  took  his  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate
in  March,  1853,  holding  office  by  re-election  till
1861.  As  a  senator  he  was  intolerant,  dogmatic,
and  extreme,  but  able  and  eloquent. He  believed


TOPETE


133


in  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  the  states,  and  that
it  was  a  necessity  for  the  south  both  to  maintain
and  extend  slavery.  He  advocated  disunion  with
all  the  force  of  his  oratory,  and  after  the  election
of  Abraham  Lincoln  to  the  presidency  made  a  series
of  speeches  in  Georgia  in  which  he  asserted  that
the  north  would  no  longer  respect  the  constitu-
tional rights  of  the  south,  and  that  secession  was
the  only  remedy.  When  the  State  convention  met
in  1861,  he  was  mainly  instrumental  in  securing
the  majority  of  votes  on  the  resolution  to  secede.
He  resigned  his  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate  in  January,
1861,  and  in  March  was  formally  expelled  from  that
body.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Confederate  con-
gress at  its  first  session,  and  but  for  a  misunder-
standing might  have  been  chosen  president  of  the
Confederacy.  After  the  election  of  Jefferson  Davis
he  became  secretary  of  state,  but  resigned  in  a  few
weeks  to  take  the  commission  of  brigadier-general
in  the  army.  He  fought  at  the  second  battle  of
Bull  Run  and  at  the  Antietam,  but  resigned  and
returned  to  Georgia.  In  1864  he  commanded  the
militia,  of  which  he  was  brigadier-general.  After
the  war  he  eluded  arrest  as  a  political  prisoner,  and
passed  two  years  in  Cuba,  France,  and  England,
but  returned  on  the  restoration  in  1867  of  the  privi-
lege of  habeas  corpus,  resumed  practice,  and  ac-
cumulated an  estate  that  was  estimated  at  about
% 500,000.  As  he  refused  to  take  the  oath  of  alle-
giance to  the  U.  S.  government,  he  was  debarred
from  all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  citizenship.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Georgia  Democratic
state  convention  in  1872,  and  advocated  Horace
Greeley  as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency.  In  1874
he  began  the  railroad  war,  to  which  he  devoted  his
energies  until  his  death.  The  legislature  of  that
year  had  passed  a  law  taxing  railroads  as  all  other
property  was  taxed.  The  railroads  resisted,  and
Gen.  Toombs,  in  behalf  of  the  state,  took  the  mat-
ter into  court,  established  the  principle  that  they
should  pay  the  same  taxes  as  other  property,  and
collected  $300,000,  including  some  arrears  of  taxes.
In  the  State  convention  of  1877  he  introduced  a
resolution  providing  for  the  appointment  of  three
commissioners  who  should  have  the  power  to  over-
see the  business  of  the  roads,  to  make  and  unmake
rates,  and  to  order  improvements.  In  accordance
with  this  provision,  the  next  legislature  adopted
what  is  known  as  the  commission  railroad  law.  He
continued  his  hostility  to  the  United  States  govern-
ment until  his  death.

TOPETE,  Juan  Bautista  (to-pay'-tay),  Span-
ish naval  officer,  b.  in  Tlacotalpan,  Mexico,  24
May,  1821.  His  parents  retired  to  Spain  after  the
country  had  won  its  independence,  and  he  entered
the  Spanish  navy  as  a  midshipman.  In  1865  he
was  post-captain,  commanding  one  of  the  ships  of
the  Spanish  fleet  in  the  Pacific,  and  after  the  sui-
cide of  Admiral  Jose  de  Pareja,  when  Admiral
Mendez  Nufiez  assumed  command,  Topete  became
second  commander  of  the  expedition  with  the  rank
of  commodore,  and  participated  in  the  bombard-
ment of  Valparaiso,  31  March,  1866,  and  in  the
attack  on  Callao,  2  May,  1866,  where  he  was  danger-
ously wounded.  When  Admiral  Nunez  sailed  in
the  "Numancia"  on  a  voyage  round  the  world,
Topete  assumed  command  of  the  rest  of  the  fleet,
which  he  brought  back  to  Spain  in  1867.  He  was
promoted  rear-admiral  and  commander  of  the  iron-
clad squadron  at  Cadiz,  and  pronounced  against
the  government,  17  Sept.,  1868,  with  Gen.  Prim,
who  arrived  on  board  the  fleet  on  19  Sept.  He
became  a  member  of  the  provisional  government
as  secretary  of  the  navy  on  8  Oct.,  and  was  later
returned  to  the  constituent  cortes  by  the  city  of


134


TOPP


TORBERT


Madrid.  During  his  administration  he  took  vigor-
ous measures  against  the  insurgents  in  Cuba,  and
obtained,  in  April,  1869,  supplementary  credits  for
that  purpose.  He  was  a  stanch  supporter  of  the
candidacy  of  Montpensier,  left  the  cabinet  in  No-
vember, 1869,  to  become  vice  -  president  of  the
cortes,  was  again  secretary  of  the  navy,  10  Jan.,
1870.  and  secretary  for  the  colonies  in  Sagasta's
cabinet  in  December,  1871.  Under  Serrano's  re-
gency he  was  provisional  president  of  the  cabinet
till  3  June,  1872,  secretary  of  the  navy  and  war  till
the  suspension  of  constitutional  guarantees,  24
June,  1872,  and  during  the  republic  retired  from
service.  After  the  virtual  fall  of  the  republic  he
held  again,  from  3  Jan.  till  12  May,  1874,  the  port-
folio of  the  navy  under  Serrano,  and  accompanied
him  to  the  seat  of  war,  taking  part  in  the  relief  of
Bilbao,  25-27  March,  1874,  where  he  was  severely
wounded.  After  the  accession  of  Alfonso  XII.,  12
Dec,  1874,  he  retired  to  private  life.

TOPP,  Alexander,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  near
Elgin,  Morayshire,  Scotland,  in  1815 ;  d.  in  Toronto,
Canada,  6  Oct.,  1879.  He  was  educated  at  Elgin
academy  and  King's  college,  Aberdeen,  and  was
licensed  to  preach  in  1836.  He  was  pastor  of  Elgin
church  in  1836-'52;  of  Roxburgh  church,  Edin-
burgh, in  1852-'8;  and  in  1858  took  charge  of
Knox  church,  Toronto,  Canada,  where  he  remained
until  his  death.  In  1868  he  was  elected  moderator
of  the  general  assembly,  was  one  of  the  chief  agents
in  consummating  the  union  of  the  Presbyterian
churches  in  Canada  in  1875,  and  was  again  elected
moderator  of  the  general  assembly  in  1876.  In  1877
he  attended  the  Pan-Presbyterian  council  at  Edin-
burgh. In  1870  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  the  University  of  Aberdeen.

TOPPAN,  Robert  Noxon,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  17  Oct.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1858  and  at  Columbia  law-school  in
1861,  and  became  a  practising  lawyer,  afterward
removing  to  Cambridge,  Mass.  He  is  a  member
of  various  historical  and  antiquarian  societies,
served  on  the  international  coinage  committee  of
the  American  social  science  association,  and  was  a
delegate  in  1878  to  the  International  congress  for
the  nullification  of  weights,  measures,  and  money.
He  has  translated  Theodore  Simon  Jouffroy's
"  Ethics "  (New  York,  1862),  and  is  the  author  of
"  Historical  Succession  of  Monetary  Metallic  Stand-
ards," a  pamphlet  (1877) ;  li  Some  Modern  Monetary
Questions,"  a  pamphlet  (Philadelphia,  1881) ;  "  His-
torical Summary  of  Metallic  Money"  (Boston,
1884) ;  and  "  Biographical  Sketches  of  Old  New-
bury" (Newburyport,  1885).

TORAL,  Francisco  de,  Mexican  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Ubeda,  Spain,  in  1502 ;  d.  in  Mexico,  20  April,
1571.  He  received  his  education  at  Seville,  and
when  nineteen  years  old  became  a  Franciscan  friar.
In  1525  he  went  to  Santo  Domingo,  and  later  he
was  sent  to  New  Spain,  where  he  learned  Aztec  and
the  difficult  Totonaca  language,  and  became  pro-
fessor of  Indian  dialects  in  the  convent  of  his  or-
der at  Mexico.  After  years  of  labor  he  invented
a  new  method  of  teaching  the  Indian  dialects,  and
afforded  aid  to  the  conquerors.  Later  he  was  sent
to  Yucatan,  where  he  founded  large  and  prosper-
ous missions  and  gained  the  confidence  of  the
Indians  to  such  an  extent  that  he  became  their
legislator.  He  was  appointed  in  1549  superior  of
the  convent  of  Tecamachalco,  assisted  in  the  gen-
eral assembly  of  the  Franciscan  order  at  Salamanca
in  1558,  returning  to  Mexico  in  the  following  year
with  thirty-six  new  missionaries,  and  was  appointed
provincial  of  the  province  of  Tlaxcala.  Early  in
1562  he  was  made  first  bishop  of  Yucatan,  and


being  consecrated  at  Mexico,  15  Aug.,  1562,  fixed
his  residence  at  Merida.  During  the  following  years
he  did  much  to  improve  and  organize  his  diocese,
founded  benevolent  institutions  for  the  benefit  of
the  Indians,  and  built  at  Merida  a  cathedral,  a
seminary,  and  a  hospital.  In  1565  he  assisted  at
Mexico  in  the  synod  of  the  Mexican  bishops  under
Archbishop  Montufar.  He  died  suddenly  in  Mexi-
co during  a  journey  that  he  undertook'  to  confer
with  the  archbishop.  Toral's  works  include  "  Arte
y  Vocabulario  de  la  lengua  Totonaca"  (Salamanca,
1553)  and  "  Tratado  de  la  lengua  Mexicana  "  (1554).
The  "  Cartas  de  Indias,"  a  recent  state  publication,
contains  letters  and  memoirs  of  Bishop  Toral.

TORBERT,  Alfred  Thomas  Archimedes,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Georgetown,  Del.,  1  July.  1833 ;  d.  at
sea,  30  Sept.,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1855,  assigned  to  the  5th  in-
fantry, served  on  frontier  duty  during  the  next
five  years  in  Tex-
as and  Florida,
on  the  Utah  ex-

8 edition,  and  in
Tew  Mexico,  be-
ing promoted  1st
lieutenant,  25
Feb.,  1861.  In
April,  1861,  he
was  sent  to  mus-
ter in  New  Jer-
sey volunteers,
and  was  made
colonel,  on  16
Sept.,  of  the  1st
New  Jersey  regi-
ment. On  25
Sept.,  1861,  he
was  promoted  to
captain  in  the
5th  U.  S.  infantry.  Col.  Torbert  served  through
the  peninsula  campaign,  was  given  a  brigade  in
the  6th  corps  on  28  Aug.,  1862,  and  fought  in  the
battle  of  Manassas  on  the  two  following  days.
He  also  took  part  in  the  Maryland  campaign,
and  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Crampton's
Gap,  14  Sept.,  where  he  made  a  brilliant  bayonet
charge.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  and  was  at  Gettys-
burg. He  fought  his  last  battle  in  the  infantry
at  Rappahannock  station,  7  Nov.,  1863,  and  in
April,  1864,  was  placed  in  command  of  the  1st
division  of  cavalry  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,
participating  in  the  skirmishes  at  Milford  station
and  North  Anna  river.  He  commanded  .at  Hano-
vertown,  and  then  participated  in  the  cavalry  bat-
tle at  Hawes's  shop,  28  May,  1864,  for  which  he
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  U.  S.  army.  He
also  repelled  the  enemy  at  Matadequin  creek,  30
May,  and  drove  them  close  to  Cold  Harbor.  He
took  that  place  on  the  31st  with  cavalry  alone,
after  a  severe  fight,  before  the  arrival  of  the  infant-
ry, and  held  it  the  next  day  against  repeated  as-
saults. He  was  now  ordered  by  Gen.  Sheridan,  with
another  division,  to  make  a  raid  to  Charlottesville,
had  the  advance,  and  commanded  at  Trevillian
station  on  11  June.  On  8  Aug.,  1864,  Gen.  Torbert
was  made  chief  of  cavalry  of  the  middle  military
division,  and  given  command  of  three  divisions
when  Gen.  Sheridan  took  command  of  the  Army
of  the  Shenandoah.  When  Sheridan  was  closely
pressed  at  Winchester,  Torbert  was  specially  active
with  the  cavalry  and  aided  in  putting  the  enemy
to  flight,  for  which  he  was  brevetted  colonel  on  19
Sept.,  1864.  He  had  been  brevetted  major-general
of  volunteers  on  the  previous  9  Sept. Returning


TORIBIO


TORNOS


135


♦through  the  valley,  he  halted  after  several  actions
«t  the  command  of  Gen.  Sheridan,  and  fought  the
cavalry  battle  at  Tom's  river  on  9  Oct.,  completely
routing  Gen.  Thomas  L.  Rosser's  command,  and
pursuing  it  many  miles.  On  19  Oct.,  at  Cedar
Creek,  Gen.  Torbert  assisted  the  6th  corps  in  hold-
ing the  pike  to  Winchester  against  desperate  as-
saults. He  commanded  at  Liberty  Mills  and  Gor-
donsville  on  22-23  Dec,  1864,  when  his  active  ser-
vice ended.  After  his  return  from  a  leave  of  ab-
.sence  on  27  Feb.,  1865,  he  was  in  command  of  the
Army  of  the  Shenandoah,  22  April  till  12  July,
1865,  of  the  district  of  Winchester  till  1  Sept.,  and
of  southeastern  Virginia  till  81  Dec. On  13  March,

1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier -general,  U.  S.
.army,  for  Cedar  Creek,  and  major-general  for  gal-
lant and  meritorious  services  during  the  war.  He
was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service,  15  Jan.,
•1866,  and  resigned  from  the  regular  army,  31  Oct.,

1866.  He  was  appointed  in  1869  minister  to  San
iSalvador,  transferred  as  consul-general  to  Havana
•two  years  later,  and  filled  the  same  post  at  Paris
from  1873  till  his  resignation  in  1878.  He  lost  his
life,  while  on  his  way  to  Mexico  as  president  of  a
■mining  company,  on  the  steamer  "Vera  Cruz,"
which  foundered  off  the  coast  of  Florida.

TORIBIO,  Saint,  or  MONGROVEJO,  Tori-
bio  Alfonso,  Spanish  -  American  archbishop,  b.
in  Mayorga,  Spain,  6  Nov.,  1538 ;  d.  in  Sana,  Peru,
:23  March,  1606.  After  finishing  his  studies  in
Valladolid,  he  led  a  life  of  the  severest  asceticism,
•until  he  was  summoned  to  a  professorship  in  the
•College  of  San  Salvador  in  1575.  He  became  a
favorite  with  Philip  II.,  and,  after  occupying  many
important  offices,  was  made  chief  magistrate  of
•Granada.  In  1580  the  Spanish  monarch  nominated
him  to  the  vacant  see  of  Lima,  although  he  was
.at  the  time  a  layman.  At  first  he  refused,  but  it
was  believed  that  Toribio  was  needed  in  America
to  bring  about  a  reformation  in  the  lives  of  the
: Spanish  colonists,  whose  profligacy  was  making  the
.conversion  of  the  natives  almost  impossible.  He
received,  therefore,  all  the  holy  orders  requisite
for  a  priest  on  four  successive  Sundays,  was  af-
terward consecrated  bishop,  sailed  for  Peru,  by
way  of  Panama,  entered  Lima  on  24  May,  1581,
;and  soon  afterward  made  a  formal  visitation  of
his  immense  diocese,  which  extended  along  the
coast  for  nearly  400  miles,  and  was  almost  desti-
tute of  means  of  communication.  He  proclaimed
himself  the  protector  of  the  natives,  and  resumed
■the  contest  with  their  persecutors,  from  which
Las  Casas  had  retired  in  despair.  In  1583  he
held  a  provisional  council  at  Lima,  in  which  the
plans  that  he  suggested  for  the  reformation  of
morals  and  for  the  amelioration  of  the  condition  of
the  Indians  met  with  violent  opposition  from  sev-
eral of  his  suffragan  bishops.  He  had  also  serious
■  difficulties  with  Garcia  Hurtado  de  Mendoza,  vice-
roy of  Peru,  and  his  conduct  was  censured  by
Philip  II.  Nevertheless  he  continued  to  befriend
the  Indians.  His  charity  was  without  bounds,  and
not  only  his  money,  silver  plate,  etc.,  were  devoted
to  the  relief  of  the  needy,  but  he  was  often  known
to  take  the  shirt  from  his  back  and  bestow  it  on
a  native.  He  learned  at  an  advanced  age  several
of  •  the  Indian  idioms,  and  spoke  Quechua,  the
language  of  the  incas,  as  it  has  been  called.  He
established  missions  in  the  most  remote  and  inac-
cessible places,  and  founded  several  churches,  semi-
naries, and  institutions  for  the  poor  and  sick.  He
was  on  his  third  diocesan  visitation  when  he  learned
that  part  of  his  diocese,  several  hundred  miles  from
Lima,  was  devastated  by  the  plague.  Hurrying
.thither  to  give  the  sufferers  spiritual  and  physical


aid,  he  over-exerted  himself,  and  fell  a  victim  to
exhaustion  in  Sana.  His  body  was  taken  to  Lima,
he  was  beatified  in  1679  by  Pope  Innocent  XL,  and
canonized  by  Benedict  XIII.  in  1726.  His  life  was
written  by  Antonio  Leon  Pinelo  (Madrid,  1653).

TORICES,  Manuel  Rodriguez  (to-re'-thays),
Colombian  patriot,  b.  in  Cartagena,  24  May,  1788 ;
d.  in  Bogota,  5  Oct.,  1816.  He  received  his  edu-
cation in  the  College  of  Rosario  in  Bogota,  where
he  was  graduated  in  law,  but,  being  fond  of  scien-
tific investigations,  he  did  not  practise  his  profes-
sion, and,  retiring  to  his  native  city,  devoted  himself
to  meteorological  observations.  When  the  revo-
lution of  1810  began,  the  governing  junta  com-
missioned him,  with  Fernandez  Madrid,  to  edit
the  patriotic  paper  "  Argos  Americano."  He  was
elected  a  member  of  the  municipal  council  in  1811,
and  in  1812  president  of  the  constituent  assembly
of  the  state,  and,  in  consequence  of  the  governor's
resignation,  was  elected  by  the  assembly,  25  March,
1812,  to  the  executive,  with  dictatorial  powers.
When  Santa  Marta  declared  in  favor  of  the  Span-
iards, Torices  sent  state  troops,  under  command  of
the  French  adventurer  Labatout,  to  retake  the
city,  which  was  occupied  on  6  Jan.,  1813  ;  but  on
5  March  a  counter-revolution  put  the  place  again  in
the  hands  of  the  Spaniards.  Torices  now  marched
at  the  head  of  re-enforcements  against  Santa
Marta,  but  was  defeated  on  10  and  11  May.  Af-
ter the  defeat  and  capture  of  Nariiio  by  the  Span-
iards in  1814,  the  Federal  congress  of  Tunja  re-
solved to  confide  the  national  executive  to  a  trium-
virate, consisting  of  Restrepo,  Rovira,  and  Tori-
ces, and  in  January,  1815,  the  last-named  went  to
Bogota,  and  was  elected  to  the  presidency  of  the
triumvirate.  He  commissioned  Bolivar  to  march
against  Santa  Marta ;  but,  the  state  government  of
Cartagena  refusing  to  co-operate,  the  expedition
was  prevented,  and  Bolivar  sailed  for  Jamaica  on
8  May,  the  royalists  obtaining  great  advantages
for  want  of  combined  action  by  the  patriot  chiefs.
In  November  of  that  year  the  triumvirate  was  su-
perseded by  the  election  of  Dr.  Camilo  Torres  as
president ;  but  Torices,  as  vice-president,  remained
one  of  his  principal  advisers,  and  when,  after  the
defeat  of  Garcia  Rovira  at  Cachiri,  and  the  ap-
proach of  the  royalist  troops,  the  evacuation  of  the
capital  was  decided  upon,  Torices  fled  with  Torres
and  others,  was  captured  at  Buenaventura,  taken
to  Bogota,  and  shot  by  order  of  Gen.  Morillo.

TORNOS,  Alberto  de,  educator,  b.  in  Carinena,
Aragon,  Spain,  9  April,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
22  March,  1887.  His  father,  Andres  de  Tornos  y
Beltran,  was  a  well-known  lawyer.  The  son  became
a  teacher,  and,  after  holding  several  offices  in  Spain,
went  to  Porto  Rico  in  1845,  where  he  was  appointed
by  royal  order  director  of  the  seminary  of  teachers
of  the  island.  On  19  May,  1845,  he  received  his
diploma  as  a  graduate  of  the  normal  school  at  Mad-
rid, with  the  title  of  professor  and  director  of  nor-
mal schools  of  the  kingdom  of  Spain.  As  director
of  the  Central  military  academy  of  Porto  Rico  he
was  given  the  title  of  captain.  After  occupying
many  posts  in  Porto  Rico,  Cuba,  and  Mexico,  he
came  to  the  United  States  about  1848.  He  held
the  office  of  professor  of  languages  at  Spring  Hill
college,  Ala.,  for  three  vears,  and  a  similar  post  at
the  University  of  Louisiana,  where  he  remained
for  many  years.  He  wrote  for  Hie  press  on  educa-
tional topics,  and  did  much  to  promote  publicin-
struction.  He  was  professor  of  Spanish  at  the  New
York  evening  high-school  about  twenty  years,  lie
published  "De  Tornos'sCombined  Spanish  Method,"
and  of  which  more  than  20.000  copies  have  been
sold  (New  York,  1867),  wrote  a  book  of  Spanish


136


TORO


TORRES


and  English  correspondence,  as  well  as  two  novels
in  Spanish,  and  several  text-books  for  acquiring
foreign  languages. — His  son,  Manuel  Alberto,  b.
in  New  York  city,  2  June,  1862,  was  educated  in
the  public  schools,  and  since  1881  has  been  secre-
tary of  the  Spanish  consulate-general  in  New  York
city.  Having  rendered  important  services  to  the
Spanish  representatives  in  this  country,  in  1888  he
was  decorated  by  the  queen  regent  of  Spain  with
the  cross  of  the  order  of  Caballero  de  la  Real  orden
de  Isabel  la  Catolica.  He  has  published  "  Spanish
Tariffs,  with  Extracts  from  the  Custom-House
Regulations"  (New  York,  1888).

TORO,  Fermin,  Venezuelan  statesman,  b.  in
Caracas  in  1807 ;  d.  there  in  1865.  He  received  an
excellent  private  education,  but  was  never  gradu-
ated. After  being  employed  in  his  early  years  in
the  national  treasury,  he  was  promoted  collector  of
the  island  of  Margarita,  and  in  1831  was  elected,
before  the  legal  age,  to  congress,  where  he  soon  be-
came known  as  an  orator.  He  was  also  a  member
of  the  constituent  congress,  and  was  called  to  the
cabinet  by  Gen.  Soublette  as  secretary  of  state  and
provisionally  of  the  treasury,  also  representing  his
country  as  minister  in  Bogota  and  Madrid.  In
1845-6,  with  Juan  M.  Cajigal,  he  edited  "  El  Correo
de  Caracas."  In  1858  he  was  one  of  the  intimate  ad-
visers of  Gen.  Castro,  and  under  Gen.  Paez  formed
part  of  his  cabinet.  He  published  "  Los  Martires,"
a  romance  (Caracas,  1834) ;  "  Disertacion  sobre  la
ley  de  10  de  Abril  de  1834"  (1835);  "America  y
Europa"  (1836);  and  many  poems  published  by
his  friend,  Manuel  Caflete,  under  the  pen-name  of
Emiro  Kastos  (Paris,  1847).  He  left  in  manuscript
"  La  Sibila  de  los  Andes,"  a  novel,  and  "  La  Heca-
tonfonia  "  and  "  El  veinticuatro  de  Enero,"  poems.

TORO  ZAMBRANO,  Mat§0  de,  president  of
Chili,  b.  in  Santiago  in  1724;  d.  there,  26  Feb.,
1811.  During  the  Spanish  reign  he  occupied  sev-
eral public  offices,  and  contributed  to  the  construc-
tion of  the  breakwater  in  Santiago,  and  of  a  bridge
across  Mapocho  river.  He  equipped  at  his  own  ex-
pense a  company  against  the  Araucanian  revolt,
the  command  of  which  he  gave  to  his  son,  Jose
Gregorio.  In  1762  he  was  appointed  acting  presi-
dent during  the  absence  of  Juan  Balmaeeda,  and.
when  President  Manuel  Amat  went  to  Peru  as
viceroy  in  1768,  Toro  Zambrano  occupied  his  place

{>rovisionally.  Charles  III.  created  him  Count  de
a  Conquista  in  1771,  and  in  1809  the  central  junta
of  Seville  gave  him  the  rank  of  brigadier.  When
in  1810  the  opposition  against  President  Carrasco
began,  the  audiencia,  alarmed  by  the  popular  dem-
onstrations, caused  the  latter  to  resign,  and  ap-
pointed in  his  stead  Toro  Zambrano  on  16  July.
But  the  excitement  continued,  and  on  18  Sept.
Toro  convoked  a  meeting  of  the  authorities  and
citizens,  before  whom  he  resigned  the  presidency,
and  was  elected  again  president  of  the  new  popular
junta,  of  which  Juan  Martinez  Rozas  was  the  chief
spirit.  Toro  Zambrano's  age  and  feeble  character
prevented  him  from  taking  an  active  part  in  the
government,  and  he  died  before  the  complete  sepa-
ration of  the  country  from  Spain.

TORQUEMADA,  Juan  de  (tor-kay-mah'-dah),
Spanish  historian,  b.  in  Valladolid  about  1550 ;  d.
in  Mexico  about  1625.  He  went  to  Mexico  in  his
youth  as  an  officer,  but  assumed  there  the  habit  of
St.  Francis,  and,  besides  studying  theology,  took
a  course  in  the  Aztec  language,  history,  and  an-
tiquities under  the  direction  of  the  Indian  cacique,
Antonio  Valeriano,  who  was  one  of  the  teachers  at
the  College  of  Santiago  de  Tlaltelolco.  He  became
a  professor  in  Tlaltelolco,  and  finally  superior  of
the  college,  meanwhile  continuing  assiduously  his


studies  in  ancient  history,  and  after  twenty  years
of  labor  published  his  great  historical  work.  In
1614  he  was  elected  provincial  of  his  order  at  the^
general  chapter  in  Xochimilco,  and  during  his  ad-
ministration he  constructed  one  of  the  great  cause-
ways that  leads  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  which  is  now
called  San  Cristobal.  Besides  some  ecclesiastical
biographies,  he  wrote  "  Monarquia  Indiana,  com-
puesta  de  22  Libros"  (3  vols.,  Seville,  1615;  Mad-
rid, 1723),  which,  notwithstanding  his  ecclesiasti-
cal prejudices,  is  considered  fairly  impartial  and
truthful,  although  it  has  been  greatly  improved  by
Carlos  de  Sigiienza's  "  Anotaciones."

TORRANCE,  Frederick  William,  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  Montreal  in  July,  1823.  He  was  the
son  of  a  Scotch  merchant  of  Montreal,  and  was
educated  at  Paris  and  at  Edinburgh  university,
where  he  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1844.  On
his  return  to  Canada  he  studied  law,  was  called  to
the  bar  in  1848,  became  professor  of  Roman  law
in  McGill  university  in  1854,  and  was  appointed
puisne  judge  of  the  superior  court  in  1868.  He
aided  in  establishing  the  "Lower  Canada  Jurist,"
and  managed  it  several  years.  McGill  university
gave  him  the  degree  of  B.  C.  L.  in  1856,  and  since
1870  he  has  been  one  of  its  governors.

TORRE,  Jos6  Maria  de  la  (tor-ray),  Cuban
archaeologist,  b.  in  Havana  in  1815 ;  d.  there  in
1873.  He  studied  law  in  his  native  city,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1841,  but  he  never  practised
as  a  lawyer,  devoting  himself  instead  to  teaching.
He  published  a  remarkable  map  showing  the  dis-
tricts into  which  the  island  was  divided  before  its
discovery  by  Columbus,  accompanied  by  learned
researches  and  notes  on  the  history  of  Cuba,  and
made  numerous  contributions  to  the  geography,
history,  and  archaeology  of  the  island.  In  1848  he
was  commissioned  to  travel  in  the  United  States
and  Europe  to  study  improvements  in  agriculture
and  the  industrial  arts,  and  to  introduce  them
into  Cuba.  The  results  of  this  journey  were  very
useful.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Royal  academy
of  history  of  Madrid,  and  other  scientific  and  anti-
quarian societies.  His  works  are  "Mapa  an-
tiguo  de  Cuba"  (Havana,  1837);  "Gran  Cuadro-
Sinoptico  de  la  Monarquia  Espafiola  "  (1845);  "  Lo
que  fuimos  y  lo  que  somos,"  a  history  of  Havana
(1857) ;  "  El  Robinson  Cubano  "  (I860) ;  and  nu-
merous text-books  for  schools.

TORRE,  Tomas  de  la,  Spanish  missionary,  b.
in  Salamanca  about  1510;  d.  in  Chiapa,  Mexico,  in
1567.  He  studied  at  the  Dominican  college  of  San
Esteban,  in  Salamanca,  and  when  twenty  years  of
age  entered  the  order  and  was  attached  to  the  mis-
sions of  Santo  Domingo.  He  became  there  one  of
the  most  trusted  assistants  of  Bishop  Bartolome
de  Las  Casas  in  his  exertions  in  behalf  of  the  con-
quered Indians,  and  incurred  the  hostility  of  tho
Spanish  authorities  by  his  fearless  denunciation  of
their  cruelties.  Las  Casas  therefore  ordered  him
to  Guatemala  in  1544,  and  he  travelled  for  three
vears  through  the  country  preaching  the  gospel.
He  became  in  1547  vicar  of  Cinacautlan,  prior  of
the  convent  of  Guatemala  in  1550,  and  provincial
of  the  order  in  1553.  He  founded  the  convents  of
Chiapa  and  Copanabaxtla  and  schools  for  the  In-
dians, and  built  churches  and  colleges.  He  left  a
valuable  manuscript,  "  Ilistoria  de  los  principios
de  la  Provincia  de  Chiapa  y  Guatemala,  del  orden
de  Santo  Domingo,"  which  was  used  by  Fathrr
Antonio  de  Remesal  in  his  "  Ilistoria  de  las  Pro-
vincias  de  Chiapa  y  Guatemala"  (Madrid.  1619).

TORRES,  Ca in i In  (tor'-rays),  Colombian  states-
man, b.  in  Popayan,  22  Nov..  1766;  d.  in  Bogota,
5  Oct.,  1816. He  received  his  education  in  his


TORRES


TORRE-TAGLE


137


native  city,  where  he  studied  Latin,  Greek,  and
philosophy,  and  was  graduated  in  law.  He  served
on  several  commissions  for  his  government,  and
was  considered  at  that  time  the  first  jurist  of  New
Granada.  On  20  July,  1810,  he  joined  the  patriot
cause.  The  congress  of  Leiva  nominated  him,  4
Oct.,  1812,  president  of  the  federation,  but  Anto-
nio Narino  did  not  acknowledge  the  authority  of
congress,  and  refused  to  enter  the  confederacy. In

1814,  during  the  triumvirate,  he  was  president  of
congress,  and  as  such  assisted  Bolivar  to  subdue
the  unitarian  government  of  Bogota  and  to  prepare
an  expedition  against  Santa  Marta  and  Venezuela.
After  the  landing  of  Gen.  Pablo  Morillo  in  July,

1815,  congress  elected  Torres  supreme  chief  of  the
nation  on  15  Nov.,  but,  on  the  approach  of  Morillo
and  Calzada,  he  saw  the  hopelessness  of  resistance,
and  resigning,  14  March,  1816,  fled  to  the  south.
He  was  captured  by  the  Spaniards  in  Buenaventura,
whence  he  was  expecting  to  sail  for  Buenos  Ayres,
transported  to  Bogota,  and,  with  three  other  lead-
ers, shot  by  order  of  Morillo.

TORRES,  Diego  de,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Spain  in  1551 ;  d.  in  La  Plata,  South  America,  in
1688.  He  was  a  Spanish  nobleman  who  became  a
Jesuit  in  Valladolid  in  1571,  and  spent  most  of  his
life  in  Peru,  where  he  governed  several  colleges
and  convents.  He  was  also  the  founder  of  the  mis-
sions of  Paraguay.  Torres  was  sent  to  Rome  as
procurator  of  his  province  in  1602,  and  availed
himself  of  this  circumstance  to  publish  his  work
entitled  "  Relatione  Breve  del  P.  Diego  de  Torres
della  Compagnia  di  Giesu,  procurator  della  Pro-
vincia  del  Peru  circa  il  frutto  che  si  raccoglie  con
gli  Indiani  di  quel  Regno  "  (Rome,  1603 ;  Spanish
translation,  1603 ;  Latin,  1604 ;  French,  Paris,  1604 ;
Polish,  Dantzic,  1603).

TORRES  CAICEDO,  Jose  Maria,  South  Amer-
ican publicist,  b.  in  Bogota,  New  Granada,  30
March,  1830.  He  began,  when  seventeen  years
old,  to  compose  verses  and  to  write  for  newspa-

?ers,  and  was  afterward  managing  editor  of  "  El
'rogreso  "  and  "  El  Dia  "  in  opposition  to  the  gov-
ernment, which  retaliated  by  inciting  a  riot,  in  the
course  of  which  his  printing-office  was  broken
open  and  the  type  destroyed.  Later  he  was  elected
to  the  Colombian  congress,  was  afterward  secretary
of  legation  at  London  and  Paris,  intendant  for  the
states  of  Bolivar  and  Magdalena,  secretary  of  an
embassy  to  Washington,  and  Venezuelan  consul-
general  and  charge  d'affaires  in  France  and  the
Netherlands,  but  he  retired  in  1864  to  devote  him-
self exclusively  to  literature,  and  has  since  lived
in  Paris.  In  January,  1872,  he  became  charge
d'affaires  of  the  republic  of  San  Salvador  in  France
and  Belgium.  Torres  Caicedo  was  elected  on  4
May,  1872,  a  corresponding  member  of  the  Paris
academy  of  moral  and  political  sciences.  He  has
been  for  years  a  contributor  to  European  journals,
and  has  published  "  Religion,  Patria  y  Amor,"  a
collection  of  poems  (Paris,  1862) ;  "  Ensayos  Bio-
graficos  y  de  Critica  Literaria "  (2  vols.,  1863) ;
"  Union  Latino-Americana  "  (1864) ;  "  Mis  Ideas  y
mis  Principios "  (3  vols.,  1865) ;  and  "  Les  prin-
cipes  de  1789  en  Amerique"  (1869).

TORRES  RUBIO,  Diego  de,  South  American
educator,  b.  in  Valencia,  Spain,  in  1547;  d.  in
Chuquisaca,  Bolivia,  13  April,  1638.  He  entered
the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  went  to  Peru  in  1579.
He  devoted  himself  almost  entirely  to  the  study
of  the  native  dialects,  which  he  taught  in  Chuqui-
saca for  thirty  years.  He  published  "  Grammatica
et  Vocabularium  linguarum  Aymarae,  et  Quichiue,
quarum  est  usus  in  Peruvio  "  (Rome,  1603) ;  "Arte
de  la  lengua  Aymara,"  which  is very  rare  and


commands  a  high  price  (Lima,  1616) ;  and  "  Arte
de  la  lengua  Quechua  "  (1619).

TORRES  Y  AYALA,  Lanreano,  Marquis  of
Casa-Torres,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,
in  1645 ;  d.  in  Spain  in  1722.  He  went  as  a  boy  to
Spain,  where  he  entered  the  armv,  and  in  1693  was
appointed  governor  of  Florida.  After  a  few  years
he  returned  to  Spain,  and  from  1704  till  1707  took
part  in  the  first  war  of  the  succession.  In  the  last-
named  year  he  was  appointed  governor-general  of
the  island  of  Cuba.  He  filled  this  office  until  1711r
when  he  was  suspended  during  an  investigation  of
his  acts  that  was  ordered  by  the  Madrid  govern-
ment; but  he  was  appointed  again  to  the  same  post
in  1713,  his  administration  lasting  till  1716.  Un-
der his  rule  the  tobacco  industry  was  developed
greatly,  and  the  plant  began  to  be  cultivated  ex-
tensively in  the  district  that  is  known  as  "  Vuelta
Abajo."  He  founded  the  city  of  Santiago  del
Bejucal,  and  established  a  foundling-hospital  at
Havana,  and  other  charitable  institutions.

TORRES  Y  RUEDA,  Marcos  de,  viceroy  of
Mexico,  b.  in  Almanza,  Spain,  in  1591 ;  d.  in  Mexi-
co, 22  April,  1649.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Alcala,  and,  after  obtaining  holy  or-
ders, was  professor  of  theology  in  Osma  and  Val-
ladolid. Later  he  became  canon  of  the  cathedral
of  Burgos  and  rector  of  the  College  of  San  Nicolas
in  the  same  city,  when  in  1644  he  was  presented
by  Philip  IV.  to  the  bishopric  of  Yucatan,  and
confirmed  in  the  same  year  by  Pope  Innocent  X.
He  was  consecrated  by  the  bishop  of  Puebla,  and
in  November,  1646,  arrived  in  Campeche,  taking

gossession  of  his  see  in  Merida  in  the  next  month,
[e  was  scrupulous
in  his  visitations
of  his  diocese,  es-
pecially in  the  in-
vestigation of  the
irregularities  of
the  clergy,  who  in
consequence  clam-
ored against  him
at  court.  There-
fore, in  1647,  on
the  promotion  of
the  Count  of  Sal-
vatierratothe  vice-
royalty  of  Peru,
he  received  orders
to  take  charge  of
the  viceroyalty  of
Mexico,  with  the
title  of  governor
and  president  of
the  royal  audien-
cia.  He  left  Merida  in  December  of  that  year,  and,
the  outgoing  viceroy  being  detained  for  some  time,
he  took  charge  of  the  government,  13  May,  1648.
He  finished  the  cathedral  of  Puebla,  sent  re-en-
forcements to  Porto  Rico,  and  recommended  the
erection  of  a  university  in  Guatemala ;  but  his  ad-
ministration was  chiefly  noteworthy  for  the  "  auto
da  fe"  that  was  celebrated  by  his  orders,  11  April,
1649.  It  was  one  of  the  largest  that  was  ever  cele-
brated by  the  Inquisition  of  Mexico,  13  persons  be-
ing burned  and  107  flogged  and  otherwise  punished ;
but  the  governor  had  already  been  stricken  with
the  sickness  of  which  he  died  a  few  days  afterward.
TORRE-TAGLE,  Jos6  Bernardo,  Marquis  de,
president  of  Peru,  b.  in  Lima,  21  March,  1779;  d.
m  Callao  in  1825.  He  belonged  to  one  of  the  best
families  of  Spain,  attained  the  rank  of  colonel  of
the  armv,  and,  being  elected  deputy  to  the  cortes,
was  sent  to  Spain  in  1813  with  special  recommen-


ryVUZ>vc<xf


138


TORREY


TORREY


elation  for  his  good  services.  Being  promoted
brigadier,  he  was  appointed  inspector  of  the  army
of  Peru  and  intendant  of  the  department  of  Trujil-
lo.  When  Gen.  San  Martin  landed  in  Peru,  Torre-
Tagle  was  the  first  Peruvian  officer  to  hoist  the
national  flag  in  the  north,  and  on  24  Dec,  1820,
proclaimed  independence  in  Trujillo. On  26  July,

1822,  he  was  appointed  provisional  president  by
San  Martin  when  the  latter  went  to  meet  Bolivar
in  Guavaquil.  After  the  departure  of  San  Martin
for  Chili,  on  20  Sept.,  Torre-Tagle  was  elected  mem-
ber of  the  triumvirate  under  La  Mar. In  January,

1823,  congress  appointed  him  president ;  but  a  mili-
tary mutiny  deposed  him  and  proclaimed  Riva
Agiiero  on  28  Feb.  After  the  deposition  of  the
latter  and  his  retreat  to  Trujillo,  Torre-Tagle  was
appointed  president  by  Sucre  on  20  July,  and
elected  by  congress  on  16  Aug.,  and  Bolivar,  who
on  his  arrival,  1  Sept.,  had  been  proclaimed  dicta-
tor, left  him  in  charge  of  the  government.  When
the  garrison  of  Ca]Jao  revolted,  5  Feb.,  1824,  for
arrears  of  pay,  and,  Torre-Tagle  failing  to  provide
the  necessary  means,  pronounced  for  Spain,  Boli-
var sent  Gen.  Necochea  to  arrest  him,  and  congress
deposed  him  on  10  Feb.  Fearing  to  be  shot  by
order  of  a  court-martial,  he  fled  to  Callao,  where
the  rebels  kept  him  a  prisoner,  and  on  the  reoccu-
pation  of  Lima  by  the  Spaniards,  he  was  offered
the  place  as  governor  of  the  capital,  but  declined,

E referring  to  remain  a  prisoner  of  war.  After  the
eginning  of  the  siege  of  Callao,  he  tried  several
times  to  be  admitted  on  board  the  blockading
Chilian  fleet,  but  Admiral  Blanco  Encalada  refused
to  receive  him  except  as  a  prisoner,  and  he  perished
with  his  whole  family  by  the  disease  that  was
caused  by  the  famine  due  to  the  protracted  siege.
Although  he  was  not  a  traitor  to  his  country,  as
charged  by  his  enemies,  he  caused  great  misfor-
tunes bv  his  want  of  energy  and  vacillating  policy.
TORREY,  Bradford,  essayist,  b.  in  Weymouth,
Mass.,  9  Oct.,  1843.  He  was  educated  in  the  pub-
lic schools  of  his  native  town,  taught  for  two  years,
and  subsequently  engaged  in  business  in  Boston.
Since  1886  he  has  been  an  assistant  editor  of  the
"  Youth's  Companion,"  and  a  frequent  contributor
to  periodicals.  Mr.  Torrey  has  devoted  much  time
to  the  study  of  birds,  their  habits,  peculiarities,  and
domestic  traits.  He  has  written  numerous  papers
on  this  subject,  and  published  "  Birds  in  the  Bush  "
(Boston,  1885).

TORREY,  Charles  Turner,  reformer,  b.  in
Scituate,  Mass.,  in  1813 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  9
May,  1846.  His  ancestor,  James,  was  an  early  set-
tler of  Scituate.  (See  Torrey,  William.)  Charles
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1830,  studied  theology,
and  occupied  Congregational  pastorates  in  Prince-
ton, N.  J.,  and  Salem,  Mass.,  but  soon  relinquished
his  professional  duties  to  devote  himself  to  anti-
slavery  labors  in  Maryland.  Ih  1843  he  attended  a
slaveholders'  convention  in  Baltimore,  reported  its
proceedings,  and  was  arrested  and  put  in  jail.  In
1844,  having  been  detected  in  his  attempt  to  aid  in
the  escape  of  several  slaves,  he  was  tried,  convicted,
and  sentenced  to  a  long  imprisonment  in  the  state
penitentiary,  where  he  died  of  consumption  that
was  brought  on  by  ill  usage.  His  body  was  taken
to  Boston,  and  his  funeral  attended  from  Tremont
temple  by  an  immense  concourse  of  people.  The
story  of  his  sufferings  and  death  excited  eager  in-
terest both  in  this  country  and  in  Europe,  and
"  Torrey's  blood  crieth  out  became  a  watch-word
of  the  Abolition  party,  giving  new  impetus  to  the
anti-slavery  cause.  He  published  a  "Memoir  of
William  It.  Sax  ton  "  (Boston,  1838),  and  "Home,
or  the Pilgrim's  Faith  Revived,"  a  volume of


sketches  of  life  in  Massachusetts,  which  he  pre-
pared in  prison  (1846).  See  "  Memoir  of  the  Martyr
Torrey  "  (1847).

TORREY,  John,  botanist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
15  Aug.,  1796 ;  d.  there,  10  March,  1873.  His  father,
Capt.  William  Torrey,  served  during  the  Revo-
lutionary war.  The  son  received  his  early  edu-
cation in  public  schools  in  New  York  city.  In  his
youth  he  showed  a  fondness  for  mechanics,  and  at
one  time  determined  to  become  a  machinist,  but,
coming  under  the  influence  of  Amos  Eaton,  he  was
taught  the  structure  of  flowers  with  the  rudiments
of  botany,  and  a  knowledge  of  mineralogy  and
chemistry.  In  1815  he  began  the  study  of  medi-
cine with  Dr.  Wright  Post,  and  was  graduated  at
the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  He  opened
an  office  in  New  York  city,  and  engaged  in  the

Eractice  of  medicine,  at  the  same  time  devoting
is  leisure  to  botany  and  other  scientific  pursuits.
The  medical  profession  was  not  congenial  to  him,
and  on  5  Aug.,  1824,  he  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as
assistant  surgeon,  serving  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  as  acting  professor  of  chemistry,  mineral-
ogy, and  geology  until  his  resignation,  31  Aug.,
1828.  In  1827  he  was  chosen  professor  of  chemis-
try and  botany  in  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  New  York  city,  and  he  continued  in
that  place  until  1855,  when  he  was  made  professor
emeritus.  He  was  also  professor  of  chemistry  at
Princeton  in  1830-'54,  and  of  chemistry,  mineral-
ogy, and  botany  at  the  University  of  the  citv  of
New  York  in  1832-'3.  In  1853,  on  the  establish-
ment of  the  U.  S.  assay-office  in  New  York  city,
Dr.  Torrey  was  appointed  assayer,  which  office  he
continued  to  fill  until  his  death.  He  was  frequent-
ly consulted  by  the  treasury  department  on  mat-
ters pertaining  to  the  coinage  and  currency,  and
was  sent  on  special  missions  at  various  times  to
visit  the  different  mints.  In  1856  he  was  chosen  a
trustee  of  Columbia,  and  in  1860,  having  presented
the  college  with  his  herbarium,  numbering  about
50,000  specimens,  he  was  made  emerittes  professor
of  chemistry  and
botany.  On  the  con-
solidation of  the
College  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons
with  Columbia  in
1860,  he  was  chosen
one  of  its  trustees,
and  his  emeritus
professorships  con-
tinued. His  ad-
vice was  frequently
sought  on  scientific
subjects  by  various
corporations.  Dr.
Torrey's  earliest
publications  in  the
"  American  Journal
of  Science  "  treat  of
mineralogy.  In  1817
he  became  one  of
the  founders  of  the
New  York  lyceum
of  natural  history  (now  the  New  York  academy  of
science),  and  one  of  his  first  contributions  to  this
body  is  a  "  Catalogue  of  Plants  growing  spontane-
ously within  Thirty  Miles  of  the  City  of  New  York  "
(Albany,  1819).  Its  publication  gained  for  him  the
recognition  of  foreign  and  native  botanists.  He
undertook  in  1820  the  examination  of  the  plants
that  had  been  collected  around  the  head-waters
of  the  Mississippi  by  Prof.  David  B.  Douglass,
and  during  the  same  year  the  collections  made


GSlfA^  C^O^TT-eyJ


TORREY


TORREY


139


by  Dr.  Edwin  James,  while  with  the  expedition
that  was  sent  out  to  the  Rocky  mountains  under
Maj.  Stephen  H.  Long,  were  submitted  to  him.
His  report  was  the  earliest  treatise  of  its  kind  in
this  country  that  was  arranged  on  the  natural  sys-
tem. Dr.  Torrey,  in  the  mean  time,  had  planned
"A  Flora  of  the  Northern  and  Middle  United
States,  or  a  Systematic  Arrangement  and  Descrip-
tion of  all  the  Plants  heretofore  discovered  in
the  United  States  North  of  Virginia,"  and  in  1824
began  its  publication  in  parts,  but  it  was  soon
•suspended  owing  to  the  general  adoption  of  the
natural  system  of  Jussieu  in  place  of  that  of  Lin-
naeus. In  1836,  on  the  organization  of  the  geologi-
cal survey  of  New  York,  he  was  appointed  bota-
nist, and  required  to  prepare  a  flora  of  the  state.
His  report,  consisting  of  two  quarto  volumes,  was
issued  in  1843,  and  no  other  state  in  the  Union  has
yet  produced  a  flora  to  compare  with  it.  He  be-
gan in  1838,  with  Asa  Gray,  "  The  Flora  of  North
America,"  which  was  issued  in  numbers  irregu-
larly until  1843,  when  they  had  completed  the
"  Composite, "  but  new  botanical  material  accumu-
lated at  such  a  rapid  rate  that  it  was  deemed  best
to  discontinue  it.  Subsequently  Dr.  Torrey  pub-
lished reports  on  the  plants  that  were  collected  by
John  C.  Fremont  in  the  expedition  to  the  Rocky
mountains  (1845);  those  gathered  by  Maj.  William
H.  Emory  on  the  reconnoissance  from  Fort  Leaven-
worth, Mo.,  to  San  Diego,  Cal.  (1848) ;  the  speci-
mens secured  by  Capt.  Howard  Stansbury  on  his
•expedition  to  the  Great  Salt  Lake  of  Utah  (1852) ;
the  plants  collected  by  John  C.  Fremont  in  Cali-
fornia (1853);  those  brought  back  from  the  Red
river  of  Louisiana  by  Capt.  Randolph  B.  Marcy
(1853) ;  and  the  botany  of  Capt.  Lorenzo  Sitgreaves's
expedition  to  the  Zuni  and  Colorado  rivers  (1854);
also  memoirs  on  the  botany  of  the  various  ex-
peditions for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  most
practicable  route  for  a  Pacific  railroad  (1855-'60).
He  also  reported  on  the  "  Botany  of  the  Mexican
Boundary  Survey  "  (1859),  that  of  the  expedition
upon  the  Colorado  river  of  the  West  under  Lieut.
Joseph  C.  Ives  (1861),  and,  in  association  with  Asa
Gray,  the  botanical  collections  of  the  Wilkes  ex-
ploring expedition.  The  last  was  in  his  hands  at
the  time  of  his  death,  its  publication  having  been
delayed  by  the  civil  war.  The  Torreya  taxifolia,
an  ornamental  shade-tree  in  the  southern  states,
was  named  in  his  honor,  and  the  Torreya  Califor-
nica  of  California,  the  Torreya  nucifera  of  Japan,
and  the  Torreya  grandis  of  northern  China,  bear
his  name.  The  association  of  botanists  that  origi-
nally met  at  his  residence  were  chartered  as  the
Torrey  botanical  club,  and  he  was  its  first  presi-
dent. Besides  being  the  last  surviving  charter-
member  of  the  Lyceum  of  natural  history,  he  held
its  vice-presidency  for  several  years,  and  was  presi-
dent in  1824-'6  and  1838,  holding  the  same  office
in  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
•of  science  in  1855,  and  he  was  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  National  academy  of  science,  being
named  as  such  by  act  of  congress  in  1863.  The
degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Yale  in
1823,  and  that  of  LL  D.  by  Amherst  in  1845.  His
bibliography  is  extensive,  including  contributions
on  botanical  subjects  to  scientific  periodicals  and
to  the  transactions  of  the  societies  of  which  he
was  a  member.  A  sketch  of  his  life  by  his  pupil
and  life-long  associate,  Asa  Gray,  was  contributed
to  the  "Biographical  Memoirs"  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences  (Washington,  1877).

TORREY,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rowley,
Mass.,  2  Feb.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  26  Nov.,
1867. He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1816,


and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1819,  and
was  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Royal-
ton,  Vt.,  in  1824-7.  He  was  professor  of  Greek  and
Latin  in  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1827-42,  of
intellectual  and  moral  philosophy  in  1842-'67,  and
its  president  in  1862-6.  (See  illustration  below.)
Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1850.  He
is  the  author  of  a  posthumous  volume  of  lectures
entitled  "  A  Theory  of  Fine  Art "  (New  York,  1874) ;
edited  "  Remains  of  President  James  Marsh  "  (1843)
and  "Select  Sermons  of  President  Worthington


Smith  "  (1861),  to  both  of  which  he  prefixed  me-
moirs ;  and  translated  Neander's  "  General  History
of  the  Christian  Religion  and  Church,"  which  may
be  considered  the  principal  work  of  his  life  (5  vols.,
Boston,  1854). — His  daughter,  Mary  Cutler,  au-
thor, b.  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  28  May,  1831,  was  edu-
cated in  private  schools  and  by  her  father.  She  is
the  author  of  "  America,"  a  dramatic  poem  (New
York,  1863),  and  has  edited  Joseph  Torrey's  "  The-
ory of  Fine  Art "  and  his  revised  edition  of  Nean-
der's "Church  History"  (Boston,  1872),  herself
preparing  the  index  volume  (1881).

TORREY,  Joseph  William,  rajah  of  Amboy
and  Mavoodu,  Borneo,  b.  in  Bath,  Me.,  22  April,
1828 ;  d.  near  Boston,  Mass.,  in  March,  1884.  He
was  educated  in  Roxbury,  became  a  reporter  on  the
Boston  "  Times,"  and  was  subsequently  connected
with  Benjamin  P.  Shillaber  in  the  publication  of
the  "  Carpet-Bag."  He  became  a  clerk  in  a  com-
mercial house  in  Melbourne,  Australia,  in  1853,
and  went  to  Hong  Kong  in  1857,  where  he  was  a
partner  in  the  firm  of  Montgomery,  Parker  and
Co.,  and  editor  and  manager  of  the  "  Hong  Kong
Times"  and  the  "China  Mail."  He  was  subse-
quently appointed  vice-consul  in  Siam,  and  prac-
tised law  with  success  in  that  country.  He  founded
the  American  trading  company  of  Borneo  in  1864.
At  that  time  the  whole  of  Borneo  was  under  the
absolute  sway  of  the  sultan,  but  the  Trading  com-
pany settled  upon  about  20,000  square  miles  in  the
provinces  of  Amboy  and  Mavoodu.  In  1865,  the
sultan's  power  being  threatened  by  the  encroach-
ment of  foreign  nations,  he  made  an  ally  of  the
company  by  recognizing  Mr.  Torrey  as  rajah  or
governor  of  all  the  territory  that  it  occupied,  the
company  paying  him  a  small  yearly  tribute.  As
chief  executive  of  the  provinces,  Torrey  exercised
the  rights  of  an  absolute  sovereign,  with  power  of
retaining  his  office  for  life  and  of  naming  his  suc-
cessor. He  occupied  that  post  for  fourteen  years,
and  then  became  secretary  to  the  U.  S.  legation  in
Siam.  He  returned  to  this  country  in  1883,  and  a
few  weeks  before  his  death  was  appointed  by  the
king  of  Siam  his  chief  adviser,  but  died  before  de-
ciding whether  to  accept  or  decline  that  office.

TORREY,  William,  colonist,  b.  in  Combe,  St.
Nicholas,  Somersetshire,  England,  in  1590;  d.  in
Wevmouth,  Mass.,  about  1075.  He  was  descended
from  an  eminent  English  family,  and  carefully
educated. He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1632


140


TORRUBIA


TOTTEN


with  his  brother  James,  who  settled  in  Scituate.
William  went  to  Weymouth,  took  an  active  part  in
the  affairs  of  the  colony,  became  a  magistrate,  and
captain  of  the  train-band,  which  at  that  time  was
the  highest  local  military  office,  and  for  many
years  represented  the  town  in  the  general  court,
where,  owing  to  his  accomplishments  as  a  penman,
he  was  always  either  clerk  or  secretary.  He  was
also  a  member  of  all  the  town  educational  and
literary  committees,  and  in  the  latter  capacity  was
appointed  to  examine  and  report  on  John  Eliot's
Indian  Bible.  He  is  the  author  of  a  work  on  the
millennium  entitled  "A  Discourse  Concerning
Futurities,"  which  was  published,  with  a  biographi-
cal notice  of  him,  by  Thomas  Prince  (1757). — His
son,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  in  1631 ;
d.  in  Weymouth,  Mass.,  10  April,  1707,  was  edu-
cated at  Harvard,  but  left  before  taking  his  degree,
studied  theology,  and  in  1656  became  pastor  of  the
church  at  Weymouth,  which  post  he  held  for  fifty-
one  years.  He  preached  the  election  sermon  in
1674,  1683,  and  1689,  and  was  a  "  person  of  such
deep  and  extensive  views  that  the  governor  and
council  would  send  for  him  to  come  fifteen  miles
to  aid  them  with  his  advice  and  wise  observations."
He  declined  the  presidency  of  Harvard  in  1686,
but  for  many  years  was  a  fellow  of  the  corporation.

TORRUBIA,  Jos6,  Spanish  naturalist,  b.  in
Granada,  Spain,  late  in  the  17th  century;  d.  in
Rome,  Italy,  in  1768.  He  entered  the  order  of  the
Barefooted  Franciscans,  in  the  convent  of  St.
Peter  of  Alcantara,  in  Granada,  went  as  mission-
ary to  the  Philippine  islands,  and  was  secretary  to
the  commissary-general  of  the  religious  orders  in
Mexico.  When  this  official  attempted  to  reform
some  of  these  orders,  they  rose  against  him,  and
after  his  death  in  1748  Torrubia  was  imprisoned
for  four  months,  when  he  was  released,  by  the
syndic-general  of  the  Franciscans,  who  sent  him
to  Cadiz.  He  went  to  Rome,  was  appointed  presi-
dent of  the  Franciscan  chapter  of  the  province  of
Mexico,  and  filled  several  other  posts  of  responsi-
bility in  his  order.  He  travelled  through  various
Asiatic  countries,  and  spent  some  time  in  every
Spanish  province  in  South  America.  He  knew
several  Indian  languages,  while  his  acquaintance
with  those  of  Asia  and  Europe  acquired  for  him  a
great  reputation,  both  in  Italy  and  Spain,  and
scientists  of  note  visited  him  in  his  cell.  He  pub-
lished many  works,  of  which  the  most  important  are
"  Disertacion  historica  geografica  sobre  la  America
del  Sur"  (Madrid,  1742);  "Description  poetica  de
la  planta  Gia  que  se  halla  en  los  campos  de  la
Habana"  (1744);  and  "Aparato  para  la  historia
natural  de  la  Nueva  Espana  "  (1754).

TOTEPEHU  (to-tay-pay-hoo'),  fourth  king  of
Tollan,  Mexico;  d.  in  927.  He  was  the  son  of
Huetzin,  whom  he  succeeded  on  the  throne  in
875,  and  under  his  reign  arts  and  agriculture  flour-
ished in  Tula  or  Tollan,  which  was  the  cradle  of
culture  for  the  plateau  of  Mexico.  Thence,  after
the  destruction  of  the  Toltec  kingdom,  civilization
spread^  on  its  southward  march  to  Tehuantepec,
Central  America,  and  probably  Yucatan.  Tote-
pehu  was  succeeded  by  his  son,  Nacaxoc.

TOTIRI,  Stephen  (to-tee'-ree),  Indian  convert,
lived  in  the  first  half  of  the  17th  century.  He  re-
sided in  the  town  of  St.  Joseph,  where  he  was  re-
garded as  a  saint.  When  missionaries  came  to  his
village  in  1641  he  offered  his  cabin  for  a  chapel,
and,  after  their  departure,  instructed  the  catechu-
mens in  Christian  doctrine.  In  1643  he  aceom-
E anied  Father  Jogues,  and  was  captured  with  him
y  the  Iroquois,  but  he  eluded  their  vigilance  and
escaped  to  his  own  country,  where  he  preached  the


gospel  in  every  direction.  The  French  mission-
aries, having  been  forced  to  discontinue  their  work
among  the  Attiwandaronks,  a  tribe  known  as  the
"  neutral  nation,"  in  1644,  Totiri  went  thither.  He
explained  the  Christian  doctrine  by  means  of  sym-
bols, and  the  curiosity  that  he  excited  resulted  in
his  making  many  converts.  He  returned  to  his
tribe  in  1646.  On  one  occasion,  after  vainly  trying
to  save  an  Iroquois  prisoner  that  was  about  to  be
put  to  death,  he  instructed  him  in  the  Christian
faith,  and,  although  threatened  with  death  by  hi&
kinsmen,  baptized  the  Iroquois  before  he  was  sent
to  the  stake.  A  number  of  his  tribe  remained
heathens,  and  he  several  times  nearly  lost  his  life.
But  his  calmness  and  courage  eventually  prevailed,
and  the  village  gradually  submitted  to  his  control.

TOTOQUIYAUHTZIN(to-to-ke-yah-oo-tseen'),
king  of  Tlacopan,  or  Tacuba,  Mexico,  d.  in  1469.
He  was  a  grandson  of  Tetzotzomoc,  king  of  Azca-
potzalco,  by  his  son  Tayatzin,  and  when  the  latter,
who  had  been  aided  by  Chimalpopoca,  king  of
Mexico,  was  murdered  by  his  brother,  Maxtla,
Tayatzin's  orphan  son  was  fostered  by  Izcohuatl.
When  the  latter  defeated  •  Maxtla  in  1430,  and  de-
stroyed the  capital  and  monarchy  of  Azcapotzalco,
he  erected  part  of  the  conquered  territory  into  a
kingdom,  which  he  gave,  with  the  assent  of  Netza-
hualcoyotl,  to  Totoquiyauhtzin.  The  latter  was
succeeded  in  1469  by  his  son,  whom,  in  memory
of  his  father's  first  protector,  he  had  named
Chimalpopoca. — His  grandson,  Totoquiyauhtzin
II.,  succeeded  his  father  in  1487,  and  was  in  turn
succeeded  in  1503  by  his  son,  the  unfortunate
Tetlepanquetzal.

TOTTEN,  Benjamin  J.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  the
West  Indies  in  1806;  d.  in  New  Bedford,  Mass.,
9  May,  1877.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midship-
man, 2  March,  1823,  became  a  passed  midshipman,
20  Feb.,  1830,  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  29
March,  1834,  and  was  commissioned  a  commander,
14  Sept.,  1855.  He  was  in  charge  of  the  sloop
"  Vincennes  "  in  1858-'60  on  the  coast  of  Africa  to
suppress  the  slave-trade,  and  the  "  Brandy  wine  "  of
the  North  Atlantic  squadron,  1862-'3,  most  of  the
time  being  stationed  at  Hampton  Roads,  Va.  He
was  placed  on  the  reserved  list  in  July,  1862,  and
served  at  the  naval  rendezvous  at  New  Bedford,
Mass..  during  the  rest  of  the  war  after  May,  1863.
He  was  retired,  1  Oct.,  1864,  and  promoted  to
commodore  on  the  retired  list,  4  April,  1867,  after
which  he  was  governor  of  the  naval  asylum  at
Philadelphia  for  two  years.  He  was  the  author  of
"Totten*s  Naval  Text-Book"  (Boston,  1841;  re-
vised eds.,  New  York,  1862  and  1864).

TOTTEN,  George  Muirson,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  28  May,  1809 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  8  June,  1884.  He  was  educated  in  Capt.
Alden  Partridge's  military  academy  in  Middletown.
Conn.,  and  began  work  as  a  civil  engineer  on  the
Farmington  canal  in  1827.  Subsequently  he  went
to  Pennsylvania  and  was  there  employed  upon  the
Juniata  canal.  In  1831  he  was  one  of  the  engineers
of  the  Delaware  and  Raritan  canal  in  New  Jersey,
and  in  1835  he  was  engaged  in  building  the  rail-
road from  Reading  to  Port  Clinton.  For  several
years  following  he  was  emploved  in  building  rail-
roads in  Virginia,  Pennsylvania,  and  North  Caro-
lina. In  1843  he  was  appointed  engineer-in-chief
of  the  canal  del  Dique,  which  connects  Magdalena
river  with  the  harbor  of  Carthagena  in  Colombia,
lie  was  appointed  in  1850  engineer-in-chief  of  the
Panama  railroad,  and  spent  twenty-five  years
among  difficulties  of  every  sort  in  the  completion
of  this  arduous  task.  In  1879  he  was  associated
with  Ferdinand  de  Lesseps  on  the  commission  that


TOTTEN


TOTTEN


141


-went  to  the  isthmus  to  decide  on  the  canal  project.
Later  he  went  to  Venezuela,  where  he  was  engaged
in  the  survey  of  a  railroad,  and  he  afterward  be-
came consulting  engineer  of  the  Panama  railroad.
TOTTEN,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,
11  Sept.,  1818  ;  d.  in  Sedalia,  Mo.,  1  Oct.,  1871.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1841,  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1847,  engaged  in
the  Florida  war  against  the  Seminole  Indians  in
1849-50,  and  became  captain  in  1855.  He  aided
in  quelling  the  Kansas  disturbances  in  1857-'8,  and
in  expelling  intruders  from  the  Indian  reserves  in
Kansas  and  Arkansas  in  1860.  While  in  com-
mand of  Little  Rock  arsenal  in  February,  1861,  he
was  compelled  to  evacuate  that  post  by  a  superior
Confederate  force  under  Gov.  Henry  M.  Rector.
He  served  under  Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon  and  Gen.
John  C.  Fremont  in  the  military  operations  in
Missouri  as  chief  of  artillery,  was  engaged  at  Camp
Jackson,  Booneville,  and  Wilson's  Creek,'  and  in
June  was  brevetted  major  in  the  U.  S.  army  for
Camp  Jackson,  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  August,

1861,  for  "gallant  and  meritorious  service"  in  all
these  actions.  He  became  major  in  the  1st  Mis-
souri volunteers,  19  Aug.,  1861,  lieutenant-colonel
the  next  month,  and  assistant  inspector-general,
with  the  rank  of  major,  in  November. On  12  Feb.,

1862,  he  became  brigadier-general  of  Missouri
militia,  in  command  of  the  central  district  of  the
state.  He  then  engaged  in  several  actions  on  the
frontier  and  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  beyond  Bos-
ton mountains,  Ark.,  became  inspector-general  of
the  Department  of  the  Missouri  in  May,  1863,  and
■chief  of  artillery  and  chief  of  ordnance  in  1864.
He  was  brevetted  colonel,  U.  S.  army,  on  13  March,
1865,  "  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  during
the  siege  of  Mobile,  Ala.,"  and  on  the  same  day
brigadier-general  in  the  U.S.  army  "for  gallant
and  meritorious  service  in  the  field  "  during  the
civil  war.  He  was  inspector-general  of  the  Mili-
tary division  of  the  Atlantic  from  15  Aug.,  1865,
till  27  Aug.,  1866,  and  became  lieutenant-colonel,
U.  S.  army,  and  assistant  inspector-general,  13  June,
1867.  In  1870  he  was  retired. — His  son,  Charles
Adiel  Lewis,  inventor,  b.  in  New  London,  Conn.,
3  Feb.,  1851,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1873,  was  professor  of  military  science
and  tactics  in  the  Massachusetts  agricultural  col-
lege at  Amherst  in  1875-'8,  and  occupied  a  similar
chair  in  St.  Paul's  cathedral  school,  Garden  City,
N.  Y.,  in  1883-'6.  He  is  now  1st  lieutenant  in  the
4th  artillery.  He  served  in  the  Bannock  campaign
in  1878,  and  in  the  Chiricahua  campaign  in  1881.
In  1877  he  patented  an  improvement  in  explosives,
one  in  collimating  sights,  one  in  signal-shells,  and
several  minor  inventions.  He  patented  "  Strate-
gos,"  a  war-game,  in  1880,  a  system  of  weights  and
measures  in  1884,  and  improvements  in  linear  and
other  scales  in  1885.  Trinity  gave  him  the  degree
of  A.  M.  in  1885.  He  has  written  extensively  on
pyramid  explorations,  lectured  in  favor  of  Prof.
Piazzi  Smyth's  pyramid  theories,  and  for  several
years  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  pyramid
exploration  in  the  International  institute  for  pre-
serving Anglo-Saxon  weights  and  measures.  His
publications  include  "Strategos,  the  American
War-Game  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1880) ;  "  An  Im-
portant Question  in  Metrology,"  a  plea  for  the
Anglo-Saxon  against  the  metric  system  (1883) ;  and,
under  the  pen-name  of  Ten  Alcott,  "  Gems,  Talis-
mans, and  Guardians,  the  Facts,  Fancies,  Legends,
and  Lore  of  Nativity"  (1887).

TOTTEN,  Joseph  Gilbert,  soldier,  b.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  23  Aug.,  1788;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  22  April,  1864. He  received  his  earliest


education  under  the  direction  of  his  maternal  uncle,
Jared  Mansfield,  by  whom  he  was  brought  up  after
the  death  of  his  mother.  After  his  uncle's  occu-
pation of  the  chair  of  mathematics  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  the  boy  received  an  appointment
from  Connecticut
as  cadet.  In  1805
he  was  graduated
and  promoted  2d
lieutenant  in  the
corps  of  engineers.
Meanwhile  Capt.
Mansfield,  having
been  made  survey-
or-general of  Ohio
and  the  western  ter-
ritories, obtained
the  services  of  his
nephewas  secretary
of  the  first  syste-
matic survey  of  any
of  the  new  states  of
the  Union.  While
holding  this  place
he  resigned  in  1806
from  the  army,  but
returned  to  the  engineering  corps  two  years  later,
and  began  his  career  as  a  military  engineer  under
Col.  Jonathan  Williams.  His  first  work  was  on
the  construction  of  Castle  Williams  and  Fort  Clin-
ton in  New  York  harbor,  of  which  he  had  special
supervision  in  1808-'12 ;  and  in  July,  1810,  he  was
promoted  1st  lieutenant.  During  the  war  of  1812
he  served  as  chief  engineer  of  the  army  under  Gen.
Stephen  Van  Rensselaer  on  the  Niagara  frontier,
and  participated  in  the  battle  of  Queenstown.  Sub-
sequently he  was  chief  engineer  of  the  army  under
Gen.  Henry  Dearborn  in  1813,  and  of  that  under
Gen.  Alexander  Macomb  in  1814.  His  services
gained  for  him  promotion  to  captain,  and  the
brevets  of  major  in  1813  and  lieutenant-colonel
for  his  conduct  at  Plattsburg  in  1814.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  returned  to  duties  in  connec-
tion with  the  National  coast  defences  and  served
chiefly  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  where  he  had  charge  of
the  construction  of  Fort  Adams  until  7  Dec,  1838,
when,  having  passed  through  the  grades  of  major
in  1818  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  1828,  he  was  ap-
pointed colonel  and  chief  engineer  of  the  U.  S.
army.  In  connection  with  the  labors  incidental
to  this  office,  he  was  intrusted  with  the  inspector-
ship and  supervision  of  the  U.  S.  military  academy,
which  duties  he  filled  until  his  death.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  Mexican  war  he  was  called  by  Gen.
Winfield  Scott  to  take  charge  of  the  engineering
operations  of  the  army  that  was  to  invade  Mexico.
In  this  capacity  he  directed  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,
for  which  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general.  He
then  returned  to  his  official  duties  in  Washington,
and,  in  addition  to  his  regular  work,  was  a  member
of  the  light-house  board  in  1851-8  and  1860-'4,
also  serving  in  1855  as  a  state  commissioner  for
the  preservation  of  the  harbor  of  New  York,  arid
later  in  similar  capacity  in  Boston.  In  1859-61
he  made  a  reconnoissance  of  the  Pacific  coast  of
the  United  States  to  determine  the  requisites  for
its  defence,  and  inspecting  fortifications.  After
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  had  charge  of
the  engineer  bureau  in  Washington,  and  acted  on
various  military  commissions.  When  the  corps
of  engineers  and  that  of  topographical  engineers
were  consolidated  in  1863,  he  was  made  brigadier-
general  on  3  March,  and  for  his  long,  faithful,
and  eminent  services  was  brevetted  major-general
on  21  April,  1864. He  was  one  of  the  regents  of


142


TOTTEN


TOUCHIMBERT


the  Smithsonian  institution  from  its  establishment
in  1846  until  his  death.  Gen.  Totten  was  inter-
ested in  natural  science  and  was  an  authority  on
the  conchology  of  the  northern  coast  of  the  United
States,  publishing  occasional  papers,  in  which  he
described  hitherto  unknown  species.  The  Gemma
Tottenii  and  the  Succinea  Tottenii  were  so  named
in  his  honor.  He  also  published  papers  on  miner-
alogy. The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Brown  in  1829,  and,  in  addition  to  membership
in  other  scientific  societies,  he  was  named  by  act  of
congress  in  1863  one  of  the  corporate  members  of
the  National  academy  of  sciences.  He  published
papers  on  scientific  subjects,  which  appeared  in
transactions  of  societies  of  which  he  was  a  member,
and  various  reports  on  national  defences ;  and
translated  from  the  French  "  Essays  on  Hydraulic
and  Other  Cements  "  (New  York,  1842).  See  a  sketch
by  Gen.  John  G.  Barnard  in  "  Biographical  Me-
moirs of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences"
(Washington,  1877).

TOTTEN,  Silas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Schoharie
county,  N.  Y.,  26  March,  1804 ;  d.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,
7  Oct.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in
1830,  and  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church  in  Connecticut  by  Bishop  Brown-
ell  in  1833.  In  the  same  year  he  was  elected  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in
Washington  (now  Trinity)  college,  from  which
chair  after  four  years  he  was  elevated  to  the  presi-
dency. During  the  eleven  years  for  which  he  held
this  office  (1837-'48)  a  new  building — Brownell  hall
— was  erected  for  the  accommodation  of  the  stu-
dents. The  name  of  the  institution  was  changed,
at  the  request  of  the  alumni,  to  Trinity  college,  the
graduates  were  organized  into  a  house  of  convoca-
tion as  a  constituent  part  of  the  academic  body,
additions  were  made  to  the  scholarship  funds,  and
a  library  fund  was  established.  A  chapter  of  the
Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  was  also  established  in  the
college,  of  which  Dr.  Totten  was  the  first  president.
On  retiring  from  the  presidency  of  Trinity  college,
Dr.  Totten  accepted  the  professorship  of  belles-
lettres  in  William  and  Mary  college,  Va.,  which
he  resigned  in  1859,  to  become  chancellor  of  the
University  of  Iowa.  In  1864  he  accepted  the  rec-
torship of  a  parish  in  Decatur,  111.,  from  which
place  he  removed  in  1866  to  Lexington,  Ky.,  where
he  occupied  himself  in  teaching  for  the  remainder
of  his  life.  Dr.  Totten  received  his  honorary  de-
gree in  divinity  from  Union  college  in  1838,  and
that  in  laws  from  William  and  Mary  college  in
1860.  He  was  the  author  of  "New  Introduction
to  Algebra  "  (New  York,  1836) ;  "  The  Analogy  of
Truth"  (1848);  and  a  "Letter  about  Jubilee  Col-
lege "  (1848).

TOUCEY,  Isaac,  statesman,  b.  in  Newtown,
Fairfield  co.,  Conn.,  5  Nov.,  1796 ;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  30  July,  1869.  He  was  descended  from
Thomas,  first  Congregational  minister  of  Newtown.
He  received  a  private  classical  education,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1818  at  Hart-
ford, where  he  afterward  practised.  He  was  state's
attorney  for  Hartford  county  in  1822-'5,  a  repre-
sentative in  congress  from  the  first  Connecticut
district  in  1835-'9,  and  was  again  state's  attorney
for  Hartford  county  in  1842-'4.  He  was  unsuc-
cessful as  the  Democratic  candidate  for  governor
of  Connecticut  in  1845,  and  in  1846,  there  being
no  choice  by  the  people,  was  elected  by  the  legis-
lature, but  he  was  again  defeated  in  1847.  He
was  appointed  attorney-general  of  the  United
States,  serving  from  21  June,  1848,  till  3  March,
1849,  and  was  also  for  part  of  this  time  acting
secretary  of  state. He  was  a  member  of  the  state


senate  in  1850,  and  of  the  state  house  of  repre-
sentatives in  1852,  and  was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator
from  Connecticut  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  14
May,  1852,  till  3  March,  1857.  Mr.  Toucey  was
appointed  by  President  Buchanan  secretary  of  the
navy,  served  from  6  March,  1857,  till  3  March,
1861,  and  afterward  returned  to  Hartford  and  re-
sumed the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  was
charged  with  favoring  the  cause  of  the  seceding
states  while  secretary  of  the  navy  by  deliberately
sending  some  of  the  best  vessels  of  the  navy  to
distant  seas  to  prevent  their  being  used  against
the  Confederates.  This  was  denied,  but  he  was
generally  thought  to  sympathize  with  the  south
and  to  be  opposed  to  prosecution  of  the  war.

TOUCHARD,  Louis  Charles  (too-shar),  naval
officer,  b.  in  New  Orleans  in  1741 ;  d.  at  sea,  12
April,  1782.  He  received  his  education  in  Mar-
tinique, entered  the  marines  in  1755,  and  took  part
in  several  campaigns  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  As
lieutenant  he  commanded  in  1769  a  scientific  ex-
pedition to  the  South  sea  and  determined  the  geo-
graphical position  of  points  along  the  Patagonian
coast,  the  Strait  of  Lemaire,  and  Tierra  del  Fuego.
While  attached  to  the  station  of  Cayenne  in  1772-
he  conducted  hostilities  against  corsairs,  who  were
then  numerous  in  the  Atlantic  ocean  between
South  America  and  Africa,  and,  being  promoted
commander  in  1777,  participated  in  the  victory  of
Count  d'Orvilliers  off  Ouessant,  27  July,  1778.  He-
was  sent  afterward  with  two  frigates  to  the  West
Indies,  joined  D'Estaing's  naval  force,  and  assisted
in  the  attack  on  St.  Lucia  and  St.  Vincent  and
the  capture  of  Granada.  As  captain  he  served  un-
der De  Guichen,  and  in  1781  under  De  Vaudreuil.
When  De  Grasse  and  Vaudreuil  left  for  York-
town  he  remained  with  the  Marquis  de  Bouille,
assisted  in  the  capture  of  St.  Eustatius,  and  rav-
aged the  English  colonies  of  Bahama.  When
chased  by  a  superior  force  he  gave  battle  off
Havana  and  escaped  capture.  Joining  De  Grasse
again  in  1782,  he  took  command  of  the  "  Pluton,"
the  sister  ship  of  the  "  Ville  de  Paris,"  the  admi-
ral's flag-ship,  and  made  strenuous  efforts  to  re-
lieve the  admiral,  when  he  was  surrounded  by
superior  forces.  When  he  himself  was  attacked  by
two  English  men-of-war,  he  captured  one,  but  was-
killed  in  the  moment  of  victory.  His  vessel  re-
joined Vaudreuil's  division,  and  he  was  buried  with
honors  in  Martinique.

TOUCHIMBERT,  Eloi  AngeLimie  Pre>ost
Sansac,  Marquis  de  (too-sham-bair),  West  Indian
magistrate,  b.  in  Basse-Terre,  Guadeloupe,  29  Sept.,
1786;  d.  at  sea,  5  May,  1839.  He  emigrated  with
his  parents  to  New  Orleans,  but  after  the  coup  d'etat
of  1799  returned  to  Guadeloupe,  and  during  the
English  invasion  raised  a  regiment  among  his
slaves,  led  them  to  the  field,  and  was  severely
wounded  in  the  attack  on  Morne  Bel-Air,  3  Feb.,
1810,  and  publicly  praised  by  Capt.-Gen.  Ernouf.
After  the  surrender  of  the  colony  he  was  appointed
by  Lord  Cochrane  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
Guadeloupe,  and  later  confirmed  by  Louis  XVIII.
He  was  also  made  a  gentleman  of  the  king's  pri-
vate chamber,  and  president  of  the  grand  electoral
college  of  the  colony.  Marquis  de  Touchimbert —
who  belonged  to  one  of  the  most  illustrious  French
families,  being  the  lineal  descendant  of  that  fa-
mous Count  de  Sansac  of  whom  King  Francis  I.
said,  "  There  are  only  three  real  gentlemen  in
France,  Sansac,  Sainf-Andre,  and  I '  — was  never-
theless a  Liberal,  and  always  advocated  the  en-
franchisement of  the  slaves.  As  a  member  of  the
colonial  assembly  of  Guadeloupe,  he  alone  sup-
ported the  motion  of  the crown  for  freeing  the


TOULMIN


TOURGEE


143


negroes  for  a  liberal  consideration,  and,  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  privy  council  of  the  governor,  he  en-
forced the  rights  of  the  slaves:  Failing  health
induced  him  to  set  out  for  France,  and  he  died
when  in  sight  of  land.

TOULMIN,  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Taunton,  Eng-
land, in  1767;  d.  in  Washington  county,  Ala.,  11
Nov.,  1823.  He  was  the  son  of  the  eminent  Dr.
Joshua  Toulmin,  and  was  a  dissenting  minister
for  several  years  at  Chorobert,  Lancashire.  He
came  to  Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1793,  and  was  president
of  Transylvania  university  in  1794-'6.  He  was
secretary  of  state  of  Kentucky  in  1796-1804,  and
appointed  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  of  Mis-
sissippi in  1804.  During  his  latter  years  he  re-
sided in  Alabama,  assisted  in  framing  the  consti-
tution of  that  state,  and  served  in  the  legislature.
He  published  "  Description  of  Kentucky  "  (1792) ;
"  Magistrate's  Assistant "  ;  "  Collection  of  the  Acts
of  Kentucky  "  (Frankfort,  1802) ;  "  Review  of  the
Criminal  Law  of  Kentucky,"  with  James  Blair
(1804) ;  and  "  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  the  State  of
Alabama  "  (Cahawba,  1823).

TOUR,  Charles  (or  Claude)  Turgis  de  St,
fltienne,  Sieur  de  la,  b.  in  France ;  d.  in  Nova
Scotia  after  1635.  While  on  his  way  to  the  latter
country  in  1629  to  join  his  son,  who  held  command
of  the  fort  at  Cape  Sable,  he  was  captured  by  the
English  and  carried  as  a  prisoner  to  London.  He
married  a  lady  of  rank  at  the  English  court,  and
was  made  a  baronet  of  Nova  Scotia.  He  was  won
over  to  the  English  government  by  this  honor,  and
promised  to  put  them  in  possession  of  the  post  that
his  son  held  in  Acadia.  On  this  assurance  two
war  vessels  were  given  him,  and  he  embarked  with
his  wife  in  1630.  His  efforts  to  persuade  his  son
to  surrender  failed,  and  an  attack  on  the  fortress
was  repelled.  He  thus  found  himself  in  a  position
of  great  difficulty ;  he  could  not- return  to  either
England  or  France,  and  finally  decided,  with  the
consent  of  his  wife,  to  throw  himself  on  the  mercy
of  his  son.  The  latter  replied  that  he  would  cheer-
fully give  him  an  asylum,  but  could  not  permit
him  to  enter  his  forts.  With  the  consent  of  the
English  commander,  he  landed  with  his  wife  and
servants.  A  house  was  built  for  him  at  some  dis-
tance from  the  fort  by  his  son,  who  took  care  of
his  support.  The  Sieur  Denys  says,  in  his  "  De-
scription geographique,"  that  he  met  La  Tour  and
his  family  there  about  1635,  and  that  they  were
very  comfortably  situated.  —  His  son,  Chai'les
Amador  de  St.  Etienne,  b.  in  France;  d.  in
Nova  Scotia  about  1665,  was  made  commandant  of
Fort  St.  Louis  at  Cape  Sable,  and  a  part  of  the

geninsula  was  bequeathed  to  him  by  Biencourt
outrincourt.  His  resistance  to  the  attack  of  the
English  under  his  father  in  1630  has  been  described.
Two  ships  arrived  shortly  afterward  from  France
to  support  him.  He  was  made  in  February,  1631,
lieutenant-general  of  Acadia,  where  his  authority
was  limited  to  Fort  St.  Louis  and  Port  de  la  Tour,
and  wrote  a  letter  to  his  father  urging  him  to  re-
turn to  his  duty.  Some  time  before  this  he  had
founded  Fort  Pentagoet,  on  Penobscot  bay,  near
the  present  Castine,  Me.  After  the  restoration  of
Acadia  to  France  in  1632  he  received  important
grants  on  the  St.  John's  river,  where  he  founded
settlements  in  1635,  and  in  1638  he  was  not  only
secured  in  these  possessions,  but  was  made  lieuten-
ant-general on  the  coast  of  Acadia  from  the  mid-
dle of  the  main-land  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy  to  Cam-
ceaux,  as  well  as  what  is  now  known  as  Nova
Scotia.  Complaints  were  made  of  him  about  this
time  to  the  French  court,  which  appears  to  have
suspected  his  loyalty. On  13  Feb.,  1641,  Aulnay  de


Charnise,  his  bitter  enemy,  obtained  an  order  to  ar-
rest him  and  send  him  toFrance.  But  De  la  Tour,
who  commanded  a  body  of  soldiers  that  were  fully
equal  in  numbers  and  devotion  to  those  of  Charnise,
refused  to  surrender.  The  latter  went  to  France  to-
ward the  end  of  the  year,  and  obtained  a  new  com-
mission on  22  Feb.',  1642,  and  additional  powers.
Meanwhile,  De  la  Tour  invoked  the  aid  of  John
Winthrop,  governor  of  Massachusetts,  and  entered
Boston  harbor  in  an  armed  vessel  on  12  April,
1643.  After  several  discussions,  some  of  them  on
religious  subjects,  he  was  allowed  to  raise  volun-
teers, and  with  these  auxiliaries  forced  Charnise  to
withdraw  from  Fort  St.  John  and  retreat  to  Port
Royal,  whither  he  pursued  him  and  inflicted  some
damage  on  him.  A  short  time  afterward  La  Tour
went  to  Quebec,  and  Charnise  besieged  and  took
the  fort  in  his  absence  in  April,  1645.  (For  the
heroic  defence  of  the  fort  by  his  wife,  see  Char-
nise.) La  Tour  then  retired  to  Newfoundland,  and
in  August,  1646,  to  Quebec.  In  1648  he  went  to
France  and  described  the  tyranny  of  Charnise  so
effectively  to  the  French  court  that,  on  the  death
of  the  latter,  he  was  appointed  governor  and  lieu-
tenant-general in  Acadia.  The  wife  and  children
of  Charnise  were  about  to  oppose  his  authority
with  arms,  but  in  1653  an  arrangement  was  made
between  the  opposing  factions,  which  was  con-
firmed by  the  marriage  of  De  la  Tour  with  the
widow  of  Charnise,  his  own  wife  having  died  soon
after  the  surrender  of  Fort  St.  John.  He  was
forced  to  yield  this  fortress  in  1654  to  a  detach-
ment of  New  England  troops,  commanded  by  Rob-
ert Sedgwick,  from  want  of  provisions.  He  ob-
tained from  Oliver  Cromwell  an  extensive  grant  of
territory  in  Acadia  in  favor  of  himself  and  two
Englishmen.  But  his  different  enterprises  had  in-
volved him  in  pecuniary  embarrassment,  and  he
sold  out  to  his  co-proprietors.

TOUR,  Le  Blond  de  la,  French  soldier,  b.  in
France ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  about  1725.  He
had  some  skill  in  engineering,  and  went  to  New
France  as  chief  of  a  party,  erecting  Fort  Alibamon
(or  Alibama)  in  Louisiana  in  1713.  He  surveyed  the
site  of  New  Orleans  in  1717,  and  immediately  built
a  fort  on  piles  at  Balize  (or  North -East  Pass)  to
guard  the  entrance.  When  Bienville  was  sum-
moned to  France  in  1724,  La  Tour  was  ordered  to
take  command  until  the  return  from  Illinois  of
Dugue  de  Boisbriand,  the  governor  ad  interim.

TOURGEE,  Albion  Winegar  (toor-zhay '),  au-
thor, b.  in  Williamsfield,  Ohio,  2  May,  1838.  He
is  the  son  of  a  farmer  of  Huguenot  descent.  After
studying  at  Rochester  university  in  1859-61,  he
served  in  the  National  army  in  1861-'5,  was
wounded  at  Bull  Run  and  at  Perryville,  and  was
a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  Confederates  for
four  months.  After  the  war  he  settled  as  a  law-
yer, farmer,  and  editor  at  Greensboro',  N.  C.  He
opposed  the  plan  of  reconstruction  that  was
adopted,  favoring  instead  the  establishing  of  ter-
ritorial governments  in  the  seceding  states.  At
the  Loyalists'  convention  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in
1866,  he  prepared  the  report  on  the  condition  of
the  southern  states.  He  was  an  active  member  of
the  North  Carolina  constitutional  conventions  of
1868  and  1875,  and  was  one  of  the  commission
appointed  to  codify  and  revise  the  state  laws.  In
April,  1868,  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  superior
court  for  the  seventh  judicial  district  of  North
Carolina,  his  term  expiring  in  1874 ;  and  in  Febru-
ary, 1876,  he  was  appointed  pension  agent  for  that
state.  His  judicial  district  included  the  counties
where  the  Ku-klux  clan  was  most  powerful  and
aggressive,  and  several  unsuccessful  raids  were


144


TOURGEE


TOUSSAINT


planned  for  his  capture.  In  1866-'7  he  published
at  Greensboro'  the  "  Union  Register,"  and  in  1882
he  established  "  The  Continent,"  a  literary  weekly,
in  Philadelphia,  which  was  discontinued  in  1885.
He  is  well  known  as  a  lecturer,  and  has  published
"North  Carolina  Form-Book"  (1869) ;  " Toinette  "
<New  York,  1874);  "The  North  Carolina  Code,
with  Notes  and  Decisions  "  (1878) ;  "  A  Digest  of
Cited  Cases  "  (1879) ;  "  Statutory  Decisions  of  the
North  Carolina  Reports  "  (1879) ;  "  Figs  and  This-
tles" (1879);  "A  Fool's  Errand,  by  one  of  the
Fools."  of  which  135,000  copies  were  sold  (1879) ;
**  Bricks  without  Straw  "  (1880) ;  "  Hot  Plowshares  "
<1883);  "An  Appeal  to  Caesar"  (1884);  "Black
Ice  "  (1887) ;  and  "  Button's  Inn  "  (Boston,  1887).

TOURGEE,  Eben,  musician,  b.  in  Warwick,
R.  1.,  1  June,  1834.  At  seventeen  years  of  age  he
was  clerk  in  a  Providence  music-store,  and  at  nine-
teen a  music-dealer  at  Fall  River.  He  also  taught
in  the  public  schools,  and  edited  the  "  Massachu-
setts Musical  Journal."  In  1859  he  founded  a
musical  conservatory  at  East  Greenwich,  and  in
1864  he  projected  a  larger  institution  at  Provi-
dence, which  was  removed  to  Boston  in  1867,  and
incorporated  in  1870.  The  building  that  is  occu-
pied by  the  conservatory  has  a  concert-hall,  con-
taining a  large  pipe-organ  and  stage  and  seats  for
1,500  persons.  Besides  a  library,  reading-room,  and
offices,  it  has  rooms  for  500  students,  and  cost,  with
all  its  appointments,  more  than  $700,000.

TOURO,  Judah,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  16  June,  1775;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  18
June,  1854.  Leaving  Newport  in  1798,  where  his
father,  Isaac  Touro,  a  native  of  Holland,  was  min-
ister of  the  synagogue,  he  entered  commercial  life
in  Boston,  and  settled  as  a  merchant  in  New  Or-
leans in  1802.  Here  he  acquired  great  wealth
through  his  thrift  and  industry.  He  volunteered
under  Gen.  Jackson  when  the  British  marched
against  New  Orleans,  and  was  wounded  in  battle
on  1  Jan.,  1815.  Being  saved  by  the  bravery  and
care  of  Rezin  Davis  Shepherd,  Touro  bequeathed
to  him  a  large  share  of  his  property.  He  was  a
steady  and  generous  giver  to  charities,  Jewish  and
Christian,  and  endowed  several  synagogues  and
churches  throughout  the  country.  He  gave  $10,000
toward  Bunker  Hill  monument.  His  remains  are
buried  in  the  Newport  Jewish  cemetery.
•  TOUSEY, Sinclair,  publisher, b. inNew Haven,
Conn.,  18  July,  1818 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  16  June,
1887.  He  received  the  rudiments  of  a  common-
school  education,  and  was  employed  on  farms  and
as  a  clerk  till  1836,  when  he  came  to  New  York
and  became  a  newspaper-carrier.  He  was  subse-
quently an  agent  till  1840,  and  established  and
published  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  the  "  Daily  Times,"
the  first  penny  paper  that  was  issued  west  of  the
Alleghany  mountains.  He  engaged  in  farming  in
New  York  state  in  1840-'53.  and  in  the  autumn  of
the  latter  year  became  partner  in  a  news  agency  in
Nassau  street.  In  May,  1860,  Mr.  Tousey  became
sole  proprietor  of  the  agencv.  the  businessof  which
had  increased  from  $150,000  to  $1,000,000  per  an-
num. The  American  news  company  was  organized,
1  Feb.,  1864,  and  he  was  elected  president,  which
■office  he  held  till  his  death.  He  joined  the  Repub-
lican party  at  its  organization,  was  an  enthusiastic
Abolitionist,  writing  and  speaking  against  slavery,
was  at  one  time  a  vice-president  of  the  Union
league  club,  and  took  an  active  interest  in  philan-
thropic schemes  and  organizations.  He  published
"Papers  from  over  the  Water"  (New  York,  1869).

TOUSSAINT,  DieudonnS  Gabriel  (too-sang),
Austrian  naturalist,  b.  in  Vienna  in  1717;  d.  in
Schoenbrunn  in  1799. He  was  the  son  of  a  chan-


cellor of  the  French  legation,  studied  in  Vienna  and
Prague,  and,  devoting  himself  afterward  to  botany,
was  made  in  1759  imperial  botanist  by  the  Empress
Maria  Theresa,  and  shortly  afterward  appointed
professor  in  the  University  of  Prague.  After  the
general  peace  of  1763  he  was  sent  on  a  scientific
mission  to  South  America,  and  from  1764  till  1771
visited  several  of  the  West  Indies.  By  special
permission  of  Charles  III.  of  Spain,  he  also  went
to  Mexico  and  both  Upper  and  Lower  California,
being  detained  a  prisoner  for  several  weeks  by
Indians  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  present  city
of  Los  Angeles.  The  valuable  collections  that  he
formed  are  preserved  in  the  museum  at  Vienna.
Toussaint's  works  include  "Sertum  Mexicanum  "
(Vienna,  1773) ;  "  Prodomus  florae  Mexicana\  ex-
hibens  characteres  plantarum,  nova  genera  et
species  novas  vel  minus  cognitas  "  (4  vols.,  1773-'7) ;
and  "  Bibliotheca  botanica,  continens  genera  plan-
tarum in  America  Meridionali  crescentium  "  (1779).
His  name  has  been  given  to  a  Brazilian  plant  of
the  family  Polygalae.

TOUSSAINT,  Dominique  Francois,  best
known  as  Toussaint  L'Quverture,  Haytian  sol-
dier, b.  in  Breda,  near  Cape  Franeais,  in  1743;
d.  in  the  castle  of  Joux,  near  Pontarlier,  France,
27  April,  1803.  He
was  a  slave,  and  his
master  employed
him  as  coachman,
and  subsequently
made  him  overseer,
in  which  office  he
was  honest  and  effi-
cient, but  was  se-
vere toward  his
fellow-slaves.  In
1790,  when  the  mu-
lattos appealed  to
the  negroes  for
help  in  enforcing
their  rights,  Tous-
saint refused  to
join  them,  but  for-
warded supplies  se-
cretly to  his  friend,
Jean  Biassou,  the
leader  of  the  insur-
gents. After  the
general  massacre
of  the  whites  in  Au-
gust, 1791,  Tous-
saint protected  the  flight  of  his  master,  and  then
joined  the  forces  of  Jean  Francois,  being  appointed
by  the  latter  chief  surgeon  of  the  army.  He  soon
became  very  popular  in  the  negro  army,  but  in-
curred the  enmity  of  Francois,  who  imprisoned
him  in  the  fortress  of  La  Valliere  in  1793;  but
Biassou  liberated  him.  Soon  Toussaint  turned
against  his  benefactor,  and  supported  the  candidacy
of  Jean  Francois  as  supreme  chief.  When  news
came  of  the  execution  of  Louis  XVI.,  Francois,
followed  by  Toussaint,  accepted  a  colonel's  com-
mission in  the  Spanish-Dominican  forces,  and  went
to  the  Spanish  part  of  the  island.  Re-enforced
by  a  Spanish  division,  Toussaint  invaded  French
territory,  defeated  Brandicourt,  and  occupied  im-
portant posts,  among  them  Gonaives.  Meanwhile
the  English  had  taken  Port  au  Prince,  and  the
whole  island  was  in  confusion,  French,  English,
Spaniards,  mulattoes,  and  negroes  all  contending
for  supremacy.  After  unsuccessful  negotiations
with  the  French  agents,  Etienne  Polverel  and
Felicite  Sonthonax,  he  heard  that  the  French  gov-
ernment had  decreed  the  freedom  of  the  slaves,


K'M77&tm/Utr^/U£^


TOUSSAINT


TOUSSAINT


145


and  Gen.  Laveaux,  Polverel's  successor,  having
promised  him  the  rank  of  brigadier  he  joined  the
French  forces.  His  successes  against  the  Spanish
and  English  were  immediate  and  great.  "Get
homme  fait  done  Pouverture  partout,"  exclaimed
Laveaux,  and  afterward  Toussaint  was  given  the
surname  of  L'Ouverture.  Some  authorities  say
that  he  adopted  the  title  to  declare  himself  the
liberator  of  his  people.  Laveaux  distrusted  him,
and  was  seeking  an  opportunity  to  dismiss  him;
but  in  March,  1795,  there  was  an  insurrection  in
Cape  Francais,  and  Toussaint,  relieving  Laveaux,
was  appointed  lieutenant-general  and  deputy  gov-
ernor-general, and  caused  the  negroes  to  lay  down
their  arms.  Being  confirmed  in  his  offices  by  the
Directory  through  Sonthonax,  Laveaux's  successor,
in  April,  1796,  Toussaint  formed  and  disciplined
another  army,  with  the  purpose  of  making  himself
master  of  the  province,  and  entering  Cape  Francais
in  August,  at  the  head  of  a  strong  party  of  cavalry,
compelled  Sonthonax  to  leave  for  France.  He
then  assumed  the  government,  acknowledging  only
the  authority  of  the  Directory.  The  latter  body,
aware  of  the  extraordinary  influence  that  he  ex-
ercised over  the  blacks,  feigned  to  approve  his
acts,  but  sent  a  new  commissioner,  Gen.  Hedou-
ville,  to  Santo  Domingo.  Meanwhile  the  English
general,  Maitland,  had  received  orders  from  the
home  government  to  evacuate  Santo  Domingo,
and  he  sought  to  conciliate  Toussaint.  It  is  now
demonstrated,  through  the  documents  published  by
Pamphile  Lacroix,  that  a  treaty  was  concerted  be-
tween Maitland  and  Toussaint  which  recognized
the  latter  as  king  of  Santo  Domingo,  England
pledging  also  the  acceptance  of  the  other  powers,
on  condition  that  an  exclusive  right  of  commerce
in  the  island  be  conceded  to  the  English,  who
should  maintain  forever  an  armed  fleet  for  the
protection  of  Santo  Domingo.  The  sudden  land-
ing of  Gen.  Hedouville  terminated  the  negotia-
tions, and  Maitland  surrendered  to  Toussaint  Port
au  Prince,  St.  Marc,  Jeremie,  and  Mole  St.  Nicolas.
Hedouville,  aware  of  Toussaint's  intrigues,  sought
to  overthrow  him,  but  the  latter  organized  through
his  agents  a  rebellion  in  Cape  Francais,  and  He-
douville was  compelled  to  return  to  France.  Be-
fore sailing  he  appointed  Gen.  Andre  Rigaud  his
lieutenant,  and  the  mulattoes,  dissatisfied  with
Toussaint's  rule,  rallied  around  Rigaud.  A  fierce
war  ensued,  in  which  Toussaint  was  almost  defeated,
but  finally  drove  Rigaud  to  Les  Caves  in  Decem-
ber, 1799.  At  this  juncture  new  commissioners,
sent  by  Bonaparte,  brought  to  Toussaint  a  commis-
sion of  commander-in-chief, and  determined  Rigaud
to  sail  for  France.  Toussaint  then  proclaimed
a  general  amnesty  and  issued  his  famous  decree,
which,  though  acknowledging  the  enfranchisement
of  the  negroes,  compelled  them  to  work  for  five
years  for  their  old  masters  without  other  remuner-
ation than  a  fourth  part  of  the  net  income  from
the  land  that  was  thus  cultivated.  He  also  organ-
ized his  military  household  with  pomp  and  cere-
mony, formed  a  guard,  built  palaces,  and  began
to  direct  his  attention  to  the  prosperity  of  the
country,  fostering  agriculture  and  commerce.  He
used  to  say,  "  I  am  the  Bonaparte  of  Santo  Domin-
go," and  it  is  said  that  he  headed  his  correspond-
ence to  the  first  consul,  "  The  first  among  the  blacks
to  the  first  among  the  whites."  At  the  beginning
he  selected  an  administrative  council  composed
of  eight  whites  and  one  black.  Toward  the  close
of  January,  1801,  he  subdued,  without  effort,  the
Spanish  part  of  the  island,  which  had  been  ceded
to  France  by  the  treaty  of  Basles.  His  next  act
was  to  promulgate  a  constitution  the  first  article
vol.  vi. — 10


of  which  made  him  president  and  commander-in-
chief  of  Santo  Domingo  for  life,  with  the  privilege
of  choosing  his  successor  and  of  appointing  all
military  and  civil  officers.  This  provoked  harsh
criticism,  and  there  were  riots  in  several  cities,
which  Toussaint  subdued  with  his  usual  vigor.  In
the  north  he  defeated  the  rebels  on  4  Nov.,  and
ordered  his  own  nephew,  Hyacinthe  Moyse,  to  be
shot  without  trial.  On  26  Nov.  he  issued  a  decree
recalling  the  emigrated  proprietors  and  providing
severe  penalties  for  larceny  and  other  offences
against  the  common  law.  Bonaparte  just  then
directed  his  attention  to  Santo  Domingo.  It  is
now  conceded  that  he  had  less  in  mind  to  subdue
Toussaint  than  "  to  get  rid  of  60,000  soldiers,"  the
partisans  of  Gen.  Moreau,  as  he  said  to  Gen.  Fair-
fait,  who  dissuaded  him  from  sending  an  expedi-
tion to  perish  by  yellow  fever  in  Santo  Domingo.
A  powerful  fleet,  carrying  an  army  under  command
of  Gen.  Victor  Leclerc,  appeared  on  29  Jan.,  1802,
in  the  Bay  of  Samana,  and,  dividing  his  forces  into
four  divisions,  the  general-in-chief  made  sail  for
Cape  Francais.  Toussaint's  army  numbered  then
20,000  trained  soldiers,  twice  Leclerc  "s  forces,  yet
he  did  not  oppose  the  landing,  but  instructed  Henry
Christophe  to  set  fire  to  the  town,  6  Feb.,  1802.
The  whole  island  readily  accepted  the  French  rule,
yet  nothing  was  gained  so  long  as  Toussaint  re-
fused to  make  his  submission.  Leclerc  tried  hard
to  conciliate  him,  choosing  as  his  ambassadors
Toussaint's  two  sons,  who  had  been  brought  from
school  in  France  to  deliver  to  their  father  a  letter
from  the  first  consul,  commending  Toussaint's  ad-
ministration and  maintaining  him  in  the  office  of
commander-in-chief.  But  as  Toussaint  demanded
that  the  French  forces  should  re-embark  immedi-
ately, the  captain-general  proclaimed  him  an  out-
law on  17  Feb.  A  sanguinary  conflict  ensued  with
varying  success,  the  French  holding  the  seaports
and  the  blacks  defying  them  in  their  mountain-
fastnesses,  and  Leclerc,  finding  it  impossible  to  con-
quer the  island  by  force,  sought  to  win  over  the
negro  generals,  and  succeeded  in  part,  Christophe
and  Dessalines  making  their  submission.  Leclerc,
nevertheless,  was  most  anxious  to  treat,  as  out  of  a
total  of  23,000  men,  5,000  were  already  dead  and  up-
ward of  6,000  in  the  hospitals.  He  consented,  there-
fore, to  pardon  Toussaint,  and  assigned  him  for  resi-
dence his  estate  of  Sancey,  near  Gonaives,  1  May,
1802.  It  was  alleged  by  the  French  authorities  that
Toussaint  was  continuing  to  conspire  against  them,
and  a  correspondence  with  his  former  adjutant,
Joseph  Fontaine,  which  has  never  been  published,
having  been  seized,  Leclerc  resolved  to  arrest  him.
Gen.  Brunet  invited  Toussaint  to  a  conference  at
Gorges,  and  both  parties  went,  accompanied  by
twenty  guards,  but  the  negroes  were  easily  over-
come, and  Toussaint  was  embarked  on  the  frigate
"  La  Creole "  and  transported  to  Cape  Francais.
There  he  was  transferred  on  the  ship  "Le  He-
ros  "  and  sent  with  his  family  to  France,  arriving
at  Landerneau,  10  Aug.,  and  at  Paris,  17  Aug.,
1802.  There  he  was  met  by  Gen.  Caffarelli,  an
aide-de-camp  of  Bonaparte,  transported  to  the  cas-
tle of  Joux,  and  closely  confined.  Stories  of  harsh
treatment  have  been  circulated;  it  has  even  been  said
that  he  was  subjected  to  the  intense  cold  with  in-
sufficient clothing  and  food,  and  that  finally  he  died
from  hunger  during  an  absence  of  the  governor  of
the  castle,  or,  as  some  say,  from  poison :  but  there
is  no  positive  proof  of  all  this.  It  must  be  borne  in
mind  that  Toussaint  was  at  that  time  sixty  years
old.  that  he  had  never  before  left  Santo  Domingo,
and  was  unaccustomed  to  the  severe  winters  of
the  Jura  mountains. Moreover,  the  governor  of


146


TOUSSARD


TOWLE


the  castle  not  only  had  special  orders  for  the  wel-
fare of  his  prisoner,  but  became  his  friend,  as  is
shown  by  Toussaint's  correspondence.  Toussaint
probably  died  from  apoplexy,  provoked  by  anger,
resentment,  and  humiliation  at  his  ill  fortune.  In
person  Toussaint  was  short  of  stature  and  of  un-
prepossessing appearance.  He  was  temperate  and
hardy,  often  riding  fifty  leagues  without  stopping,
and  sleeping  but  two  hours.  In  his  army  he  main-
tained the  strictest  discipline,  and  his  soldiers
looked  on  him  as  a  superior  being.  His  life  has
been  written  by  Charles  de  St.  Remy  (Paris,  1850),
by  John  R.  Beard  (London,  1853),  by  Charles  W.
Elliot  (New  York,  1855),  and  by  James  Redpath
(Boston,  1863),  and  he  forms  the  subject  of  one  of
Wendell  Phillips's  most  celebrated  lectures.  Tous-
saint's family  was  transported  to  Prance  with  him,
and  assigned  a  residence  in  Agen  with  a  pension
from  the  government.  His  wife  died  there  in  May,
1816,  and  his  third  son  soon  afterward.  The  two
eldest,  Isaac  and  Placide,  having  tried  to  escape  in
1805,  were  imprisoned  in  Belle-Isle  till  1815.  They
settled  afterward  in  Bordeaux.  Placide,  who  died
in  1843,  published  "  Vie  de  Toussaint  l'Ouverture  "
(Bordeaux.  1825). Isaac  died  in  1850.

TOUSSARD,  Louis  (toos-sar),  Chevalier  de,
French  soldier,  b.  in  Burgundy  in  1749  ;  d.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  in  1821.  He  studied  at  the  school  of
artillery  of  La  Pere,  and  was  a  lieutenant  when  he
resigned  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  for  independ-
ence and  came  to  this  country  with  Chevalier  de
Loyante  through  means  that  were  furnished  by
Caron  de  Beaumarchais.  In  June,  1777,  upon  Si-
las Deane's  recommendation,  he  received  a  lieuten-
ant's commission  and  was  attached  to  Washing-
ton's staff.  Later  he  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
Lafayette,  assisted  in  the  battle  of  the  Brandy-
wine,  and  lost  an  arm  during  the  retreat  from
Rhode  Island  in  the  autumn  of  1778.  Soon  after-
ward he  was  brevetted  lieutenant  -  colonel  and
awarded  by  congress  a  pension  for  life.  He  as-
sisted in  the  capture  of  Yorktown  in  1781,  and
fought  in  the  south  with  Lafayette  till  the  conclu-
sion of  peace.  In  1784  he  was  made  a  knight  of
Saint  Louis,  a  colonel  in  the  French  service,  and
appointed  inspector  of  the  artillery  of  the  French
West  Indies.  He  was  at  Santo  Domingo  at  the
beginning  of  the  troubles  in  1790,  and  fought  on
the  royalist  side.  In  1794  he  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  negroes,  but  through  the  intervention  of  the
U.  S.  consul  was  placed  on  board  a  vessel  bound
for  New  Orleans.  He  petitioned  congress  for  his
reinstatement  in  the  army,  which  was  granted,  and
in  February,  1795,  he  was  made  major  of  the  2d
artillery,  being  promoted  its  lieutenant  -  colonel
early  in  1800.  The  regiment  was  disbanded  in
January,  1802,  and  he  retired  to  private  life.  In
1812— '15  he  held  the  office  of  French  consul  at
New  Orleans.  His  works  include  "  American  Ar-
tillerist's Companion"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1809;
revised  ed.,  1821).

TOWER,  Fayette  Bartholomew,  civil  engi-
neer, b.  in  Waterville,  N.  Y.,  29  Jan.,  1817:  d.
there,  16  Feb.,  1857.  He  received  such  education
as  the  local  schools  afforded,  and  chose  the  profes-
sion of  civil  engineering.  In  1837  he  was  appoint-
ed on  the  Croton  aqueduct,  and  he  continued  on
that  work  until  its  completion  in  1842.  During
the  ensuing  five  years  he  made  Waterville  his
residence,  and  at  that  time  prepared  his  "  Illustra-
tions of  the  Croton  Aqueduct,"  consisting  of  a
series  of  twenty-one  plates,  with  text  (New  York,
1843).  About  1848  his  health  led  him  to  seek  a
milder  climate,  and  he  settled  in  Cumberland,  Md.
He  was  chosen  to  the  Maryland  legislature,  and


later  was  elected  mayor  of  Cumberland.  His  health
continued  to  fail,  and  in  1856  he  returned  to
Waterville  and  died  soon  afterward.

TOWER,  Zealous  Bates,  soldier,  b.  in  Cohasset,
Mass.,  12  Jan.,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1841,  first  in  a  class  of  fifty-
two,  among  whom  were  Horatio  O.  Wright,  Thomas
J.  Rodman,  Nathaniel  Lyon,  and  Don  Carlos  Buell.
He  was  promoted  2d  lieutenant  in  the  corps  of
engineers,  1  July,  1841,  assigned  to  duty  as  as-
sistant to  the  board  of  engineers,  and  in  1842
as  principal  assistant  professor  of  engineering
at  West  Point.  During  the  years  1843-6  he  was
engaged  on  the  defences  of  Hampton  Roads.  He
served  with  great  credit  in  the  war  with  Mexico  in
1846-'8,  especially  at  Cerro  Gordo,  Contreras  (where
he  led  the  storming  column),  Chapultepec  (where
he  was  wounded),  and  in  the  final  assault  and  cap-
ture of  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  became  1st  lieu-
tenant in  April,  1847,  and  captain,  1  July,  1855.
During  1848-'61  he  was  engaged  upon  river  and
harbor  improvements,  on  the  building  of  the  San
Francisco  custom-house,  and  on  the  board  to  pro-
ject the  defences  of  the  Pacific  coast.  He  was  pro-
moted major  of  engineers,  6  Aug.,  1861,  and  as-
signed as  chief  engineer  of  the  defence  of  Fort
Pickens.  For  his  conduct  there  he  was  appointed
a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  23  Nov.,  1861,
the  date  of  the  bombardment.  He  participated,
in  command  of  troops,  in  the  operations  in  north-
ern Virginia,  under  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  and
Gen.  John  Pope,  until  the  second  battle  of  Bull
Run,  30  Aug.,  1862,  where  he  was  severely  wound-
ed. Upon  his  recovery  he  served  as  superintend-
ent of  the  U.  S.  military  academy  at  West  Point
from  July  till  September,  1864,  when  he  rejoined
the  armies  in  the  field  as  chief  engineer  of  the  de-
fences of  Nashville,  took  part  in  the  battle,  and
held  responsible  staff  offices  in  the  military  divis-
ions of  the  Mississippi  and  Tennessee  until  the
close  of  the  war.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel  of  engineers  in  1865,  and  mustered  out  of
volunteer  service,  15  Jan.,  1866.  Thereafter  Gen.
Tower  was  employed  in  the  supervision  of  the  work
of  improving  the  great  harbors,  both  for  commer-
cial and  military  purposes,  until  13  Jan.,  1874,
when  he  was  promoted  colonel  of  engineers,  and,
having  served  more  than  forty  years,  was,  at  his
own  request,  retired  from  active  service.  He  re-
ceived eight  brevets  for  "gallant  and  meritorious
service"  in  war — from  1st  lieutenant,  18  April,
1847,  for  Cerro  Gordo,  to  major-general,  U.  S.  army,
13  March,  1865.  Gen.  Tower  is  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  Aztec  club,  founded  in  the  city  of
Mexico,  13  Oct.,  1847,  by  the  officers  of  Gen.  Scott's
army.  He  is  the  author  of  "  An  Analytical  Investiga-
tion of  the  Possible  Velocity  of  the  Ice-Boat,"  pub-
lished in  "  Van  Nostrand's  Engineering  Magazine."

TOWLE,  George  Makepeace  (tole),  author,  b.
in  Washington,  D.  C,  27  Aug.,  1841.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1861  and  at  the  Harvard  law-
school  in  1863,  and  practised  in  Boston  in  1863-'5.
He  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Nantes,  France,  in  1866-'8,
and  in  the  latter  year  was  transferred  to  the  con-
sulate at  Bradford,  England,  where  he  remained
until  his  return  to  Boston  in  1870.  He  became
president  of  the  Papyrus  club  in  1880,  and  was  a
delegate  to  the  Republican  national  convention  at
Chicago  in  1888.  He  was  managing  editor  of  the
Boston  "Commercial  Bulletin"  in  1870-'l,  was
foreign  editor  of  the  Boston  "Post"  in  1871-6,
and  became  a  contributor  to  many  foreign  and
American  periodicals.  He  has  published  "  Glimpses
of  History  v  (Boston,  1865) ;  "  The  History  of  Henry
the  Fifth,  King  of  England  "  (New  York,  1866) ;


TOWLER


TOWNSEND


147


"American  Society  "  (2  vols.,  London,  1870) ;  "  The
Eastern  Question  :  Modern  Greece-"  (Boston,  1877);
"Principalities  of  the  Danube:  Servia  and  Rou-
mania  "  (1877) ;  "  Beaconsfield  "  (New  York,  1878) ;
"  Young  Folks'  Heroes  of  History,"  including
"  Vasco  da  Garaa,"  "  Pizarro,"  "  Magellan,"  "  Marco
Polo,"  "  Raleigh,"  and  "  Drake  "  (6  vols..  Boston,
1878-'82) ;  "  Modern  Prance,  1851-'79  "  (New  York,
1879) ;  "  Certain  Men  of  Mark  "  (1880) ;  "  England
and  Russia  in  Asia  "  (1885) ;  "  England  in  Egypt "
(1885);  "Young  People's  History  of  England"
(1886) ;  and  "  Young  People's  History  of  Ireland  "
(1887).  He  has  translated  several  French  works
into  English.

TOWLER,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Rathmell,
Yorkshire,  England,  20  June,  1811.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Giggleswick  grammar-school  and  was
admitted  a  member  of  St.  John's  college,  Cam-
bridge, in  1833.  After  coming  to  this  country  he
was  elected  in  1850  professor  of  modern  languages
and  literature  in  Geneva  (now  Hobart)  college,  at
whose  medical  department  he  was  graduated  in
1855.  From  1853  till  1872  he  was  its  professor  of
chemistry,  toxicology,  and  medical  jurisprudence,
and  dean  of  the  medical  faculty.  Subsequently,
when  this  institution  was  merged  into  the  Syracuse
school  of  medicine,  he  was  given  the  chair  of  anato-
my, and  in  18G8  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of
civil  engineering  and  chemistry  in  Hobart.  These
places  he  resigned  in  1882  to  become  U.  S.  consul  at
Trinidad,  British  West  Indies,  where  he  remained
until  1886.  Since  that  time  he  has  devoted  his  at-
tention to  literary  work  at  Orange,  N.  J.  Prof.
Towler  was  co-editor  of  Hilpert's  "  German  and
English  Dictionary  "  (4  vols.,  Carlsruhe,  1846),  and
he  also  edited  after  Hilpert's  death  an  abridged
edition  of  the  "  Dictionary "  (2  vols.,  Pforzheim,
1846-'7).  He  was  editor  of  "  Humphrey's  Journal
of  Photography  and  the  Allied  Arts  and  Sciences  "
and  "  The  American  Photographic  Almanac "  in
1864-'7,  and  for  five  years  subsequent  to  1867  he
wrote  an  article  each  month  for  the  "  Philadel-
phia Photographer."  He  published  translations  of
Schiller's  "  Don  Carlos,"  "  Die  Braut  von  Messina,"
and  "  Die  Rauber  "  in  the  same  metre  as  the  origi-
nal (Carlsruhe,  1845-'8),  and  made  translations  of
German  war  songs.  His  other  works  include  "  Der
kleine  Englander"  (Carlsruhe,  1845):  "The  Silver
Sunbeam '?(New  York,  1863);  "Dry  Plate  Photog-
raphy" (1865);  "The  Porcelain  Picture"  (1865);
"The  Magic  Photography"  (1866);  "The  Nega-
tive and  the  Print "  (1866) ;  "  The  Tannin  Process  "
(1867);  and  "The  Photographer's  Guide"  (1867);
and  he  has  translated  Karl  Friedrich  Rammels-
berg's  "  Guide  to  a  Course  of  Quantitative  Chemi-
cal Analysis  "  (Geneva,  1871).

TOWLES,  Catherine  Webb,  author,  b.  in  Char-
lemont,  Mass.,  25  Oct.,  1823.  She  was  the  daugh-
ter of  Rufus  Barber,  of  Worcester,  Mass.,  and  has
been  a  teacher.  She  began  to  write  verses  for  the
newspapers  at  an  early  date,  and  at  the  death  of
her  father  in  1846  she  removed  to  the  south.  She
was  editor  of  the  "  Family  Visitor "  in  Madison,
Ga.,  in  1849-'52,  in  1861  became  connected  with  the
"Southern  Literary  Companion,"  and  in  1866  be-
came editor  and  proprietor  of  "  Miss  Barber's
Weekly,"  which  she  continued  till  her  marriage  to
John  C.  Towles,  of  Lafayette,  Ala.,  in  1867.  In
1884  she  married  Jett  T.  McCoy,  who  has  since
died.  She  now  resides  at  Columbus,  Ga.  She  has
received  honorary  degrees  from  southern  colleges.
She  has  published  "  Tales  for  the  Freemason's  Fire-
side" (New  York,  1859);  "The  Three  Golden
Links  "  (Cassville.  Ga.,  1857) :  and  "  Poor  Claire,  or
Life  Among  the  Queer"  (1888).


TOWN,  Ithiel,  architect,  b.  in  Thompson,  Conn.,
in  1784;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  13  June,  1844.
He  became  associated  with  Alexander  J.  Davis  in
1829,  and  the  two  opened  an  office  in  New  York.
Among  the  more  important  of  their  works  were
the  state  capitol  in  New  Haven,  the  city-hall  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  and  the  capitols  of  Indiana  and
North  Carolina.  Town  also  built  several  bridges,
including  one  over  the  James  river,  near  Rich-
mond, Va.  He  was  the  possessor  of  a  fine  library
of  books  on  art,  a  portion  of  which  went  to  Yale
college.  He  was  one  of  the  original  members  of
the  Academy  of  design,  New  York,  and  travelled
in  Europe  in  1829-30.  He  published  "Descrip-
tion of  his  Improvements  in  the  Construction  of
Bridges  "  (Salem,  1821) ;  "  School-House  Architec-
ture " ;  "  Sir  George  Collier's  Journal  in  the  'Rain-
bow,' 1776-'9"  (New  York,  1835);  and  "Atlantic
Steamships :  On  navigating  the  Ocean  with  Steam-
ships of  Large  Tonnage  "  (1838).

TOWN,  Salem,  educator,  b.  in  Belehertown,
Mass.,  5  March,  1779 ;  d.  in  Greencastle,  Ind.,  24
Feb.,  1864.  He  resided  at  Aurora,  N.  Y.,  was  for
forty  years  a  teacher  in  New  York  state,  and  at
one  time  a  member  of  the  New  York  senate.  He
died  while  on  a  visit  to  Greencastle.  He  Mas  the
author  of  "  System  of  Speculative  Masonry  "  (New
York,  1822);*"  An  Analysis  of  Derivative  Words
in  the  English  Language  "  (1830);  and  otherschool-
books.  With  Nelson  M.  Holbrook,  he  published
a  series  of  school-readers,  of  which  many  millions
of  copies  have  been  sold.

TOWNS,  George  Washington  Bonaparte,
statesman,  b.  in  Wilkes  county,  Ga.,  4  May,  1801 ;
d.  in  Macon,  Ga.,  15  July,  1854.  His  father,  John,  a
Virginian  and  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution,  served
with  credit  at  the  battles  of  Cowpens  and  Eutaw.
The  son  began  life  as  a  merchant,  but  afterward
studied  law,  and,  removing  to  Alabama,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1824.  After  editing  a  political
newspaper  there,  he  returned  to  Georgia  in  1826,
settled  in  Talbot  county,  where  he  practised  law,
and  served  in  both  branches  of  the  legislature.  He
was  elected  to  congress,  and  served  from  1835  till
1839  and  from  1845  till  1847.  In  the  latter  year
he  was  elected  governor  of  Georgia  for  two  years,
and  at  the  end  of  his  term  he  was  re-elected.

TOWNSEND,  Edward  Davis,  soldier,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  22  Aug.,  1817.  His  paternal  grand-
father, David  was  a  surgeon  in  the  Massachusetts
line  during  the  Bevolution,  and  his  maternal  grand-
father was  Elbridge  Gerry.  His  father,  David  S.
Townsend,  was  an  officer  of  the  U.  S.  army  and  lost
a  leg  at  the  battle  of  Chrysler's  Field  in  the  war
of  1812.  Edward  was  educated  at  Boston  Latin-
school  and  at  Harvard,  and  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1837.  He  became  2d
lieutenant  in  the  2d  artillery,  1  July,  1837,  was
adjutant  in  1838-'46,  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in
1838,'  assistant  adjutant-general  with  brevet  rank
of  captain  in  1846,  captain  in  1848,  brevet  major
in  1852,  lieutenant-colonel,  7  March,  1861,  colonel,
3  Aug.,  1861,  and  adjutant-general  with  rank  of
brigadier-general,  22  Feb.,  1869.  He  served  dur-
ing the  Florida  war  in  1837-8,  on  the  northern
frontier  during  the  Canada  border  disturbances  in
1838-41,  and  thenceforward  in  the  office  of  the
adjutant-general  of  the  army  and  as  chief  of  staff
to  Lieut.-Gen.  Scott  in  1861.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier  -  general,  U.  S.  army,  24  Sept.,  1864,  "  for
meritorious  and  faithful  service  during  the  rebel-
lion," and  major-general,  13  March,  1865,  for  "faith-
ful, meritorious,  and  distinguished  services  in  the
adjutant-general's  department  during  the  rebel-
lion." He  was  retired  from  active  service,  15  June,


148


TOWNSEND


TOWNSEND


1880.  During  the  entire  civil  war  Gen.  Townsend
was  the  principal  executive  officer  of  the  war  de-
partment, and  was  perhaps  brought  into  more  inti-
mate personal  contact  with  President  Lincoln  and
Sec.  Stanton  than  any  other  military  official.  As
adjutant -general  of  the  army  he  originated  the
plan  of  a  U.  S.  military  prison,  urged  legislation
on  the  subject,  and  established  the  prison  at  Fort
Leavenworth,  Kan.  Gen.  Townsend  is  a  member
of  the  Societv  of  the  Cincinnati.  He  is  the  author
of  "Catechism  of  the  Bible— The  Pentateuch"
(New  York,  1859) ;  "  Catechism  of  the  Bible — Judges
and  Kings  "  (1862) ;  and  "  Anecdotes  of  the  Civil
War  in  the  United  States"  (1884). <J  ■  iS*^

TOWNSEND,  Frederick,  soldier,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  21  Sept.,  1825.  He  wa"s  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1844,  and  admitted  to  the  bar.  Having
a  leaning  toward  military  matters,  he  became  ad-
jutant-general of  the  state  in  1856.  He  found  the
militia  in  a  most  disordered  condition  and  ad-
dressed himself  to  the  task  of  making  it  what  it
ought  to  be.  He  prepared  an  annual  report  from
this  department  for  the  first  time,  and  he  was  re-
appointed by  the  next  governor  of  the  state.  To
his  efficiency  is  due  the  fact  that  the  state  of  New
York  sent  so  many  troops  to  the  field  in  the  civil
war.  He  declined  a  reappointment  as  adjutant-
general  in  1861,  and  organized  a  regiment,  being
commissioned  colonel.  He  took  part  in  the  battle
of  Big  Bethel,  but  soon  afterward  he  was  com-
missioned a  major  in  the  regular  army  and  re-
signed his  colonelcy.  As  major  his  duties  led  him
to  organize  troops  in  Columbus,  Ohio.  Afterward
he  participated  in  the  battles  of  Pea  Ridge,  Stone
River,  and  other  engagements  at  the  west.  In  1863
he  was  detailed  as  assistant  provost-marshal-gen-
eral in  Albany,  which  position  he  filled  for  several
years.  In  1867  he  was  ordered  to  California  and
made  a  thorough  inspection  of  all  the  military
posts  in  Arizona.  In  1868  he  resigned  from  the
army,  and  he  has  resided  in  Albany  since  that
time.  In  1878  he  was  appointed  a  brigadier-gen-
eral in  the  state  militia,  and  he  afterward  became
adjutant-general  of  the  state  under  Gov.  Alonzo
B.  Cornell.  In  this  post  he  again  addressed  him-
self to  the  condition  of  the  citizen  soldiers  and  in-
creased their  numbers  to  12,000  effective  men.  He
successfully  urged  the  adoption  of  a  state  service
uniform  and  a  state  military  camp. — His  brother,
Howard,  physician,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  22  Nov.,
1823;  d.  there,  16  Jan.,  1867,  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1844,  and  at  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1847.  Estab-
lishing himself  in  his  native  city,  he  was  surgeon-
general  of  the  state  in  1851-'2,  and  afterward  pro-
fessor in  the  Albany  medical  college.  Dr.  Town-
send  was  the  author  of  "The  Sunbeam  and  the
Spectroscope  "  (Albany,  1864) ;  "  Food  and  its  Di-
gestion" (1866);  and  "Sinai  Bible"  (1866).

TOWNSEND,  George  Alfred,  author,  b.  in
Georgetown,  Del.,  30  Jan.,  1841.  His  father,  the
Rev.  Stephen  Townsend,  a  Methodist  clergyman
for  half  a  century,  studied  and  practised  medicine
at  the  age  of  fifty,  and  at  seventy  obtained  the
degree  of  Ph.  D.  by  actual  university  study.  The
son  was  educated  mainly  in  Philadelphia,  where
he  began  writing  for  the  press  and  speaking  in
public,  and  in  1860  adopted  the  profession  of
journalism.  In  1862  he  was  a  war-correspondent
of  the  New  York  "Herald,"  describing  for  that
journal  McClellan's  peninsula  campaign  and  Pope's
campaign  in  northern  Virginia.  Later  in  the  year
he  went  to  Europe,  where  he  wrote  for  English
and  American  periodicals,  and  lectured  on  the
civil  war. In  1864  he  became  war-correspondent


of  the  New  York  "  World,"  was  permitted  to  sign
his  letters,  and  quickly  made  a  reputation  as  a
descriptive  writer.  After  the  war  he  became  a
professional  lecturer,  continuing  also  his  miscel-
laneous writing  for  the  press,  and,  going  to  Europe,
described  the  Austro-Prussian  war  of  1866.  1 1  is
pen-name,  "  Gath,"  was  first  used  in  1868  in  letters
to  the  Chicago  "  Tribune."  In  1885  he  built  a
house  on  the  battle-field  of  Crampton's  Gap,  South
Mountain,  Md.,  where  a  small  village  has  since
sprung  up,  to  which  he  gives  the  name  Gapland.
His  publications  in  book-form  are  "  The  Bohemi-
ans," a  play  (New  York,  1862);  "Campaigns  of  a
Non-Combatant"  (1865):  "Life  of  Garibaldi"
(1867);  "Real  Life  of  Abraham  Lincoln  "  (1867) :
"  The  New  World  compared  with  the  Old"  (1868);
"  Poems  "  (1870)  ;  "  Washington  Outside  and  In-
side" (1871);  "Mormon  Trials  at  Salt  Lake"
(1872);  "Washington  Re-builded  "  (1873) ;  "Tales
of  the  Chesapeake"  (1880);  "Bohemian  Davs"
(1881);  "Poetical  Addresses"  (1883);  "The  En-
tailed Hat"  (1884);  "President  Cromwell."  a
drama  (1885);  "Katy  of  Catoctin,"  a  novel  (1886);
and  a  campaign  life  "of  Levi  P.  Morton  (1888).  He
is  now  writing  a  romance  entitled  "  Dr.  Priestley,
or  the  Federalists."

TOWNSEND,  John  Kirk,  naturalist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10  Aug.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  16  Feb.,  1851.  He  was  educated  at  the
Friends'  school,  and  in  the  West  Town  boarding-
school.  When  he  grew  older  he  developed  a  fond-
ness for  natural  history,  and  was  associated  with
John  J.  Audubon  in  the  preparation  of  his  "  Ameri-
can Ornithology,"  in  which  many  of  the  descriptions
are  from  his  pen.  During  1833-'7  he  made  exten-
sive journeys  in  the  western  states  and  across  the
Rocky  mountains  with  Thomas  Nuttall.  Subse-
quently he  visited  the  Sandwich  islands  and  South
America,  and  then  for  some  years  had  charge  of
the  department  of  birds  in  the  Smithsonian  institu-
tion. While  in  Washington  he  practised  dentistry,
and  so  acquired  the  title  of  doctor.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natural
sciences,  and  a  contributor  to  its  proceedings.  Dr.
Townsend  was  the  author  of  "A  Narrative  of  a
Journey  across  the  Rocky  Mountains  to  the  Co-
lumbia River"  (Boston,  1839),  published  in  Eng-
land under  the  title  "Sporting  Adventures  in  the
Rocky  Mountains"  (London,  1840),  and  of  "Or-
nithology of  the  United  States,"  only  the  first  part
of  which  was  issued  (Philadelphia,  1839).

TOWNSEND,  Luther  Tracy,  clergyman,  b.  in
Orono,  Me.,  27  Sept.,  1838.  He 'was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  in  1859  and  at  Andover  theological
seminary  in  1862.  and  ordained  to  the  ministry  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  adjutant  of  the  16th  New  Hampshire
volunteers.  He  was  professor  of  exegetieal  theolo-
gy in  Boston  university  in  1867-'8  and  of  historical
theology  in  1869-73,  and  since  the  last  date  has
occupied  the  chair  of  practical  theology.  Dart-
mouth gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1871.  He
has  published  several  addresses  and  sermons,  be-
came an  associate  editor  of  "Our  Day"  in  1888,
and  is  the  author  of  "  True  and  Pretended  Chris-
tianity "  (Boston,  1869) ;  "  Sword  and  Garment "
(1871) ;  "  God-Man  "  (1872) ;  "  Credo  "  (1873) ;  "  Out-
lines of  Theology  "  (New  York,  1873) ;  "  Arena  and
Throne  "  (Boston,  1874) ;  "  The  Chinese  Problem  "
(1876);  "The  Supernatural  Factor  in  Revivals"
(1877);  "The  Intermediate  World  "  (1878);  "Ele-
ments of  General  and  Christian  Theologv "  (New
York,  1879);  "Fate  of  Republics"  (Boston,  1880);
"Art  of  Speech"  (1880);  "Studies  in  Poetry  and
Prose  "  (1880) ;  "  Studies  in  Eloquence  and  Logic  "


TOWNSEND


TOWNSEND


149


(1881);  "Mosaic  Record  and  Modern  Science"
(1881);  "Bible  Theology  and  Modern  Thought"
(1883) ;  "  Faith- Work,  Christian  Science,  and  other
Cures"  (1885);  "Hand-Book  upon  Church  Trials"
(1885):  "The  Bible  and  other  Ancient  Literature
in  the  Nineteenth  Century"  (1885);  and  "Pulpit
Rhetoric  "  (1886).

TOWNSEND,  Martin  Ingham,  lawyer,  b.  in
Hancock,  Mass.,  6  Feb.,  1810.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1833,  studied  law,  and  established
himself,  after  admission  to  the  bar,  in  Troy,  N.  Y.

He  was  district
attorney  of  Rens-
selaer countv  in
1842-'5,  and  in
1867-'8  he  was  a
member  for  the
state  at  large  of
the  Constitution-
al convention.
He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Re-
publican for  two
successive  terms,
serving  from  6
Dec,  1875,  till  3
March,  1879. He

jt ',_- J^^  / was a memDer

^rua^t^ty  ^-  o4rz<sri>*€av&{,  of  various  im-
portant commit-
tees, and  among  the  ablest  debaters  in  that  body.
Declining  a  renomination,  he  was  appointed  dis-
trict attorney  for  the  northern  district  of  New
York,  which  office  he  held  for  nearly  eight  years.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1866  "from
Williams. — His  brother,  Randolph  Wanton,  law-
yer, b.  in  Hancock,  Mass.,  4  May,  1812,  was  gradu-
ated at  Williams  in  1836,  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1838,  and  settled  in  New  York
city,  soon  attaining  a  good  standing  at  the  bar,
where  he  has  practised  successfully  for  half  a  cen-
tury. Mr.  Townsend  served  for  six  years  on  the
Metropolitan  board  of  education,  is  one  of  the
managers  of  the  Presbyterian  hospital,  and  has
been  for  many  years  counsel  for  the  Importers'  and
traders'  bank,  of  which  he  is  also  a  director.

TOWNSEND,  Mary  Ashley,  author,  b.  in  Ly-
ons, N.  Y.,  about  1836.  Her  maiden  name  was  Van
Voorhis.  She  was  educated  in  her  native  town,
married  Gideon  Townsend,  of  New  Orleans,  La.,
and  resides  in  that  city.  She  began  to  write  for
publication  about  1856,  and  under  the  pen-name
of  "  Xariffa "  made  a  reputation  as  the  author  of
"  Quillotypes,"  a  series  of  humorous  papers  that
appeared  in  the  New  Orleans  "  Delta  "  and  were
widely  copied  by  the  southern  and  western  press.
Her  other  works  are  "  The  Brother  Clerks  "  (New
York,  1859) ;  "  Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1870) ;  "  The
Captain's  Story"  (1874);  and  "Down  the  Bayou,
and  other  Poems"  (Boston,  1884).  Her  most  im-
portant short  poems  are  "Creed,"  "A  Woman's
Wish,"  " The  Bather,"  and  "The  Wind."  She  was
officially  appointed  to  deliver  the  poem  on  the
opening  of  the  New  Orleans  exposition  in  1884,
and  that  at  the  unveiling  of  the  statue  of  Gen.
Albert  Sidney  Johnston  in  1887.

TOWNSEND,  Penn,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  20  Dec,  1651 ;  d.  there,  21  Aug.,  1727.  His
father,  William,  came  to  Boston  in  1636.  Penn
was  a  wine-merchant,  an  active  member  of  the
council,  a  representative  in  1686-'98,  and  later
speaker  of  the  house  and  chief  judge  of  the  Suffolk
superior  court.  He  was  afterward  captain  of  the
Ancient  and  honorable  artillery  company,  and  in
1703  was  colonel  of  the  Boston  regiment.  In  1707  he


was  an  agent  to  superintend  the  military  forces  that
were  sent  against  Port  Royal.  He  married  a  daugh-
ter of  Gov.  John  Leverett,  was  a  patron  of  art  and
literature,  and  a  public-spirited  citizen.— His  grand-
son, Alexander,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in
1784 ;  d.  there.  13  April,  1835.  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1802,  and  studied  law.  He  became  a
large  owner  of  real  estate,  was  active  in  city  poli-
tics, and  delivered  many  addresses  in  Faneuil  hall.
In  1810  he  was  appointed  by  the  authorities  to  de-
liver the  Fourth-of-July  oration.— Alexander's  sis-
ter, Eliza,  poet,  b.  in  Boston  in  1789 ;  d.  there,  12
Jan.,  1854,  was  educated  in  her  native  city,  and
began  her  literary  career  by  contributing  anony-
mous rural  and  religious  essays  to  the  "  Monthly
Anthology,"  "  Unitarian  Miscellany,"  and  "  Port-
folio." She  was  the  first  native  woman  poet  in  her
state  to  receive  the  praise  of  judicious  critics.  Her
writings  include  verses  on  "The  Incomprehensi-
bility of  God  " ;  an  "  Occasion  Ode  "  (1809),  in  which
she  commented  severely  on  the  career  of  Napoleon,
who  was  then  at  the  summit  of  his  greatness;
"  Lines  to  Robert  Southey  "  (1812) ;  and  the  "  Rain-
bow"— all  of  which  appeared  in  magazines.  Her
"  Poems  and  Miscellanies "  were  collected  by  her
sister,  Mary  P.  Townsend,  and  printed  privately
(Boston,  18*56).

TOWNSEND,  Robert,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  in  1819;  d.  at  sea,  off  Shanghai,
China,  15  Aug.,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1835,  and  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  the  same
year  as  a  midshipman.  He  served  in  the  Mexican
war  in  1846-'7,  was  engaged  in  the  capture  of
Vera  Cruz,  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1850,  and
resigned  from  the  navy  in  1851.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  re-entered  the  service  as  acting
lieutenant,  participated  under  Admiral  David  G.
Farragut  in  the  passage  of  the  forts  below  New
Orleans,  and  the  taking  of  that  city,  and  did  effi-
cient service  in  command  of  the  "  Miami "  in  the
sounds  of  North  Carolina.  He  was  restored  to
the  regular  navy  in  1862,  with  the  rank  of  com-
mander, was  in  charge  of  the  iron-clad  "  Essex  "  at
the  siege  of  Port  Hudson,  and  was  subsequently
division  commander  under  Admiral  David  D.  Por-
ter, and  in  the  Red  river  campaign.  He  became
captain  in  1866,  and  afterward  was  ordered  to  the
East  Indian  squadron,  where  his  conduct  of  affairs
at  Newchwang,  China,  preserved  the  peace  of  the
port,  and  at  the  same  time  did  not  interfere  with
the  authority  of  the  native  officials.

TOWNSEND,  Thomas  S.,  compiler,  b.  in  New
York  city,  27  Aug.,  1829.  His  father,  John  R.,
was  a  well-known  member  of  the  New  York  bar.
The  son  received  a  classical  education,  and  at  an
early  age  entered  the  mercantile  firm  of  Lawrence,
Trimble  and  Co.,  New  York  city.  In  1860  he  de-
termined to  form  a  chronological  history  of  every
important  occurrence  in  connection  with  the  im-
pending civil  war  by  preserving  from  the  newspa-
pers every  statement  of  value  relating  to  any  cir-
cumstance that  directly  or  indirectly  led  to  seces-
sion, to  national  complications  growing  out  of  the
struggle,  to  the  cause,  conduct,  and  results  of  the
rebellion,  to  personal  records  of  soldiers  from  the
lowest  to  the  highest  rank,  and  to  the  military  and
civil  history  of  the  Union  and  the  Confederacy.
This  journalistic  record  comprises  about  120  vol-
umes containing  60.000  pages.  William  Cullen
Bryant  said  of  it :  "  The  age  has  given  birth  to  few
literary  undertakings  that  will  bear  comparison
with  this  work.  The  forty  academicians  who  com-
piled the  dictionary  of  the  French  language  had  a
far  less  laborious  task."  This  collection  is  now  in
Columbia  college  library,  New  York  city. He  has


150


TOWNSEND


TOWNSHEND


delivered  numerous  lectures  and  addresses  on  the
subject  of  the  war,  including  an  oration  on  Memo-
rial day,  1885,  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  on  "  The  Empire
State  in  the  Rebellion."

TOWNSEND,  Virginia  Frances,  author,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1836.  She  has  passed  her
life  in  literary  pursuits,  edited  "Arthur's  Home
Magazine  "  for  several  years,  and  has  contributed
much  to  journals  and  magazines.  Her  writings  in-
clude "  While  it  was  Morning"  (New  York,  1859);
"  Buds  from  Christmas  Boughs  "  (1859) ;  "  By  and
By  "  (1859) ;  "  Amy  Deane,  and  other  Tales  "  (1862) ;
"The  Well  in  the  Rock,  and  other  Tales"  (1863);
"The  Temptation  and  Triumph,  and  other  Tales"
(Cincinnati,  1863) ;  "  The  Battle-Fields  of  Our  Fa-
thers" (New  York,  1864);  "Janet  Strong"  (Phila-
delphia, 1865) ;  "  Darryl  Gap  "  (Boston,  1866) ;  "  The
Hollands  "  (1869) ;  "  Max  Meredith's  Millennium  "
(1870) ;  "  One  Woman's  Two  Lovers  "  (1872) ;  "  Eliza-
beth Tudor"  (1874);  "Only  Girls"  (1876);  and
"  Six  in  All "  (1878).

TOWNSHEND,  George,  first  Marquis,  soldier,
b.  in  Norfolk,  England,  28  Feb.,  1724;  d.  14  Sept.,
1807.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  third  Viscount
Townshend,  whom  he  succeeded  in  May,  1767.  He
entered  the  British  army  at  an  early  age,  and  took
part  in  the  battles  of  Dettingen,  Fontenoy,  Cullo-
den,  and  Laffeldt.  In  1747  he  entered  parliament.
He  went  out  to  Canada  in  1759  as  brigadier-gen-
eral, and  commanded  a  division  under  Wolfe,  suc-
ceeding that  officer  in  command  when  Wolfe  fell
at  Quebec.  Five  days  later  he  received  the  capitu-
lation of  the  city.  He  then  returned  to  England,
was  present  at  the  battle  of  Fellinghausen  in  1761,
and  served  in  Portugal  in  1762.  He  became  a
privy  councillor  after  succeeding  to  the  title,  and
was  lord-lieutenant  of  Ireland  from  1767  till  1772.
He  was  master-general  of  the  ordnance  in  the  lat-
ter year,  and  was  created  Earl  of  Leicester  in  1784
and  Marquis  Townshend  in  1787.  He  was  a  man
of  "  quick  perception  but  unsafe  judgment."  He
is  said  to  have  received  the  capitulation  of  Quebec
as  though  the  achievement  had  been  his  own,  and
in  his  official  report  of  the  battle  he  omitted  the
name  of  Wolfe,  whom  he  indirectly  censured.
Hurrying  away  from  the  citadel,  which  he  be-
lieved to  be  untenable,  he  returned  home,  and  was
soon  engaged  in  assisting  his  brother  Charles  in
the  latter's  attempt  to  make  the  colonies  submit
to  an  odious  system  of  taxation. — His  brother,
Charles,  statesman,  b.  in  England,  29  Aug.,  1725  ;
d.  there,  4  Sept.,  1767,  entered  parliament  when  only
twenty-two  years  old,  and  soon  achieved  a  brilliant
reputation  as  an  orator  and  a  supporter  of  the
Pelham  administration.  He  was  appointed  a  com-
missioner of  trade  and  plantations  in  1749,  and  a
commissioner  for  executing  the  office  of  lord  high
admiral  in  1751 ;  was  a  lord  of  the  admiralty  in
.1754,  and  treasurer  of  the  chamber  and  member  of
the  privy  council  in  1756.  From  1761  till  1763  he
was  secretary  of  war,  and  in  February  of  the  latter
year  he  was  made  first  lord  of  trade  and  planta-
tions. He  was  subsequently  paymaster  of  the
forces  and  chancellor  of  the  exchequer.  From  the
period  of  his  introduction  to  office  through  the
commission  for  the  colonies,  Townshend  made  a
special  study  of  American  affairs. His  plan  for

f governing  the  American  colonies  was  to  extract  as
arge  a  revenue  as  possible  from  them  by  onerous
imposts  levied  without  the  slightest  regard  to  their
rights.  In  1765  he  had  heartily  supported  Gren-
ville's  stamp-act,  although  he  subsequently  voted
for  its  repeal,  and  was  in  favor  of  burdening  the
colonies  with  an  expensive  civil  list  and  a  stand-
ing army. He  was  also  of  opinion  that  the  various


charters  that  had  been  granted  to  them  at  differ-
ent times,  and  which  every  ministry  of  Charles  II.
had  spared,  should  be  annulled,  a  uniform  system
of  government  set  up  in  their  stead,  and  the  royal
governors,  judges,  and  attorneys  made  independent
of  the  people.  "  I  would  govern  the  Americans,"
he  said,  "  as  subjects  of  Great  Britain.  I  would
restrain  their  trade  and  their  manufactures  as
subordinate  to  the  mother  country.  These,  our
children,  must  not  make  themselves  our  allies  in
time  of  war  and  our  rivals  in  peace."  The  eclipse
of  Chatham  in  March,  1767,  left  Townshend,  who
had  been  chancellor  of  the  exchequer  since  the  pre-
ceding August,  and  whom  Chatham  had  vainly  en-
deavored to  have  dismissed  from  office,  "  lord  of
the  ascendant."  From  that  moment  he  ruled  the
ministry  in  all  matters  relating  to  America,  and
succeeded  in  carrying  through  parliament  a  bill
taxing  the  colonies  that  was  far  more  burdensome
than  the  stamp-act  that  had  nearly  created  a  revo-
lution. Thus  the  latter  left  the  civil  officers  de-
pendent on  the  local  legislatures,  and  preserved
the  proceeds  of  the  American  tax  in  the  ex-
chequer. The  revenue  collected  under  Town-
shend's  bill,  on  the  other  hand,  was  to  be  un-
der the  sign  manual  at  the  king's  pleasure,  and
could  be  burdened  at  will  by  pensions  to  English-
men. By  providing  an  independent  support  for
the  crown  officers,  it  virtually  did  away  with  the
necessity  for  colonial  legislatures,  as  governors
would  have  little  inducement  to  call  them,  and  an
angry  minister  might  dissolve  them  without  in-
convenience. When  it  was  suggested  to  Town-
shend that  the  army  might  perhaps  be  safely  with-
drawn from  America,  in  which  case  expense  would
cease  and  no  revenue  be  necessary,  he  replied:
"  The  moment  a  resolution  shall  be  taken  to  with-
draw the  army,  I  will  resign  my  office  and  have  no
more  to  do  in  public  affairs.  I  insist  it  is  abso-
lutely necessary  to  keep  up  a  large  army  there  and
here."  Townshend  only  lived  a  few  months  after
the  successful  passage  of  his  bill,  which,  by  its  tax
on  tea  and  similar  imports,  lost  England  her  colo-
nies, and  was  about  to  be  intrusted  with  the  for-
mation of  a  new  ministry,  when  he  was  suddenly
carried  off  by  a  fever  at  the  early  age  of  forty-one.
"  He  was,"  says  Bancroft,  "  a  man  of  wonderful
endowments,  dashed  with  follies  and  indiscretion.
Impatient  of  waiting,  his  ruling  passion  was  pres-
ent success.  ...  In  the  house  of  commons  his
brilliant  oratory  took  its  inspiration  from  the  pre-
vailing opinion  ;  and,  careless  of  consistency,  heed-
less of  whom  he  deserted  or  whom  he  joined,  he
followed  the  floating  indications  of  the  loudest
cheers."  He  had  been  courted  by  all  parties,  but
never  possessed  the  confidence  of  any.  If  his  in-
discretion forbade  esteem,  his  good  humor  dis-
sipated hate.  He  had  clear  conceptions,  great
knowledge  of  every  branch  of  administration,  and
indefatigable  assiduity  in  business.  Burke  styled
him  "  the  delight  and  ornament  of  the  house  of
commons,  and  the  charm  of  every  private  society
that  he  honored  with  his  presence."  Macaulay
refers  to  him  as  "a  man  of  splendid  talents,  of  lax
principles,  and  of  boundless  vanity  and  presump-
tion," who  "  would  submit  to  no  control."  See  his
"  Essay  on  the  Earl  of  Chatham  "  and  "  Charles
Townshend,  Wit  and  Statesman,"  by  Percy  Fitz-
gerald (London,  1866). — Another  brother,  Roger,
British  soldier,  b.  in  England  about  1730;  d.  near
Ticonderoga,  N.  Y.,  25  July,  1759,  entered  the  army
at  an  early  age,  and  became  a  lieutenant-colonel  on
1  Feb.,  1758.  He  served  as  adjutant-general  of  the
expeditionary  force  that  was  sent  against  Louis-
burg, was  deputy  adjutant-general  of  Gen.  Sir


TOWNSHEND


TRACY


151


Jeffrey  Amherst's  expedition  against  Fort  Ticon-
deroga,  and  was  killed  there  in  the  trenches  by  a
cannon-ball,  and  taken  to  Albany  for  burial.

TOWNSHEND,  Norton  Strange,  educator,  b.
in  Clay-Coton,  Northamptonshire,  England,  25  Dec,
1815.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1830,  and  settled
with  his  parents  in  Avon,  Ohio,  where  he  attended
school  and  also  taught.  Subsequently  he  began
the  study  of  medicine,  and  was  graduated  in  1840
at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  New
York.  He  then  went  abroad,  and,  after  attending
the  World's  anti-slavery  convention  in  London  in
July,  1840,  as  the  delegate  of  the  Anti-slavery  soci-
ety of  Ohio,  he  studied  in  the  hospitals  of  Paris,
Edinburgh,  and  Dublin.  In  1841  he  returned  to
Elyria,  Ohio,  where  he  settled  in  the  practice  of
his  profession,  but  in  1848  he  was  elected  to  the
Ohio  legislature,  where  he  was  active  in  securing  a
repeal  of  the  "  black  laws  "  of  that  state  and  the
return  of  Salmon  P.  Chase  to  the  U.  S.  senate.  He
was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  in  1850  framed
the  present  constitution  of  Ohio,  and  in  the  same
year  was  eleeted  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,  serving
from  1  Dec,  1851,  till  3  March,  1853.  At  the  end
of  his  term  he  was  elected  to  the  Ohio  senate,  where
he  introduced  measures  that  led  to  the  founding
of  an  asylum  for  training  imbecile  youth,  of  which
institution  he  was  a  trustee  for  twenty-one  years.
Later  he  was  active  with  Dr.  John  S.  Newberry
and  others  in  the  movement  that  aimed  to  estab-
lish an  agricultural  college  in  Ohio.  In  1858  he
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  board  of  agriculture
and  served  till  1863,  also  in  1868-9.  Early  in  1863
he  was  appointed  medical  inspector  in  the  U.  S.
army,  and  he  served  in  that  capacity  until  the  end
of  the  civil  war.  In  1867  he  was  named  a  member
of  the  committee  that  was  appointed  to  examine
and  report  upon  the  system  of  wool  appraisement
and  duties  in  the  custom-houses  of  Boston,  New
York,  and  elsewhere,  prior  to  the  tariff  revision  of
that  year.  He  was  appointed  professor  of  agricul-
ture in  Iowa  agricultural  college  in  1869,  but  re-
signed a  year  later  to  accept  the  appointment  of
trustee  and  assist  in  founding  the  Agricultural  and
mechanical  college  of  Ohio,  in  which  institution,
now  known  as  the  University  of  Ohio,  he  has  held
since  1873  the  chair  of  agriculture.

TOWNSHEND,  Richard  Wellington,  mem-
ber of  congress,  b.  in  Prince  George  county,  Md.,  30
April,  1840.  He  was  educated  in  public  and  pri-
vate schools  at  Washington,  D.  C,  removed  in
1858  to  Illinois,  and,  after  teaching  for  some  time
in  Fayette  county,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  at  McLeansborough  in  1862.  He  was
clerk  of  the  county  court  of  Hamilton  county
from  1863  till  1868,  and  district  attorney  for  the
next  four  years.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National
Democratic  convention  in  1872.  He  settled  in
Shawneetown  in  1873,  was  elected  a  member  of
congress  in  1876,  and  has  since  been  continuously
re-elected,  serving  in  the  congress  which  began  its
sessions  on  5  March,  1887,  as  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  military  affairs.  He  was  the  author  of
the  proposition  to  secure  the  establishment  of  an
American  Zollverein,  which  was  embodied  in  a  bill
passed  by  congress  in  1888.

TOWSON,  Nathan,  soldier,  b.  near  Baltimore,
Md.,  22  Jan.,  1784;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  20
July,  1854.  He  was  educated  at  the  common
schools,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  with
Great  Britain  was  appointed  captain  in  the  2d
U.  S.  artillery,  12  March,  1812.  He  was  trans-
ferred to  the  corps  of  artillery  in  May,  1814,  and
to  the  light  artillery,  17  May,  1815.  He  served
with  distinction  during the  war  of 1812, par-


ticularly in  the  capture  of  the  brig  "  Caledonia "
from  under  the  guns  of  Fort  Erie.  8  Oct.,  1812,  for
which  he  was  brevetted  major,  and  for  gallantry  at
the  battle  of  Chippewa,  5  July,  1814,  he  was  brevet-
ted lieutenant-colonel.  In  the  assault  upon  Fort
Erie  in  August  of  the  same  year  he  again  distin-
guished himself,  and  received  the  recognition  of
the  government  as  a  brevet  colonel.  He  was  ap-
pointed paymaster-general  of  the  army  in  1819,
and  in  1821  colonel  of  the  2d  artillery.  The  senate
failed  to  confirm  the  president's  nomination,  and
Col.  Towson  was  reappointed  paymaster-general,
8  May,  1822.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,
30  June,  1834,  and  major-general,  30  May,  1848.  for
meritorious  conduct  during  the  war  with  Mexico.

TOY,  Crawford  Howell,  educator,  b.  in  Nor-
folk, Va.,  23  March,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Virginia  in  1856,  studied  at  the
University  of  Berlin  in  1866-8,  was  professor  of
Hebrew  in  the  Southern  Baptist  theological  semi-
nary at  Greenville,  S.  C,  and  Louisville,  Ky.,  in
1869-79,  and  since  1880  has  occupied  that  chair  at
Harvard.  Besides  articles  on  Semitic  philology
and  biblical  criticism  he  has  published  "  History  of
the  Religion  of  Israel "  (Boston,  1882),  and  "  Quota-
tions in  the  New  Testament"  (New  York,  1884).

TRACY,  Marquis  Alexandre  De  Prouville
de,  governor  of  Canada,  b.  in  France  in  1603 :  d.
there  in  1670.  He  was  a  lieutenant-general  in  the
French  army,  and  in  1655  retook  Cayenne  from
the  Dutch,  and  brought  several  of  the  adjacent
islands  under  French  authority.  In  1664  he  was
appointed  viceroy  of  Canada,  which  at  that  time
was  an  object  of  considerable  attention  at  the
French  court,  especially  in  what  was  known  as  the
parti  devot.  So,  when  Tracy  set  sail,  a  throng  of
young  nobles  embarked  with  him,  and  the  king
gave  him  200  soldiers,  and  promised  that  1,000
more  should  follow.  All  Quebec  was  on  the  land-
ing-place when  he  arrived,  30  June,  1665,  and  he
debarked  with  a  pomp  and  ceremony  such  as  the
city  had  never  before  seen.  He  soon  won  the  fer-
vent admiration  of  the  inhabitants  by  his  piety,
and  at  the  same  time  he  betrayed  a  lack  of  no
qualities  needful  in  his  position.  After  a  severe
campaign,  he  subdued  the  Iroquois  Indians,  con-
cluding a  peace  with  them  that  lasted  nearly
twenty  years.  He  then  went  on  an  expedition
against  the  Mohawks,  at  the  head  of  a  force  of
1,200  French  soldiers,  and  laid  their  country  waste,
taking  possession,  in  the  name  of  the  king,  of  all
their  lands.  The  Mohawks  sued  for  peace,  and  re-
ceived Jesuit  missionaries.  The  English,  hearing
of  Tracy's  advance,  claimed  the  country  he  invad-
ed, and  Sir  Richard  Nicolls,  governor  of  New  York,
wrote  to  the  New  England  governors,  begging
them  to  join  him  against  the  French.  But  the
New  England  governors  were  not  prepared  for  war,
and,  fearing  that  their  Indian  neighbors  might
take  part  with  the  French,  hesitated  to  act.  The
treaty  of  Breda  in  1667  secured  peace  for  a  time
between  the  rival  colonies.  Tracy  returned  to
France  in  1667.  "The  Jesuits,"  says  Parkman,
"resumed  their  hazardous  mission  to  the  Iroquois,
and  Tracy's  soldiers  having  made  peace,  the  Jesuits
were  the  rivets  to  hold  it  fast.  Of  all  the  French
expeditions  against  the  Iroquois,  that  of  Tracy  was
the  most  productive  of  good."

TRACY,  Charles,  lawver,  b.  in  WThitestown,
Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  17  Feb.,' 1810;  d.  in  New  York
city,  1  June,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1832,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835,  and  passed  his
earlier  professional  life  in  Utica,  N.  Y.  He  re-
moved to  New  York  city  in  1849,  and  continued  in
active  practice  there  until  his  death,  and  for  many


152


TRACY


TRACY


years  in  partnership  with  his  brother  William.
With  great  capacity  and  ability  for  work  he  early
achieved  a  front  rank  at  the  bar,  especially  as
counsel  for  several  charitable  societies. In  1879-82

he  was  president
of  the  New  York
association  of
Yalealumni,and
for  many  years
took  an  active
part  in  the  annu-
al conventions
of  the  Protest-
ant Episcopal
church  of  the
diocese  of  New
York.  He  mar-
ried Louisa,
daughter  of  Gen.
Joseph  Kirk-
land,  of  Utica,
N.  Y.  A  fine
memorial  build-
ing in  connec-
tion with  St.  George's  church,  New  York  city,  was
completed  in  1888  by  his  son-in-law,  John  Pier-
pont  Morgan.  Mr.  Tracy  published  "The  True
and  the  False,"  an  oration  before  the  *  B  K  society
of  Yale  college  (New  Haven,  1862),  and  "  Yale  Col-
lege. Sketches  from  Memory  "  (New  York,  1880).

TRACY,  Charles  Chapin,  missionary,  b.  in
East  Smithfield,  Pa.,  31  Oct.,  1838.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Williams  in  1864  and  at  Union  theological
seminary  in  1867,  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of
the  Presbyterian  church,  and  the  same  year  sailed
for  Turkey  in  Asia  as  a  missionary.  He  labored  at
Marsova  for  several  years,  and  was  subsequently
settled  in  Constantinople,  where  he  established
the  first  illustrated  child's  paper  that  was  ever  pub-
lished in  the  empire.  In  1872  he  returned  to  Mar-
sova, where  he  has  since  resided,  occupying  a  chair
in  the  theological  seminary,  and  engaging  in  mis-
sionary work.  He  has  published  "  Letters  to  Ori-
ental Families  "  (New  York,  1874),  and  translated
into  Turkish  a  "  Commentary  on  the  Hebrews  and
Daniel  "  and  Bishop  Butler's  "  Analogy."

TRACY,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hartford,
Vt.,  3  Nov.,  1794;  d.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  24  March,
1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1814,
studied  divinity,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Congrega-
tional churches  in  West  Thetford  and  West  Fair-
lee,  Vt.,  from  1821  till  1829.  He  subsequently
edited  the  "  Chronicle "  at  Windsor,  Vt.,  for  five
years,  and  the  Boston  "Recorder"  for  one  year.
He  then  became  secretary  of  the  Massachusetts
colonization  society,  and  of  the  American  coloniza-
tion society  for  Massachusetts,  which  posts  he  held
until  his  death.  The  University  of  Vermont  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1859.  He  was  asso-
ciated with  Prof.  Henry  B.  Smith  for  several  years
in  the  editorship  of  the  "  American  Theological
Review."  He  published  "  Three  Last  Things "
(Boston,  1839) ;  "  The  Great  Awakening,  a  History
of  the  Revival  of  Religion  in  the  Time  of  Edwards
and  Whitefield  "  (New  York,  1842) ;  "  History  of
the  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign
Missions"  (1842);  "  Refutation  of  Charges  against
the  Sandwich  Island  Missionaries  "  (Boston,  1844) ;
and  "  A  Memorial  of  the  Semi-Centennial  Anni-
versary of  the  American  Colonization  Society"
(1867). — His  brother,  Ebenezer  Carter,  editor,  b.
in  Hartford,  Vt.,  10  June,  1796;  d.  in  Windsor,
Vt.,  15  May,  1862,  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1819,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1822.
He  edited  the  "  Vermont  Chronicle  "  from  1822  till


1828,  and  again  from  1834  till  his  death.  He  was  also
editorially  connected  with  the  New  York  "  Journal
of  Commerce  "  and  the  "  Boston  Recorder."  He
published  a  "  Life  of  Jeremiah  Evarts  "  (Boston,
1845). — Another  brother,  Ira,  missionary,  b.  in
Hartford,  Vt.,  15  Jan.,  1806;  d.  in  Bloomington,
Wis.,  10  Nov.,  1875,  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1829,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1832,  was  ordained  a  missionary  in  the  same  year,
and  held  charges  in  China,  Siam,  and  southern
Hindostan  from  1832  till  1841,  but  at  the  latter
date  he  was  compelled  to  return  to  this  country,
owing  to  the  failure  of  his  health.  He  was  subse-
quently a  financial  agent  of  the  American  board,
and  held  various  Congregational  charges  in  Ohio,
Minnesota,  and  Wisconsin.  He  contributed  many
articles  to  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra."  and  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Duty  to  the  Heathen  "  (Boston,  1859).

TRACY,  Phineas  Lyman,  congressman,  b.  in
Norwich,  Conn.,  25  Dec,  1786 ;  d.  in  Batavia,  N.  Y.,
23  Dec,  1876.  His  father,  Dr.  Philemon  Tracy,
was  a  physician  of  Norwich.  Phineas  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1806,  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Utica,
N.  Y,  in  1811,  and  in  1813  settled  in  Batavia,  N.  Y.
He  was  chosen  to  congress  in  1826  by  the  anti-
Masonic  party  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  served  by  re-
election till  1833,  when  he  declined  a  renomination.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1840,  became  first
judge  of  Genesee  county  in  1841,  and  held  office
till  1846,  when  he  retired  from  professional  life.
— His  brother,  Albert  Haller,  jurist,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  17  June,  1793 ;  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  12
Sept.,  1859,  began  the  study  of  medicine  with  his
father,  but  soon  abandoned  it  for  the  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1815,  and  settled  in  Buffalo.
He  rose  to  a  high  place  in  the  bar  of  western  New
York.  At  the  age  of  twenty-four  Mr.  Tracy  was
elected  a  representative  to  the  16th  congress,  but  he
reached  his  twenty-fifth  birthday  anniversary  be-
fore the  assembling  of  congress  on  6  Dec,  1819,
and  was  thereby  not  excluded  by  the  constitutional
limit  as  to  age.  He  was  returned  to  the  17th  and
18th  congresses,  and  gained  a  reputation  during
his  term  of  six  years'  service.  In  1830  Mr.  Tracy
was  chosen  state  senator,  serving  eight  years.  That
body  was  then  the  court  of  errors.  Exercising  the
functions  of  a  court  of  last  resort,  and  as  a  member
of  this  court,  Mr.  Tracy  achieved  his  greatest  dis-
tinction. He  was  one  of  the  ablest  lawyers  of  the
senate,  and  his  opinions  and  decisions  have  been
standard  authority  upon  questions  that  were  liti-
gated then.  Mr.  Tracy  was  a  candidate  for  U.  S.
senator  in  the  famous  election  of  1839.  After  this
contest  he  retired  from  public  life.

TRACY,  Roger  Sherman,  sanitarian,  b.  in
Windsor,  Vt.,  9  Dec,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1862,  and,  after  teaching  for  five  years,
took  his  medical  degree  at  the  College  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons  of  Columbia  in  1868.  For  over
a  year  he  was  house  physician  at  Bellevuc  hospital,
and  in  1869  he  was  made  inspector  of  prisons  and
hospitals  for  the  department  of  charities  and  cor-
rections in  New  York  city.  He  was  appointed  sani-
tary inspector  in  the  health  department  in  1870,
became  chief  of  the  corps  in  July,  1887,  and  in
October  of  the  same  year  registrar  of  vital  statistics.
Dr.  Tracy  has  contributed  numerous  articles  on
sanitary  science  to  "  The  Popular  Science  Monthly."
the  "  New  York  Medical  Journal,"  and  similar
periodicals ;  also  the  articles  on  "  Public  Nui-
sances," "  Hygiene  of  Occupation,"  and  "  Village
Sanitary  Associations  "  to  Albert  H.  Buck's  "  Hy-
giene" (New  York,  1879),  and  he  is  the  author  of
"  The  New  Liber  Primus  "  (Boston,  1858),  the  "  Ap-
pendix on  Hygiene  "  in  the  "  Primer  of  Physiology  "


TRACY


TRAIN


153


(New  York,  1884) ;  also  "  Handbook  of  Sanitary  In-
formation for  Householders  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Essen-
tials of  Anatomy,  Physiology,  and  Hygiene  "  (1885).

TRACY,  Uriah,  senator,  b.  in  Franklin,  Conn.,
2  Feb.,  1755;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  19  July,
1807.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1778,  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1781,  and  practised  successfully  in
Litchfield  for  many  years.  He  served  in  the  legis-
lature in  1788-'93,  and  in  congress  in  1793-'6,  hav-
ing been  chosen  as  a  Federalist.  At  the  latter  date
he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in'  place  of  Jona-
than Trumbull,  who  had  resigned,  serving  until
the  time  of  his  death.

TRAFTON,  Mark,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bangor,
Me.,  1  Aug.,  1810.  He  had  a  limited  education,
was  a  shoemaker  by  trade,  and  at  nineteen  years
of  age  began  to  preach.  He  joined  the  itinerant
ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in
1830,  and  held  pastorates  in  that  denomination
for  fifty-two  years.  He  was  a  member  of  congress
in  1855-'7,  having  been  chosen  as  an  American.
He  was  defeated  for  the  next  canvass,  and  has
since  held  no  political  office.  Wesleyan  gave  him
the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1850.  His  publications  in-
clude "  Rambles  in  Europe  "  (Boston,  1852) ;  "  Safe
Investment "  (1856) ;  "  Baptism :  its  Subjects  and
Mode  "  (1870) ;  and  "  Scenes  in  My  Life  "  (1878).—
His  daughter,  Adeline,  author,  b.  in  Sacarappa,
Me.,  about  1845,  was  educated  in  public  and  private
schools,  and  about  1870  began  to  write  for  publi-
cation. Her  novels  were  first  printed  as  serials
in  magazines.  They  include  "An  American  Girl
Abroad  "  (Boston,  1872) ;  "  Katherine  Earle  "  (1874) ;
and  "His  Inheritance"  (1878).

TRAILL,  Catherine  Parr  Strickland,  Cana-
dian author,  b.  in  Kent,  England,  9  Jan.,  1802.  She
is  a  member  of  the  Strickland  family,  was  educated
at  her  home,  Ryden  Hall,  Suffolk,  and  began  to
write  when  she  was  fifteen  years  of  age.  Her  first
book  of  tales  for  children  was  published  in  London
in  1818,  and  she  wrote  many  other  juvenile  works,
which  were  published  without  her  name,  and  com-
manded a  large  sale.  In  1832  she  married  Lieut.
Thomas  Traill,  of  the  Royal  Scotch  fusiliers,  and
soon  afterward  they  emigrated  to  Canada  and  set-
tled in  Douro,  Ont.,  in  1833.  She  subsequently
lived  at  Peterborough,  Rice  Lake,  and  is  now,  and
has  been  for  many  years,  residing  at  Lakefield.
Since  going  to  Canada  she  has  contributed  to
"  Chambers's  Journal,"  "  Sharpe's  London  Maga-
zine," and  other  periodicals,  and  has  published,
among  other  works,  "The  Backwoods  of  Canada"
(London,  1835);  "Canadian  Crusoes,"  edited  by
Agnes  Strickland  (New  York,  1852) ;  "  Ramblings
in  the  Canadian  Forest"  (1854):  "Stories  of  the
Canadian  Forests  "  (New  York,  1856) ;  "  Lady  Mary
and  her  Nurse,  or  a  Peep  into  Canadian  Forests
(London,  1856) ;  "  Afar  in  the  Forest,  or  Pictures  of
Life  and  Scenery  in  the  Wilds  of  Canada"  (Lon-
don, 1869) ;  and  "  Studies  of  Plant  Life,  or  Floral
Gleanings  by  Forest,  Lake,  and  Plain "  (Ottawa,
1884).  The  illustrations  in  the  last  work  are  by
Mrs.  Agnes  F.  Chamberlaine,  a  daughter  of  Mrs.
Susanna  Moodie,  who  was  a  sister  of  Mrs.  Traill.
For  some  time  past  Mrs.  Traill  has  been  engaged
in  writing  "  A  Family  Record."

TRAIN,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Weston,
Mass.,  7  Jan.,  1783;  d.  in  Framingham,  Mass.,  17
Sept.,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1805,
licensed  to  preach  as  a  Baptist  in  Newton  in  May,
1806,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1807  took  charge  of
Framingham  academy,  at  the  same  time  preaching
on  alternate  Sundays  at  Framingham  and  Weston.
He  was  ordained  a  "minister  in  Framingham  on  30
Jan.,  1811,  and  was  appointed  pastor  of  the  Baptist


churches  in  Weston  and  Framingham.  In  1826
the  connection  between  the  two  branches  was  dis-
solved, and  he  became  pastor  of  Framingham
alone,  in  which  town  a  new  church  was  dedicated
in  1827.  He  resigned  his  charge  in  1839.  A  con-
siderable part  of  his  life  was  devoted  to  public
affairs.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Massa-
chusetts legislature  in  1822,  and  continued  to  rep-
resent his  district  for  the  following  seven  years,
except  during  1827,  when  his  extreme  views  on
temperance  offended  his  constituents.  In  1829  he
was  elected  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  state  senate  by
the  two  branches  of  the  legislature,  and  in  1830  he
was  chosen  senator  by  the  people.  He  was  the
first  to  take  steps  for  the  formation  of  a  legislative
library,  and  to  propose  a  revision  of  the  laws  affect-
ing common  schools,  while  Amherst  college  was
largely  indebted  to  his  exertions  for  its  charter.
He  acquired  considerable  celebrity  as  a  preacher
and  public  speaker,  and  published  various  ad-
dresses, orations,  and  sermons  between  1810  and
1830.— His  son,  Charles  Russell,  lawyer,  b.  in
Framingham,  Mass.,  18  Oct.,  1817,  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1837,  studied  law  at  Harvard,  and  was
called  to  the  bar  in  1841.  He  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  in  1847,  and
was  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  northern  Massachu-
setts from  1848  till  1851.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1853,  a  mem-
ber of  the  governor's  council  in  1857-8,  and  was
elected  to  congress  in  1859,  serving  until  1863.  He
was  a  volunteer  aide  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  George
H.  Gordon,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Antie-
tam.  He  was  again  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature
from  1868  till  1871,  and  was  attorney-general  from
1871  till  1878.  He  published,  in  conjunction  with
Franklin  F.  Heard,  "  Precedents  of  Indictments,
Special  Pleas,  etc.,  adapted  to  American  Practice,
with  Notes"  (Boston,  1855). — His  eldest  son,  Ar-
thur Savage,  clergyman,  b.  in  Framingham.  Mass.,
1  Sept.,  1812 ;  d.  there,  2  Jan.,  1872,  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1833,  and  remained  there  as  tutor  for
two  years,  pursuing  at  the  same  time  theological
'studies  under  the  direction  of  Francis  Wayland.
He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  in  1836,  as  pastor
of  the  Baptist  church  in  Haverhill,  Mass.,  and  he
continued  in  that  relation  for  twenty-three  years,
resigning  his  pastorate  to  accept  the  professorship
of  sacred  rhetoric  and  pastoral  duties  in  Newton
theological  seminary.  In  1866,  after  a  service  of
seven  years  in  the  seminary,  he  resigned,  and
passed  "the  remainder  of  his  life  with  the  church  in
Framingham.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Brown  in  1855.

TRAIN,  George  Francis,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  24  March,  1829.  He  is  a  son  of  Enoch
Train.  He  engaged  in  business  in  Boston  for  sev-
eral years  and  then  went  to  Australia  in  1853,
where  he  founded  the  house  of  Caldwell,  Train,
and  Co.  He  travelled  extensively,  went  to  Eng-
land, and  made  vigorous  efforts  to  introduce  street-
railways  into  Birkenhead  and  London  in  1859,
but  met  with  violent  opposition  and  was  unsuc-
cessful. He  lectured  in  Great  Britain  and  Ire-
land before  large  audiences,  especially  in  the  latter
countrv,  and,  although  his  manner  and  language  !
were  singular,  his  sarcasms  on  English  society  were
often  incisive  and  eloquent.  He  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1862,  and  since  that  time  has
been  widely  known  on  account  of  his  eccentricity.
He  has  written  "An  American  Merchant  in  Eu-
rope, Asia,  and  Australia"  (New  York,  1857);
"  Young  America  Abroad  "  (1857) ;  "  Young  Ameri-
ca in  Wall  Street"  (1858);  "  Spread-Eagleism "
(1859;  London,  1860);  "Every  Man  his  own  Auto-


154


TRALL


TRAUTWINE


crat,"  chiefly  biographical  (1859) ;  "  Young  Ameri-
ca on  Slavery"  (1860);  "Observations  on  Street-
Railways"  (Liverpool,  1860);  "George  Francis
Train,  Unionist,  on  Thomas  Colley  Grattan,  Seces-
sionist" (London,  1861);  "Union  Speeches  deliv-
ered in  England  during  the  Present  American
War"  (Philadelphia  and  London,  4  vols.,  1862);
'•  Downfall  of  England  "  (1865) ;  "  Irish  Independ-
ency "  (1865) ;  and  "  Championship  of  Women  "
(Leavenworth,  Kan.,  1868).

TRALL,  Russell  Thacher,  physician,  b.  in
Vernon,  Tolland  co.,  Conn.,  5  Aug.,  1812;  d.  in
Florence,  N.  J.,  23  Sept.,  1877.  He  was  brought
by  his  parents  to  Western  New  York  when  he  was
a  child,  and  for  several  years  worked  on  a  farm.
He  afterward  studied  medicine,  began  practice,
and  settled  in  New  York  city  in  1840,  where  he
became  a  hydropathist.  in  1843  he  founded  an
establishment  in  that  city  for  the  water-cure  treat-
ment, and  opened,  in  connection  with  it  in  1853,  a
medical  school  for  both  sexes,  which  was  chartered
in  1857  under  the  title  of  the  New  York  hygeio-
therapeutic  college.  It  was  afterward  removed  to
Florence,  N.  J.  He  edited  the  "  New  York  Organ,"
a  weekly  temperance  journal,"  and  the  "  Hydro-
pathic Review,"  a  quarterly  magazine,  from  1845
to  1848,  was  also  the  editor  of  other  medical  jour-
nals, and  the  author  of  "Hydropathic  Encyclo-'
paedia"  (New  York,  1852);  "New  Hydropathic
Cook-Book  "  (1854) ;  "  Prize  Essay  on  Tobacco  "
(1854) ;  "  Uterine  Diseases .  and  Displacements  "
(1855);  "Home  Treatment  for  Sexual  Abuses";
"The  Alcoholic  Controversy "(1856);  "The  Com-
plete Gymnasium  "  (1857) ;  "  Illustrated  Family
Gymnasium  "  (1857) ;  "  Diseases  of  the  Throat  and
Lungs " (1861) ;  "Diphtheria "(1862);  "Pathology
of  the  Reproductive  Organs"  (1862);  "  The  True
Temperance  Platform,  or  an  Exposition  of  the
Fallacy  of  Alcoholic  Medication"  (1864-'6):
"  Hand-Book  of  Hygienic  Practice  "  (1865) :  "  Sex-
ual Physiology"  (1866;  London,  1867);  "Water-
Cure  for  the  Million "  (1867) ;  "  Digestion  and
Dyspepsia"  (1874);  "The  Human  Voice"  (1874);
and  "  Popular  Physiology  "  (1875).

TRANCHEPAIN  DE  SAINT  AUGUSTINE,
Marie  de,  mother  superior,  b.  in  Rouen,  France  ;  d.
in  New  Orleans,  La.,  11  Nov.,  1733.  She  belonged
to  an  old  Huguenot  family,  but  became  a  Roman
Catholic,  and,  shortly  after  her  conversion  in  1699,
entered  the  Ursuline  order.  She  conceived  the
idea  of  founding  a  convent  in  this  country,  and,
although  she  met  with  great  difficulties,  finally
procured  money  and  companions  for  her  purpose.
She  sailed  for  Louisiana  on  22  Jan.,  1727,  accom-
panied by  seven  professed  nuns,  a  novice,  and  two
seculars,  and  reached  New  Orleans  on  7  Aug.  The
Ursuline  convent  that  she  founded  was  not  opened
until  1734.  The  building  is  still  standing,  and  is
the  oldest  in  the  city.  She  also  managed  a  hos-
pital, an  academy  for  young  ladies,  a  school  for  the
poor,  an  orphan  asylum,  and  an  institution  for  the
religious  instruction  of  negroes.

TRASK,  George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Beverly,
Mass.,  15  Aug.,  1798:  d.  in  Fitchburg.  Mass.,  25
Jan.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1826,
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1829,  was
ordained,  15  Sept.,  1830,  and  held  pastorates  in
Framingham,  Warren,  and  Fitchburg,  Mass.,  till
1850,  after  which  he  was  a  temperance  agent  in
the  last-named  town  until  his  death.  Mr.  Trask
became  specially  known  for  his  efforts  against  the
use  of  tobacco,  in  opposition  to  which  he  labored
earnestly  with  voice  and  pen.  He  delivered  many
lectures  throughout  the  United  States,  and  was  the
author  of  many  anti-tobacco  tracts.


TRASK,  William  Blake,  antiquary,  b.  in  Dor-
chester, Mass.,  25  Nov.,  1812.  He  is  a  descendant
of  Capt.  William  Trask,  who  emigrated  to  New
England  before  John  Endicott  in  1628,  and  having
settled  at  Salem,  Mass.,  became  subsequently  an
intimate  friend  of  that  governor,  a  deputy  to  the
general  court,  and  a  commander  in  the  Pequot
wars.  William  Blake  received  an  English  educa-
tion at  the  common  schools,  and  in  1828  was  ap-
prenticed to  a  cabinet-maker.  He  worked  at  his
trade  in  his  native  town  until  1835,  when  he  went
to  Pennsylvania ;  but  he  returned  to  Dorchester  in
1837.  He  served  for  three  years  on  the  school
committee  of  Dorchester,  and  in  1850  became  as-
sessor. He  was  obliged  to  resign  this  post,  owing
to  failing  health,  and  soon  afterward  began  to  de-
velop an  interest  in  historical  and  antiquarian
studies.  He  gave  valuable  aid  to  several  writers
by  supplying  them  with  the  fruits  of  his  investiga-
tions. He  copied  the  ancient  town-records  of  Bos-
ton and  made  fac-similes  of  autographs  for  Sam-
uel G.  Drake's  history  of  that  city,  and  was  of
great  aid  to  Gen.  William  H.  Sumner  in  preparing
a  "  History  of  East  Boston  "  (Boston,  1858).  He
contributed  to  the  "  New  England  Historical  and
Genealogical  Register,"  made  copies  of  entire  docu-
ments from  the  Massachusetts  archives  for  this
publication,  and  prepared  indexes  of  names  as  well
as  general  indexes  for  the  nineteen  volumes  from
1851  till  1869.  The  "  History  of  Dorchester"  (Bos-
ton, 1859)  owed  much  to  his  researches,  and  137
pages,  comprising  a  fifth  of  the  work,  were  written
by  him.  He  published  a  "  Memoir  of  Andrew  H.
Ward  "  (Boston,  1863),  and  edited  "  The  Journal  of
Joseph  Ware  "  (1852) ;  "  Baylie's  Remarks  on  Gen-
eral Cobb"  (1864);  "The  Bird  Family"  (1871):
and  "  The  Seaver  Family  "  (1872).  He  has  aided
in  preparing  several  genealogies,  has  been  a  mem-
ber of  the  Historic-genealogical  society  since  1851,
and  was  its  historiographer  from  1861  till  1868.

TRAUTWINE,  John  Cresson,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  30  March,  1810;  d.  there,
14  Sept.,  1883.  In  1828  he  entered  the  office  of
William  Strickland,  then  the  chief  civil  engineer
and  architect  in  that  city,  and  soon  afterward  sub-
mitted a  design  for  the  Penn  township  bank,  which
was  accepted,  and  the  execution  of  which  he  super-
intended. Subsequently  he  assisted  Mr.  Strickland
in  the  construction  of  the  U.  S.  mint  and  other
Philadelphia  buildings.  He  was  engaged  on  the
Columbia  railroad  in  1831,  was  appointed  principal
assistant  engineer  of  the  Philadelphia,  Wilming-
ton, and  Baltimore  railroad  in  1835,  and  in  1836
became  engineer  of  the  Philadelphia  and  Trenton
railroad,  but  during  the  latter  part  of  the  same
year  passed  to  the  service  of  the  Hiawassee  railroad,
from  Tennessee  to  Georgia,  of  which  he  was  chief
engineer  for  six  years.  In  1844-'9  he  was  asso-
ciated with  George  M.  Totten  in  the  construction
of  the  canal  del  Dique,  connecting  the  Magdalena
river  with  the  Bay  of  Carthagena,  and  again  with
Mr.  Totten,  in  1850,  he  made  the  surveys  for  the
Panama  railroad.  On  his  return  to  Philadelphia
in  1854  he  published  a  report  of  his  work.  He
next  examined  and  reported  on  the  harbor  of  Are-
cibo,  in  Porto  Rico,  and  then  became  engineer  of
the  Coal  Run  railroad  in  northeastern  Pennsyl-
vania. He  surveyed  in  1856  the  Lackawanna  and
Lanesborough  railroad  in  Susquehanna  county.  Pa.,
and  in  1857  the  route  for  an  interoceanic  railroad
through  Honduras.  He  examined  and  reported  on
the  harbor  of  Montreal  in  1858,  and  arranged  a
system  of  docks  for  that  city.  After  1864  he
gradually  retired  from  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion, although  continuing  his  consulting  work,  and


TRAVIS


TREADWELL


155


he  was  frequently  called  upon  to  testify  as  an  ex-
pert on  questions  of  engineering.  Mr.  Trautwine
was  a  member  of  scientific  bodies,  and  a  contribu-
tor of  professional  papers  to  technical  journals.
His  works  include  "  Method  of  Calculating  the  Cu-
bic Contents  of  Excavations  and  Embankments"
(Philadelphia,  1851);  "Field  Practice  of  Laying
out  Circular  Curves  for  Railroads "  (1851) ;  and
"  Civil  Engineer's  Pocket-Book  "  (1872).

TRAVIS,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Maryland,
13  Sept.,  1786;  d.  in  Mississippi.  16  Sept,.' 1858.
He  became  an  itinerant  minister  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church  in  1806,  and  served  in  South
Carolina,  Georgia,  Louisiana,  and  Tennessee.  His
"Autobiography"  was  edited  by  the  Rev.  Thomas'
0.  Summers,  D.D.  (Nashville,  1856).

TRAVIS,  William  Barrett,  soldier,  b.  in
Conecuh  county,  Ala.,  in  1811 ;  d.  near  San  Anto-
nio, Tex.,  6  March,  1836.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  about  1830,  and  practised  in  Claiborne,  Ala,,
but  became  financially  embarrassed,  and,  leaving
that  place  about  1832,  went  to  Texas,  where  he
afterward  took  up  arms  in  the  struggle  for  the  in-
dependence of  that  country.  At  the  head  of  140
men  he  was  besieged  in  the  old  mission  station  of
San  Antonio  de  Valerio,  which  had  been  named
Fort  Alamo  (see  illustration),  by  Gen.  Santa-Anna,


Sg  »  V **  -■■'

with  4,000  Mexicans,  on  23  Feb.,  1836.  The  fort
was  defended  for  ten  days,  frequent  assaults  being
repelled  with  great  slaughter,  while  not  a  man  in
the  fort  was  injured.  Many  appeals  for  re-enforce-
ments were  sent  out,  but  only  thirty-two  men  could
fet  through  the  Mexican  lines.  Finally,  on  6
Larch,  three  assaults  were  made,  and  in  the  hand-
to-hand  fight  that  followed  the  last,  the  Texans
were  overpowered.  They  fought  desperately,  with
clubbed  muskets,  till  only  six  were  left,  including
Travis.  David  Crockett,  and  James  Bowie.  These
surrendered  under  promise  of  protection ;  but  when
they  were  brought  before  Santa-Anna  he  ordered
them  to  be  cut  to  pieces.  In  the  bloody  defeat  of
the  Mexicans  at  San  Jacinto  shortly  afterward,  the
Texan  battle-cry  was  "  Remember  the  Alamo."  In
person  Travis  was  of  fine  stature,  with  regular
features,  blue  eves,  and  auburn  hair.

TREADWELL,  Daniel,  inventor,  b.  in  Ipswich.
Mas^.,  10  Oct.,  1791;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  27
Feb.,  1872.  He  early  displayed  inventive  talent,
his  first  device,  made  when  he  was  quite  young,
being  a  machine  for  producing  wooden  screws.
In  1818  he  devised  a  new  form  of  printing-press,
and  in  1819  went  to  England,  where  he  conceived
the  idea  of  a  power-press.  This  was  completed  in
a  year  after  his  return,  and  was  the  first  press  by
which  a  sheet  was  printed  on  this  continent  by
other  than  hand  power.  It  was  widely  used,  and
in  New  York  city  large  editions  of  the  Bible  were
published  by  its  means.  In  1825  he  was  employed
by  the  city  of  Boston  to  make  a  survey  for  the  in-
troduction of  water,  and  in  1826  he  devised  a  sys-


tem of  turnouts  for  railway  transportation  on  a
single  track.  He  completed  the  first  successful
machine  for  spinning  hemp  for  cordage  in  1829.
Works  capable  of  spinning  1,000  tons  a  year  were
erected  in  Boston  in  1831,  and  by  machines  that
he  furnished  in  1836  to  the  Charlestown  navy-yard
all  the  hemp  was  spun  and  the  cordage  made  for
some  time  for  the  U.  S.  navy.  These  machines
were  Used  in  Canada,  Ireland,  and  Russia,  and  one
of  them,  called  a  circular  hackle  or  lapper,  has
been  generally  adopted  wherever  hemp  is  spun  for
coarse  cloth.  In  1835  he  perfected  a  method  for
making  cannon  from  wrought-iron  and  steel,  re-
sembling the  process  that  was  subsequently  intro-
duced by  Sir  William  Armstrong.  He  patented  it
and  received  government  contracts,  but  the  great
cost  of  his  cannon  prevented  a  demand  for  them.
From  1834  till  1845  he  was  Rumford  professor  in
Harvard,  and  in  1822,  with  Dr.  John  Ware,  he  es-
tablished and  conducted  the  "  Boston  Journal  of
Philosophy  and  tlje  Arts."  His  publications  in-
clude "  The  Relations  of  Science  to  thev  Useful
Arts"  (Boston,  1855);  "On  the  Practicability  of
constructing  a  Cannon  of  Great  Calibre"  (Cam-
bridge, 1856) ;  and  "  On  the  Construction  of  Hooped
Cannon,"  a  sequel  to  the  foregoing  (1864).

TREADWELL,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Farm-
ington,  Conn.,  23  Nov.,  1745 ;  d.  there.  19  Aug.,
1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1767,  studied
law,  and  began  to  practise  in  Farmington.  He
was  elected  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1776,
and  continued  to  take  part  in  it  until  1785,  when
he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  governor's  coun-
cil. He  sat  in  the  Continental  congress  from  1785
to  1786.  In  1789  he  became  judge  of  probate  and
of  the  supreme  court  of  errors,  which  office  he  held
until  1809.  He  afterward  served  as  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  for  three  years.  He  was
made  lieutenant-governor  of  Connecticut  in  1798.
He  was  one  of  eight  that  were  delegates  both  to
the  convention  at  Hartford  that  ratified  the  con-
stitution of  the  United  States  in  1788,  and  of  the
convention,  thirty  years  afterward,  that  formed  the
state  constitution.  In  1809-'ll  he  was  governor
of  Connecticut.  Gov.  Treadwell  took  an  active'
part  in  the  management  of  the  school  fund  of
Connecticut,  and  was  president  of  the  American
board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions  dur-
ing the  latter  years  of  his  life.  He  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Yale  in  1800.

TREADWELL,  John  Goodhue,  physician,  b.
in  Salem,  Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1805;  d.  there,  6  Aug.,
1856.  He  was  the  son  of  a  physician  of  Salem,
from  whom  he  inherited  a  large  fortune.  After
his  graduation  at  Harvard  in  1825  he  adopted  the
medical  profession,  and  settled  in  his  native  town.
Dr.  Treadwell  bequeathed  his  farm  at  Topsfield  to
the  Essex  county  agricultural  society,  to  be  used
for  scientific  experiments  in  agriculture,  and  to
Harvard  an  estate  valued  at  about  $100,000,  to  be
applied  to  the  foundation  and  maintenance  of  a
professorship  of  physiology  and  anatomy.  He
also  left  his  medical  fibrarv  to  the  same  institution,

TREADWELL,  Seymour  Boughton,  politi-
cian, b.  in  Bridgeport,  Conn..  1  June,  1795;  d.  in
Jackson,  Mich.,  9  June,  1867.  His  parents  removed
in  his  infancy  to  Monroe  county,  N.  Y.,  where  he
was  educated.  He  taught  in  western  New  York
and  Ohio,  and  in  1830  engaged  in  trade  in  Albion,
N.  Y.,  where  he  began  to  attract  notice  as  a  tem-
perance and  anti-slaverv  advocate.  He  removed  to
Rochester  in  1837,  and  went  to  Michigan  in  1839
to  conduct  the  "  Michigan  Freeman,"  an  anti-slav-
ery organ,  at  Jackson.  He  took  an  active  part  in  all
the  conventions  and  movements  of  the  Abolition-


156


TREAT


TREAT


ists,  supporting  James  G.  Birnev  for  president  in
1840  and  1844  and  John  P.  Hale"  in  1852.  In  1854
he  was  nominated  by  the  Free-soil  party  for  com-
missioner of  the  state  land-office  and  twice  elected.
He  acquired  note,  especially  by  a  remarkable  state
paper  in  which  he  denied  the  constitutionality  of
the  payment  by  the  state  of  the  expenses  of  the
judges' of  the  supreme  court.  The  correctness  of
his  views  on  the  question  was  maintained  by  the
state  auditors  in  opposition  to  the  attorney-gen-
eral. He  lived  in  retirement  after  1859  on  a  farm
near  Jackson.  He  became  first  known  to  the  pub-
lic as  the  author  of  a  work  entitled  "American
Liberties  and  American  Slavery  Morally  and  Po-
litically Illustrated  "  (Rochester,  1838).

TREAT,  Robert,  governor  of  Connecticut,  b.
in  England  in  1622 ;  d.  in  Milford,  Conn.,  12  July,
1710.  Early  in  the  17th  century  he  came  to  Weth-
ersfield,  Conn.,  with  his  father,  Richard,  who  died
there  in  1669.  The  latter  was  a  deputy  from  1644
till  1658,  assistant  or  magistrate  from  1658  till  1665,
and  a  patentee  of  the  charter  that  was  granted  to
Connecticut  by  Charles  II.  in  1662.  His  estate  of
about  900  acres  in  what  is  now  Glastonbury  was
long  known  as  the  Treat  farm.  The  son  removed
to  Milford  in  1639,  and,  although  only  eighteen
years  of  age,  was  appointed  one  of  nine  men  to
survey  and  lay  out  the  land.  He  was  a  deputy
in  1653-'9  and  again  in  1665,  and  was  assistant
from  1659  till  1664.  Mr.  Treat  was  active  in  op-
posing the  movement  for  consolidation  of  Con-
necticut and  New  Haven.  The  dissatisfied  fac-
tion of  the  New  Haven  colony  determined  to  seek
another  settlement,  and  the  result  was  the  found-
ing of  Newark,  N.  J.  Robert  Treat  went  with
them,  and  was  the  first  town-clerk  of  the  new  set-
tlement as  well  as  a  deputy  to  the  1st  assembly
from  1667  till  1672.  He  was  also  granted  a  home
lot  of  eight  acres  there.  In  1672  he  returned  to
Milford,  where  he  had  been  made  lieutenant  in  the
train-band  in  1654,  and  promoted  captain  in  1661.
He  became  major  in  1673.  In  1675  he  was  chosen
commander-in-chief  of  the  forces  for  the  war  with
King  Philip,  and  drove  the  Indians  from  North-
'field  and  Springfield.  In  their  assault  upon  Had-
ley  he  put  them  to  flight,  and  he  took  an  active
part  in  the  destruction  of  the  fort  of  the  Narra-
gansetts,  19  Dec,  1675.  Maj.  Treat  is  said  to  have
been  the  last  to  leave  the  fort.  He  was  elected
deputy  governor  of  Connecticut  in  1676,  and  served
till  1683,  when  he  was  elected  governor.  He  was
chosen  again  to  the  former  post  in  1698  and  served
till  1708.  In  1683  he  was  elected  governor  and
served  till  1698,  not  including  the  two  years  under
Sir  Edmund  Andros.  In  1683  a  dispute  arose
with  the  governor  of  New  York,  who  claimed  that
Rye,  Greenwich,  and  Stamford  belonged  to  his  ju-
risdiction. Gov.  Treat  was  chosen  one  of  the  com-
missioners to  settle  the  controversy,  and  a  compro-
mise was  made  by  giving  up  Rye  and  retaining  the
two  other  towns.  When  King  James  II.  deter-
mined to  withdraw  their  charters  from  the  colonies
and  place  them  under  a  governor  appointed  by  the
crown,  the  loss  of  the  liberties  of  the  colony  seems
to  have  been  a  foregone  conclusion  from  the  very
beginning  to  Mr.  Treat's  mind,  and  he  determined
to  delay  the  calamity  as  long  as  possible.  Accord-
ing to  the  "  instructions  "  that  he  drew  up  for  the
colony's  agent,  his  duty  was  flrst  to  prevent  if  pos-
sible the  loss  of  the  charter,  and  secondly,  failing
in  this,  to  plead  that  the  colony  might  not  be  di-
vided and  united  to  others,  but  allowed  to  remain
intact.  Subsequently  the  hope  was  expressed  that
if  Connecticut  was  to  be  united  with  some  other
colony,  she  might  be  annexed  to  Massachusetts


rather  than  to  New  York.  When  Gov.  Andros  de-
manded the  surrender  of  the  charter,  the  governor
and  council  replied  that  they  could  not  comply
with  the  request  till  they  had  heard  from  the  king.
Finally  Andros  went  to  Hartford  on  31  Oct.,  1687,
to  take  charge  of  the  government,  and,  according
to  Dummer,  an  almost  contemporary  writer,  he
"  seized  their  charter  for  the  king."  It  is  common-
ly supposed  that  he  did  not  obtain  the  charter.
(See  Andros.)  There  is  no  record  that  he  ever  de-
manded it  of  the  assembly.  He  had  gained  pos-
session of  the  government,  was  loyally  received  by
the  people,  and,  moreover,  the  proceedings  of  the
next  day  prove  that  Andros  could  have  known
nothing  of  the  hiding  of  the  charter  from  him.
This  act  of  disloyalty  would  certainly  have  caused
trouble :  but  the  hiding  of  a  charter  may  have
been  strictly  true,  though  there  is  no  mention  of  it
in  the  records  or  by  contemporary  writers.  On  1
Nov.,  Gov.  Treat,  though  on  various  pretexts  he
had  refused  to  surrender  the  charter  for  about  two
years,  was  made  one  of  Gov.  Andros's  council,  and
within  a  week  colonel  of  militia  in  New  Haven
county.  Connecticut  suffered  less  from  the  tyran-
nical acts  of  Andros  than  any  other  of  the  colo-
nies, doubtless  owing  to  the  guidance  of  Mr.  Treat.
On  9  May,  1689,  after  the  rebellion  against  Andros,
Gov.  Treat  and  the  old  magistrates  under  the  char-
ter resumed  the  offices  from  which  they  had  been
deposed  in  1687. — His  son,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.
in  Milford,  Conn.,  in  1648 ;  d.  in  Eastham,  Mass.,  18
March,  1717.  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1669,
received  a  call  to  Eastham,  on  Cape  Cod,  in  1672,
and  was  ordained  in  1675  at  a  salary  of  £50  a  year,
which  was  subsequently  increased,  besides  several
grants  of  land.  He  had  about  500  Indians  under
his  pastoral  care,  whose  affections  he  so  effectually
gained  by  visiting  their  wigwams  and  joining  in
their  festivities  that  they  looked  upon  him  as  a
father.  He  translated  the  "  Confession  of  Faith  "
into  the  Nauset  dialect  for  the  use  of  the  Indians.
In  1678  and  in  1713  he  preached  the  election  ser-
mon, the  former  at  Plymouth.  He  was  the  grand-
father of  Robert  Treat  Paine,  the  signer  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence,  and  the  great-grand-
father of  the  Rev.  James  Freeman,  the  first  Uni-
tarian clergyman  of  Boston. — Samuel's  great-grand-
son, Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Bangor,  Me.,  8  Dec,
1775 ;  d.  there,  27  Feb.,  1853,  became  a  civil  engi-
neer, but  was  commissioned  captain  in  the  21st  U.  S.
infantry  on  12  March,  1812.  Owing  to  the  envy
of  some  of  his  superior  officers,  he  was  accused  of
cowardice  at  the  battle  of  Chippewa,  5  July,  1814;
but  upon  trial  he  was  honorably  acquitted,  none  of
his  accusers  appearing  against  him.  He  was  mus-
tered out  in  1815,  in  1817  and  1818  was  a  member
of  the  general  court  of  Massachusetts,  and  in  1820
of  the  Maine  constitutional  convention.  He  after-
ward became  brigadier-general  in  the  state  militia.
Gen.  Treat  published  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  The
Vindication  of  Capt.  Joseph  Treat,  late  of  the  21st
U.  S.  Infantry,  against  the  Atrocious  Calumnies
Comprehended  in  Maj.-Gen.  Brown's  Official  Re-
port of  the  Battle  of  Chippeway"  (Philadelphia,
1815). — Samuel's  descendant  in  the  seventh  genera-
tion, John  Harvey,  author,  b.  in  Pittsfield,  N.  H.,
23  July,  1839,  removed  to  Andover,  Mass.,  in  1856,
and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1862,  after  which
he  engaged  in  business  with  his  father  in  Law-
rence, Mass.  In  1869  and  1875  he  travelled  exten-
sively in  Europe  and  the  East.  He  is  a  member  of
historical  societies  in  this  country  and  England.
In  1888  he  presented  to  Harvard  a  large  collection
of  rare  boolvs  and  to  its  Museum  of  comparative
zoology  his  large  collection  of  entomological  sped-


TREDWELL


TREJO


157


mens.  In  addition  to  various  privately  printed
pamphlets  on  theological  and  archaeological  sub-
jects, he  is  the  author  of  "  Notes  on  the  Rubrics  of
the  Communion  Office,  with  a  Review  of  the  De-
cisions of  the  Privy  Council  and  Observations  on
Modern  Ritualism,"  with  an  introductory  letter  by
the  Rev.  Morgan  Dix,  S.  T.  D.  (New  York,  1882);
"Truro  Baptisms,  1711-1800"  (Lawrence,  1886);
"  The  Catholic  Faith,  or  the  Doctrines  of  the  Church
of  Rome  Contrary  to  Scripture  and  the  Teach-
ing of  the  Primitive  Church,"  with  an  introduc-
tion by  the  Rev.  James  A.  Bolles  (Nashotah,  Wis.,
1888) ;  and  has  a  "  Genealogy  of  the  Treat  Fami-
ly" in  preparation. — Joseph's  descendant,  Sam-
uel, jurist,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  17  Dec,  1815,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1837,  taught  while
studying  law,  and  in  1830  became  principal  of  an
academy  in  Geneseo,  N.  Y.  In  1841  he  removed  to
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
appointed  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
1849,  and  again  held  this  office  in  1851-'7.  On  5
March,  1857,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  judge  for  the
eastern  district  of  Missouri,  which  office  he  re-
signed on  15  Feb.,  1887.  Judge  Treat  was  a  cor-
porator of  Washington  university,  St.  Louis,  from
which  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1879.
See  "  Proceedings  of  the  St.  Louis  Bar  on  the  Re-
tirement of  Hon.  Samuel  Treat "  (St.  Louis,  1887).
— Samuel's  cousin.  Samuel  Hubbel,  jurist,  b.  in
Plainfield,  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,  21  June,  1811 ;  d.  in
Springfield,  111.,  27  March,  1887,  was  of  the  seventh
generation  from  Matthias  Treat,  and  his  grand-
father, Theodore,  served  in  the  Revolutionary  army
from  1775  till  1780.  He  worked  on  his  father's
farm  and  studied  law  in  Richfield,  where  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1834  he  walked  to  Spring-
field, 111.,  formed  a  law-partnership,  and  practised
until  1839,  when  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the
state  circuit  court  and  held  this  office  until  1841.
He  was  transferred  to  the  supreme  bench  in  that
year,  and  served  till  3  March,  1855,  when  he  was
appointed  by  President  Pierce  to  the  office  of  U.  S.
judge  for  the  southern  district  of  Illinois,  which
post  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.  His  library
was  one  of  the  finest  private  collections  in  the
state,  and  he  was  active  in  the  diocesan  convention
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  Illinois.
With  Walter  B.  Scates  and  Robert  S.  Blackwell
he  compiled,  with  notes,  "  Illinois  Law  Statutes,"
embracing  all  of  the  general  laws  in  force,  1  Dec,
1857  (2  vols.,  Chicago,  1858).

TREDWELL,  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  Smithtown,
Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  in  1742 ;  d.  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,
30  Jan.,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1764,  and  was  a  member  of  the  New  York  provin-
cial congress  in  1774-'5  and  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  of  1776-7.  In  .1788  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  convention  that  ratified  the  consti-
tution of  the  United  States.  He  sat  in  the  assem-
bly from  1777  till  1783,  and  in  the  state  senate  in
1786-'9  and  1803-7,  was  first  judge  of  the  court  of
probate  in  1778-'87,  and  surrogate  of  Suffolk  coun-
ty in  1787-'91.  From  1791  till  1795  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress.  Judge  Tredwell  was  an  original
proprietor  of  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  represented  Clin-
ton and  Essex  counties  in  the  State  constitutional
convention  of  1801,  and  was  surrogate  of  Clinton
county  in  1807-'31.

TREGO,  William  Henry,  expressman,  b.  in
Middleburg,  Carroll  co.,  Md.,  18  Feb.,  1837.  He
was  educated  at  the  Baltimore  public  schools,
entered  the  service  of  Adams  express  company  at
Baltimore  in  1852,  and  passed  through  various
grades  to  the  superin tendency  in  1856.  During
the  civil  war  he  had  charge  of  the  transportation


of  express  matter  for  troops  in  the  southern  states.
In  1877  he  projected  and  organized  on  the  Balti-
more and  Ohio  railroad  system  the  first  trunk-line
railway  express  in  the  United  States,  and  he  was
intimately  associated  with  its  subsequent  history.
In  1887  he  organized  the  railway  express  over  the
Erie  system,  allied  with  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio
express,  and  he  brought  about  other  railway  express
alliances  which,  under  rulings  of  the  U.  S.  supreme
court,  acquired  an  area  rivalling  that  of  corporate
expresses,  and  advantages  that  seemed  to  menace
the  existence  of  the  latter.  Previously  all  express
business  on  railroads  was  done  by  express  com-
panies as  separate  corporations,  paying  the  rail-
roads a  certain  percentage  of  the  earnings  for  haul-
ing, usually  forty  per  cent.  Under  the  railway
express  system  the  railway  company  performed
the  service  directly,  and  secured  the  entire  profit.
The  large  financial  interests  that  were  involved
placed  the  wealthy  corporate  expresses  on  the
defensive.  The  question  promised  to  become  im-
portant in  American  railway  management.  The
railway  express  that  had  been  founded  by  Mr.
Trego  grew  to  great  proportions  in  spite  of  a  com-
bined corporate  opposition  of  ten  years,  when
peculiar  circumstances  banished  it  as  an  institution
from  the  United  States.  Early  in  1887  a  new
management  of  the  Philadelphia  and  Reading  road
sold  that  company's  express  to  corporate  interests,
Later,  the  same  year,  embarrassments  impelled  the
Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad  to  part  with  its  express,
and  in  1888  the  remaining  railway  express,  the
Erie,  succumbed  to  allied  pressure,  and  was  sold.

TREJO,  Hernando  de  (tray'-ho),  Spanish  ad-
venturer, b.  in  Truxillo,  Estremadura,  about  1510 ;
d.  in  Asuncion,  Paraguay,  in  1555.  He  served
in  Italy,  went  to  Mexico  about  1540,  and  in  1550
to  La  Plata  with  Juan  de  Salazar  de  Espinosa.
They  encountered  heavy  seas  and  hurricanes,  and
the  adventurers  became  dissatisfied.  Dissensions
following  between  the  chief  pilot  and  Juan  de  Sa-
lazar, the  latter  was  deposed  from  the  command
and  Trejo  was  elected  in  his  place.  But  the  latter,
fearing  that  the  adelantado  of  La  Plata  would
punish  him  for  his  rebellion,  landed  Salazar  at
San  Vicente  and  sailed  to  the  south,  intending  to
found  a  settlement.  Driven  by  contrary  winds,  he
landed  early  in  1551  in  a  bay  a  few  miles  north  of
Santa  Catalina  island  and  south  of  Cananea.  There
he  founded  the  city  of  San  Francisco  and  tried  to
explore  the  interior,  but  the  warlike  Indians
checked  his  progress  and  cut  off  his  supplies.  The
adventurers  greatly  suffering  from  want,  Trejo
determined  in  1553  to  abandon  the  colony  and  set
out  for  Asuncion.  Sailing  up  Itabucu  river  and
otherwise  following  the  route  that  had  been  ex-
plored a  few  years  before  by  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  he
entered  the  territory  of  the  Guaranis,  where  he  was
assailed  by  the  Indians,  but  he  defeated  them  and
pursued  his  march  toward  Asuncion,  suffering
great  hardships  and  arriving  at  last  in  May,  1554,
after  a  march  of  six  months.  He  was  impris-
oned there  by  Martinez  de  Irala,  and,  beint;  re-
leased by  order  of  the  court,  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  the  city,  dying  a  few  weeks  later.  He
had  married  in  San  Francisco  one  of  the  daughters
of  the  deceased  adelantado-elect,  Sanabria.— Their
son,  Hernando  de  Trejo  y  Sanabria,  b.  in  San
Francisco  in  1553 ;  d.  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  in  1614,
became  a  Franciscan,  and  is  counted  among  the
first  apostles  of  Brazil.  He  was  elected  in  1603
provincial  of  the  latter  country,  and  founded  col-
leges and  built  churches  everywhere,  interesting
himself  to  the  last  in  the  welfare  of  the  Indians,
especially  of  the  half-breeds,  or  Mamalucos,  and


158


TREJO


TRENCHARD


became  their  legislator.  He  left  a  valuable  manu-
script, "Arte  de  la  lengua  de  los  Mamalueos,"
which  is  preserved  in  the  archives  of  Simancas.

TREJO,  Rafael  de,  Spanish  soldier  and  histo-
rian, b.  in  Estremadura  in  the  last  quarter  of  the
15th  century;  d.  in  Mexico  about  1540.  Little  is
known  of  his  life  except  that  he  was  an  officer  in
the  band  of  adventurers  that  accompanied  Hernan
Cortas  to  the  conquest  of  Mexico.  He  seems  to
have  been  an  educated  man,  as  he  wrote  an  ac-
count of  the  accidents  of  the  conquest,  under  the
title  of  "  Memorial  de  algunas  cosas  dignas  de
saberse  en  la  eonquista  de  Nueva  Espafia,"  the
manuscript  of  which,  according  to  Torquemada,
who  confesses  that  he  used  some  of  the  contents,
existed  in  the  government  archives  of  Simancas,
but  has  not  yet  been  found.

TREMAIN,  Henry  Edwin,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city,  14  Nov.,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at
the  College  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1860  and
then  entered  Columbia  law-school.  On  17  April,
1861,  he  enlisted  in  the  7th  New  York  regiment  as
a  private,  and  served  through  its  two  months'
campaign  about  Washington,  after  which,  on  13
July,  he  entered  the  National  volunteer  service  as
1st  lieutenant  of  the  2d  New  York  fire  zouaves.
During  the  peninsular  campaign  he  was  on  Gen.
Daniel  E.  Sickles's  staff,  and  was  in  the  battles  of
Williamsburg,  Fair  Oaks,  and  Malvern  Hill.  He
was  then  transferred  to  Gen.  John  Pope's  army,
and  engaged  at  Bristow  Station  and  the  second
battle  of  Bull  Run,  where  he  was  captured  while
endeavoring  to  check  a  temporary  panic  and  the
rapid  advance  of  the  enemy.  After  several  months'
confinement  in  Libby  prison  he  was  exchanged,
resumed  duty  on  Gen.  Sickles's  staff  as  assistant
inspector-general,  and  was  present  at  Fredericks-
burg and  Chancellorsville,  where  he  served  as  an
aide  to  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker.  Meanwhile,  on  25
April,  1863,  he  had  been  commissioned  major,  and
was  chief  staff  officer  to  Gen.  Sickles  at  the  battle
of  Gettysburg.  He  was  on  Gen.  Daniel  Butter-
field's  staff  at  Chattanooga,  and  took  part  in  the
battles  of  Dalton  and  Resaca.  In  1864  he  was  or-
dered to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  and  served  suc-
cessively on  the  staffs  of  Gen.  David  M.  Gregg  and
Gen.  George  Crook,  participating  in  the  cavalry
battles  under  these  officers,  until  the  surrender  of
the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  30  Nov.,  1865,
and  continued  on  duty  in  the  Carolinas  until  his
discharge  on  29  April,  1866.  Gen.  Tremain  then
resumed  his  law  studies  and  was  graduated  in  1867,
after  which  he  entered  into  practice,  forming  in
1868  the  firm  of  Tremain  and  Tyler.  From  1870
till  1885  he  was  usually  retained  either  by  or
against  the  government  in  its  legal  controversies
in  New  York,  and  he  was  connected  with  the  Marie-
Garrison  litigation  involving  the  title  to  the  Mis-
souri Pacific  railroad.  He  has  been  active  as  a
Republican  in  political  canvasses,  and  for  five  terms,
beginning  in  1871.  he  has  been  president  of  the
associate  alumni  of  the  College  of  the  city  of  New
York.  On  19  April,  1887,  he  was  elected  colonel  of
the  veterans  of  the  7th  regiment,  the  oldest  organi-
zation of  its  kind  in  this  country.  His  campaign
notes  of  "  Last  Hours  of  Sheridan's  Cavalry "
were  edited  by  John  Watts  de  Peyster  (1885).

TREMAIN,  Lyman,  lawyer  and  statesman,  b.
in  Durham,  Greene  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  June,  1819 ;  d.
in  New  York  city,  30  Nov.,  1878.  After  passing
through  college,  he  studied  law,  and  was  called  to
the  bar  in  1840.  He  began  practice  in  his  native
county,  and  continued  it  in  Albany,  was  elected
supervisor  of  Durham  in  1842,  and  became  district


attorney  in  1844.  In  1846  he  was  elected  surro-
gate and  county  judge  of  Greene  county,  and  in
1858  he  became  attorney-general  of  the  state  of
New  York.  He  was  sent  to  the  assembly  in  1866-'8,
and  in  1872  was  elected  congressman  as  a  Repub-
lican over  Samuel  S.  Cox,  serving  from  1  Dec,
1873,  to  3  March,  1875. — His  son,  Lyman,  soldier,
b.  in  Durham,  Greene  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  June,  1843;  d.
near  Petersburg,  Va.,  6  Feb.,  1865,  entered  Hobart
in  1860,  but  abandoned  his  studies  in  1862,  and
entered  the  National  army.  He  was  appointed  ad-
jutant of  the  7th  New  York  heavy  artillery,  served
in  the  defences  of  Washington,  and  was  afterward
made  assistant  adjutant-general,  with  the  rank  of
captain,  on  the  staff,  in  Kilpatrick's  division  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac.  In  December,  1864,  he
was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  iOth
New  York  cavalry.  He  commanded  this  regiment
at  the  battle  of  Hatcher's  run,  where  he  received
the  wound  of  which  he  died.

TRENCHARD,  Edward,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  Jersey  in  1784 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  3  Nov.,
1824.  He  was  descended  from  the  English  family
of  Trenchards,  of  Somersetshire  and.  Wolverton,
one  of  whom  settled  at  Salem,  N.  J.,  and  his
grandfather,  George  Trenchard,  was  attorney-gen-
eral of  West  New  Jersey.  Edward  was  appointed
a  midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy  on  30  April,  1800,
and  became  lieutenant  on  18  Feb.,  1807;  com-
mandant, 24  July,  1813;  and  captain,  5  March,
1817.  During  the  war  of  1812-'15  he  served  with
Col.  Isaac  Chauncey  on  Lake  Ontario,  and  com-
manded the  "  Madison "  during  some  of  her  en-
gagements on  the  lake,  and  rendered  meritorious
services  in  the  blockade  of  Kingston,  and  other
operations.  He  had  the  sloop  "John  Adams"  in
the  Mediterranean  squadron  after  the  Algerine  war
in  1815-'17,  was  promoted  to  captain,  5  March,
1817,  and  commanded  the  sloop  "Cyane"  on  the
coast  of  Africa  in  1819-'22. — His  son,  Stephen
Decatur,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10
Julv,  1818,  was  appointed  a  midshipman  in  the
U.  S.  navy,  23
Oct.,  1834,  after
making  a  cruise
as  acting  mid-
shipman in  the
European  squad-
ron in  1832.  He
was  at  the
naval  school
in  Philadelphia
in  1839-'40,  be-
came passed  mid-
shipman, 16  Ju-
ly, 1840,  and  was
on  coast  survey
duty  in  1845-6.
During  this  ser-
vice Trenchard  x,  *>*
was  on  board  the  ^^2£~^5S^*~~*£l^
brig  "  Washing-  /
ton " when she

was  wrecked  off  the  coast  of  North  Carolina,  and
was  one  of  the  few  that  were  saved.  He  was  made
lieutenant,  27  Feb.,  1847,  was  on  the  "  Saratoga  "  in
Mexico  in  that  year,  and  while  again  on  coast  survey
duty  in  1853-'7  rescued  the  British  bark  "Adieu"
off  Gloucester,  Mass.,  when  in  great  peril,  saving  all
hands  and  the  entire  cargo,  for  which  service  he
was  presented  with  a  sword  by  the  queen  of  Eng-
land, and  a  watch  by  the  underwriters  of  the  bark.
He  was  in  the  "  Powhatan "  on  her  diplomatic
cruise  to  China  and  Japan  in  1857-'60,  and  acted
as  aide,  or  flag-lieutenant,  to  Com.  Josiah  Tatnall


TRENHOLM


TREVETT


159


and  was  with  the  commodore  when  he  visited  the
British  Admiral  Hope.  Lieut.  Trenchard  was
slightly  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Peiho  River.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  one  of  the  first  officers
to  go  on  duty,  as  he  was  ordered  to  command  the
"Keystone  State"  on  19  April,  1861.  He  went
with*  that  steamer  to  Norfolk  navy-yard ;  but  the
yard  was  burning  when  the  "  Keystone  State "
arrived,  and  the  vessel  assisted  in  rescuing  such
property  as  was  saved.  Lieut.  Trenchard  was
ordered  on  19  June,  1861,  to  the  "  Rhode  Island,"
which  was  first  used  as  a  supply  and  special  despatch
ship,  but  she  was  afterward  converted  into  a
heavily  armed  cruiser  and  ordered  to  the  North
Atlantic  squadron.  While  the  "  Rhode  Island  "
was  towing  the  "  Monitor  "  from  Hampton  Roads
to  Beaufort,  N.  C,  the  latter  foundered  off  Cape
Hatteras,  but,  through  the  exertions  of  the  officers
and  crew  of  the  "  Rhode  Island,"  the  majority  of
the  "  Monitor's  "  crew  were  saved.  His  vessel  was
afterward  attached  to  the  special  West  Indian
squadron  to  look  after  the  "  Alabama  "  and  "  Flori-
da," and  also  to  the  South  Atlantic  squadron  for
a  short  time.  During  her  early  service  as  a  cruiser
she  captured  several  valuable  prizes.  Trenchard
was  made  commander  in  July,  1862,  and  took  an
active  part  in  both  bombardments  of  Fort  Fisher
and  its  capture.  He  became  captain  in  July,  1866,
and  commodore,  7  May,  1871,  was  on  the  examining
board  in  1871— '2,  and  served  as  light-house  inspec-
tor and  on  headquarters  duty  in  1873-'5.  He  was
promoted  rear-admiral,  10  Aug.,  1875,  and  com-
manded the  North  Atlantic  squadron  in  1876-'8.
In  1876  Admiral  Trenchard  had  twenty-one  vessels
in  his  squadron,  which  was  the  largest  since  the  war.
He  was  retired,  10  July,  1880. — Stephen  Decatur's
son,  Edward,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17
Aug.,  1850,  studied  art  with  Peter  Moran  and
others  during  1864-'72,  and  afterward  at  the  Na-
tional academy  and  the  Art  students'  league.  His
works  include  "  The  Passing  Shower  "  (1874),  "  The
Old  Wreck  "  (1875),  and  "  Sea,  Sand,  and  Solitude  "
(1876),  all  exhibited  at  the  Academy  of  design;
"The  Breaking  Waves  dashed  high"  (1876);  and
"A  Tronic  Beach "  (1879).

TRENHOLM,  George  A.,  merchant,  b.  in  South
Carolina  in  1806  ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  10  Dec,
1876.  He  was  for  many  years  a  merchant  in
Charleston.  Prior  to  the  civil  war  his  firm  trans-
acted a  large  business  in  cotton,  and  enjoyed  almost
unlimited  credit  abroad.  During  the  war  they
were  engaged  extensively  in  blockade-running,  and
were  interested  in  many  daring  attempts  to  obtain
supplies  from  Nassau.  He  was  a  strong  adherent
of  the  Confederacy,  and  was  appointed  secretary
of  the  Confederate  treasury  in  1864,  which  office
he  held  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  taken
prisoner  by  National  troops  and  held  until  October,
1865,  when  he  was  pardoned  by  President  Johnson.

TRESCOT,  William  Henry,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  10  Nov.,  1822.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  College  of  Charleston  in  1840,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843.  He  also
engaged  in  planting  on  one  of  the  sea  islands  near
Beaufort.  Mr.  Trescott  became  U.  S.  secretary  of
legation  at  London  in  December,  1852,  and  assist-
ant secretary  of  state  in  June,  1860,  but  he  resigned
that  office  upon  the  secession  of  his  state.  He  was
elected  to  the  legislature  in  1862,  1864,  and  1866,
and  during  that  period  was  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
Roswell  S.  Ripley  and  afterward  a  member  of  the
executive  council.  He  was  selected  by  James  L.
Petigru  to  assist  him  in  preparing  the  code  of  law
for  the  state.  At  the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  was
sent  to  Washington  to  represent  the  state  on  cer-


tain questions  under  the  reconstruction  acts.  In
June,  1877,  he  was  appointed  counsel  for  the
United  States  on  the  fishery  commission  at  Hali-
fax, N.  S.  He  was  one  of  the  plenipotentiaries
to  China  to  revise  the  treaties  in  April,  1880,  and
was  appointed  by  Sec.  Evarts  to  continue  and
conclude  the  negotiations  with  the  Columbian  min-
ister, and  the  protocol  in  reference  to  the  rights  of
the  United  States  on  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  in
February,  1881.  He  was  appointed  special  envoy  to
the  belligerents  in  South  America  (Peru,  Chili,  and
Bolivia)  in  November,  1881,  and  plenipotentiary
with  Gen.  Grant  to  negotiate  a  commercial  treaty
with  Mexico  in  August,  1882.  At  present  he  is
practising  law  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and  is  agent  for
the  state  of  South  Carolina  for  the  settlement  of  di-
rect tax  questions.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Thoughts
on  the  Foreign  Policy  of  the  United  States  "  (pri-
vately printed,  Charleston,  1849) ;  "  Diplomacy  of
the  Revolution"  (New  York,  1852);  "Letter  to
Andrew  P.  Butler  on  the  Diplomatic  System  of  the
United  States"  (1853) ;  "  An  American  View  of  the
Eastern  Question "  (Charleston,  1854) ;  "  Diplo-
matic History  of  the  Administrations  of  Washing-
ton and  Adams"  (Boston,  1857);  a  memoir  of  Gen.
Johnson  Pettigrew  (1870) ;  and  various  addresses,
including  one  on  Gen.  Stephen  Elliott,  delivered
before  the  South  Carolina  legislature.

TRESSAN,  Philippe  Francois  de  la  Renan-
diere  de,  French  geographer,  b.  in  Vire,  Nor-
mandy, in  1781 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  February,  1845.
He  was  for  several  years  president  of  the  civil  tri-
bunal of  his  native  city,  but  resigned  in  1815  to
devote  himself  to  geographical  researches,  and  be-
came in  1823  editor  of  the  noted  collection  "Les
annales  des  voyages."  Besides  his  contributions
on  South  and  North  American  scenery  to  this
periodical,  he  prepared  a  new  edition  of  Malte-
Brun's  geography,  and  published,  among  other
works,  "  Notice  sur  Mexico,  suivie  d'un  coup  d'oeil
historique  sur  les  derniers  evenements  qui  s  y  sont
succedes  depuis  1810  "  (Paris,  1824) ;  "  Histoire  du
Mexique"  (1829);  "Voyages  de  Christophe  Co-
lomb  (1836);  "La  guerre  civile  dans  l'Amerique
du  Sud"  (1840);  and  "  Le  Mexique"  (1843).

TRESSLER,  David  Loy,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lovs-
ville,  Perry  co.,  Pa.,  5  Feb..  1839 ;  d.  in  Carthage,  111.,
20  Feb.,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Pennsylvania
college,  Gettysburg,  in  1860,  with  the  highest  hon-
ors of  his  class.  In  the  autumn  of  the  same  year
he  became  principal  of  Loysville  academy.  In  1862
he  raised  a  company  of  volunteers,  and  served  as
captain  for  nine  months  in  the  civil  war,  partici-
pating in  the  battles  of  South  Mountain,  Antietam,
and  Fredericksburg,  where  he  received  two  severe
wounds.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1864,  and
was  engaged  in  the  practice  of  his  profession  until
1870,  when  he  removed  to  Mendota,  111.,  and  short-
ly afterward  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Lutheran
church,  accepting  a  call  to  Lena,  111.  In  1872  he
became  professor  of  ancient  languages  in  Carthage
college,  111.,  and  its  treasurer.  In  the  following
year  he  was  elected  president  of  the  college,  which
post  he  occupied  until  his  death.  Under  him  the
college  was  thoroughly  organized,  and  prospered.
In  1876  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Wit-
tenberg college,  Springfield,  Ohio.  He  published
two  baccalaureate  sermons  and  occasional  articles
in  the  periodicals  of  his  church.

TREVETT,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  1747;  d.
in  Newport,  R.  I.,  in  November,  1823.  In  Novem-
ber, 1775,  he  entered  the  Continental  navy  as  a
midshipman  on  board  the  "  Columbus,"  and  was
soon  promoted  to  be  a  lieutenant,  in  which  capacity
he  served  under  Com.  Esek  Hopkins. In  1776  he


160


TREVETT


TRIMBLE


was  attached  to  the  "  Andrea  Doria,"  commanded
the  marines  in  the  "  Providence,"  and  was  active
in  the  capture  of  New  Providence.  He  joined  the
frigate  "  Trumbull "  in  1780,  and  lost  his  right  eye
in  an  engagement ;  then  went  on  a  cruise  in  the
*'  Deane,"  but  was  taken  prisoner  and  carried  to
St.  John's,  where  he  remained  two  years.

TREVETT,  Samuel  Russell,  soldier,  b.  in  Mar-
blehead.  Mass.,  in  1751 ;  d.  there,  19  Jan.,  1832.  He
served  with  coolness  and  courage  at  the  battle  of
Bunker  Hill,  where  he  commanded  a  company  of
artillery,  and  again  in  the  Rhode  Island  expedition
in  August,  1778.  In  1812  he  was  captured  by  a
British  vessel  as  he  was  returning  to  this  country
from  Sweden,  where  he  had  been  engaged  for  four
years  in  trade.  From  July,  1814,  till  his  death  he
commanded  a  IT.  S.  revenue-cutter  at  Boston. — His
son,  Samuel  Russell,  surgeon,  b.  in  Marblehead,
20  Aug.,  1783 ;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  4  Nov.,  1822,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1804,  and  began  prac-
tice in  Boston,  but  was  soon  afterward  appointed
to  the  navy.  He  served  in  the  frigate  "  United
States"  when  she  captured  the  "Macedonian,"
and  was  in  the  "  President "  when  that  vessel  was
taken  by  the  British  in  1815.  He  distinguished
himself  by  his  bravery  on  the  burning  steamboat
"  Phoenix  "  on  Lake  Champlain  in  September,  1819.
After  the  war  he  was  appointed  surgeon  of  the  navy-
yard  at  Charleston,  and  in  1822  he  was  detailed  as
surgeon  on  board  the  sloop-of-war  "  Peacock."  For
some  time  previous  to  his  death  he  had  been  en-
gaged in  collecting  materials  for  a  biography  of
American  physicians. — His  son,  Russell,  educator,
b.  in  Marblehead,  Mass.,  30  Dec,  1817 ;  d.  in  North
Salem,  Westchester  eo.,  N.  Y.,  8  March,  1805,  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1835,  and  entered  the
ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  He
was  professor  of  classics  and  history  at  St.  James's
college,  Md.,  in  1844-'55,  and  of  ancient  languages
at  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,  Md.,  in  1855-'61,
and  was  rector  of  St.  James's  church,  North  Salem,
N.  Y.,  from  1861  till  his  death.  A  volume  of  his
sermons,  with  a  sketch  of  the  author  by  John  B.
Kerfoot,  was  published  (New  York,  1869).

TRIG  AND,  Jacques  Nicolas  Bell  in  de  (tree-
gahng),  French  geographer,  b.  in  Paris  in  1703 ;  d.
in  Versailles,  21  March,  1772.  He  entered  the  em-
ployment of  the  navy  department,  and  was  in-
structed to  make  charts  of  all  the  oceans  and  seas.
His  "Neptune  Francais"  (Paris,  1753)  contains
charts  of  the  coast  of  France,  and  his  "  Hydro-
graphie  Franeaise"  (1756)  contains  eighty  charts
of  the  coast  of  both  Americas,  Asia,  and  Africa.
His  "Petit  atlas  maritime"  (5  vols.,  1764)  is  spe-
cially devoted  to  the  coast  of  North  and  South
America,  and  contains  also  the  plan  of  most  of
the  important  harbors  and  maritime  cities.  He
prepared  also  all  the  charts  that  are  in  Abbe  Pre-
vost's  "  Histoire  generale  des  voyages,"  and  con-
tributed to  the  Academy  of  sciences  several  "  Me-
moires  sur  les  cotes  de  l'Araerique  Sept^ntrionale,"
which  were  collected  and  printed  (Paris,  1755).
His  works  include  also  "Essais  geographiques  sur
les  iles  Britanniques"  (1763);  "Essai  sur  la  Guy-
ane"  (1757);  "Geographie  des  Antilles"  (1765);
and  "Essai  sur  File  de  Saint  Domingue"  (1766).

TRIMADEUC,  Gui  Plonvencal  (tre-mah-duk),
Baron  de,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  the  castle  of
Trimadeuc,  near  Auray,  Brittany,  in  1720;  d.  there
in  1784.  He  entered  the  maritime  service  when
fourteen  years  old,  assisted  in  the  battle  off  Toulon
in  1740,  and,  being  promoted  to  the  command  of
the  brig  "Pluto"  in  1749,  was  attached  to  the  sta-
tion of  Canada,  and  made  an  exploration  of  the
northern  coast  of  America. He  escorted  a  convoy


of  troops  from  Brest  to  Quebec  in  1756,  sustained
afterward  a  successful  engagement  with  a  British
division  off  Louisburg,  which  he  relieved,  and,
being  sent  to  the  West  Indies,  defended  the  islands
of  Grenada  and  St.  Vincent,  and  raised  the  block-
ade of  Cape  Francais  in  Santo  Domingo.  He  was
promoted  brigadier-general  of  the  naval  forces  in
1763,  brevetted  chef  d'escadre  in  1778,  and  sent
with  a  division  to  operate  on  the  coast  of  North
America.  After  ruining  the  cod-fisheries  of  New-
foundland, he  assisted  in  the  siege  of  Savannah  in
1779,  defeated  Admiral  Drake  in  the  West  Indies
in  1780,  and  fought  till  the  conclusion  of  peace  in
1783,  when  he  was  retired  with  the  rank  of  com-
mander of  the  order  of  Saint  Louis.

TRIMBLE,  Allen,  statesman,  b.  in  Augusta
county,  Va.,  24  Nov.,  1783 ;  d.  in  Hillsborough,
Ohio,  2  Feb.,  1870.  His  father,  Capt.  James,  re-
moved in  1784  to  Lexington,  Ky.,  where  he  died
in  October,  1804.  Allen  then  settled  in  Highland
county,  Ohio,  where  he  was  clerk  of  the  courts  and
recorder  in  1809-'16.  He  commanded  a  mounted
regiment  under  Gen.  William  Henry  Harrison  in
1812— '13,  was  a  state  representative  in  1816,  state
senator  in  1817-'26,  and  speaker  of  the  house  in
1819-'26.  He  was  acting  governor  of  Ohio  in
1821-2,  governor  in  1826-'30,  and  in  1846-'8  was
president  of  the  first  state  board  of  agriculture.
While  he  was  governor  he  did  much  to  extend  and
improve  the  common-school  system,  encouraged
manufacturing  companies,  and  promoted  peniten-
tiary reform. — His  brother,  William  A.,  senator,
b.  in  Woodford,  Ky.,  4  April,  1786;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  13  Dec,  1821,  was  graduated  at
Transylvania  college,  studied  law  with  Judge  Rob-
ert Trimble,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811,  and
began  practice  at  Highland,  Ohio.  He  was  adju-
tant of  his  brother  Allen's  regiment  in  the  cam-
paign against  the  Pottawattamie  Indians  in  1812,
became  major  of  Ohio  volunteers,  7  May,  1812,  and
was  taken  prisoner  at  the  capture  of  Detroit.  He
was  appointed  major  of  the  26th  U.  S.  infantry,
18  March,  1813,  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  17
Sept.,  1814,  for  gallantry  at  the  sortie  at  Fort
Erie,  in  which  he  was  severely  wounded,  and  be-
came lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st  infantry,  30  Nov.,
1814.  Col.  Trimble  was  transferred  to  the  8th  in-
fantry, 17  May,  1815,  and  resigned,  1  March,  1819.
He  was  then  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Ohio,  and
served  from  1819  till  his  death.  He  was  a  com-
missioner with  Gen.  Lewis  Cass  in  1821  to  treat
with  the  northwestern  Indians  at  Green  Bay.

TRIMBLE,  David,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Fred-
erick county,  Va.,  about  1782 ;  d.  in  Trimble's  Fur-
nace, Ky.,  26  Oct.,  1842.  He  was  educated  at  Will-
iam and  Mary  college,  studied  law,  and  removed
to  Kentucky  in  1804.  He  was  engaged  in  the  war
of  1812,  and  served  during  two  campaigns  under
Gen.  William  Henry  Harrison.  In  1817  ho  was
elected  to  congress,  where  he  served  without  inter-
ruption till  1827,  and  was  highly  esteemed  for  his
integrity  and  devotion  to  his  public  duties.  After
retiring  from  congress  he  engaged  in  agriculture
and  iron  manufacture,  and  in  the  latter  industry
did  much  to  develop  the  resources  of  the  state.
— His  nephew,  Isaac  Ridgeway,  soldier,  b.  in
Culpeper  county,  Va..  15  May,  1802 ;  d.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  2  Jan.,  1888,  was  the  son  of  John  Trim-
ble, who  removed  to  Kentucky  in  1805  and  settled
on  the  military  reservation  at.  Fort  Stirling.  His
uncle  David  procured  him  the  appointment  of
cadet  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  en-
tered in  1818,  making  the  entire  journey  on  horse-
back, and  generally  by  night,  to  avoid  being  at-
tacked by  Indians. He  was  graduated  in  1822,


TRIMBLE


TROLLOPE


161


and  detailed  to  survey  the  military  road  from
Washington  to  Ohio  river.  He  also  served  at  Bos-
ton and  New  York.  He  resigned  in  1832,  and
pursued  the  profession  of  civil  engineering.  In
1834  he  became  chief  engineer  of  the  Baltimore
and  Susquehanna  railroad,  which  he  completed  to
York,  Pa.,  in  1837.  He  was  also  chief  engineer  of
the  Philadelphia,  Wilmington,  and  Baltimore  rail-
road, and  of  the  Boston  and  Providence  railroad.

He  was  engaged  in
large  railroad  oper-
ations in  the  West
Indies  when  the
civil  war  began  in
1861,  and  was  on
the  point  of  set-
ting out  from  Cuba
when  he  was  as-
signed to  the  com-
mand of  the  non-
uniformed  volun-
teers that  were  or-
ganized to  defend
Baltimore  from
northern  troops.
_  s^.  ' /9  a He  entered  the  mili-

s~JfS7'Ji '  ,Af„ tary  service  of  the
Cr.aC  Sl^rMJZ, stak  of  Virginia  in

May,  1861.  as  colo-
nel of  engineers,  and  was  ordered  by  Gen.  Robert
E.  Lee  to  take  charge  of  the  construction  of  the
field-works  and  forts  for  the  defence  of  Norfolk.
Upon  their  completion  he  was  promoted  brigadier,
and  ordered  to  report  to  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston
at  Centreville,  who  directed  him  to  locate  and  con-
struct batteries  at  Evansport  on  Potomac  river,  so
as  to  close  that  river  against  U.  S.  vessels.  With
them  he  effectually  blockaded  the  river  during  the
winter  of  1861— '2.  In  November,  1861,  he  was  as-
signed to  the  command  of  the  7th  brigade  of
Ewell's  division,  and  when  Gen.  Ewell  was  ordered
to  report  to  Gen.  Thomas  J.  Jackson  in  May,  1862,
Trimble  took  an  active  part  in  the  campaign  that
ensued  against  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  Gen.  John
0.  Fremont,  and  Gen.  James  Shields.  He  selected
the  Confederate  position  for  the  battle  of  Cross
Keys,  8  June,  1862,  with  the  consent  of  Gen.  Ewell,
who  gives  him  credit  for  it  in  his  report.  He  led
his  brigade  at  the  battle  of  Gaines's  Mills  and  the
subsequent  seven  days'  battles.  At  the  battle  of
Slaughter's  Mountain,  12  Aug.,  1862,  between  the
armies  of  Gen.  John  Pope  and  Gen.  Jackson,  he
did  good  service,  and  on  the  night  of  27  Aug.,
1862,  with  the  21st  North  Carolina  and  21st  Geor-
gia regiments,  he  captured  Manassas  Junction,
with  supplies  of  subsistence,  clothing,  and  ammu-
nition. For  this  Gen.  Jackson  recommended  his
promotion  to  be  major-general.  When  Jackson
was  promoted  to  command  a  corps  he  selected  Gen.
Trimble  to  succeed  him  in  command  of  his  division.
Trimble  was  wounded  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull
Run,  28  Aug.,  1862,  was  appointed  major-general
on  23  April,  1863,  commanded  a  division  of  the  2d
corps  at  Chancellorsville,  and  in  June,  1863,  Gen.
Lee  offered  him  the  command  of  the  valley  district
to  form  the  left  wing  of  the  Army  of  Northern  Vir-
ginia. He  was  in  Gen.  George  E.  Pickett's  charge
on  the  third  day  of  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  where
he  was  wounded  and  captured,  and  lost  a  leg.  He
remained  in  prison  at  Johnson's  island  twenty-one
months,  and  was  exchanged  in  April,  1865.  Hast-
ening to  rejoin  Gen.  Lee,  on  reaching  Lynchburg
he  found  that  Lee  had  surrendered  the  day  before
At  Appomattox.  He  then  returned  to  Baltimore,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.
vol.  vi. — 11


TRIMBLE,  Robert,  jurist,  b.  in  Berkelev  coun-
ty, Va.,  in  1777;  d.  25  Aug.,  1828.  When  three
years  old  his  parents  removed  to  Kentucky.  He
was  largely  self-educated,  taught  for  several  years,
studied  law,  and  was  licensed  to  practise  in  1803.
He  settled  in  Paris,  Ky.,  and  the  same  year  was
elected  to  the  legislature,  but  afterward  would  not
permit  himself  to  be  nominated  for  any  political
office.  Devoting  himself  exclusively  to  his  profes-
sion, he  soon  became  known  as  an  able  jurist.  In
1808  he  was  appointed  second  judge  of  the  court
of  appeals,  and  in  1810  he  was  appointed  chief
justice  of  Kentucky.  He  became  U.  S.  district  at-
torney in  1813,  was  district  judge  of  Kentucky  in
1816-'26,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  appointed  a
justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  which  post  he
filled  till  his  death. — His  brother,  John,  jurist,
b.  in  Clark  county,  Ky.,  in  1783 ;  d.  in  Harrison
county,  Ky.,  17  June,  1852,  received  a  classical
education,  studied  law  with  his  brother  Robert,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  became  a  circuit
judge  of  Kentucky,  and  afterward  a  judge  of  the
court  of  appeals.

TRIPPE,  John,  naval  officer,  d.  at  sea,  off  Ha-
vana, 9  July,  1810.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  sail-
ing-master, 6  May,  1803,  and  sailed  in  the  brig
"  Vixen  "  to  join  Preble's  squadron  off  Tripoli.  In
August,  1804,  he  was  appointed  acting  lieutenant
and  placed  in  command  of  gun-boat  No.  6.  In  the
attack  on  the  Tripolitan  fleet  he  boarded  one  of
the  largest  of  the  enemy's  vessels,  and  had  a  hand-
to-hand  conflict  with  her  commander,  while  he  was
armed  with  only  a  short  pike.  He  received  nine
sabre-cuts  across  the  head,  but  thrust  his  pike
through  his  adversary,  whereupon  the  Tripolitan
crew  surrendered.  He  also  distinguished  himself
subsequently  during  the  Tripolitan  war,  and  re-
ceived a  vote  of  thanks  and  a  sword  from  congress.
He  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  9  Jan.,  1807,  and
in  1809  was  lieutenant-commandant  in  command
of  the  schooner  "  Enterprise,"  on  which  he  died.

TRIST,  Nicholas  Philip,  lawyer,  b.  in  Char-
lottesville, Va.,  2  June,  1800;  d.  in  Alexandria,
Va.,  11  Feb.,  1874.  He  was  educated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  and  was  assistant  professor  of
French  there  in  1818— '19,  but  resigned  before  he  was
graduated,  adopting  the  profession  of  law,  which
he  studied  under  Thomas  Jefferson.  He  was  1st
clerk  in  the  U.  S.  treasury  department  in  1828,

Erivate  secretary  to  President  Jackson  in  1829,  and
r.  S.  consul  at  Havana  in  1834-6.  He  became
assistant  secretary  of  state  in  1845,  and  in  1848  was
sent  as  peace  commissioner  to  Mexico,  where  he  ne-
gotiated and  signed  the  treaty  of  Guadalupe  Hi-
dalgo. He  then  resumed  the  practice  of  his  pro-
fession. In  1870  President  Grant  appointed  him
postmaster  at  Alexandria.  Va.  Mr.  Trist  trans-
lated a  treatise  on  "  Milch  Cows  "  from  the  French
of  M.  F.  Guenon  (New  York,  1857).

TROLLOPE,  Frances  Milton,  author,  b.  in
Heckfield,  Hampshire,  England,  about  1780;  d.  in
Florence,  Italy,  6  Oct.,  1863.  She  was  the  daughter
of  Rev.  William  Milton,  and  in  1809  married  An-
thony Trollope,  a  barrister  at  law.  The  union
proved  unhappy,  and  in  1829  she  came  to  this  coun-
try and  endeavored  to  establish  herself  in  business
in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  Failing  in  this  enterprise,
she  returned  to  England  in  1831,  and  published
"  Domestic  Manners  of  the  Americans,"  in  which
rude  and  ludicrous  phases  of  American  character
and  habits  were  depicted  in  a  broad  but  witty  cari-
cature (2  vols.,  London,  1832).  She  subsequently
led  a  career  of  great  literary  activity,  travelled  ex-
tensively on  the  continent,  and  became  among  the
most  voluminous  of  English  female  writers. Her


162


TROLLOPE


TROUBAT


first  book  was  followed  by  a  novel  entitled  "  The
Refugee  in  America  "  (1832),  and  "  The  Adventures
of  Jonathan  Jefferson  Whitlaw"  (1836),  both  il-
lustrative of  the  vulgar  side  of  American  manners
and  character.  Her  other  writings  include  numer-
ous novels,  and  "  Belgium  and  Western  Germany  "
(2  vols.,  London,  1834) ;  "  A  Visit  to  Italy  "  (2  vols.,
1842) ;  and  "  Travels  and  Travellers  "  (1846).— Her
son,  Thomas  Adolphus,  is  a  voluminous  author,
and  was  for  many  years  Italian  correspondent  of  the
New  York  "Tribune." — Another  son,  Anthonv,
(1815-1882),  was  connected  with  the  British  postal
service  in  1834-'67,  and  was  sent  by  the  govern-
ment several  times  to  this  country  to  compare  the
English  system  with  that  in  the  United  States.  He
is  best  known  by  his  numerous  novels.  He  also
published  a  book  of  travels  in  this  country,  entitled
"  North  America "  (London,  1862),  and  his  auto-
biographv  appeared  soon  after  his  death  (1883).

TROLLOPE,  Sir  Henry,  British  naval  officer,
b.  in  Norwich,  England,  in  1756 ;  d.  in  Freshford,
near  Bath,  England,  2  Nov.,  1839.  He  entered  the
navy  in  1770,  participated  in  the  battles  of  Lex-
ington and  Bunker  Hill,  and  afterward  in  the  siege
of  Boston,  was  with  Lord  Dunmore  in  Virginia,
and  assisted  at  the  taking  of  Rhode  Island.  He
became  3d  lieutenant  of  the  "  Bristol  "  in  1777,  as-
sisted at  the  attack  on  Port  Montgomery  and  Fort
Clinton,  and  subsequently  served  at  Philadelphia
and  Mud  island.  He  became  a  post-captain  in
1781,  and  was  knighted  for  his  participation  in  the
victory  of  Camperdown.  He  became  full  admiral
in  1812,  and  was  a  knight  commander  of  the  Bath.

TROOST,  Gerard,  mineralogist,  b.  in  Bois  Le
Due,  Holland,  15  March,  1776 ;  d.  in  Nashville,
Tenn.,  14  Aug.,  1850.  He  was  educated  at  the
universities  of  Leyden  and  Amsterdam,  where  he
devoted  special  attention  to  chemistry,  geology,
and  natural  history.  In  1801  he  received  the  degree
of  master  in  pharmacy  from  the  latter  university.
For  a  time  he  practised  his  art  at  the  Hague  and
elsewhere,  but  soon  went  to  Paris,  where  he  became
the  pupil  of  the  Abbe  Haiiy.  In  1809  he  was  ap-
pointed by  Louis  Bonaparte,  then  king  of  Holland,
scientific  attache  of  a  naval  expedition  to  Java,
but  he  was  captured  by  an  English  privateer,  and,
after  confinement  in  Dunkirk,  returned  to  Paris.
He  then  made  his  way  on  an  American  sailing
vessel  from  La  Rochelle  to  Philadelphia,  hoping
thence  to  reach  Java.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in  the
United  States,  Louis  Bonaparte  relinquished  the
throne,  and  Java  was  surrendered  to  the  English.
In  consequence  he  determined  to  remain  in  Phila-
delphia, where,  in  1812,  he  assisted  in  founding  the
Academy  of  natural  sciences,  and  was  its  president
in  1812-'17.  The  first  works  in  the  United  States
for  the  manufacture  of  alum  were  organized  by  him
in  1814  at  Cape  Sable,  Md. ;  but  the  enterprise  was
unsuccessful.  He  returned  to  Philadelphia,  and  in
1821  was  appointed  professor  of  mineralogy  in  the
Philadelphia  museum.  He  delivered  public  lec-
tures on  that  branch  and  on  chemistry  at  the
Philadelphia  college  of  pharmacy,  also  making
geological  excursions  into  New  Jersey,  New  York,
and  elsewhere.  In  1825  he  removed  to  New  Har-
mony, Ind.,  with  Robert  Owen  and  others,  but,  be-
coming dissatisfied,  settled  in  Nashville  in  1827.
He  was  appointed  professor  of  chemistry,  geology,
and  mineralogy  in  the  University  of  Nashville  in
1828,  which  chair  he  held  until  his  death,  and  in
1831  he  was  made  state  geologist,  an  office  he
filled  until  1849.  Prof.  Troost  gathered  an  exten-
sive collection  of  minerals,  including  about  15,000
specimens,  as  well  as  more  than  5,000  geological
specimens  and  various  other  articles,  constituting


a  cabinet  that  at  that  time  was  considered  the
finest  in  the  possession  of  a  single  individual  in
the  United  States.  He  was  a  member  of  many  sci-
entific and  philosophical  societies  in  the  United
States  and  Europe,  and  translated  into  Dutch
Alexander  von  Humboldt's  "  Aspects  of  Nature.""
Besides  numerous  contributions  to  the  transactions
of  learned  societies,  he  published  a  "Geological
Survey  of  the  Environs  of  Philadelphia"  (Phila-
delphia, 1826),  and  nine  "  Annual  Geological  Re-
ports of  Tennessee  "  (Nashville,  1835-'48).

TROTT,  Nicholas,  jurist,  b.  in  England  in
1663 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.t  in  1740.  After  a
residence  in  the  Bahamas,  of  which  he  was  gover-
nor, he  emigrated  to  South  Carolina  about  1690,
settling  in  Charleston.  He  became  speaker  of  the
assembly  in  1700,  was  a  councillor  in  1703,  and
subsequently  a  judge.  He  was  deeply  versed  in
the  Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew  languages  and  in
the  principles  of  jurisprudence,  and  during  nearly
forty  years  was  among  the  chief  men  in  the  prov-
ince. He  revised  and  published  "  Laws  of  South
Carolina  before  1734"  (2  vols.,  Charleston,  1736),
and  is  the  author  of  "  Clavis  Linguae  Sanctae
(1719),  and  "  Laws  relating  to  the  Church  and  the
Clergy  in  America  "  (London,  1721).

TROTTER,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1779 ;  d.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  13  Oct.,  1815.  His  fa-
ther, Lieut.-Col.  James  Trotter,  was  a  soldier  in
the  Revolution.  The  son  entered  the  army  in  1812,
at  the  beginning  of  the  second  war  with  Great
Britain,  as  a  captain  in  a  volunteer  company  of
dragoons,  was  wounded  in  action  with  the  Indians
under  Col.  John  B.  Campbell  on  18  Dec.  of  that
year,  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  Kentucky  vol-
unteers in  1813,  and  led  a  brigade  from  his  state,
with  rank  of  brigadier-general,  at  the  battle  of  the
Thames,  5  Oct.,  1813.

TROTTER,  James  Fisher,  jurist,  b.  in  Bruns-
wick county,  Va.,  5  Nov.,  1802 :  d.  in  Holly  Springs,
Miss.,  9  March,  1866.  He  emigrated  with  his  par-
ents to  eastern  Tennessee  at  an  early  age,  received
a  careful  education,  and  in  1820  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  He  settled  in  Hamilton,  Monroe  co.,  Miss.,
in  1823,  and  soon  established  a  reputation  as  8*301*^^^
stitutional  lawyer.  After  serving  several  terms  in^
the  legislature,  he  was  chosen,  in  1837,  a  judge
the  circuit  court  of  his  district,  and  in  1838  suc-<
ceeded  Judge  John  Black  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  hav-
ing been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  After  serving
from  February  to  December  of  that  year,  he  re-
signed to  accept  a  seat  in  the  court  of  appeals  of
Mississippi,  which  he  held  till  1840.  He  then  re-
sumed his  profession,  and  was  vice-chancellor  of
the  northern  district  of  the  state  in  1855-'7,  and
professor  of  law  in  the  University  of  Mississippi  in
1860-'2.  He  ardently  supported  the  southern
cause  during  the  civil  war,  but  subsequently  did
much  to  promote  peaceable  submission  to  the  U.  S.
authorities. He  became  a  circuit  judge  in  1866.

TROTTER,  Newbold  Hough,  artist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  Jan.,  1827.  He  studied  art  in
his  native  city  during  1853-'5,  and  has  devoted
himself  principally  to  painting  pictures  of  animal
life.  Mr.  Trotter  is  a  member  of  the  Academy  of
fine  arts,  and  of  various  art  societies  in  Philadel-
phia. His  more  important  works  of  this  class
include  "  They  knew  not  the  Voice  of  Strangers,"
"  They  only  knew  the  Voice  of  Strangers,"  "  The
Range  of  the  Bison,"  "After  the  Combat."
"  Grizzly  Bears,"  "  The  Last  Stand,"  "  El-Mahdi,"
and  "  In  the  Soudan."

TROUBAT,  Francis  Joseph,  lawyer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1802 ;  d.  near  Paris,  France,  8
Oct.,  1868. He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of


TROUDE


TROW


163


Pennsylvania  in  1820,  adopted  the  profession  of
law,  and  practised  in  his  native  city.  He  published,
with  William  H.  Haley,  "  Practice  in  Civil  Actions
and  Proceedings  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Penn-
sylvania "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1825-9) ;  " Trea-
tise on  the  Law  of  Limited  Partnership  in  the
United  States"  (1853);  and  "Treatise  on  the  Law
of  Partnership  "  (London,  1867).  He  edited  "  Eng-
lish Exchequer  Reports"  (6  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1835);  "Chitty  on  Contracts"  (1835);  and.  with
Ellis  Lewis  and  William  McCandless,  "  The  New
Law  Library"  (15  vols.,  Harrisburg,  1845-'9).

TROUDE,  Aimable  Gilles  (trood),  French
naval  officer,  b.  in  Cherbourg,  France,  1  June,
1762 ;  died  there,  1  Feb.,  1824.  He  took  part  in
two  expeditions  to  Martinique  in  1777,  afterward
served  under  D'Estaing  at  Newport  and  Boston,
and  was  present  in  all  the  naval  engagements  un-
der Guichen  and  De  Grasse.  After  the  peace  of
1783  he  entered  the  mercantile  marine,  but  re-
turned to  the  service  of  the  state  in  1792.  He  was
appointed  commander  of  the  "  Bergere  "  in  1795,
and  fought  several  battles  on  the  coast  of  Cayenne,
Brazil,  and  Guadeloupe.  He  took  command  of  the
"  Suff ren  "  in  1805,  and  assisted  in  the  capture  of
Dominica.  In  1809  he  commanded  a  squadron  in-
tended to  carry  troops  and  military  stores  to  the
West  Indies,  but,  having  been  informed  that
Guadeloupe  was  blockaded  by  the  English,  he
anchored  at  one  of  the  Saintes  islands,  where  he
was  discovered  and  blockaded  by  an  English  fleet.
After  some  days  he  succeeded  in  forcing  a  passage,
and,  having  eluded  the  English  cruisers,  gained
the  French  coast.  '  He  was  made  rear-admiral  in
1811,  and  was  retired  in  1816.

TROUP,  George  Mcintosh,  senator,  b.  at  Mc-
intosh Bluff,  on  Tombigbee  river,  Ga.,  8  Sept.,
1780;  d.  in  Laurens  county,  Ga.,  3  May,  1856.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1797,  adopted  the
profession  of  law,  and  in  1803-'4  served  in  the
legislature.  He  was  chosen  to  congress  in  1806  as
a  Jeffersonian  Democrat,  held  his  seat  by  re-elec-
tion till  1815,  and  was  an  active  supporter  of  the
administrations  of  President  Jefferson  and  Presi-
dent Madison.  He  ardently  opposed  the  compro-
mise that  was  made  by  the  Federalists  with  the
Yazoo  speculators,  and  sustained  the  war  measures
against  Great  Britain  in  1812.  He  became  U.  S.
senator  in  1816,  having  been  elected  to  fill  the  va-
cancy caused  by  the  resignation  of  William  W.
Bibb,  served  two  years,  and  in  1823  became  gov-
ernor of  Georgia.  The  legislature  of  that  year  re-
quired the  executive  to  "  use  his  exertions  to  obtain
from  the  United  States  the  extinguishment  of  the
Indian  title  to  all  their  remaining  territory  in
Georgia."  Gov.  Troup  accordingly  opened  a  cor-
respondence with  the  secretary  of  war  that  resulted
in  the  appointment  of  a  commission  that  con-
cluded a  treaty  with  the  Indians  by  which,  in  con-
sideration of  the  payment  of  $27,491,  the  Creeks
ceded  to  the  state  all  their  lands.  During  Gov.
Troup's  administration,  Lafayette  visited  Georgia,
and  was  entertained  by  him  with  great  hospitality
in  the  executive  mansion.  Troup  was  returned  to
the  U.  S.  senate  in  1828,  but  retired  before  the  ex-
piration of  his  term,  on  account  of  the  failure  of
his  health.  He  was  an  able  advocate  of  state  sov-
ereignty, and,  under  the  conviction  that  popular
rights  were  imperilled,  declared  in  1833  "  that  he
would  have  been  carried  from  his  death-bed  to  the
capital  rather  than  not  have  given  his  vote  against
the  force  bill."  See  his  "  Life,"  by  Edward  J.  Har-
den (Savannah,  Ga.,  1859).

TROUP,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1757;  d.  there,  14  Jan.,  1832. He  was  gradu-


ated at  Columbia  in  1774,  studied  law  under  John
Jay,  and  early  in  1776  joined  the  Revolutionary
army  on  Long  Island  as  a  lieutenant.  He  became
aide  to  Gen.  Nathaniel  Woodhull  shortly  after-
ward, was  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Long
Island,  and  confined  for  some  time  in  the  "  Jersey  "
prison-ship,  but  in  the  spring  of  1777  was  ex-
changed and  joined  the  army  in  New  Jersey.  He
became  aide  to  Gen.  Horatio  Gates  in  August,  and
participated  in  the  battle  of  Stillwater,  and  the
surrender  of  Gen.  Burgoyne,  17  Oct.,  1777.  In
February,  1778,  he  was  appointed  by  congress  sec-
retary of  the  board  of  war.  On  its  dissolution  in
1779  he  went  to  New  Jersey  and  completed  his  law
studies  with  Judge  William  Patterson.  After  the
peace  he  became  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court
of  New  York,  held  office  for  several  years,  and  was
a  member  of  the  assembly.  He  was  the  warm  per-
sonal friend  of  Alexander  Hamilton,  and  support-
ed him  in  politics.  During  his  latter  years  he  re-
sided in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  as  principal  agent  of  the
great  Pulteney  estate.  He  published  several  pam-
phlets, including  "  Vindication  of  the  Claim  of
Elkanah  Watson  "  (New  York,  1821),  and  "  Letter
on  the  Lake-Canal  Policy  of  New  York  "  (1822).

TROUSDALE,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Sumner
county,  Tenn.,  in  1790 ;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  in
March,  1872.  He  served  as  private  and  subse-
quently as  lieutenant  in  the  Creek  war  under  Gen.
Andrew  Jackson,  participating  in  the  battles  of
Tallahatchie  and  Talladega.  During  the  latter
part  of  the  second  war  with  Great  Britain  he  took

Sart  in  the  capture  of  Pensacola  and  the  battle  of
Tew  Orleans.  In  1836  he  served  in  the  Seminole
difficulties  as  major-general  of  militia.  During
the  war  with  Mexico  he  was  a  colonel  of  infantry,
and  engaged  in  all  the  battles  in  .the  valley  of
Mexico,  being  wounded  at  Molino  del  Rev,  and
again  in  the  attack  on  Chapultepec.  In  1849-51
he  was  governor  of  Tennessee,  and  in  1853-'7  he
was  U.  S.  minister  to  Brazil.  After  that  service
he  did  not , again  enter  public  life.

TROUVE,  Claude,  French  clergyman,  b.  in  the
diocese  of  Tours,  France,  in  1642 ;  d.  probably  in
Canada  about  the  close  of  the  17th  century.  He
was  educated  by  the  Sulpitians  in  Paris,  was  or-
dained a  subdeacon,  and  sent  with  Francois  Salig-
nac  de  la  Motte  Fenelon,  the  brother  of  the  illus-
trious archbishop  of  Cambrai,  to  Canada  in  June,
1667.  He  was  ordained  a  priest  soon  after  his
arrival.  He  was  then  appointed  to  take  charge  of
an  Iroquois  mission  at  the  western  extremity  of
Lake  Ontario.  He  reached  the  village  of  Kente
on  28  Oct.,  1668,  and  began  his  labors.  He  was
joined  by  other  missionaries  the  following  year,
and,  with  their  aid,  established  missions  at  the
villages  of  Gandaseteiagon  and  Ganeraske.  He  was
at  Port  Royal  in  1690,  when  that  town  was  taken
by  Sir  William  Phipps,  and  was  brought  as  a
prisoner  to  Boston,  contrary  to  the  terms  of  the
capitulation.  He  was  exchanged  toward  the  end
of  the  year,  and  returned  to  Canada,  where  he  con-
tinued his  missionary  labors.

TROW,  James  (tro),  Canadian  member  of  par-
liament, b.  in  Newtown,  Montgomeryshire,  Wales,
16  Dec,  1827.  He  was  educated  at  Welchpool,
came  to  Canada  in  1841,  taught  for  seven  years,
and  has  been  warden  of  the  countv  of  Perth  for
twenty  years.  He  represented  South  Perth  in  the
legislative  assembly  in  1867-71,  was  elected  to  the
Dominion  parliament  in  1872,  and  re-elected  in
1874,  1878,  1882,  and  1887.  He  is  a  banker,  con-
nected with  various  financial  institutions,  and  is
one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Liberals  in  parliament.
He  wrote  letters  relative  to  the  Franco-Prussian


164


TROW


TROWBRIDGE


war,  which  were  copied  extensively  in  the  Cana-
dian press,  and  his  contributions  concerning  the
northwest  territories  were  published  in  pamphlet-
form,  to  the  number  of  80,000  copies,  by  the  Do-
minion government,  although  it  was  then  under
the  control  of  his  political  opponents.

TROW,  John  Fowler,  printer,  b.  in  Andover,
Mass.,  29  Jan..  1810 ;  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,  8  Aug.,
1886.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer  in  his  native
town  for  seven  years,  and,  on  attaining  his  majori-
ty, established  the  Nashua,  N.  H.,  "Herald,"  which
was  unsuccessful.  He  settled  in  New  York  city  in
1833,  formed  a  partnership  in  the  printing  business
with  John  F.  West,  became  sole  owner  of  the  es-
tablishment in  1836,  and  in  1842  admitted  Jona-
than Leavitt  into  the  firm,  but  returned  to  the
conduct  of  the  business  alone  about  1848.  He  was
one  of  the  first  to  introduce  electrotyping  into
the  printing  business,  and  adopted  many  inven-
tions to  facilitate  type-setting  and  the  manufac-
ture of  books.  For  many  years  he  was  active
in  the  publication  of  directories,  was  interested  in
the  "  Wilson  Business  Directory  "  in  1849,  and  in
1852  began  to  issue  "  Trow's  New  York  City  Direc-
tory," which  has  since  appeared  yearly.  In  1865
he  issued  the  "  United  States  Business  Directory,"
an  undertaking  of  greater  magnitude  than  had
ever  before  been  attempted  in  this  country.  In
1855  he  published  a  specimen-book  of  the  typo-
graphic art,  for  which  the  University  of  New  York
conferred  on  him  the  title  of  University  printer.

TROWBRIDGE,  Edmund,  lawyer,  b.  in  New-
ton, Mass.,  in  1709  ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  2
April,  1792.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1728,  and  for  some  time  bore  the  name  of  Goff,
after  an  uncle.  "  This  Goff,"  wrote  John  Adams
in  1759,  "had  been  attorney  -  general  for  twenty
years,  and  commanded  the  practice  in  Middlesex
and  Worcester  and  several  other  counties.  He
had  power  to  crush,  by  his  frown  or  his  nod,  any
young  lawyer  in  his  country."  He  became  attorney-
general  of  Massachusetts  in  1749,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  council  several  years,  but  lost  favor  with
the  popular  party  in  1766,  on  account  of  his  luke-
warmness  in  resisting  British  aggressions.  He  was
elevated  to  the  supreme  bench  of  Massachusetts  the
next  year,  and,  notwithstanding  his  loyalist  princi-

Eles,  is  declared  by  all  his  contemporaries  to  have
een  the  most  profound  lawyer  in  New  England
prior  to  the  Revolution,  and  an  honorable  and  up-
right judge.  In  the  trial  of  Cant.  Thomas  Preston
and  other  British  soldiers  for  firing  on  the  people
in  State  street,  Boston,  5  March,  1770,  his  fairness
and  ability  commanded  universal  praise.  But,  al-
though he  was  attached  to  the  royal  government,
he  did  not  approve  of  all  its  measures,  and  in  1772,
alarmed  at  the  aspect  of  affairs,  he  resigned  his
office  and  retired  to  private  life.  As  an  executor
of  John  Alfred,  a  wealthy  merchant  of  Boston,  he
had  the  power  of  determining  to  what  the  latter's
bounty  should  be  applied,  and  founded  in  Harvard
the  Alfred  professorship  of  natural  religion,  moral
philosophy,  and  civil  polity.  He  was  the  last  of
the  judges  of  the  supreme  court  of  Massachusetts
that  wore  the  scarlet  robe  and  powdered  wig.

TROWBRIDGE,  John,  physicist,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  5  Aug.,  1843.  He  was  prepared  for
Harvard  at  the  Boston  Latin  -  school,  but  was
graduated  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of
that  university  in  1866.  After  graduation  he  was
made  a  tutor,  and  he  continued  so  until  1869,  when
he  was  called  to  the  assistant  professorship  of
physics  in  Massachusetts  institute  of  technology.
In  1870  he  returned  to  Harvard  to  establish  a
laboratory  course  of  instruction  in  physics,  out  of


which  has  grown  the  Jefferson  physical  laboratory,
which  is  now  the  largest  of  its  kind  in  the  United
States.  In  order  to  secure  this  great  means  for
advancing  the  study  of  physical  science,  Prof.
Trowbridge  did  much  in  the  way  of  personal  so-
licitation, and  also  by  publishing,  both  in  journals
and  as  pamphlets,  papers  upon  the  necessity  of  a
well  -  equipped  physical  laboratory.  His  original
investigations  gained  for  him  in  1873  the  degree
of  S.  D.  from  Harvard,  and  in  1880  he  was  made
professor  of  experimental  physics.  In  1888  he
was  advanced  to  the  Rumford  professorship  of
the  application  of  science  to  the  useful  arts,  which
chair  he  still  (1888)  holds.  His  scientific  work  has
consisted  largely  of  original  investigations  con-
ducted under  his  direction  and  issued  as  "  Contri-
butions from  the  Physical  Laboratory  of  Harvard
College."  His  independent  researches  include
papers  on  "  Animal  Electricity  "  (1872),  in  which  he
showed  that  the  existence  of  the  so-called  muscu-
lar electric  current  had  not  been  proved,  although
generally  accepted  at  that  time.  He  has  devised
among  other  instruments  "  A  New  Form  of  Gal-
vanometer "  (1871)  ;  "  A  New  Induction  Coil "
(1875) ;  and  "  A  New  Form  of  Mirror  Galvanome-
ter "  (1876).  His  later  papers  have  had  much  to
do  with  electricity,  and  among  his  memoirs  on
this  subject  is  "  On  Telegraphing  without  a  Cable  "
(1884)  and  "  Niagara  Falls  considered  as  a  Source  of
Electricity  "  (1885).  During  1887-'8  he  instituted
experiments  that  have  proved  the  presence  of  car-
bon and  platinum  in  the  sun,  and  also  a  series
which  indicate  the  absence  of  oxygen-lines  from
the  solar  spectrum.  Prof.  Trowbridge,  in  addition
to  membership  in  many  societies,  was  secretary  of
the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in
1879-84,  and  in  the  latter  year  presided  over  the
physical  section  of  the  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  science.  Then  he  delivered
a  vice-presidential  address,  on  "  What  is  Elec-
tricity 1 "  which  was  very  rich  in  suggestions  con-
cerning the  possibilities  of  that  science.  He  was  a
member  of  the  International  congress  of  electri-
cians that  met  in  Paris  in  1883,  and  was  a  delegate
to  the  U.  S.  congress  of  electricians  that  convened
in  Philadelphia  in  October,  1884.  In  1878  he  was
chosen  to  membership  in  the  National  academy  of
sciences.  Prof.  Trowbridge  was  one  of  the  editors
of  the  "  Annals  of  Scientific  Discovery  for  1869  "
(Boston,  1870),  and  since  1879  has  been  an  asso-
ciate editor  of  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"
with  charge  of  the  notices  on  physics.  His  scien-
tific papers  exceed  fifty  in  number,  and  he  has
published  "  The  New  Physics  "  (New  York,  1884).
TROWBRIDGE,  John  Townsend,  author,  b.
in  Ogden,  N.  Y.,  18  Sept.,  1827.  He  was  educated
in  the  common  schools,  learned  the  elements  of
Latin,  Greek,  and  French  without  a  master,  and,
after  teaching  and  working  on  a  farm  for  one  year
in  Illinois,  settled  in  New  York  city,  where  he  wrote
for  the  journals  and  magazines.  He  removed  to
Boston  about  1848,  and  in  1850,  during  the  absence
of  Ben.  Perley  Poore  in  Washington,  D.  C,  edited
his  paper,  the  "  Sentinel,"  but  wrote  for  it  an  edi-
torial on  the  fugitive  -  slave  law  that  nearly  de-
stroyed the  popularity  of  the  paper.  He  has  since
been  connected  with  many  magazines  and  news-
papers, has.  led  an  active  literary  life,  and  was  man-
aging editor  of  "Our  Young  Folks"  in  1870- '3.
He  was  one  of  the  original  contributors  to  the
"  Atlantic  Monthly  " ;  and  the  "  Vagabonds,"  "  At
Sea,"  and  the  "  Pewee  "  among  his  poems,  and  the
popular  short  story  "  Coupon-Bonds,"  appeared  in
that  magazine.  John  Burroughs  says  of  him:
"  He  knows  the  heart  of  a  bov  and  the  heart  of  a


TROWBRIDGE


TRUE


165


man,  and  has  laid  them  both  open  in  his  books.
His '  Neighbor  Jackwood '  is  the  pioneer  of  novels  of
real  life  in  New  England,  and  the  '  Vagabonds '  is
the  first  specimen,  and  one  of  the  best,  of  what  has
come  to  be  known  as  the  Bret  Harte  school  of
poetry."  Mr.  Trowbridge  has  published  numerous
books  of  adventure,  travel,  and  fiction,  and  his
writings  include  "  Father  Brighthopes,  or  an  Old
Clergyman's  Vacation  "  (Boston,  1853) ;  "  Burrcliff  "
(1853) ;  "  Hearts  and  Faces  "  (1853) ;  "  Home  Life
Unveiled  "  (1853) ;  "  Martin  Merrivale,  his  X-Mark  "
(1854) ;  "  Ironthorpe  "  (1855) ;  "Neighbor  Jackwood,
a  Novel  of  New  England  Life  "  (1857) ;  "  The  Old
Battle-Oround "  (1859) ;  "  The  Vagabonds,  and
other  Poems  "  (1869) ;  "  The  Drummer-Bov  "  (1863) ;
"  Cudjo's  Cave  "  (1864) ;  "  The  Three  Scouts  "  (1865) ;
"Lucy  Arlyn"  (1866);  "The  South,  a  Tour  of  its
Battle-Fieldsand  Ruined  Cities"  (Hartford,  1866);
"Neighbors'  Wives"  (Boston,  1867);  "The  Story
of  Columbus  "  (1867) ;  "  Coupon  Bonds,  and  other
Stories"  (1871);  "The  Jack  Hazard  Series"  (5
vols.,  1871-5) ;  " The  Emigrant's  Story,  and  other
Poems"  (1875);  "The  Silver  Medal  Series"  (6
vols.,  1877-'82) ;  "  The  Book  of  Gold,  and  other
Poems"  (New  York,  1878);  "A  Home  Idyl,  and
other  Poems  "  (1881) ;  and  "  The  Tide-Mill  Series  "
(6  vols.,  Boston,  1882-'7).

TROWBRIDGE,  William  Petit,  engineer,  b.
in  Oakland  county,  Mich.,  25  May,  1828.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1848
at  the  head  of  his  class,  and  promoted  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  corps  of  engineers.  During  the
last  year  of  his  course  he  acted  as  assistant  pro-
fessor of  chemistry,  and  after  graduation  he  spent
two  years  in  the  astronomical  observatory  at
West  Point,  preparing  himself  for  duty  in  the
U.  S.  coast  survey,  to  which  he  was  ordered  at
his  own  request.  In  1852  he  was  assigned  to
duty  under  Alexander  D.  Bache  in  the  primary
triangulation  of  the  coast  of  Maine,  which  in  1852
was  placed  under  his  immediate  charge.  Later
he  executed  surveys  of  Appomattox  river,  in  Vir-
ginia, with  a  view  to  the  improvement  of  its  navi-
gation, and  also  similar  surveys  of  James  river
near  Richmond.  He  also  surveyed  the  Dutch  gap,
and  recommended  the  "  cut-off, '  or  canal,  that  was
subsequently  constructed.  In  1853  he  was  sent  to
the  Pacific  coast,  where  he  conducted  a  series  of
tidal  and  magnetic  observations  extending  through
a  period  of  three  years  along  the  coast  from  San
Diego  to  Puget  sound.  He  became  1st  lieutenant,
18  Dec,  1854,  returned  from  the  west  in  1856,  and
resigned  from  the  corps  of  engineers  on  1  Dec.  to
accept  the  professorship  of  mathematics  in  the
University  of  Michigan,  which  chair  he  held  for  a
year.  At  the  solicitation  of  Supt.  Alexander  D.
Bache  he  accepted  the  permanent  appointment  of
assistant  on  the  coast  survey,  and  was  engaged  in
preparing  for  publication  the  results  of  the  Gulf
stream  exploration.  In  1860  he  was  sent  to  Key
West  to  superintend  the  erection  of  a  permanent
self-registering  magnetic  observatory,  and  in  1861
he  prepared  minute  descriptions  of  the  harbors,
inlets,  and  rivers  of  the  southern  coast,  for  the  use
of  the  navy.  Later  he  was  ordered  to  execute  a
hydrographic  survey  of  Narragansett  bay,  where
there  was  a  design  to  erect  a  navy-yard,  but  the
results  of the  survey  were  not  favorable  to  the

Eroject.  Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
e  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  engineer  office  in
New  York  city,  where  his  duties  included  the
supply  of  materials  for  fortifications  and  other
defences,  and  the  construction  and  shipping  of
engineer  equipage  for  armies  in  the  field.  He  also
was  superintending  engineer  of  the  constructing  of


the  fort  at  Willett's  point,  N.  Y.,  of  repairs  of
Fort  Schuyler,  N.  Y„  and  in  charge  of  works  on
Governor's  island  in  New  York  harbor.  In  1865
he  became  vice-president  of  the  Novelty  iron-works
in  New  York  city,  with  direction  of  their  shops,
where  he  remained  for  four  years.  He  was  then
elected  professor  of  dynamical  engineering  in  the
Sheffield  scientific  school  of  Yale  until  1876,  when
he  was  called  to  take  charge  of  the  engineering
department  of  the  School  of  mines  of  Columbia,
which  place  he  now  holds.  Prof.  Trowbridge  held
various  state  offices  while  he  was  in  New  Haven,
notably  that  of  adjutant-general  with  the  rank  of
brigadier-general  on  the  governor's  staff  in  1872-'6.
The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Rochester  in  1856  and  by  Yale  in  1870,  that  of
Ph.  D.  by  Princeton  in  1879,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
by  Trinity  in  1880,  and  the  University  of  Michi-
gan in  1887.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific  socie-
ties, and  vice-president  of  the  New  York  academy
of  sciences,  was  vice-president  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  presid-
ing over  the  section  of  mechanical  science  in  1882,
and  in  1878  was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of
sciences.  In  addition  to  many  papers  in  scientific
journals  and  the  transactions  of  societies  of  which
he  is  a  member,  he  has  published  "  Proposed  Plan
for  building  a  Bridge  across  the  East  River  at  Black-
well's  Island  "  (New  York.  1869) ;  "  Heat  as  a  Source
of  Power"  (1874);  and  "Turbine  Wheels"  (1879).

TROYES,  Pierre  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in
France ;  d.  at  Niagara  in  1687.  He  had  seen  much
service  both  in  France  and  Canada,  and  commanded
a  troop  of  eighty  men  in  the  Hudson  bay  expedi-
tion of  1686.  He  arrived  at  the  head  of  Hudson
bay  on  20  June,  and  at  once  laid  siege  to  Monsipi
fort,  on  the  Monsoni  river,  which  he  finally  carried
by  assault.  He  held  a  command  of  regulars  in
Denonville's  campaign  of  1687.  He  was  sent  the
same  year  to  take  charge,  with  100  men,  of  a  fort
which  had  been  erected  at  Niagara.  But  sickness
attacked  the  garrison,  which,  with  its  commander,
perished  in  a  short  time,  according  to  Charlevoix
in  his  "  Histoire  de  la  Nouvelle  France."  La  Hon-
tan  in  his  "  Nouveaux  voyages  "  (The  Hague,  1703)
says  that  some  escaped.  See  also  "Histoire  de
l'Amerique  Septentrionale,"  by  De  la  Potherie.

TRUDEL,  Francois-Xavier  Anselme,  Cana-
dian journalist,  b.  in  Sainte  Anne  de  la  Parade,
Quebec,  29  April,  1838.  He  was  educated  at  Nico-
let  college,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1861,  and  appointed  queen's  counsel  in  1880.  He
was  editor  of  "  La  Minerve  "  in  Montreal  in  1860,
founded  "  L'Etendard,"  a  French  daily,  of  which
he  is  part-proprietor  and  editor,  and  is  also  editor
of  "  La  Revue  Canadienne "  and  "  L'Ouvrier."
He  represented  Champlain  in  the  Quebec  assembly
in  1871-3,  and  became  a  member  of  the  Dominion
parliament,  31  Oct.,  1873.  He  was  one  of  the  au-
thors of  the  "  Programme  Catholique  "  (1871),  and
wrote  several  political  pamphlets.  He  has  been
for  several  vears  president  of  the  "  Cercle  literaire  "
and  the  "  Union  Catholique  "  of  Montreal.

TRUE,  Charles  Kittridge,  educator,  b.  in  Port-
land, Me.,  14  Aug.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  20
June,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1832.  and  was  subsequently  pastor  of  various  Meth-
odist churches,  and  principal  of  the  Amenia  semi-
nary, N.  Y.  He  was  professor  of  moral  and  intel-
lectual philosophy  at  Wesleyan  in  1849-60.  Har-
vard gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1849.  He
edited  the  "  Oregonian  and  Indian  Advocate  "  in
1839,  in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  was  the  author  of  "  Ele-
ments of  Logic  "  (Boston.  1840) ;  "  Shawm ut.  or  the
Settlement  of  Boston"  (1845);  "John  Winthrop


166


TRUGUET


TRUMBULL


and  the  Great  Colony  "  (New  York,  1875) ;  "  Life
and  Times  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  "  (Cincinnati,  Ohio,
1878) ;  "  Life  and  Times  of  John  Knox  "  (1878) ;
"  Memoirs  of  John  Howard  "  (1878) ;  "  The  Thirty
Years'  War  "  (1879) ;  "  Heroes  of  Holland  "  (1882) ;
and  "  Life  of  Capt.  John  Smith  "  (1882).
TRUGUET,  Laurent  Jean  Francois (troo-

fay),  Comte,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Toulon,  10
ah.,  1752 ;  d.  in  Paris,  26  Dec,  1839.  He  entered
the  navy  in  1756.  and  had  made  eight  cruises  to
the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  South  America  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  war  of  1778.  He  was  then  attached
as  lieutenant  to  the  fleet  of  Count  d'Estaihg,  took
part  in  the  assault  on  St.  Lucia  and  in  the  en-

fagement  with  Admiral  Howe  off  Port  Royal,
lartinique,  and  at  the  siege  of  Savannah  in  Sep-
tember, 1779,  saved  D'Estaing's  life.  He  was  pro-
moted captain,  and  assisted  under  De  Guichen  in
the  engagements  with  Admiral  Byron  off  Do-
minica, and  served  afterward  under  De  Grasse  and
Vaudreuil  to  the  end  of  the  cruise.  He  was  pro-
moted rear-admiral  in  1792,  and  vice-admiral  in
1794.  He  was  secretary  of  the  navy  from  Novem-
ber, 1795,  till  May,  1797,  and  made  strenuous
efforts  to  pacify  Santo  Domingo  and  the  French
colonies  in  the  Antilles.  He  was  ambassador  in
Spain  in  1797-'8,  and  obtained  the  release  of  all
the  French  citizens  arrested  in  South  America  as
republicans.  Truguet  was  state  councillor  in  1801
and  maritime  prefect  of  Holland  in  1811-'14,  and
was  made  admiral  of  France,  19  Nov.,  1831.

TRUMAN,  Benjamin  Cummings,  author,  b.
in  Providence,  R.  L,  25  Oct.,  1835.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Canterbury,  Merrimack  co.,  N.  H.,  and
adopted  the  profession  of  journalism.  In  1862-'5
he  served  on  the  staff  of  Andrew  Johnson,  then
military  governor  of  Tennessee,  and  as  a  volunteer
participated  in  the  battles  of  Stone  River,  Nashville,
Mobile,  and  other  engagements.  He  afterward
became  private  secretary  to  President  Johnson,  and
in  1865-'6  was  special  commissioner  to  the  south-
ern states  to  inquire  into  the  condition  of  the  ne-
groes and  poor  white  inhabitants.  He  was  special
agent  of  the  post-office  department  for  the  Pacific
coast  in  1866-'9  and  again  in  1878-'9,  was  presi-
dent and  secretary  of  the  Southern  district  agri-
cultural society  of  California  in  1873-7, and  now
(1888)  is  connected  with  the  Pacific  railroad  com-
pany. He  has  published  "  The  South  after  the
War  "  (New  York,  1867) ;  "  Semi-Tropical  Califor-
nia "  (1870) ;  "  Occidental  Sketches  "  (1878) ;  "  Win-
ter Resorts  of  California  "  (1880)  ;  "  From  the
Crescent  City  to  the  Golden  Gate  "  (1882) ;  "  The
Field  of  Honor,"  a  history  of  duelling  (1884) ;  and
"  Homes  and  Happiness  in  the  Golden  Gate  "  (i886).
TRUMBULL,  Benjamin,  historian,  b.  in  He-
bron, Conn.,  19  Dec,  1735 ;  d.  in  North  Haven,  Conn..
2  Feb.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1759,  and
received  his  theological  education  under  Rev.  Elea-
zer  Wheelock,  who  delivered  his  ordination  sermon
in  1760,  commending  him  to  the  people  of  North
Haven  as  "  not  a  sensual,  sleepy,  lazy,  dumb  dog,
that  could  not  bark  back."  He  continued  in  that
charge  for  nearly  sixty  years,  his  preaching  being
interrupted  only  by  the  Revolution,  in  which  he
served  both  as  a  volunteer  and  as  chaplain.  After
the  war  he  published  a  pamphlet  sustaining  the
claim  of  Connecticut  to  the  Susquehanna  purchase,
which  influenced  the  decision  of  congress  in  her
favor.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1796.
He  published  "Twelve  Discourses  on  the  Divine
Origin  of  the  Holy  Scriptures"  (Hartford,  1790);
"  General  History  of  the  United  States  of  America"
(8  vols.,  Boston,  1765-1810);  and  "Complete  His-
tory of  Connecticut  from  1630  till  1713"  (2  vols.,


Hartford,  1797).  The  manuscript  collections  from
which  this  history  is  compiled  are  in  the  Yale
library. — Benjamin's  grandson,  Lyman,  senator,  b.
in  Colchester.  Conn.,  12  Oct.,  1813,  began  to  teach
at  sixteen  years  of  age,  and  at  twenty  was  at  the
head  of  an  acad-
emy in  Georgia,
where  he  studied
law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar
in  1837.  He  remov-
ed to  Belleville,  111.,
and  in  1841  was
secretary  of  the
state  of  Illinois.  In
1848  he  was  elected
one  of  the  justices
of  the  state  su-
preme court.  In
1854  he  was  chosen
to  represent  his  dis-
trict in  congress,  ^/?  {•?  *  ..
but  before  his  term  ^^^-***-a-«^  *'z<!^+*~v-z<s6£
began  he  was  elect- '

ed  U.  S.  senator,  and  took  his  seat,  4  March.  1855.
Until  that  time  he  had  affiliated  with  the  Demo-
cratic party,  but  on  the  question  of  slavery  he  took
a  decided  stand  against  his  party  and  his  colleague,
Stephen  A.  Douglas,  especially  on  the  question  of
"popular  sovereignty.  In  I860  he  was  brought
forward  by  some  Republicans  as  a  candidate  for
president.  He  had  no  desire  to  be  so  considered,
and  when  his  friend,  Abraham  Lincoln,  was  nomi-
nated, he  labored  with  earnestness  for  his  election.
In  1861  he  was  re-elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  in
which  he  did  good  service  for  the  National  cause,
and  was  one  of  the  first  to  propose  the  amendment
to  the  Federal  constitution  for  the  abolition  of  sla-
very. He  was  one  of  the  five  Republican  senators
that  voted  for  acquittal  in  the  impeachment  trial
of  Andrew  Johnson,  and  afterward  he  acted  with
the  Democratic  party,  whose  candidate  for  gov-
ernor of  Illinois  he  was  in  1880.  Since  his  retire-
ment from  congress  he  has  had  a  lucrative  law-
practice  in  Chicago.

TRUMBULL,  James  Hammond,  philologist,
b.  in  Stonington.  Conn.,  20  Dec,  1821.  He  entered
Yale  in  1838,  and  though,  owing  to  ill  health,  he  was
not  graduated  with  his  class,  his  name  was  enrolled
among  its  members  in  1850,  and  he  was  given  the
degree  of  A.  M.  In  1842-'3  he  assisted  the  Rev.
James  H.  Linsley  in  the  preparation  of  catalogues
of  the  mammalia,  reptiles,  fishes,  and  shells  of  Con-
necticut. He  settled  in  Hartford  in  1847,  and  was
assistant  secretary  of  state  in  1847-52  and  1858-'61,
and  secretary  in  1861-'4;  also  state  librarian  in
1854.  Soon  after  going  to  Hartford  he  joined  the
Connecticut  historical  society,  was  its  correspond-
ing secretary  in  1849-63,  and  was  elected  its  presi-
dent in  1863.  He  has  been  a  trustee  of  the  Wat-
kinson  free  library  of  Hartford,  and  its  librarian
since  1863;  and  has  been  an  officer  of  the  Wads-
worth  athemeum  since  1864.  Dr.  Trumbull  was
an  original  member  of  the  American  philological
association  in  1869,  and  its  president  in  1874-'5.
He  has  been  a  member  of  the  American  Oriental
society  since  1860,  and  the  American  ethnological
society  since  1867,  and  honorary  member  of  many
state  historical  societies.  In  1872  he  was  elected  to
the  National  academy  of  sciences.  Since  1858  he
has  devoted  special  attention  to  the  subject  of  the
Indian  languages  of  North  America.  He  has  pre-
pared a  dictionary  and  vocabulary  to  John  Eliot's
Indian  Bible,  and  is  probably  the  only  American
scholar  that  is  now  able  to  read  that  work. In


TRUMBULL


TRUMBULL


167


1873  he  was  chosen  lecturer  on  Indian  languages  of
North  America  at  Yale,  but  loss  of  health  and
other  labors  soon  compelled  his  resignation.  The
degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Yale  in
1871  and  by  Harvard  in  1887,  while  Columbia
gave  him  an  L.  H.  D.  in  1887.  He  has  been  a  large
•contributor  of  articles  to  the  proceedings  of  socie-
ties and  to  periodicals,  notably  on  the  significance
of  the  word  "  Shawmut,"  the  supposed  Indian
name  of  Boston  (1866),  the  significance  of  "  Mas-
sachusetts "  (1867),  and  on  the  Algonkin  name  of
"Manitou"  (1870).  His  larger  memoirs  include
"  The  Colonial  Records  of  Connecticut "  (3  vols.,
Hartford,  1850-'9) ;  u  Historical  Notes  on  some
Provisions  of  the  Connecticut  Statutes"  (1860-'l);
"  The  Defence  of  Stonington  against  a  British
Squadron,  August,  1814  "  (1864) ;  Roger  Williams's
"Key  into  the  Language  of  America"  (Provi-
dence, 1866) ;  "  Thomas  Lechford's  '  Plain  Dealing,
or  Newes  from  New  England,  1642'"  (Boston,
1867);  "The  Origin  of  McFingal"  (1868);  "The
Composition  of  Indian  Geographical  Names  "(1870) ;
"  The  Best  Method  of  studying  the  Indian  Lan-
guages "  (1871) ;  "  Some  Mistaken  Notions  of  Al-
gonkin Grammar"  (1871);  "Historical  Notes  on
the  Constitution  of  Connecticut "  (1872) ;  "  Notes
on  Forty  Algonkin  Versions  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  "
(1873) ;  "  On  the  Algonkin  Verb  "  (1876) ;  "  The
True  Blue-Laws  of  Connecticut  and  the  False
Blue-Laws  Invented  by  the  Rev.  Samuel  Peters  "
(1876);  "Indian  Names  of  Places  in  and  on  the
Borders  of  Connecticut,  with  Interpretations "
•(1881) ;  and  also  edited  "  The  Memorial  History  of
Hartford  County"  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1886).  The
catalogue  of  Americana  belonging  to  George  Brin-
ley  was  made  by  him  at  the  time  of  the  sale  of  the
collection,  1879-86,  and  gained  for  him  the  repu-
tation of  being  perhaps  the  "most  learned  and
.acute  bibliographer  in  America." — His  brother,
Henry  Clay,  author,  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  8
June,  1831,  was  educated  privately  and  for  a  time
studied  in  Williston  seminary.  In  1851  he  re-
moved to  Hartford  and  engaged  in  railroad  busi-
ness, but  in  1858  was  appointed  Sunday-school
missionary  for  Connecticut,  which  office  he  held
until  1862.  He  was  commissioned  to  the  10th  Con-
necticut regiment  as  a  chaplain,  ordained  a  clergy-
man of  the  Congregational  church,  and  served
until  the  close  of  the  civil  war,  except  during  a

1>art  of  1863,  when  he  was  in  prison  in  South  Caro-
ina  and  Virginia,  having  been  captured  before
Fort  Wagner.  In  1865  he  was  appointed  missionary
secretary  of  the  American  Sunday  -  school  union
for  New  England,  and  in  1872  normal  secretary
of  the  same.  He  settled  in  Philadelphia  in  1875,
where  he  has  since  edited  "  The  Sunday-School
Times."  During  1881  he  travelled  through  Egypt,
Arabia,  and  Syria,  and  while  crossing  the  desert
■of  Arabia  Petrasa  located  the  biblical  site  of  Ka-
desh  Barnea  on  the  southern  boundary-line  of  Pal-
estine, which  had  long  been  an  object  of  research.
He  was  Lyman  Beecher  lecturer  at  Yale  in  1888.
The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Yale
in  1866,  and  that  of  D.  D.  by  Lafayette  in  1881  and
the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1882.
His  published  books  are  many ;  the  more  recent
have  been  republished  in  London,  and  include
"  Some  Army  Sermons  "  (Hartford,  1864) ;  "  The
Knightly  Soldier"  (Boston,  1865);  "A  Useful  Life
and  a  Fragrant  Memory"  (Philadelphia,  1866);
"  Falling  in  Harness  "  (1867) ;  "  The  Captured  Scout
of  the  Army  of  the  James  "  (Boston,  1869) ;  "  Chil-
dren in  the  Temple"  (Springfield,  1869);  "The
Worth  of  an  Historic  Consciousness "  (Hartford,
1870);  "A  Model  Superintendent  "(New  York,  1880);


"Kadesh  Barnea"  (1884);  "  Teaching  and  Teach-
ers "  (Philadelphia,  1884);  "  The  Blood  Covenant "
(New  York,  1885) ;  and  "  Yale  Lectures  on  the  Sun-
day-School" (1888).— Another  brother,  Guidon,
artist,  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  5  May,  1841,  studied
art  under  various  teachers  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  and
also  for  a  time  under  James  M.  Hart  in  New  York.
He  is  more  successful  in  his  paintings  of  fish,  his
best-known  pictures  being  "  Over  the  Fall,"  "  A
Plunge  for  Life,"  and  "  A  Critical  Moment."  His
last  work  in  art  was  the  illustration  of  Mrs.  Annie
Trumbull  Slosson's  "The  China  Hunters'  Club"
(New  York,  1878).  Of  late  years  he  has  devoted
himself  principally  to  the  study  of  ornithology,  and
has  written  "  Names  and  Portraits  of  Birds  which
interest  Gunners,  with  Descriptions  in  Language
understanded  of  the  People  "  (New  York,  1888).

TRUMBULL,  John,  poet,  b.  in  Westburv  (now
Watertown),  Conn.,  24  April,  1750 ;  d.  in  Detroit,
Mich.,  10  May,  1831.  At  five  years  of  age,  without
the  knowledge  of  any  one  but  his  mother,  he  began
the  study  of  Latin.  In  1757  he  passed  his  exami-
nation for  admission  to  Yale,  but,  in  consequence
of  his  youth,  he  did  not  enter,  and  spent  six  years
in  study.  He  was  graduated  in  1767,  and  with  his
friend  and  fellow-student,  Timothy  Dwight,  wrote
papers  in  the  style  of  the  "  Spectator,"  which  they
published  in  the  Boston  and  New  Haven  journals
in  1769.  They  became  tutors  at  Yale  in  1771,  and
Trumbull  at  the  same  time  studied  law,  which  he
was  licensed  to  practise  in  1773.  He  published  a
poetical  satire  on  the  prevailing  mode  of  education,
entitled  "  The  Progress  of  Dulness  "  (1772),  adding
the  second  and  third  parts  a  year  later.  In  1773
he  entered  the  law-office  of  John  Adams  in  Boston,
and  recorded  his  impressions  of  the  spirit  of  free-
dom and  resistance  in  an  "  Elegy  on  the  Times,"  a
poem  of  sixty-three
stanzas  on  the  port
bill,  and  other  colo-
nial themes  (Bos-
ton, 1774).  He  re-
turned to  New  Ha-
ven in  1774,  and,
while  practising
law,  wrote  the  first
two  cantos  of  "  Mc-
Fingal," a  modern
epic  poem  in  Hudi-
brastic  verse,  in
which  he  described
the  American  con-
test and  the  char-
acter and  customs
of  the  times,  and
satirized  the  man-
ner and  extrava-
gances of  both  his  own  countrymen  find  the  British
(Philadelphia,  1774).  He  married  Sarah,  daughter
of  Col.  Leveret  Hubbard,  in  1776.  and  returned  to
Westbury,  whence  he  removed  to  Hartford  in  1781.
He  there  completed  "McFingal"  (Hartford,  1782;
6th  ed.,  London,  1793 ;  new  ed.,  with  notes,  Boston,
1826 ;  revised  and  corrected,  with  notes  by  Benson
J.  Lossing,  New  York,  1860).  Its  popularity  was
great,  and  there  were  more  than  thirty  pirated  im-
pressions of  the  poem  in  pamphlet  and  other  forms.
Two  or  three  couplets  of  McFingal  that  still  circu-
late as  proverbs  are  generally  credited  to  Samuel
Butler,  author  of  "  Hudibras  " :

"  No  man  e'er  felt  the  halter  draw,
With  good  opinion  of  the  law,"


'fawn,  Q/irHsrtT^frusCCs


and,


"  But  optics  sharp  it  needs,  I  ween,
To  see  what  is  not  to  be  seen,"


168


TRUMBULL


TRUMBULL


After  the  peace,  with  David  Humphreys,  Joel  Bar-
low, and  Lemuel  Hopkins,  he  wrote  a  series  of  es-
says that  were  designed  to  check,  by  the  boldness
of  their  satire,  the  then  prevalent  spirit  of  disor-
ganization and  anarchy.  They  were  extensively
copied  in  the  newspapers,  under  the  title  of  "  Ameri-
can Antiquities,  Extracts  from  the  '  Anarchiad '
and  Other  Papers."  H  e  became  state's  attorney  for
Hartford  county  in  1789,  served  in  the  legislature
in  1792  and  1800,  and  in  1801-19  was  a  judge  of
the  superior  court.  In  1808  he  received  from  the
legislature  the  additional  appointment  of  judge  of
the  supreme  court  of  errors,  which  he  held  till  1819.
He  was  for  several  years  treasurer  of  Yale,  from
which  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1818.  He
removed  to  Detroit,  Mich.,  in  1825,  where  he  subse-
quently resided  for  six  years.

TRUMBULL,  Jonathan,  patriot,  b.  in  Leba-
non, Conn.,  12  Oct.,  1710;  d.  there,  17  Aug.,  1785.
His  ancestor  came  from  England  about  1639,  and
settled  in  Rowley,  Mass.,  leaving  three  sons.  His
father,  Joseph,  was  a  merchant  and  farmer.  Jona-
than was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard
in  1727,  studied
theology,  and  was
licensed  to  preach,
but  in  1731  re-
signed the  minis-
try to  take  the
Elace  of  an  elder
rother  in  his  fa-
ther's store.  He
afterward  adopt-
ed the  profession
of  law,  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  assem-
bly in  1733  and  its
speaker  in  1739,
became  an  assist-
ant in  1740,  and
was  re-elected  to
that  office  twenty-
two  times.  He
was  subsequently  judge  of  the  county  court,  assist-
ant judge  of  the  superior  court,  and  in  1766-'9  chief
justice  of  that  body.  He  was  deputy  governor  in
1767-8,  and  governor  from  1769  till  1783,  when  he
resigned.  He  refused  to  take  the  oath  of  office  in
1765  that  was  required  of  all  officials  to  support
the  provisions  of  the  stamp-act.  Bancroft  says  of
him  in  this  period  of  his  career  (1767) :  "  He  was
the  model  of  the  virtues  of  a  rural  magistrate ;
profoundly  religious,  grave  in  manner,  discrimi-
nating in  judgment,  fixed  in  his  principles."  His
opinion  was  formed  that  if  "  methods  tending  to
violence  should  be  taken  to  maintain  the  depend-
ence of  the  colonies,  it  would  hasten  separation,"
that  the  connection  with  England  could  be  pre-
served "by  gentle  and  insensible  methods  rather
than  by  power  and  force."  But  on  the  declaration
of  war  he  threw  his  whole  influence  on  the  patriot
side,  co-operated  with  vigor  in  securing  the  inde-
pendence of  the  colonies,  and  was  the  only  colonial
governor  that  espoused  the  people's  cause.  When
Washington  wrote  to  him  of  the  weakness  of  his
army  in  August,  1776,  Trumbull  convened  his
council  of  safety,  and,  although  he  had  already
sent  out  five  Connecticut  regiments,  he  called  for
nine  more,  and  to  those  who  were  not  enrolled  in
any  train-band  said:  "Join  yourselves  to  one  of
the  companies  now  ordered  to  New  York,  or  form
yourselves  into  distinct  companies,  and  choose  cap-
tains forthwith.  March  on ;  this  shall  be  your  war-
rant. May  the  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel  be  your


leader."  At  these  words  the  farmers,  although
their  harvests  were  but  half  gathered,  rose  in  arms,
forming  nine  regiments,  each  of  350  men,  and,  self-
equipped,  marched  to  New  York  just  in  time  to
meet  the  advance  of  the  British.  In  1781,  when
Washington  appealed  to  the  governors  of  the  New
England  states  to  "complete  their  Continental  bat-
talions," Trumbull  cheered  him  with  the  words  that
he  "should  obtain  all  that  he  needed."  He  was
the  chosen  friend  and  counsellor  of  Washington
throughout  the  Revolution,  who,  says  Jared  Sparks,
"  relied  on  him  as  one  of  his  main  pillars  of  sup-
port, and  often  consulted  him  in  emergencies."
The  epithet  "  Brother  Jonathan."  now  applied  as
a  personification  of  the  United  States,  is  supposed
to  owe  its  origin  to  Washington's  habit  of  ad-
dressing Gov.  Trumbull,  and  to  the  phrase  that
he  often  used  when  perplexed :  "  Let  us  hear  what
Brother  Jonathan  says.  In  1783  he  extolled  Wash-
ington's last  address  in  a  letter  to  him  dated  10
June  of  that  year,  as  "  exhibiting  the  foundation
principles  of  an  indissoluble  union  of  the  states
under  one  federal  head."  In  the  next  autumn,
when  he  retired  from  public  life  after  fifty  years'
service,  he  set  forth  to  the  legislature  of  Connecti-
cut "  that  the  grant  to  the  Federal  constitution  of
powers  clearly  defined,  ascertained,  and  under-
stood, and  sufficient  for  the  great  purposes  of  the
Union,  could  alone  lead  from  the  danger  of  anar-
chy to  national  happiness  and  glory."  Washing-
ton wrote  of  him  as  "the  first  of  patriots,  in  his
social  duties  yielding  to  none."  The  Marquis  de
Chastellux,  the  traveller,  who  saw  him  When  he
was  seventy  years  of  age,  describes  him  as  "  pos-
sessing all  the  simplicity  in  his  dress,  all  the  im-
portance, and  even  all  the  pedantry,  becoming  the
great  magistrate  of  a  small  republic/'  Yale  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1779,  and  the  Uni-
versity of  Edinburgh  the  same  in  1787.  See  his
"  Life  "  by  Isaac  W.  Stuart  (Hartford,  1857).— His
son,  Joseph,  member  of  the  Continental  congress,
b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,  11  March,  1737;  d.  there,  23
July,  1778,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1756,
served  in  the  Continental  congress  in  1774-'5,  was
commissary-general  of  the  Revolutionary  army
from  19  July,  1775,  till  2  Aug.,  1777,  and  a  com-
missioner of  the  board  of  war  in  1777-'8,  resigning
in  the  latter  year  on  account  of  the  failure  of  his
health.  His  services  were  highly  eulogized  in  a
report  that  was  made  to  congress  in  1779,  and  a
commission  on  the  sums  he  had  disbursed  was
voted  to  his  heirs. — Another  son,  Jonathan,  states-
man, b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,  26  March,  1740:  d.
there,  7  Aug.,  1809,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1759,  and  for  several  years  previous  to  the  Revo-
lution was  a  member  of  the  legislature  and  speaker
of  the  house.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  he  en-
tered the  patriot  army  as  a  paymaster,  and  held
that  post  till  1780,  when  he  became  aide-de-camp
to  Gen.  Washington,  with  whom  he  remained
until  the  peace.  He  was  a  member  of  congress  in
1789-95,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Federalist,  was
speaker  of  the  house  for  the  last  four  years  of  his
service,  and  became  U.  S.  senator  in  1795.  in  place
of  Stephen  M.  Mitchell,  who  had  resigned,  but  he
himself  resigned  the  next  year  to  become  lieuten-
ant-governor of  Connecticut.  From  1798  until  his
death  he  was  governor. — Jonathan's  son,  John,
artist,  b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,  6  June,  1756 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  10  Nov.,  1843,  entered  Harvard
at  the  age  of  sixteen,  and  was  graduated  the  fol-
lowing year,  1773.  As  he  has  said  himself,  his
"  taste  for  drawing  began  to  dawn  early."  While
at  college  he  studied  Brooke  Taylor's  "  Jesuit's
Perspective "  and  William Hogarth's  "  Analysis


TRUMBULL


TRUMBULL


169


of  Beauty,"  and  after  returning  to  Lebanon  he
painted  the  death  of  Paulus  Emilius  at  Cannse.
When  the  Revolutionary  war  opened,  he  joined

the  army  as  adju-
tant. His  skill  as
a  draughtsman
enabled  him  to
make  drawings
of  the  enemy's
works  at  Boston,
and  Washington
appointed  him
one  of  his  aides-
de-camp.  He  sub-
sequently went
northward  with
Gen.  Horatio
Gates  as  adjutant,
with  the  rank  of
colonel,  but  on  22
Feb.,  1777,  being
dissatisfied  with
the  date  of  his
commission  as
deputy  adjutant-
general,  he  re-
signed and  resumed  his  art-studies.  His  love  for
military  life  had  not  left  him,  however,  and  when,  in
1778,  a  plan  was  formed  for  the  recovery  of  Rhode
Island  from  the  British,  he  joined  Gen.  John  Sul-
livan during  the  enterprise  as  volunteer  aide-de-
camp. In  May,  1780,  he  sailed  for  France,  whence,
after  a  short  stay,  he  went  to  London,  with  a  letter
from  Benjamin  Franklin  to  Benjamin  West.  He
was  soon  arrested  for  treason,  but  after  an  impris-
onment of  eight  months  he  was  released,  on  con-
dition of  leaving  the  kingdom,  West  and  John
Singleton  Copley  becoming  his  sureties.  When  the
close  of  the  war  enabled  him  to  go  again  to  Eng-
land in  January,  1784,  he  resumed  his  studies  with
West.  He  visited  Paris  in  1785,  and  there  began
the  composition  of  his  "  Declaration  of  Independ-
ence." After  a  journey  through  the  countries  wa-
tered by  the  Rhine,  he  returned  to  London  in  the
autumn  of  1786.  During  this  period  he  painted
also  his  "  Sortie  from  Gibraltar.  A  sketch  on  pa-
per of  this  subject,  now  in  the  Boston  athenaeum,
was  made  in  1787.  A  small  picture  of  this  he  pre-
sented to  West,  and  a  second  one  he  sold.  A  third,
finished  in  1789,  was  purchased  by  the  athenaeum
at  Boston.  Another,  also  small,  was  painted  for
William  Sharp  to  engrave  from,  and  with  the  key
in  Trumbull's  autograph  is  now  in  Philadelphia.
In  1787  and  1789  he  was  again  in  Paris,  where  he
painted  the  portrait  of  Thomas  Jefferson.  He  was
commissioned  in  the  summer  of  1790,  by  the  cor-
poration of  New  York  city,  to  paint  a  full-length
portrait  of  Washington,  and  in  1791  he  executed
a  likeness  of  George  Clinton.  These  are  in  the
city-hall,  New  York.  Another  full-length  portrait
of  Washington,  representing  him  on  the  even-
ing before  the  battle  of  Princeton,  was  painted
for  the  city  of  Charleston  in  1792.  But,  a  picture
of  Washington  as  president  being  preferred,  Trum-,
bull  executed  a  second.  The  first,  now  at  Yale,
was  considered  by  the  artist  the  best  portrayal  of
him  "  in  his  heroic  military  character."  He  also
executed  in  1794  portraits  of  Gen.  and  Mrs.  Wash-
ington, in  the  National  museum,  Washington,  D.  C.
During  this  time  he  was  also  collecting  a  valuable
series  of  portraits  for  his  historical  paintings.  In
May,  1794,  he  returned  to  England  as  secretary  to
John  Jay,  and  in  1796  he  was  appointed  fifth  com-
missioner for  carrying  into  execution  the  seventh
article  of  the  treaty  of  1794. In  June,  1804,  he


came  again  to  the  United  States,  settling  in  New
York  as  a  portrait-painter.  At  this  time  were
painted  the  portraits  of  John  Jay  and  Alexander
Hamilton  for  the  city  of  New  York,  and  Timothy
Dwight  and  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer,  which  are  at
Yale.  In  1817  he  was  commissioned  by  congress
to  paint  historical  pictures  for  the  rotunda  in  the
capitol.  The  subjects  were  "The  Declaration  of
Independence,".  "The  Surrender  of  Burgoyne,"
"  The  Surrender  of  Cornwallis,"  and  "  The  Resig-
nation of  Washington."  The  pictures  were  com-
pleted in  1824,  and  exhibited  in  various  cities.
They  have  been  made  familiar  by  engravings  (nota-
bly the  "  Declaration,"  by  Asher  B.  Durand),  and
have  been  the  subject  of  much  criticism.  In
1816-'25  he  was  president  of  the  American  acad-
emy of  fine  arts.  He  subsequently  projected  a
new  series  of  historical  pictures,  but  the  paint-
ings remained  unsold.  He  was  glad,  therefore,
to  present  his  works  to  Yale,  in  return  for  an  an-
nuity of  $1,000.  In  this  final  disposition  of  his
works  he  made  the  condition  that  after  his  death
the  entire  proceeds  of  the  exhibition  of  the  gal-
lery were  to  be  "  perpetually  appropriated  toward
defraying  the  expense  of  educating  poor  scholars
in  Yale  college.'  A  fire-proof  gallery  was  erected
by  the  college,  and  his  pictures  were  arranged
there  under  his  own  direction.  On  the  comple-
tion of  the  new  art-school  building  they  were  re-
moved thither.  He  removed  to  New  Haven  in
1837,  but  in  1841  returned  to  New  York,  where  he
remained  until  his  death.  Trumbull's  fame  rests
mainly  on  the  four  paintings  in  the  capitol,  the
"  Battle  of  Bunker  Hill,"  and  "  Death  of  Montgom-
ery," which  two  pictures  still  stand  unexcelled  in
American  historical  painting,  and  on  such  strong
portraits  as  those  of  Washington  and  Alexander
Hamilton.  The  miniature  likenesses  in  some  of  his
pictures  are  at  times  more  successful  than  his  large
portraits.  His  paintings  comprise  numerous  copies,
historical  and  scripture  subjects,  and  portraits,  in-
cluding, besides  those  already  mentioned,  those  of
John  Adams  (1797) ;  Jonathan  Trumbull  and  Rufus
King  (1800) ;  and  Christopher  Gore  (1800).  Several
of  his  works,  especially  portraits,  are  in  the  New
York  historical  society  s  rooms,  the  city-hall,  New
York,  and  other  public  institutions  and  private
galleries,  but  most  of  them  are  in  the  gallery  at
Yale.  There  are  five  portraits  of  Trumbull — one
by  himself,  painted  in  1833,  two  by  Samuel  Waldo
and  Matthew  II.  Jouett,  of  which  one  is  in  the  old
gallery  at  Yale,  beneath  which  he  is  buried,  a  good
cabinet  full-length  by  George  W.  Twibill,  in  the
National  academy,  and  one  by  Gilbert  Stuart.  A
bust  by  Ball  Hughes  is  at  Yale.  The  most  interest-
ing account  of  Trumbull's  life  is  found  in  his  "  Au-
tobiography" (New  York,  1841).  See  also  Eliza-
beth B.  Johnson's  "  Original  Portraits  of  Wash-
ington "  (Boston,  1882),  and  an  article  by  John
Durand,  in  the  "  American  Art  Review  "  for  1881.
William  Dunlap's  account,  though  full,  is  preju-
diced and  unjust.  Thomas  S.  Cu minings,  in  his
"  Historic  Annals  of  the  National  Academy,"  gives
a  full  account  of  the  part  Trumbull  played  in
opposing  the  formation  of  that  institution.— A
grandson  of  the  first  Jonathan,  Joseph,  congress-
man, b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,  7  Dec,  1782;  d.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  4  Aug.,  1861,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1801,  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Windham  in
1803,  settled  in  Hartford  the  next  year,  and  prac-
tised his  profession  there  till  1828,  when  he  became
president  of  the  Hartford  bank.  He  represented
that  citv  in  the  legislature  in  1832-'48  and  1851,
served  in  congress  in  1834-'5,  having  been  chosen
as  a  Whig  to  fill  the  vacancy  left  by  the  resigna-


170


TRUSDELL


TRUXTUN


tion  of  William  W.  Ellsworth,  and  sat  again  in  that
body  in  1839-43.  In  1849-50  he  was  governor  of
Connecticut.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
in  1849.  He  was  active  in  fostering  public  inter-
nal improvements,  and  in  many  educational  enter-
prises. During  his  later  life  he  was  president  of
a  railroad  company.

TRUSDELL,  Charles  Gregory,  clergyman,  b.
in  Montgomery,  N.  Y.,  1  May,  1826.  When  he  was
eight  years  of  age  his  father  died,  and  the  boy's
educational  advantages  were  limited  to  the  com-
mon school  and  academy.  In  1857,  after  working
in  mechanical  and  commercial  pursuits,  he  felt
called  to  preach.  He  ministered  to  Methodist  con-
gregations in  Iowa,  and  in  1865  was  appointed  pre-
siding elder  of  the  Iowa  City  district.  He  was
subsequently  appointed  pastor  of  the  Grant  place
Methodist  church  of  Chicago,  where  he  preached
till  he  was  selected  to  superintend  the  distribu-
tion of  money  and  other  relief  that  was  sent  from
all  parts  of  the  world  for  the  sufferers  of  the  great
Chicago  fire  of  October,  1871.  That  fund  amounted
to  nearly  $5,000,000.  All  of  this  and  the  many
thousand  dollars  that  are  annually  contributed  by
the  people  of  Chicago  for  the  relief  of  the  deserv-
ing poor  have  been  distributed,  and  a  detailed  ac-
count of  the  same  kept  under  the  direction  of  Mr.
Trusdell  as  general  superintendent  of  the  Chicago
relief  and  aid  society.  From  1  Oct.,  1871,  to  31
Oct..  1887,  this  amount  was  $6,486,999.45.  In  1885
he  was  appointed  presiding  elder  of  the  Chicago
district  of  the  Methodist  church,  and  at  the  same
time  tendered  his  resignation  as  general  superin-
tendent, but  it  was  not  accepted.

TRUTCH,  Joseph  William,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Bath,  England,  18  Jan.,  1826.  He  was
educated  at  Exeter,  England,  studied  civil  engi-
neering under  Sir  John  Rennie,  removed  to  the
Pacific  coast  in  1849,  and  till  1856  practised  as  a
civil  engineer  in  California  and  Oregon.  He  was
subsequently  assistant  engineer  on  the  Illinois  and
Michigan  canal,  and  on  the  Illinois  river  improve-
ment. In  1859  he  removed  to  Victoria,  British  Co-
lumbia, and  till  1864  was  employed  in  the  con-
struction of  public  works  for  the  colony.  Chief
among  these  were  the  section  through  the  cafion  of
Praser  river,  and  the  Grand  Trunk  railroad  from
Yale  to  Cariboo,  including  the  Alexandria  suspen-
sion-bridge over  Fraser  river.  He  was  chief  com-
missioner of  lands  and  works  and  surveyor-general
of  British  Columbia,  and  a  member  ex  officio  of
the  executive  and  legislative  councils  from  1864
till  1871,  when  British  Columbia  entered  the  Do-
minion. He  was  a  delegate  to  Ottawa  in  1870  to
confer  with  the  government  of  Canada  as  to  the
terms  upon  which  British  Columbia  could  enter
the  confederation,  and  in  1871  to  Ottawa  and  Lon-
don to  settle  finally  the  details  of  the  arrangements
for  the  union.  Mr.  Trutch  was  appointed,  5  July.
1871,  lieutenant-governor  of  British  Columbia,  and
on  9  Dec,  1879,  he  became  resident  agent  of  the
Canadian  government  in  British  Columbia.  In
1877  he  was  appointed  a  companion  of  the  order
of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George.

TRUXTUN,  Thomas,  naval  officer,  b.  on  Long
Island,  N.  Y,  17  Feb.,  1755;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  5  May,  1822.  He  began  a  seafaring  life  when
he  was  twelve  years  old,  as  an  apprentice  in  the
English  packet  "  Pitt,"  and  was  impressed  in  Eng-
land to  serve  in  the  frigate  "  Prudent,"  whence  he
obtained  his  discharge  through  friends.  He  de-
clined the  offer  of  a  midshipman's  warrant,  served
in  the  merchant  marine,  and  quickly  rose  to  com-
mand. In  1775  he  had  charge  of  the  "Andrew
Caldwell,"  in  which  he  brought  large  quantities  of


powder  to  Philadelphia.  In  the  latter  part  of
that  year  he  was  seized  off  St.  Kitt's  by  the  frigate
"  Argo,"  and  his  vessel  was  condemned  under  the
restraining  act.  He  made  his  way  to  Philadelphia,
where  he  arrived  in  time  to  enter  on  board  the
"  Congress  "as  a  lieutenant.  This  was  the  first
private  armed  ship
that  was  fitted  out
by  the  colonies.  In
1776  several  prizes
were  taken  off  Ha-
vana, one  of  which
he  took  to  New
Bedford.  In  1777
he  aided  in  fitting
out  the  ship  "  In-
dependence." of
which  he  took  com-
mand and  cap-
tured three  large
ships  among  other
prizes  off  the
Azores  islands.
One  of  these  was
much  more  pow-
erfullyarmed  than
his  own  vessel.  On
his  return  he  fit-
ted out  the  ship  "  Mars,"  twenty  guns,  and  made
a  cruise  in  the  English  channel,  capturing  many
prizes,  which  he  sent  to  France.  He  then  com-
manded the  "  Com  merce  "  and  other  vessels,  in  which
he  brought  needed  cargoes  of  military  stores  for  the
army  to  Philadelphia.  He  had  the  ship  "  St.  James  "
in  1781,  and  conveyed  the  U.  S.  consul-general
to  France,  in  this  voyage  disabling  a  British  ship
of  thirty-two  guns  and  returning  with  a  valu-
able cargo.  He  was  uniformly  successful  in  all  en-
gagements with  British  vessels.  After  the  war  he
commanded  several  East  Indiamen.  Upon  the  or-
ganization of  the  U.  S.  navy,  he  was  selected  as
one  of  its  six  captains,  4  June,  1798,  and  assigned
to  command  the  frigate  "Constellation,"  which
was  building  at  Baltimore.  He  was  ordered  with
a  squadron  under  his  command  to  protect  com-
merce in  the  West  Indies,  where  he  made  numer-
ous prizes.  On  9  Feb.,  1799,  off  Hen's  island,  he  fell
in  with  the  French  frigate  "  L'Insurgente,"  fifty
guns,  which  was  much  more  powerful  than  his  own
ship.  An  engagement  ensued  of  more  than  an
hour,  when  the  enemy  surrendered,  a  perfect  wreck,
after  having  twenty-nine  of  her  crew  killed  and
forty-four  wounded.  Truxtun  lost  one  killed  and
two  wounded.  The  prize  was  refitted  and  added
to  the  navy.  "For  this  brilliant  victory  the  mer-
chants of  Lloyd's  coffee-house,  London,  sent  him  a
present  of  plate  worth  600  guineas.  In  January,
1800,  he  had  a  severe  encounter  with  the  French
frigate  "  La  Vengeance,"  fifty  guns,  which  surren-
dered after  a  long  engagement ;  but  before  Trux-
tun could  secure  the  prize  a  squall  came  up  and
she  escaped.  For  his  gallantry  in  this  action  con-
gress gave  him  a  gold  medal  and  a  vote  of  thanks.
.In  the  same  year  he  commanded  the  frigate  "  Presi-
dent "  and  a  squadron  of  ten  vessels  in  the  West
Indies.  In  1802  he  was  appointed  to  command  the
squadron  that  was  fitting  out  for  the  Tripolitan
war,  and  went  to  Norfolk  to  join  the  "Chesa-
peake." He  then  asked  to  have  a  captain  appoint-
ed to  command  the  flag-ship,  which  was  declined,
and  Truxtun's  letter  was  construed  to  mean  his
resignation,  which  was  accepted  contrary  to  his
wishes.  He  resided  in  New  Jersey  on  a  farm  after
he  left  the  service,  and  subsequently  removed  to
Philadelphia,  where  he  was  sheriff  of  the  county


TRYON


TSCHUDI


171


in  1819-21.  The  memory  of  Truxtun  has  been
handed  down  in  the  navy  as  one  of  its  most  dis-
tinguished officers,  and  the  brig  "  Truxtun  "  was
named  after  him.  He  was  the  author  of  a  work
entitled  "  Remarks,  Instructions,  and  Examples  re-
lating to  Latitude  and  Longitude  "  (Philadelphia,
1794).  Com.  Truxtun  had  a  large  family,  and
eight  of  his  grandsons  were  in  the  U.  S.  naval
academy  at' one  time. — His  grandson,  William
Talbot,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  11  March,
1824;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  25  Feb.,  1887,  entered
the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  9  Feb.,  1841,  attended
the  naval  academy  for  one  year,  and  was  graduated
as  a  passed  midshipman,  10  Aug.,  1847.  He  cruised
in  the  frigate  "  Brandywine "  in  1847-'8  on  the
Brazil  station,  whence  he  returned  in  command  of
the  prize-slaver  "  Independence."  He  served  on  the
Pacific  station  in  the  ship  " Supply "  in  1849-52,
in  the  brig  "  Dolphin  "  in  1853  on  special  service  in
connection  with  laying  the  trans-Atlantic  cable,
and  in  1854  with  the  Strain  expedition  to  survey  a
route  for  a  ship-canal  across  the  Isthmus  of  Darien.
He  was  promoted  to  master,  14  Sept.,  1855,  and  to
lieutenant  the  next  day  by  action  of  the  retiring
board.  He  served  in  the  brig  "  Perry  "  during  the
Paraguayan  war  in  1859-'60,  and  in  the  sloop
■"Dale,"  of  which  he  succeeded  in  command  in
1861,  in  the  North  Atlantic  squadron,  where  he  con-
tinued to  serve  throughout  the  civil  war.  He  was
promoted  to  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,
and  had  the  steamers  "  Alabama,"  "  Chocura,"  and
"  Tacony  "  in  succession.  He  participated  in  the
operations  in  the  sounds  of  North  Carolina,  in  vari-
ous engagements  with  the  Confederate  batteries,
in  the  capture  of  Plymouth,  N.  C,  and  in  both  at-
tacks on  Fort  Fisher.  He  was  promoted  to  com-
mander, 25  July,  1866,  was  superintendent  of  coal
shipments  for  the  navy  in  1866-'7,  commanded  the
sloop  "  Jamestown "  in  the  Pacific  squadron  in
1 868-' 70  on  a  special  survey,  and  was  ordnance  of-
ficer of  the  Boston  navy-yard  in  1871-'3.  He  was
promoted  to  captain,  25  Sept.,  1873,  commanded
the  "  Brooklyn,  of  the  North  Atlantic  squadron,
in  1873-'4,  and  the  flag-ship  of  the  South  Atlantic
station,  1874-'5.  He  was  a  member  of  the  board
of  inspectors  in  1876-'7,  and  served  at  the  navy-
yards  at  Boston  and  Norfolk  in  1877-81.  He  was
promoted  to  commodore,  11  May,  1882,  and  was
•commandant  of  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  in  1885-'6.
He  was  promoted  to  rear-admiral  by  seniority,
18  Feb.,  1886,  but  action  on  his  nomination  was
delayed,  and  he  was  retired  by  law  as  a  com-
modore, 11  March,  1886.

TRYON,  Dwight  William,  artist,  b.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  13  Aug.,  1849.  He  was  a  pupil  dur-
ing 1876-'81  at  the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts,  and  un-
der Louis  Jacquesson  de  la  Chevreuse,  Charles  F.
Daubigny,  and  Jean  Baptiste  Antoine  Guillemet,  in
Paris.  At  the  salon  of  1881  he  exhibited  "  Harvest
Time  in  Normandy  "  and  "  On  the  Maas."  Among
his  other  works  are  "  A  New  England  Village,"  "  A
November  Day,"  "Evening  in  Autumn,"  "Even-
ing in  a  New* England  Village,"  "Starlight,"  and
"Night."  He  was  awarded  gold  medals  at  the
American  art  association  for  his  "  Daybreak "  in
1886,  and  "  Moonlight "  in  1887.  He  has  been  pro-
fessor of  art  at  Smith  college,  and  director  of  the
Hartford  school  of  arts  since  1885.

TRYON,  George  Washington,  conchologist,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  20  May,  1838 ;  d.  there,  5
Feb.,  1888.  He  was  educated  at  the  Friends'
school  in  his  native  city,  and  then  entered  busi-
ness, from  which  he  retired  in  1868.  Thereafter  he
devoted  his  attention  chiefly  to  his  favorite  study
of  conchology. He  was  an  active  member  of  the


Philadelphia  academy  of  natural  sciences  and  be-
gan the  movement  in  1865  to  devise  methods  for  the
erection  of  its  present  building.  Through  his  liber-
ality the  conchological  section  contributed  $3,000
to  the  work,  and  he  gave  an  equal  sum.  In  1869
he  was  elected  a  curator  of  the  academy,  and
under  his  direction  the  library  and  the  numerous
collections  of  the  museum  were  arranged  in  the
new  building  in  1876.  He  became  conservator  of
the  conchological  section  of  the  academy  in  1875,
and  continued  in  that  office  until  his  death.  The
present  condition  of  this  large  collection  is  due
to  his  skill  and  labor,  and  he  bequeathed  money  to

? reserve  the  shell  specimens  of  the  academy.  Mr.
ryon  was  a  member  of  various  scientific  societies,
and  edited  in  1865-71  the  "  American  Journal  of
Conchology."  He  was  a  prolific  writer  on  his
specialty,  and  prepared  numerous  memoirs,  includ-
ing "  On  the  Mollusca  of  Harper's  Ferry  "  (1861) ;
"Synopsis  of  the  Recent  Species  of  Gastrochae-
nidaa "  (1861) ;  "  Monograph  of  the  Order  of  Phola-
dacea "  (1862) ;  and  "  Monograph  of  the  Terres-
trial Mollusks  of  the  United  States"  (1865);  "List
of  American  Writers  on  Conchology  "  (New  York,
1861);  "Synopsis  of  the  Species  Strepomatida? "
(1865).  His  larger  works  comprise  "Land  and
Fresh- Water  Shells  of  North  America,"  including
monograph  on  the  genus  Strepomatidae  (4  vols.,
Washington,  1873) ;  "  American  Marine  Concholo-
gy "  (Philadelphia,  1873) ;  "  Structural  and  System-
atic Conchology"  (3  vols.,  1882);  and  "Manual
of  Conchology,"  including  "  Marine  Shells,"  9  vols.,
and  "  Land  Shells,"  3  vols.  (1879-'85).  With  Will-
iam G.  Binney  he  edited  "  The  Complete  Writings
of  Constantine  S.  Rafinesque  on  Recent  and  Fossil
Conchology  "  (Philadelphia,  1864).

TRYON,  William,  colonial  governor,  b.  in  Ire-
land about  1725 ;  d.  in  London,  England.  27  Feb.,
1788.  He  received  a  good  education,  entered  the
British  army,  and  served  with  credit  as  an  officer.
He  married  Miss  Wake,  a  relative  of  the  Earl  of
Hillsborough,  secretary  of  state  for  the  colonies,
through  whose  influence  he  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant-governor of  North  Carolina.  He  arrived
there,  27  June,  1864,  and  on  the  death  of  Gov.
Arthur  Dobbs,  20  July,  1765,  he  succeeded  him,
and  continued  to  administer  the  affairs  of  the  col-
ony till  July,  1771,  when  he  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  New  York.  He  suppressed  the  revolt  of
the  "Regulators"  in  North  Carolina,  and  treated
the  prisoners  with  great  cruelty.  At  an  expense
of  £15,000,  which  was  voted  by  the  assembly  of
that  colony,  he  erected  a  magnificent  residence  at
New  Berne.  He  was  detested  by  the  patriots  for
his  rigorouc  administration  of  the  governments  of
the  colonies  over  which  he  presided,  and  for  the
inhumanity  he  displayed  on  various  occasions,  es-
pecially for  the  destruction  of  Danbury,  Fairfield,
and  Norwalk,  Conn.,  by  expeditions  that  he  con-
ducted in  person.  He  resigned  the  governorship
of  New  York,  21  March,  1778,  and  returned  to
England.  He  was  made  a  colonel.  25  May,  1772;
major-general,  29  Aug.,  1777 ;  lieutenant-general,
20  Nov.,  1782;  and  colonel  of  the  29th  foot,  15
Aug.,  1783.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  B.
from  King's  college  in  1774.

TSCHUDI,  Johann  Jakob  von  (choo  -de),
Swiss  traveller,  b.  in  Glarus,  25  July,  1818.  He
studied  the  natural  sciences  ami  medicine  in  the
universities  of  Neufchatel,  Leyden,  and  Pans,  and
in  1838  sailed  for  Peru,  where  he  sojourned  five
years,  exploring  the  country  and  forming  a  rich
collection  of  plants  in  the  mountains  of  the  inte-
rior. He  went  to  Vienna  in  1843,  visited  Brazil
and  other  countries  of  South  America  in  1857-9,


172


TSONDATSAA


TUCKER


and  in  1860  was  appointed  minister  of  the  Swiss
republic  to  Brazil,  which  office  he  retained  eight
years,  devoting  most  of  that  time  to  exploring  the
country  and  forming  collections  of  plants  for  the
museums  of  Neufchatel,  Glarus,  and  Freiburg.  In
1868  he  was  promoted  minister  to  Vienna.  His
works  include  "  Untersuchungen  fiber  die  Fauna
Perus"  (St.  Gall,  1844-7) :  "Peruanische  Reise-
skizzen  wahrend  der  Jahre  1838-'42  "  (2  vols.,  1846) ;
"  Die  Ketchuasprache "  (2  vols.,  Vienna,  1853) ;
"  Reise  durch  die  Andes  von  Sudamerika  "  (Gotha,
1860) ;  "  Die  brasilianische  Provinz  Minas-Geraes  "
(1863) ;  and  "  Reisen  durch  Sudamerika "  (5  vols.,
Leipsic,  1866-9).  He  also  edited,  in  association  with
Dr.  Mariano  Eduardo  de  Rivera,  "  Antigfiedades
Peruanas "  (Vienna,  1851 ;  translated  by  Rev.  F.
L.  Hawks,  New  York,  1853).

TSONDATSAA,  Charles,  Indian  convert,  lived
in  the  17th  century.  He  acted  as  guide  to  Father
Brebeuf,  and  was  converted  to  Christianity  by  that
missionary.  He  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Iroquois
in  1643,  being  one  of  the  party  that  accompanied
Father  Jogues,  but  escaped  to  Three  Rivers.  He
became  the  prop  of  the  Christian  religion  among
the  Hurons,  preached  to  them  frequently,  and  made
many  converts.  His  pagan  companions,  on  one
occasion,  induced  him  to  enter  an  Indian  vapor-
bath.  They  then  increased  the  heat,  declaring  that
he  must  pronounce  three  words  in  favor  of  his  titu-
lar demon  if  he  would  escape  suffocation.  He  re-
fused, and  was  almost  dead  when  he  was  released.
His  only  revenge  on  his  torturers  after  he  recovered
was  to  say  to  them :  "  You  nearly  killed  me,  but
you  could  not  make  me  sin."  He  continued  to  la-
bor for  several  years  among  his  countrymen,  and
eventually  converted  nearly  all  his  persecutors.

TUBMAN,  Harriet,  abolitionist,  b.  near  Cam-
bridge, Dorchester  co.,  Md.,  about  1821.  She  was
the  child  of  slaves  of  pure  African  blood,  whose
name  was  Ross.  Her  original  Christian  name  of
Araminta  she  changed  to  Harriet.  When  about
thirteen  years  old  she  received  a  fracture  of  the
skull  at  the  hands  of  an  enraged  overseer,  which
left  her  subject  during  her  whole  life  to  fits  of
somnolency.  In  1844  she  married  a  free  colored
man  named  Tubman.  In  1849,  in  order  to  escape
being  sent  to  the  cotton-plantations  of  the  south,
she  fled  by  night,  and  reached  Philadelphia  in
safety.  In  December,  1850,  she  visited  Baltimore
and  brought  away  her  sister  and  two  children,  and
within  a  few  months  returned  to  aid  in  the  escape
of  her  brother  and  two  other  men.  Thenceforth
she  devoted  herself  to  guiding  runaway  slaves  in
their  flight  from  the  plantations  of  Maryland
along  the  channels  of  the  "  underground  railroad,"
with  the  assistance  of  Thomas  Garrett  and  others.
At  first  she  conducted  the  bands  of  escaped  slaves
into  the  state  of  New  York,  but,  when  the  fugitive-
slave  act  began  to  be  strictly  enforced,  she  piloted
them  through  to  Canada.  She  made  nineteen  jour-
neys, and  led  away  more  than  300  slaves.  A  re-
ward of  $40,000  was  offered  for  her  apprehension.
Among  the  people  of  her  race  and  the  agents  of
the  "  underground  railroad  "  she  was  known  as
"Moses."  During  the  civil  war  she  performed
valuable  service  for  the  National  government  as  a
spy  and  as  a  nurse  in  the  hospitals.

TUCK,  Joseph  Henry,  inventor,  b.  in  Dorches-
ter, Mass.,  12  March,  1812.  He  is  a  grandson  of
John  Tuck,  who  was  a  chaplain  in  the  Revolution-
ary army.  Joseph  was  graduated  at  the  Boston
high-school,  and  afterward  apprenticed  to  a  watch-
maker. He  was  subsequently  employed  in  a  candle-
factory,  where  he  brought  to  perfection  his  first  in-
vention, the  endless  wick. He  went  to  England


in  1837,  began  business  as  an  engineer  in  London,
and  for  twenty-five  years  was  constantly  engaged
in  the  invention  and  introduction  of  improved  ma-
chinery. He  took  out  fifty-five  patents  in  different
countries.  Among  his  inventions  are  a  candle-ma-
chine, wrought-iron  and  bitumen  gas-  and  water-
pipes,  a  ventilating-machine,  a  dredging-machine,
a  rotary  engine,  a  new  system  of  breakwaters  for
harbors,  and  his  steam-engine  packing,  the  most
profitable  of  his  inventions.  In  spite  of  great  op-
position on  the  part  of  English  engineers,  he  or-
ganized a  company  to  lay  the  first  submarine  elec-
tric cable,  between  Dover  and  Calais,  in  1848-'9.
He  derived  no  pecuniary  advantage  from  this  great
enterprise,  as  he  was  defrauded  of  the  profits  by
those  whom  he  had  aided  in  its  promotion.  He
furnished  plans  for  the  excavation  of  the  Suez
canal,  which  were  accepted  by  the  contractors ;  but
ill  health  forced  him  to  abandon  his  connection
with  this  enterprise,  and  he  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1865.  His  constitution  had  been  so  much
injured  by  his  long-continued  and  severe  labors  in
Europe  that  he  was  forced  to  live  in  retirement
for  several  years,  but  he  engaged  in  real-estate
operations  in  Brooklyn  in  1869.

TUCKER,  Henry  Holcombe,  clergyman,  b.  in
Warren  county,  Ga.,  10  May,  1819.  He  received
his  early  education  in  Philadelphia,  and  entered
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1834,  but  finished
his  course  in  Columbian  college  (now  university),
Washington,  D.  C,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1838.  He  then  studied  law,  was  called  to  the  bar
in  1846,  and  practised  his  profession  until  1848r
when  he  entered  Mercer  university  with  the  view
of  preparing  himself  for  the  Baptist  ministry.  He
was  appointed  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in
Alexandria,  Va.,  in  1854,  but  feeble  health  com-
pelled him  to  resign  in  less  than  a  year.  Since
that  time  he  has  held  no  pastorate,  but  has  preached
in  various  parts  of  the  United  States.  In  1856  he
was  elected  professor  of  belles-lettres  and  meta-
physics in  Mercer  university,  which  office  he  filled
until  1862,  when  the  university  was  for  a  time  sus-
pended by  the  war.  In  1860  he  received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  from  Columbian  university.  He  was
elected  president  of  Mercer  university  in  1866,  and
was  principally  instrumental  in  removing  that  in-
stitution from  Penfield  to  Macon.  He  resigned
in  1871,  and  spent  a  year  in  Europe,  during  which
he  assisted  in  the  organization  of  a  Baptist  church
in  Rome,  and  officiated  for  several  months  in  the
American  chapel  in  Paris.  In  1874  he  was  elected
chancellor  of  the  University  of  Georgia,  and  he  re-
mained in  this  office  until  1878,  when  he  assumed
the  editorship  of  the  "  Christian  Index  "  at  Atlanta.
He  was  the  founder  of  the  Georgia  relief  and
hospital  association,  which  rendered  such  great  as-
sistance to  the  sick  and  wounded  of  the  south  dur-
ing the  civil  war.  Besides  a  series  of  letters  on
"  Religious  Liberty "  to  Alexander  H.  Stephens
(1855),  which  were  the  subject  of  wide  comment,,
and  several  sermons,  he  has  published  "  The  Gos-
pel in  Enoch,  or  Truth  in  the  Concrete:  a  Doc-
trinal and  Biographical  Sketch "  (Philadelphia,
1868),  and  "The  Old  Theology  restated  in  Ser-
mons "  (1884).  One  of  his  sermons,  "  The  Position
of  Baptism  in  the  Christian  System"  (1882),  has
been  translated  into  Armenian,  German,  Greek,
Spanish,  Swedish,  and  Turkish.  He  is  now  editor
and  proprietor  of  the  "  Christian  Index."

TUCKER,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Amesburyr
Mass.,  19  Sept.,  1719;  d.  in  Newbury.  Mass.,  22
March,  1792.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1741,  studied  theology,  and  on  20  Nov.,  1745,  was-
ordained  as  colleague  minister  of  Newbury,  Mass,


TUCKER


TUCKER


173


His  theological  opinions  were  Arminian,  and  in  his
controversies  with  Calvinistic  clergymen  he  en-
livened argument  with  wit  and  satire.  The  dis-
sident members  of  his  congregation  seceded  to
join  the  Presbyterian  society  of  which  Jonathan
Parsons  was  pastor.  Mr.  Tucker  received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1787.  Among  his
publications  were  "Four  Sermons"  (1756);  "On
the  Doctrines  and  Uncharitableness  of  Jonathan
Parsons"  (1757);  "An  Account  of  an  Ecclesiasti-
cal Council,  to  which  is  annexed  a  Discourse,  being
a  Minister's  Appeal  to  his  Hearers  as  to  his  Life
and  Doctrines  "  (1767) ;  and  a  Dudleian  lecture  at
Harvard  on  "  The  Validity  of  Presbyterian  Ordina-
tion "  (1778).

TUCKER,  Joshua  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in
Milton,  Mass.,  20  Sept.,  1812.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1833,  and  at  Lane  theological  seminary,
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  1837,  became  pastor  of  a  Pres-
byterian church  at  Chester,  111.,  in  the  latter  year,
then  of  one  in  Hannibal,  Mo.,  in  1840,  arid  in  1846
of  a  church  in  St.  Louis,  where  in  1847-8  he  edited
the  "  Herald  of  Religious  Liberty."  He  took  charge
in  1849  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Holliston,
Mass.,  remaining  till  1867,  afterward  preached  in
Chicopee  Falls  for  ten  years,  and  since  1877  has
resided  in  Boston.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Boston
Review,"  a  Congregational  magazine,  in  1861-'8,
also  of  the  "  Boston  Recorder  "  in  1863-'4,  and  in
1871-'7  was  an  editorial  writer  on  the  Springfield
"  Daily  Evening  Union."  The  University  of  Iowa
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1875.  Dr.  Tucker
is  the  author  of  a  life  of  Christ,  entitled  "  The  Sin-
less One,  or  the  Life  Manifested  "  (Boston,  1855),
and  "  Christ's  Infant  Kingdom  "  (1870).

TUCKER,  Josiah,  English  clergyman,  b.  in
Laugharne,  Carmarthenshire,  Wales,  in  1711 ;  d.
in  Gloucester,  England,  4  Nov.,  1799.  He  was
graduated  at  Oxford  and  ordained  a  priest  of  the
English  church.  He  was  appointed  curate  of  St.
Stephen's  church,  Bristol,  in  1737,  soon  afterward
promoted  to  be  a  minor  canon  of  the  cathedral,
and  was  made  rector  of  St.  Stephen's  in  1749.  In
1756  he  was  nominated  prebendary  of  Bristol,  and
he  became  dean  of  Gloucester  in  1758.  Dr.  Tucker
was  famous  for  his  pamphlets  on  politics  and  po-
litical economy  in  the  latter  half  of  the  18th  cen-
tury, but  especially  for  his  views  on  the  relations
of  the  American  colonies  to  the  mother  country.
He  held  that  a  separation  would  be  no  loss  to  the
latter,  and  that  the  English  parliament  should  by
solemn  act  separate  the  colonies  from  the  parent
government  and  disregard  any  application  for
restoration  to  the  rights  and  privileges  of  British
subjects  until  by  humble  petition  they  should  ask
for  pardon  and  re-ihstatement.  During  the  war
he  was  frequently  in  conflict  with  Edmund  Burke,
who  treated  his  views  on  the  causes  of  the  troubles
between  Great  Britain  and  her  colonies  with  little
ceremony.  In  his  pamphlets  on  political  economy
he  anticipated  some  of  the  views  of  Adam  Smith.
His  most  noteworthy  works  are  "  The  Elements  of
Commerce  and  Theory  of  Taxes"  (Bristol,  1753);
"  Four  Tracts,  together  with  Two  Sermons,  on  Po-
litical and  Commercial  Subjects"  (Gloucester,
1774) ;  "  Treatise  concerning  Civil  Government "
(London,  1781);  "Cui  Bono?"  (1782);  and  "Re-
flections on  the  Present  Matters  of  Dispute  be-
tween Great  Britain  and  Ireland  "  (1775).

TUCKER,  Luther,  editor,  b.  in  Brandon,  Vt.,
7  May,  1802 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,  1873.
He  was  apprenticed  to  the  printer's  trade  when  he
was  fourteen  years  of  age,  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,  and
followed  his  employer  to  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  in  1817.
On  the  expiration  of  his  service  he  travelled  as  a


journeyman  through  the  middle  and  New  Eng-
land states.  In  1825  he  entered  into  partnership
with  Henry  C.  Sleight  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  where
they  published  standard  works  for  New  York
houses.  Later  he  removed  to  Rochester,  and  on
27  Oct.,  1826,  issued  the  initial  number  of  the
Rochester  "  Daily  Advertiser,"  the  first  daily  news-
paper published  west  of  Albany.  The  absence  of
any  suitable  agricultural  reading  early  impressed
itself  on  his  mind,  and  on  1  Jan.,  1831,  he  estab-
lished "  The  Genesee  Farmer,"  which  met  with
considerable  success.  In  1839  he  sold  the  "Ad-
vertiser," which  is  still  continued  under  the  title
of  the  "  Rochester  Union  and  Advertiser."  Mean-
while he  had  purchased  a  farm  near  Rochester  and
devoted  himself  to  its  cultivation  and  the  manage-
ment of  his  paper,  but  in  1839  he  was  induced  to
combine  "  The  Cultivator "  of  Albany  with  his
journal,  and  accordingly  in  1840  the  two  in  one
were  issued  from  Albany  as  "  The  Cultivator :  a
Consolidation  of  Buel's  Cultivator  and  the  Genesee
Farmer."  In  1853  he  established  "The  Country
Gentleman,"  weekly,  with  which  "  The  Cultivator  "
was  finally  combined  in  1866  under  the  united
titles,  and  it  is  still  published  by  Mr.  Tucker's
sons. — His  son,  Willis  Gaylord,  educator,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,  1849,  was  graduated  at  the
Albany  academy  in  1866,  and  at  Albany  medical
college  in  1870.  A  year  later  he  became  assistant
in  chemistry  at  the  medical  college,  and  he  has
since  continued  his  relations  with  that  institution,
becoming  full  professor  in  1876,  and  in  1887  pro-
fessor of  inorganic  and  analytical  chemistry  and
toxicology.  In  1881  he  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Albany  college  of  pharmacy,  and  became
professor  of  chemistry,  in  addition  to  which,  since
1883,  he  has  been  its  president.  Besides  the  fore-
going he  was  professor  of  chemistry  at  the  Albany
academy,  the  Albany  female  academy,  and  the  Al-
bany high-school  in  1876-'87,  and  has  been  lecturer
on  chemistry  at  St.  Agnes's  school  since  1874.  He
was  appointed  analyst  to  the  state  board  of  health
in  1881,  and  still  holds  that  office,  and  he  has  been
registrar  of  the  Albany  medical  college  since  1882,
secretary  of  its  alumni  association  since  its  organi-
zation in  1874,  member  of  the  board  of  governors
of  Union  university,  and  a  member  of  the  state
board  of  medical  examiners  of  the  board  of  re-
gents of  the  University  of  the  state  of  New  York.
The  honorary  degree  of  Ph.  G.  was  conferred  on
him  by  the  Albany  college  of  pharmacy  in  1882,
and  that  of  Ph.  D.  by  Union  in  1882.  He  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies,  and  has  contributed
largely  to  scientific  journals  and  proceedings  on
chemical  subjects.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Albany
Medical  Annals "  in  1882-7.

TUCKER,  Mary  Eliza,  author,  b.  in  Cahawba,
Ala.,  6  Nov.,  1838.  Her  maiden  name  was  Perine.
She  was  educated  at  a  boarding-school  in  New
York,  and,  after  her  return  to  the  south,  married
John  M.  Tucker,  of  Milledgeville,  Ga.  Her  hus-
band and  her  father  lost  all  their  property  during
the  civil  war,  and  she  came  to  New  York  to  pro-
cure a  publisher  for  a  volume  of  poems  that  she
had  written,  and  to  obtain  employment  as  a  jour-
nalist. After  struggling  with  poverty  for  a  time,
she  was  entirely  successful,  and  became  a  regular
contributor  to  the  "  Ledger  "  and  other  New  York
papers.  Her  first  volume  of  "  Poems  "  (New  York,
1867)  was  strongly  colored  by  the  writer's  southern
sympathies  during  the  war.  but  was  marked  by
sincerity  and  pathos.  "  Loew's  Bridge,  a  Broadway
Idyl  "  (i868)  also  attracted  much  attention.  She  is
the  author  of  a  "  Life  of  Mark  M.  Pomeroy  "  (1868).
In  1871  she  married  Col.  James  H.  Lambert,  of  the


174


TUCKER


TUCKER


Philadelphia  "  Press,"  and  now  resides  in  Philadel-
phia, where  she  has  edited  several  journals.

TUCKER,  Pomeroy,  journalist,  b.  in  Palmyra,
N.  Y.,  in  1802 ;  d.  30  June,  1870.  He  served  an
apprenticeship  as  a  printer  in  Palmyra,  became  a
contributor  to  the  Canandaigua  "  Messenger,"  and
in  1824  established  the  "  Sentinel "  as  a  Democratic
organ.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1837,
and  was  for  several  years  postmaster,  and  at  one
time  a  canal  collector.  His  journal  espoused  the
cause  of  free  soil  in  1848,  and  he  was  offered,  but
declined,  a  nomination  to  congress.  He  published
a  work  on  the  "  Origin,  Rise,  and  Progress  of  Mor-
monism,"  containing  biographies  of  the  founders
and  a  history  of  the  church,  with  personal  remem-
brances (New  York,  1867).

TUCKER,  Samuel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Marble-
head,  Mass.,  1  Nov.,  1747;  d.  in  Bremen.  Me.,  10
March,  1833.  He  was  the  son  of  a  ship-master,  and
when  eleven  years  old  ran  away  and  shipped  in
the  English  sloop-of-war  "  Royal  George.  He
had  command  of  a  merchantman  in  1768,  and
made  many  voyages  before  the  Revolution  as  a
captain.  When  the  war  began  he  was  in  London,
and  narrowly  escaped  compulsory  service  in  the
British  navy.  He  returned  as  a  passenger  in  a
ship  that  was  owned  by  Robert  Morris,  and  on  the
voyage  took  charge  of  the  vessel  during  a  violent
storm.  Mr.  Morris  then  introduced  him  to  Gen.
Washington,  who  commissioned  him  a  captain  in
the  navy,  20  Jan.,  1776,  and  assigned  him  to  com-
mand the  armed  schooner  "  Franklin."  While
this  vessel  was  fitting  out  he  took  command  of  a
small  schooner  for  a  short  cruise,  and  fell  in  with
a  British  transport  with  troops  and  stores.  After
a  desperate  engagement  for  two  and  a  half  hours
the  transport  surrendered.  The  stores  were  given
to  Washington's  army,  and  arrived  most  oppor-
tunely. Tucker  received  the  thanks  of  Washing-
ton and  the  army  for  this  brilliant  service.  In
March,  1776,  he  was  transferred  to  command  the
schooner  "  Hancock,"  in  which  he  captured  two
English  brigs  in  Massachusetts  bay  on  17  April,
the  ship  "  Peggy  "  on  29  July,  a  brig  and  a  brig-
antine  on  the  following  day,  and  the  brig  "  Live-
ly" on  29  Oct.,  1776.  He  captured  more  than
thirty  vessels  in  the  "  Franklin  "  and  "  Hancock  "
in  1776.  The  list  was  destroyed,  but  the  prizes
included  several  armed  vessels,  and  some  of  them
were  very  valuable.  On  15  March,  1777,  he  was
appointed  to  command  the  frigate  b  Boston,"  in
which  he  took  out  John  Adams  as  minister  to
France  in  February,  1778.  In  June,  1779,  after
capturing  five  prizes  on  his  return  voyage  from
France,  he  convoyed  a  fleet  of  merchantmen  from
the  West  Indies  to  Philadelphia,  loaded  with
clothing  that  had  been  bought  in  Holland  for  the
American  army.  He  was  chased  by  the  Brit-
ish frigate  "  Pole,"  but  by  a  ruse  obtained  a  com-
manding position  and  compelled  the  enemy  to
surrender,  without  firing  a  gun.  He  next  cruised
in  the  "  Boston  "  with  the  frigate  "  Confederacy  "
also  under  his  command,  and  captured  several
British  privateers.  In  August,  1779,  he  sailed  in
company  with  the  "  Deane,"  under  Com.  Samuel
Nicholson  ;  both  ships  captured  several  prizes,  and
the  "  Boston "  took  the  sloop-of-war  "  Thorn  "
alone.  He  sailed  in  the  "  Boston  "  in  1779  to  join
the  squadron  of  Cora.  Abraham  Whipple  to  assist
in  the  defence  of  Charleston,  S.  C.  The  American
squadron  was  captured  by  the  British  fleet  on  the
surrender  of  Charleston,  and  Tucker  was  paroled,
20  May,  1780.  He  went  to  Boston,  effected  his  ex-
change with  Capt.  Wardlaw,  whom  he  had  cap-
tured in the  "Thorn,"  and  obtained  command


of  his  former  prize.  He  was  highly  successfxil
on  this  cruise,  and  captured  seven  prizes.  He
endeavored  to  capture  the  enemy  by  stratagem
whenever  it  was  possible.  In  July,  1781,  he  was
taken  in  the  "  Thorn "  by  the  British  frigate
"  Hind  "  off  the  mouth  of  St.  Lawrence  river.  He
and  his  crew  were  carried  to  Prince  Edward
island,  where  they  were  kindly  treated.  He  was
permitted  to  go  in  an  open  boat  to  Halifax  with
some  of  his  officers,  instead  of  which  he  went  to
Boston,  notwithstanding  the  peril  of  the  under-
taking. Upon  his  arrival  he  wrote  to  the  British
commissary  at  Halifax  saying  he  and  his  officers
considered  themselves  on  parole,  as  their  escape
was  not  strictly  proper.  The  British  officer  accepted
the  apology  for  the  escape,  and  also  granted  them
their  parole.  After  the  war  Tucker  received  a
vote  of  thanks  from  congress  for  his  services.  The
country  was  without  any  navy  from  1785  till  1797,
and  Tucker  commanded  several  packets  between
the  Atlantic  ports  and  Europe.  In  1792  he  re-
moved from  Marblehead  to  a  farm  near  Bristol,
where  afterward  was  the  town  of  Bremen,  Me.  In
1813  British  privateers  committed  depredations
on  the  coast  of  Maine,  and  the  commodore  was
called  on  to  command  a  schooner.  Two  brass
cannon  were  borrowed  from  the  fort  at  Wiscasset,
and  with  improvised  armament  the  schooner
chased  and  captured  a  privateer  after  a  desperate
fight  of  two  hours.  The  vessel  proved  to  be  the
"  Crown,"  with  valuable  stores,  which  Tucker  dis-
tributed among  the  needy  people  of  the  district.
After  his  retirement  from  the  sea  he  served  as  se-
lectman of  the  town  of  Bristol,  was  elected  to  the
Massachusetts  legislature  in  1814-'18,  and  was  a
member  of  the  convention  to  form  a  constitution
for  the  new  state  of  Maine  in  October,  1819,  after
which  he  was  a  member  of  the  Maine  legislature  in
1820-'l.  In  1820  he  was  a  presidential  elector.  He
had  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  compensation  for
his  services  as  a  captain  in  the  navy.  His  claim
for  pay  was  debarred  by  a  statute  of  limitation,
and  in  his  old  age  he  was  in  reduced  circum-
stances, as  he  had  been  defrauded  of  the  fortune
that  came  to  him  from  his  immense  prizes.  In
March,  1821,  he  was  granted  a  pension  of  $20  a
month  from  1  Jan.,  1818.  In  June,  1832,  this  was
increased  to  $600  per  annum.  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  was,  excepting  Gen.  Lafayette,  the
highest  in  rank  of  surviving  officers  of  the  Revo-
lution. See  "  Life  of  Commodore  Samuel  Tucker,"
by  John  H.  Sheppard  (Boston,  1868).

TUCKER,  Sarah,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, R.  I.,  in  1779 ;  d.  in  1840.  Her  maiden
name  was  Fish.  She  was  a  minister  of  the  Society
of  Friends  for  thirty-seven  years.  Her  autobiog-
raphy was  published  under  the  title  of  "  Memoirs
of  the  Life  and  Religious  Experience  of  Sarah
Tucker"  (Providence,  1848).

TUCKER,  Thorn  as  Tudor,  member  of  the  Con-
tinental congress,  b.  in  Port  Roval,  Bermuda,  in
1745 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  2  May,  1828.  He
studied  medicine,  emigrated  to  South  Carolina,
and  took  the  patriot  side  in  the  Revolution.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  in
1787-'8,  and  sat  in  the  first  two  congresses  under
the  Federal  constitution.  From  1  Dec,  1801,  till
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  treasurer  of  the  United
States.  He  published  an  oration  that  was  delivered
in  Charleston  before  the  South  Carolina  Society  of
the  Cincinnati  (Charleston,  1795). — His  brother,
St.  George,  jurist,  b.  in  the  island  of  Bermuda,
10  July,  1752:  d.  in  Warminster,  Nelson  co.,
Va.,  10  Nov.,  1828,  came  to  Virginia  in  1771
to  complete  his  education,  was  graduated  at  Will-


TUCKER


TUCKER


175


? /u^nLe^


iam  and  Mary  in  1772,  finished  a  course  of  law,
and  began  practice  in  the  colonial  courts.  In
June,  1775,  he  returned  to  Bermuda,  but  he  came
again  to  Virginia  in  January,  1777,  and  bore
arms  in  defence  of  the  colonies,  serving  as  lieu-
tenant-colonel at
the  siege  of  York-
town.  In  1778  he
married  Prances
Bland,  mother  of
John  Randolph.
After  the  war  he
resumed  the  prac-
tice of  law,  was
made  a  judge  of
the  general  court
of  Virginia  in
1787,  and  in  1789
professor  of  law
in  the  College
of  William  and
Mary,  succeed-
ing Chancellor
George  Wythe.
He  was  appointed
in  1804  president-
judge  of  the  Virginia  court  of  appeals,  and  in
1813  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  of  Virginia.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Annapolis  convention
of  1786  that  recommended  the  convention  by
which  the  constitution  was  formed.  He  was  a
poet  as  well  as  a  jurist.  William  and  Mary  col-
lege gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1790,  and
he  left  dramas — tragedy  and  comedy — and  several
minor  poems,  some  of  them  gems.  The  one  en-
titled "Resignation,"  beginning  "Days  of  my
youth."  was  highly  praised  by  John  Adams.  "  The
Probationary  Odes  of  Jonathan  Pindar,  Esq.,  a
Cousin  of  Peter's,  and  a  Candidate  for  the  Post  of
Poet  Laureate,  to  the  C.  U.  S.  In  Two  Parts,"  is  the
title  of  a  volume  of  political  satires  by  Judge
Tucker  (1796).  He  also  published  "Dissertation
on  Slavery,  with  a  Proposition  for  its  Gradual
Abolition  in  Virginia"  (1796);  "Letters  on  the
Alien  and  Sedition  Laws"  (1799);  an  essay  on  the
question  "  How  far  the  Common  Law  of  England
is  the  Common  Law  of  the  United  States?"  an
annotated  edition  of  Blackstone's  commentaries
(Philadelphia,  1803);  and  a  "Commentary  on  the
Constitution,"  as  an  appendix  to  the  last-mentioned
work. — Another  brother  was  Dr.  Nathaniel,  who,
when  very  young,  published  a  poem  called  "  The
Bermudian  (London,  1774). — A  relative,  George,
philosopher,  b.  in  Bermuda  in  1775  ;  d.  in  Sherwood,
Albemarle  co.,  Va.,  10  April,  1861,  emigrated  to  Vir-
ginia about  1787,  and  was  educated  under  the  direc-
tion of  St.  George.  He  was  graduated  at  William
and  Mary  in  1797,  studied  law,  and  practised  in
Lynchburg.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  house
of  delegates  for  some  time,  and  was  thrice  elected  to
the  National  house  of  representatives,  serving  from
6  Dec,  1819,  till  3  March,  1825.  On  retiring  from,
congress,  in  which  he  occupied  a  prominent  posi-
tion as  a  debater  and  a  constitutional  lawyer,  he
became  professor  of  moral  philosophy  and  political
economy  in  the  University  of  Virginia,  and  filled
that  chair  for  twenty  years.  He  contributed  to
many  newspapers  and  magazines,  wrote  some  of
the  papers  in  William  Wirt's  "  British  Spy."  sign-
ing them  "  An  Enquirer,"  was  the  author  of  "  Let-
ters on  the  Conspiracy  of  Slaves  in  Virginia "
(Richmond,  1800) ;  "  Letters  on  the  Roanoke  Navi-

fation  "  (1811);  "  Recollections  of  Eleanor  Rosalie
'ucker  "  (Lynchburg,  1819) :  "  Essays  on  Subjects
of  Taste,  Morals,  and  National  Policy,"  by  "  A


Citizen  of  Virginia"  (Georgetown,  1822);  "The
Valley  of  the  Shenandoah  "  (New  York,  1824),  a
novel  that  was  reprinted  in  England  and  translated
into  the  German  language ;  a  satirical  romance  en-
titled "A  Voyage  to  the  Moon,"  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Joseph  Atterlev  "  (1827) :  "  Principles  of
Rent,  Wages,  and  Profits"  (Philadelphia,  1837):
"  Public  Discourse  on  the  Literature  of  the  United
States"  (Charlottesville,  1837):  "Life  of  Thomas
Jefferson,  with  Parts  of  his  Correspondence  "  (Phil-
adelphia and  London,  1837) :  "  The  Theory  of
Money  and  Banks  Investigated"  (Boston,  1839);
"  Essay  on  Cause  and  Effect "  (Philadelphia,  1842) ;
"  Essay  on  the  Association  of  Ideas  "  (1843) ;  "  Pub-
lic Discourse  on  the  Dangers  most  Threatening  to
the  United  States  "  (Washington,  1843) ;  "  Progress
of  the  United.  States  in  Population  and  Wealth  in
Fifty  Years"  (New  York,  1843);  "Memoir  of  the
Life  and  Character  of  Dr.  John  P.Emmet"  (Phila-
delphia, 1845);  "Correspondence  with  Alexander
H.  Everett  on  Political  Economy  "  (1845) :  "  His-
tory of  the  United  States  from  their  Colonization
to  the  End  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Congress  in  1841 "
(4  vols.,  1856-'8);  "  Banks'  or  No  Banks  "  (New  York,
1857);  and  "Essays,  Moral  and  Philosophical"
(1860). — St.  George's  eldest  son,  Henry  St.  George,
b.  in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  29  Dec,  1780 ;  d.  in  Win-
chester, Va.,  28  Aug.,  1848,  was  educated  at  the
College  of  William  and  Mary,  and  became  a  lawyer,
settling  at  Winchester,  Va.,  in  1802.  He  was  a  vol-
unteer officer  in  the  war  of  1812,  served  as  a  member
of  the  U.  S.  house  of  representatives  from  1815  till
1819,  and  in  the  Virginia  senates  from  1819  till  1823.
He  was  appointed  chancellor  of  the  state  in  1824,
and  served  till  1831,  when  he  was  made  president-
judge  of  the  Virginia  court  of  appeals,  which  post
he  resigned  in  1841,  being  then  elected  professor  of
law  at  the  University  of  Virginia.  This  post  he  re-
signed in  1845  because  of  feeble  health.  He  was
tendered  the  attorney-generalship  of  the  United
States  by  Andrew  Jackson,  but  declined.  While  he
was  chancellor  he  established  a  successful  private
law-school  at  Winchester.  William  and  Mary  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1837.  He  published
"  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Virginia  "  (2  vols.,
Winchester,  1836-'7) ;  "  Lectures  on  Constitutional
Law  "  (Richmond,  1843) ;  and  "  Lectures  on  Natu-
ral Law  and  Government "  (Charlottesville,  1844). —
St.  George's  second  son,  Nathaniel  Beverley,  b.
at  Williamsburg,  James  City  co.,  Va.,  6  Sept.,  1784;
d.  in  Winchester,  Va.,  26  Aug.,  1851,  was  generally
known  by  his  second  name.  He  was  graduated  at
William  and  Mary  in  1801,  studied  law,  and  prac-
tised in  Virginia  until  1815,  when  he  moved  to  Mis-
souri, where  he  was  a  judge  in  the  circuit  court  till
1830.  Returning  to  Virginia,  he  was  elected  in
1834  professor  of  law  in  William  and  Mary,  which
post  he  filled  with  signal  ability  till  his  death.  As
a  writer  he  excelled  any  of  his  Virginia  contempo-
raries. His  most  remarkable  work  is  "The  Par-
tisan Leader:  a  Tale  of  the  Future,  by  Edward
William  Sydney"  (2  vols.,  New  York.  1836;  Wash-
ington, 1837).  This  was  printed  secretly,  bearing
the  fictitious  date  1856,  and  purported  to  be  a  his-
torical novel  of  the  events  between  1836  and  that
year.  In  its  accurate  delineation  of  events  between
1861  and  1865  it  seems  almost  prophetic.  It  was
reprinted  with  the  title  "  A  Key  to  the  Disunion
Conspiracy  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1861).  His  other
works  include  "  George  Balcombe."  a  novel  (1836);
"  Discourse  on  the  Importance  of  the  Study  of  Po-
litical Science  as  a  Branch  of  Academic  Education
in  the  United  States "  (Richmond,  1840) ;  "  Dis-
course on  the  Dangers  that  threaten  the  Free  In-
stitutions of  the  United  States"  (1841);  "Lectures


176


TUCKER


TUCKERMAN


intended  to  Prepare  the  Student  for  the  Study  of
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1845) ;  and  "  Principles  of  Pleading  (Boston,
1846).  He  left  an  unfinished  life  of  his  half-broth-
er, John  Randolph  of  Roanoke.  He  wrote  a  great
number  of  political  and  miscellaneous  essays,  and
was  a  large  contributor  to  the  "  Southern  Literary
Messenger,"  of  Richmond,  Va.,  and  to  the  "  South-
ern Quarterly  Review."  He  also  maintained  an
extensive  correspondence  with  scholars  and  politi-
cians, and  the  influence  of  his  mind  was  felt  by
all  such  with  whom  he  came  in  contact. — Henry
St.  George's  son,  Nathaniel  Beverley,  journalist,
b.  in  Winchester,  Va..  8  June,  1820,  was  educated
at  the  University  of  Virginia,  founded  the  Wash-
ington "  Sentinel "  in  1853,  was  elected  printer  to
the  U.  S.  senate  in  December  of  that  year,  and  in
1857  was  appointed  consul  to  Liverpool,  remaining
till  1861.  He  was  sent  by  the  Confederate  govern-
ment in  1862  to  England  and  France, and  in  1863-4
to  Canada,  to  obtain  commissary  supplies.  He  went
to  Mexico  after  the  civil  war  closed,  was  there  till
Maximilian's  reign  came  to  an  end,  then  returned
to  the  United  States,  and  has  since  resided  in
Washington,  D.  C.  and  Berkeley  Springs,  W.  Va.
— Another  son,  John  Randolph,  statesman,  b.  in
Winchester,  Va.,  24  Dec,  1823,  received  his  early
education  at  a  private  school  near  his  home,  en-
tered Richmond  academy,  and  finished  his  studies
at  the  University  of  Virginia,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  law  in  1844.  He  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1845,  and  began  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion in  Winchester.  He  was  a  presidential  elector
on  the  Democratic  ticket  in  1852  and  1856,  was
elected  attorney  -  general  of  Virginia  in  May,
1857,  to  fill  an  unexpired  term,  and  was  re-elected
in  1859  and  in  1863.  He  was  dispossessed  of  this
office  by  the  results  of  the  war.  He  was  elected
professor  of  equity  and  public  law  in  Washington
and  Lee  university,  Lexington,  in  1870,  and  con-
tinued in  this  office  until  he  was  elected  in  1874  to
congress,  of  which  he  was  a  member  till  1887.  He
was  for  a  short  time  chairman  of  the  ways  and
means  committee,  and  was  a  member  of  that  com-
mittee for  eight  years.  He  was  chairman  of  the
judiciary  committee  in  the  48th  and  49th  con-
gresses. Mr.  Tucker  is  an  orator  of  much  power,
and  has  taken  an  active  part  in  the  debates  on
the  tariff,  in  opposition  to  the  protective  policy.
His  speeches  on  other  questions  include  those  on
the  electoral  commission  bill,  the  constitutional
doctrine  as  to  the  presidential  count,  the  Hawaiian
treaty  in  1876,  the  use  of  the  army  at  the  polls,  in
1879,  and  Chinese  emigration,  in  1883.  He  deliv-
ered an  address  before  the  Social  science  associa-
tion in  1877,  and  one  in  1887  before  the  law-school
of  Yale,  which  in  that  year  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D. — Another  son,  St.  George,  was  a  lawyer
by  profession,  and  was  clerk  of  the  Virginia  legis-
lature. He  joined  the  Confederate  army,  held  a
lieutenant-colonel's  commission,  and  died  from  ex-
posure in  the  seven  days'  battles  around  Rich-
mond. He  was  the  author  of  "  Hansford :  a  Tale
of  Bacon's  Rebellion"  (Richmond,  1853);  "The
Southern  Crop " ;  and  the  dedicatory  poem  of
Washington's  equestrian  statue  at  Richmond. —
Their  kinsman,  John  Randolph,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Alexandria,  Va.,  31  Jan.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Petersburg,
Va.,  12  June,  1883.  He  received  his  early  educa-
tion in  his  native  city,  and  on  1  June,  1826,  entered
the  U.  S.  navv  as  a  midshipman.  He  became
lieutenant,  20  Dec,  1837,  served  as  executive  officer
on  board  the  bomb-brig  "  Stromboli "  during  the
war  with  Mexico,  and  participated  in  the  capture
of  Tabasco  and  other  naval  operations. During


the  latter  part  of  the  war  Tucker  succeeded  to  the
command  of  the  vessel.  On  14  Sept.,  1855,  he  re-
ceived his  commission  as  a  commander,  and  was
ordered  to  take  charge  of  the  receiving  -  ship
"  Pennsylvania "  at  Norfolk.  His  next  post  was
that  of  ordnance-officer  of  the  Norfolk  navy-yard.
He  resigned  his  commission  on  18  April,  1861,
after  the  passage  by  Virginia  of  a  secession  ordi-
nance, and  on  21  April  was  appointed  a  commander
in  the  Virginia  navy.  On  22  April  he  was  directed
by  Gov.  Letcher  to  "  conduct  the  naval  defences
of  James  river,"  but  on  3  June  he  was  ordered  to
the  command  of  the  steamer  "  Yorktown,"  which
afterward  became  the  "  Patrick  Henry."  When
Virginia  joined  the  Confederate  states,  Tucker,  with
all  other  officers  of  the  state  navy,  was  transferred
to  the  Confederate  service  with  the  same  rank  he
had  held  in  the  U.  S.  navy.  The  "  Patrick  Henry  "
participated  in  the  various  conflicts  in  Hampton
Roads,  including  the  battle  between  the  "  Merri-
mac"  and  the  "Monitor"  on  9  March,  and  on  the
13th  Tucker  was  placed  in  command  of  the  wooden
fleet.  Soon  after  the  repulse  of  the  National
squadron  at  Drewry's  Bluff,-  in  which  his  vessel  took
part,  Tucker  was  promoted  on  13  May,  1863,  to  the
rank  of  captain,  and  ordered  to  Charleston,  S.  C,
where  he  commanded  the  Confederate  naval  forces
as  flag-officer  of  the  station.  When  Charleston
was  evacuated  in  February,  1865,  Capt.  Tucker  re-
turned to  Drewry's  Bluff,  organized  the  naval  bri-
gade, and  commanded  it  there  until  Richmond
was  evacuated,  when  he  reported  to  Gen.  Robert
E.  Lee,  and  was  attached  to  Custis  Lee's  division
of  Gen.  Ewell's  corps,  which  formed  the  rear-
guard of  the  Confederate  army  on  the  retreat  from
Richmond.  In  1866  Capt.  Tucker  was  appointed
to  the  command  of  the  Peruvian  navy  with  the
rank  of  rear-admiral.  During  the  war  between
Peru,  Chili,  and  Spain  he  commanded  the  com-
bined fleets  of  the  two  republics.  When  that  war
ceased,  his  rank  and  emoluments  were  continued,
and  he  was  made  president  of  the  Peruvian  hydro-
graphic  commission  of  the  Amazon.  His  last  ser-
vice was  the  exploration  and  survey  of  the  upper
Amazon  and  its  tributaries.  In  a  short  time  he
returned  to  Petersburg.  Va.,  where  he  died.

TUCKER,  Tilghman  M.,  lawyer,  b.  in  North
Carolina;  d.  in  Alabama,  30  April,  1859.  He  re-
ceived a  good  education,  studied  law,  and  practised
in  Columbus,  Miss.  He  was  for  many  years  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  in  one  branch  or  the  other,
was  governor  of  Mississippi  in  1841-'3,  and  served
a  term  in  congress,  which  ended  on  4  March,  1845.

TUCKER,  William  Jewett,  clergyman,  b.  in
Griswold,  Conn.,  13  July,  1839.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1861,  and  in  1863,  after  teaching
for  two  years,  entered  Andover  theological  semi-
nary, where  he  was  graduated  in  1866.  After  a
ministry  of  eight  years  in  Manchester,  N.  H.,  where
he  became  noted  for  the  grace  and  eloquence  of  his
sermons,  he  removed  to  New  York  city  in  1875,
and  was  pastor  of  the  Madison  square  Presbyterian
church  until  he  entered  on  the  professorship  of
sacred  rhetoric  at  Andover  seminary  in  1879.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in
1875.

TUCKERMAN,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  18  Jan.,  1778 ;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  20
April,  1840.  His  father,  Edward  Tuckerman,  a
citizen  of  Boston,  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
first  fire  insurance  company  in  New  England.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1798,  where  he
was  the  classmate  of  William  Ellery  Channing,  and
room-mate  of  Joseph  Story.  He  entered  the  Uni-
tarian ministry  in  1801,  and  first  settled  in  Chelsea.


TUCKERMAN


TUCKERMAN


177


In  1826  he  was  appointed  by  the  American  Unita-
rian association  minister  at  large  in  Boston.  The
remainder  of  his  life  was  devoted  to  a  scientific
study  of  pauperism  and  the  administration  of
charity.  The  philanthropy  and  practical  wisdom
that  he  brought  to  the  work  revolutionized  the
methods  of  dealing  with  the  poor,  and  gained  for
him  a  great  reputation.  "  To  the  system  in-
augurated by  him,"  says  Rev.  Edward  E.  Hale,
"  Boston  owes  it  that  in  every  revulsion  of  busi-
ness, or  in  any  great  calamity,  her  ordinary  insti-
tutions of  charitable  relief  have  proved  sufficient
for  whatever  exigency."  Justice  Story  declared
that  his  work  "  entitles  him  to  a  prominent  rank
among  the  benefactors  of  mankind."  In  France
his  principles  were  adopted  by  the  celebrated  Baron
Degerando.  In  England  they  resulted  in  the  Tuck-
erman  institute  of  Liverpool,  and  other  associations
that  still  survive.  He  visited  England  in  1833
and  formed  friendships  with  Lady  Byron,  Joanna
Baillie,  and  others,  with  whom  he  maintained  a
constant  correspondence.  Harvard  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1824.  He  published  numerous
discourses,  tracts,  and  reports,  chiefly  in  further-
ance of  the  work  in  which  he  was  engaged.  His
principal  writings,  under  the  title  of  "  Elevation  of
the  Poor,"  have  been  collected  (Boston,  1874).  See
memoirs  of  Dr.  Tuckerman,  by  William  E.  Chan-
ning,  D.  D.  (Boston,  1841),  and  by  Mary  Carpenter
(London,  1849). — His  nephew,  Henry  Theodore,
author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  20  April,  1813 ;  d.  in

New  York  city,  17
Dec.,1871,  was  pre-
pared to  enter  col-
lege, but  thecondi-
tion  of  his  health
compelled  a  cessa-
tion of  study,  and
in  1833  he  went
to  Europe,  where
he  remained  near-
ly a  year,  passing
most  of  the  time
in  Italy.  "The
Italian  Sketch-
Book"  (Philadel-
phia, 1835)  was  the
fruit  of  his  so-
journ abroad.  His
academical  stud-
ies were  resumed
on  his  return,  but
were  again  relin-
quished, and  he  made  a  second  voyage  to  Europe
in  1837,  remaining  abroad  until  the  summer  of  1839.
This  journey  embraced  a  tour  of  Sicily  and  length-
ened residences  in  Palermo  and  Florence.  The  lit-
erary outcome  of  this  second  trip  was  "  Isabel,  or
Sicily :  a  Pilgrimage  "  (1839).  With  greatly  im-
proved health,  he  now  devoted  himself  to  letters,  and
was  for  years  a  regular  and  frequent  contributor  to
periodicals.  These  writings  were  in  due  course  col-
lected and  published  at  intervals.  Scholarly  taste,
wide  reading,  and  varied  learning  are  displayed  in
these  numerous  compositions.  The  criticisms  are
well  tempered  and  sympathetic  ;  the  sentiments
are  wholesome;  the  style,  if  perhaps  lacking  in
vigor,  is  graceful,  melodious,  and  refined.  In  the
works  that  relate  especially  to  art  and  artist  life  a
command  of  knowledge  and  just  appreciation  are
clearly  exhibited.  Mr.  Tuckerman's  prose  writings
are  a  valuable  contribution  to  polite  literature.
The  two  volumes  of  poetry  are  not  remarkable,
though  "  Love  and  Fame,"  "  Mary,"  and  "  The
Apollo  Belvidere  "  are  still  admired.  He  was  much
vol.  vi. — 12


<^»y^A Juc^Wv+KOAt/


beloved  socially,  in  virtue  of  grace  of  manners  and
irreproachable  personal  worth.  He  spent  many
summers  at  Newport,  where  a  pleasant  memorial  of
him,  presented  by  his  sister,  may  be  seen  in  the
"Redwood  Library,"  consisting  of  a  complete  set
of  Mr.  Tuckerman's  writings  in  a  beautiful  ebony
case.  His  works,  besides  those  mentioned  above,  in-
clude "Rambles  and  Reveries"  (1841);  "Thoughts
on  the  Poets,"  principally  English  (1846;  German
translation  by  Dr.  Emile  Miiller,  Marburg,  1856);
"Artist  Life,  or  Sketches  of  American  Painters"
(New  York,  1847);  "Characteristics  of  Literature"
(Philadelphia,  1849;  2d  series,  1851);  "The  Opti-
mist," a  volume  of  miscellaneous  essays  (New  York,
1850) ;  "  Life  of  Commodore  Silas  Talbot "  (1851) ;
"Poems"  (Boston,  1851);  "A  Month  in  England"
(1853);  "Memorial  of  Horatio  Greenough"  (New
York,  1853) ;  "  Leaves  from  the  Diary  of  a  Dream-
er" (1853);  "Mental  Portraits,  or  Studies  of  Char-
acter" (London,  1853 ;  revised  and  enlarged  as  "  Es-
says, Biographical  and  Critical,  or  Studies  of  Char-
acter," Boston,  1857) ;  "  Essay  on  Washington,  with
a  Paper  on  the  Portraits  of  Washington"  (New
York,  1859);  "America  and  Her  Commentators"
(1864) ;  "  A  Sheaf  of  Verse  "  (1864) ;  "  The  Criterion,
or  the  Test  of  Talk  about  Familiar  Things  "  (1866) ;
"  Maga  Papers  about  Paris  "  (1867) ;  "  Book  of  the
Artists,"  a  study  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  art
in  America  (1867);  and  "Life  of  John  Pendleton
Kennedy  "  (1871).  See  addresses  by  Henry  W.  Bel-
lows and  Evert  A.  Duyckinck  (New  York,  1872).
— Another  nephew,  Edward,  lichenologist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  7  Dec,  1817;  d.  in  Amherst,  Mass.,
15  March,  1886,  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1837,
and  at  the  Harvard  law-school  in  1839,  after  which
for  two  years  he  continued  at  Cambridge,  pursu-
ing studies  in  law,  and  taking  a  special  course
at  the  divinity-school.  In  1841  he  went  to  Europe
for  further  study,  and  in  Upsala  met  Elias  Fries,
who  confirmed  his  fondness  for  botany.  On  his
return  in  1842,  he  made  with  Asa  Gray  a  botanical
excursion  in  the  White  mountains,  and  contributed
to  the  "American  Journal  of  Science  "a  paper  de-
scriptive of  the  plants  that  he  had  collected.  He
had  previously  published  several  papers  on  the
New  England  lichens,  giving  the  results  of  his  in-
dividual experiences.  In  1847  he  took  the  A.  B.  de-
gree at  Harvard,  having  entered  the  senior  class
a  year  previous.  He  completed  the  course  of  study
at  the  Harvard  divinity-school  in  1852.  In  1854
he  was  appointed  lecturer  on  history  in  Amherst,
and  until  1873  he  continued  to  give  instruction  in
that  branch,  during  a  part  of  the  time  filling  the
chair  of  oriental  history.  He  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  botany  in  1858,  which  chair  he  then  held
until  the  end  of  his  life,  although  during  his  later
years  he  was  relieved  from  class  instruction.  His
botanical  studies  were  various,  but  he  made  a
specialty  of  lichenology,  in  which  branch  he  had
no  superior  in  the  United  States.  Prof.  Tucker-
man's papers  on  this  subject  number  nearly  fifty,
and  are  devoted  to  descriptions  of  the  lichens  not
•  only  of  New  England,  but  of  other  parts  of  North
America.  Specimens  collected  by  the  U.  S.  ex-
ploring expedition,  the  Pacific  railroad  surveys,
and  later  by  the  U.  S.  geological  surveys,  were  re-
ferred to  him  for  examination  and  classification.
Early  in  life  Thomas  Nuttall  dedicated  to  him  the
genus  Tuckermania,  one  of  the  finest  of  California
Compositae,  and  several  species  have  been  named
in  his  honor.  Tuckerman's  ravine,  on  Mount
Washington,  also  bears  his  name.  The  degree  of
LL.  D.  was  given  him  by  Amherst  in  1865,  and
he  was  a  member  of  various  scientific  societies,
among  which  were  the  American  academy  of  arts


178


TUCKERMAN


TUFTS


and  sciences  after  1865,  and  the  National  acade-
my of  sciences  after  1868.  Prof.  Tuckerraan  con-
tributed to  the  New  York  "  Churchman,"  between
1834  and  1841,  numerous  articles,  under  the  titles
of  "  Notitia  Literaria  "  and  "  Adversaria,"  on  sub-
jects in  history,  biography,  and  theology.  He
also  contributed  short  articles  on  antiquarian  topics
to  the " Mercantile  Journal "  in  1832,  and  in  1832-3
he  aided  Samuel  G.  Drake  in  the  preparation  of
his  "  Book  of  the  Indians  "  and  "  Indian  Wars."
Besides  his  paper  on  botany,  he  edited  "  New  Eng-
land's Rarities  Discovered,"  by  John  Josselyn  (1860),
and  published  "  Genera  Lichenum :  An  Arrange-
ment of  North  American  Lichens "  (Amherst,
1872);  "A  Catalogue  of  Plants  growing  without
Cultivation  within  Thirty  Miles  of  Amherst  Col-
lege "  (1882) ;  and  "  A  Synopsis  of  the  North
American  Lichens  "  (part  i.,  Boston,  1882).  The
second  part  of  the  last-named  work,  left  by  Prof.
Tuckerman,  has  been  issued,  with  an  appendix,  by
Henry  Willey  (New  Bedford,  1888).  See  "  Memoir
of  Edward  Tuckerman"  (Washington,  1887),  by
William  G.  Farlow.— Edward's  brother,  Frederick
Goddard,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  10  Aug.,
1821 ;  d.  there,  14  May,  1877,  entered  Harvard  in
the  class  of  1841,  and,  leaving  before  he  had  passed
through  the  entire  course,  went  to  the  law-school,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1842.  He  was  admitted
to  the  Suffolk  bar  in  1845.  Mr.  Tuckerman  pub-
lished a  volume  of  "  Poems  "  (Boston,  1860 ;  Lon-
don, 1863),  and  was  a  contributor  to  the  "  Atlantic
Monthly." — Henry  Theodore's  brother,  Charles
Keating,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  11  March,
1821,  was  U.  S.  minister  to  Greece  in  1868-'72,  and
since  his  retirement  from  that  post  has  resided  in
Europe.  He  has  edited  A.  R.  Rangabe's  "  Greece :
Her  Progress  and  Present  Position  "  (New  York,
1867),  and  is  the  author  of  "The  Greeks  of  To-
day" (1873);  and  "Poems"  (London,  1885).— His
son,  Arthur  Lyinan,  architect,  b.  in  New  York,
14  Sept.,  1861,  was  prepared  for  his  profession
in  Europe,  and  was  appointed  superintendent  of
the  Metropolitan  museum  art-schools  in  1888.  Mr.
Tuckerman  has  published  a  "  History  of  Architec-
ture" (New  York,  1887). — Another  cousin,  Bay-
ard, author,  b.  in  New  York,  2  July,  1855,  studied
in  Europe,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1878,  and
has  become  a  writer  on  historical  and  literary  sub-
jects. He  is  the  author  of  "  History  of  English
Prose  Fiction"  (New  York,  1882),  and  has  in
course  of  publication  a  "  Life  of  General  Lafay-
ette."— Henry  Theodore's  cousin,  Stephen  Salis-
bury, artist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  Dec,  1830,  at
first  engaged  in  business,  but  subsequently  studied
drawing  in  Birmingham,  England,  and  on  his  re-
turn to  Boston  became  principal  of  the  New  Eng-
land school  of  design.  He  went  abroad  again  in
1860,  and  studied  in  Paris  for  a  year.  After  this
he  taught  drawing  in  Boston  until  1864,  when  he
devoted  himself  entirely  to  painting.  Since  1872
he  has  worked  chiefly  abroad,  and  he  has  exhibited
in  London,  Paris,  and  in  Holland,  as  well  as  in  his
native  country.  He  is  noted  especially  for  his  ma-
rine views,  among  which  are  "  Beach  at  Hastings  " ;
"U.  S.  Frigate  "Constitution'  escaping  from  the
British  Fleet  in  1812,"  which  is  in  the  Boston  mu-
seum of  fine  arts ;  and  "  Dutch  Fishing  -  Boats
Beaching  in  a  Gale." — Stephen  Salisbury's  cousin,
Samuel  Parkman,  musician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
11  Feb.,  1819,  had  his  first  instruction  in  music
from  Charles  Zeuner,  and  was  then  for  several  years
organist  at  St.  Paul's  church,  Boston.  During  this
time  he  published  "The  Episcopal  Harp"  (1844)
and  "  The  National  Lyre  "  (1848),  the  latter  with
Silas  A.  Bancroft  and  Henry  K.  Oliver. He  went


to  England  in  1849,  and  the  degree  of  Mus.  Doc.
was  conferred  on  him  by  the  archbishop  of  Canter-
bury in  1853.  In  the  preceding  year  he  had  re-
ceived a  diploma  from  the  Academy  of  St.  Cecilia
in  Rome.  After  returning  to  the  United  States  he
lectured  on  sacred  music,  and  gave  performances
of  church  music  of  the  period  from  the  4th  to  the
19th  centuries.  He  went  again  to  England  in  1856,
and  a  third  time  in  1868,  returning  in  1879.  As  a
composer  he  has  given  his  attention  chiefly  to
sacred  music,  and  he  has  compiled  "  Cathedral
Chants  "  (London,  1852)  and  "  Trinitv  Collection
of  Church  Music  "  (1864).

TUDOR,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
28  March,  1750 ;  d.  there,  8  July,  1819. He  was

fraduated  at  Harvard  in  1769,  studied  law  with
ohn  Adams,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Suffolk  bar,
27  July,  1772,  rising  to  a  high  rank  in  his  profes-
sion. He  was  attached  to  Gen.  Washington  s  staff
in  1775-'8  as  judge-advocate  with  the  rank  of  colo-
nel, was  a  member  of  both  houses  of  the  Massa-
chusetts legislature,  and  in  1809-'10  served  as  sec-
retary of  state.  Col.  Tudor  was  vice-president  of
the  Massachusetts  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  in
1816,  and  delivered  an  address  before  that  body.
Among  his  other  published  orations  is  one  that  he
delivered  on  the  anniversary  of  the  "  Boston  Mas-
sacre "  (Boston,  1779),  and  one  before  the  Massa-
chusetts charitable  fire  society  (1798).  A  memoir
of  Col.  Tudor  is  printed  in  the  "  Collections  "  of  the
Massachusetts  historical  society,  of  which  he  was  a
founder. — His  son,  William,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  28  Jan.,  1779 ;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  9  March,
1830,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1796,  became
a  clerk  in  the  employ  of  John  Cod  man,  and  visited
Europe  on  business.  On  his  return  he  was  active
in  founding  the  Anthology  club,  and  wrote  much
for  its  magazine,  the  "  Monthly  Anthology,"  dur-
ing its  publication  in  1803-11.  In  1807  he  was  a
founder  of  the  Boston  athenaeum,  which  grew  out
of  the  club.  In  December,  1814,  he  projected  the
"  North  American  Review,"  the  first  number  of
which  appeared  in  May,  1815,  under  his  editor-
ship. Three  fourths  of  the  matter  in  the  first  four
volumes  were  written  by  him.  Mr.  Tudor  was  for
some  time  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  legis-
lature, and  he  originated  the  present  Bunker  Hill
monument.  Hearing  that  the  ground  on  which
it  stands  was  to  be  sold,  he  interested  men  of
means  in  the  purchase,  and  the  work  was  begun  by
his  suggestion.  He  was  engaged  in  various  Eu-
ropean commercial  transactions,  and  in  November,
1805.  as  the  agent  of  his  brother  Frederic,  went  to
the  West  Indies,  where  he  founded  the  ice  trade
with  tropical  countries.  In  1823  he  was  appointed
U.  S.  consul  at  Lima,  Peru,  and  in  1827  he  be-
came charge  d'affaires  in  Brazil,  where  he  negoti-
ated a  treaty.  Besides  his  contributions  to  current
literature  and  separate  orations  and  addresses,  he
wrote  "  Letters  on  the  Eastern  States  "  (New  York,
1820);  "Miscellanies,"  from  his  contributions  to
the  "  Anthology  "  and  the  "  North  American  Re-
view "  (1821) ;  "  Life  of  James  Otis,  of  Massachu-
setts "  (1823) ;  and  "  Gebel  Teir."  an  anonymous
5>olitieal  allegory,  written  at  Rio  Janeiro  (1829).
le  left  valuable  unpublished  manuscripts.

TUFTS,  Charles,  donor,  b.  in  Medford,  Mass.,
16  July,  1781 ;  d.  in  Somerville  (formerly  a  part  of
Charlestown),  Mass.,  24  Dec,  1876.  He  received
a  common-school  education,  inherited  a  large  prop-
erty in  land,  became  a  manufacturer  and  active
business  man,  promoted  the  prosperity  of  his  town,
and  added  to  his  fortune  by  sagacious  investments.
He  was  a  liberal  friend  of  education,  and  gave  the
site  and  seventy  acres  of  valuable  land  to  found


TUFTS


TULLY


179


Tufts  college,  Medford,  Mass.  It  stands  on  a  site
that  was  purchased  in  1690  by  Peter  Tufts,  the
emigrant  ancestor.

TUFTS,  Cotton,  physician,  b.  in  Medford,
Mass.,  30  May,  1734;  d.  in  Weymouth,  Mass.,  8
Dec,  1815.  He  was  the  grandson  of  Peter  Tufts,
who  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1654  and  died  in
Maiden,  Mass.,  in  1700,  aged  eighty-two.  Cotton
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1749,  studied  medi-
cine, and  settled  at  Weymouth,  where  he  was  high-
ly esteemed  as  a  physician.  He  was  one  of  the
original  members  of  the  Massachusetts  medical
society,  its  president  in  1787-'95,  and  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Academy  of  arts  and  sciences.  In
1765  he  wrote  spirited  and  patriotic  instructions
to  the  representatives  of  Weymouth  against  the
stamp-act.  He  was  a  representative  of  the  state
and  a  councillor,  for  many  years  an  active  member
of  the  state  senate,  and  supported  in  the  conven-
tion the  adoption  of  the  U.  S.  constitution. — His
grandson,  Quincy,  b.  in  Weymouth,  Mass.,  4  July,
1791 ;  d.  there,  18*  April,  1872,  was  a  citizen  of  Bos-
ton, and  distinguished  for  his  liberality.  He  left
by  his  will  $10,000  to  Harvard  for  the  education  of
indigent  students,  $2,000  each  to  Amherst  college
and  Atkinson  academy,  N.  H.,  for  a  like  purpose,
$10,000  to  the  town  of  Weymouth  for  a  free  library,
$10,000  to  the  Massachusetts  general  hospital  for
free  beds;  and  about  $40,000  to  be  distributed
among  the  charitable  institutions  of  the  city.

TUFTS,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Medford,
Mass.,  5  May,  1089 ;  d.  in  Amesbury,  Mass.,  Au-
gust, 1750.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1708,
and  was  minister  at  Newbury,  Mass.,  from  1714  till
1738.  He  published  "  Introduction  to  the  Singing
of  Psalm-Tunes,  with  a  Collection  of  Tunes  in
Three  Parts"  (Boston,  1715),  and  a  sermon,  "Hum-
ble Call  to  Archippus "  (1829).  His  work  on  the
singing  of  psalm-tunes  was  the  first  publication  of
the  kind  in  New  England,  if  not  in  this  country,
and  was  regarded  as  a  great  novelty,  since  not
more  than  four  or  five  tunes  were  known  in  many
of  the  congregations,  and  those  were  sung  by  rote.

TUIGG,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  County  Cork,
Ireland,  in  1820.  He  entered  the  missionary  col-
lege of  All-Hallows,  near  Dublin,  and,  emigrating
to  the  United  States,  finished  his  theological  course
in  St.  Michael's  seminary,  Pittsburg.  He  was  or-
dained priest  on  14  May,  1850,  and  placed  as
assistant  pastor  at  Pittsburg  cathedral,  being  also
appointed  secretary  to  the  bishop.  In  1853  he
organized  the  congregation  of  St.  Bridget  and
erected  a  church.  He  was  transferred  the  same
year  to  the  mission  of  Altoona,  where  he  founded  a
school,  placing  it  under  the  Sisters  of  Charity,  built
a  pastoral  residence,  and  enlarged  the  church.  He
was  alsoin  charge  of  several  other  missions  at  the
same  time,  and  in  1869  was  appointed  vicar  forane
of  the  eastern  part  of  the  diocese.  He  then  erected
a  new  church,  which  was  dedicated  in  1875.  He
was  consecrated  bishop  of  Pittsburg,  19  March,
1876,  and  soon  afterward  made  administrator  of
the  diocese  of  Alleghany.  Bishop  Tuigg's  consti-
tution gave  way  under  the  labors  that  were  entailed
by  the  government  of  these  two  dioceses,  and  in
1882  he  had  three  strokes  of  paralysis.  Although
his  life  was  despaired  of,  he  recovered,  and  resumed
his  episcopal  duties.  In  1888  the  united  dioceses
contained  212  priests,  140  members  of  male  religious
orders  and  726  of  female  religious  orders,  14  ecclesi-
astical students,  133  churches  and  44  chapels,  8
monasteries,  55  convents,  3  colleges,  6  academies
for  girls,  an  industrial  school  and  reformatory,  3
orphanages,  2  hospitals,  and  70  parochial  schools,
which  were  attended  by  21,000  pupils.


TULANE,  Paul,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Cherry
Valley,  near  Princeton,  N.  J.,  in  May,  1801 ;  d.  in
Princeton,  27  March,  1887.  He  was  the  son  of  a
French  emigrant,  a  native  of  Tours,  who  was  en-
gaged in  the  lumber  trade  between  Philadelphia
and  the  French  West  Indies.  The  office  of  probate
judge  of  Tours  was  held  by  members  of  his  family
for  150  years.  Paul  Tulane  had  no  taste  for  books,
but  a  marked  talent  for  trade  from  early  youth.
In  1818  he  made  a  tour  of  the  southwest  with  a
wealthy  cousin  and  namesake,  and  in  1822  emi-
grated to  New  Orleans.  It  was  a  yellow-fever
summer,  and  he  went  while  the  epidemic  was  at  its
height,  because  there  were  better  openings  then  for
young  men.  His  first  ventures  were  marked  with
success,  and  he  soon  engaged  in  a  general  supply
business  which  proved  lucrative.  In  the  latter  part
of  his  business  career  this  was  narrowed  down  to  a
trade  in  clothing.  Until  1856  he  continued  in  ac-
tive business  in  New  Orleans  with  unvarying  suc-
cess. In  1840  he  visited  France  to  see  his  father,
who  pointed  out  to  him  the  decadence  of  Tours
and  Bordeaux  due  to  the  emancipation  of  the  West
India  slaves,  and  warned  him  of  a  like  probable
fate  to  New  Orleans.  In  consequence,  from  this
time  Mr.  Tulane  began  to  transfer  a  large  part  of
his  estate  to  the  north,  but  he  continued  his  resi-
dence in  New  Orleans  until  1873,  when  he  perma-
nently removed  to  Princeton,  N.  J.  During  his
entire  career  in  New  Orleans  he  was  looked  up  to
as  a  man  of  great,  industry,  sound  judgment,  and
perfect  integ-
rity. His
mode  of  life
was  unosten-
tatious, but
he  was  a  gen-
erous giver
both  to  public
and  private
charities,  es-
pecially for  ed-
ucational ob-
jects. His  af-
fection for  the
city  of  New
Orleans  was
strong and

unwavering,  and  this  took  definite  shape  in  an  act
of  donation  on  2  May,  1882,  by  which  he  conveyed
his  real  estate  in  New  Orleans  to  a  board  of  seven-
teen administrators  for  the  higher  education  of  the
white  youth  of  Louisiana.  This  and  subsequent
donations  aggregated  about  $1,100,000,  and  he
avowed  his  purpose  of  dedicating  a  large  part  of
the  residue  of  his  estate,  amounting  to  about  $1,-
000,000  more,  to  the  same  purpose ;  but,  as  he  died
intestate,  it  fell  to  his  legal  heirs.  The  Tulane
education  fund  has  been  used  to  found  the  Tulane
university  of  Louisiana  at  New  Orleans,  which  has
had  a  rapid  and  prosperous  development,  and  is
now  the  first  institution  in  the  south  in  endowment
and  number  of  students. (See  illustration.)

TULLY,  John,  astrologer,  b.  in  England,  9
Sept.,  1638;  d.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  5  Oct.,  1701.
For  twenty  years,  from  1681  till  the  time  of  his
death,  he  was  engaged  in  compiling  almanacs,  and
was  popularly  known  as  the  "  New-England  astrolo-
ger.'' The  first  publication  of  his  almanac  pre-
ceded William  Bradford's  by  six  years,  and  Benja-
min Franklin's  by  half  a  century.

TULLY,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Saybrook,
Conn.,  18  Nov.,  1785 ;  d.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  28
Feb.,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1806,
and,  after  studying  medicine  in  Philadelphia,  set-


180


TUOMEY


TUPPER


tied  in  practice  in  Milford,  Conn.  Subsequently
he  removed  to  Upper  Middletown  (now  Cromwell),
where  he  became  intimate  with  Dr.  Thomas  Miner,
whose  views  on  the  nature  and  treatment  of
spotted  fever  he  adopted.  In  1824  he  was  called
to  the  presidency  of  the  Vermont  academy  of
medicine  in  Castleton,  Vt.,  where  he  also  lec-
tured on  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine.
He  removed  to  Albany  in  1826,  and  was  asso-
ciated with  Dr.  Alden  March  in  the  practice  of
medicine.  In  1829  he  settled  in  New  Haven,  where
he  was  appointed  professor  of  materia  medica  in
the  medical  department  of  Yale,  which  chair  he
held  until  1842,  when  he  resigned.  He  removed  to
Springfield  in  1851,  and  there  spent  the  remainder
of  his  life  in  poverty.  Dr.  Tully  was  distinguished
as  a  botanist,  and  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  most
learned  and  thoroughly  scientific  physicians  in
New  England.  He  contributed  to  the  medical
journals  of  his  time,  and  assisted  in  the  revision  of
Webster's  "  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language  "
(editions  of  1840  and  1847).  With  Dr.  Thomas
Miner  he  published  "  Essays  upon  Fever  and  other
Medical  Subjects"  (Middletown,  1823),  and  he  was
the  author  of  "  Materia  Medica,  or  Pharmacology
and  Therapeutics"  (Springfield,  1857-'8).

TUOMEY,  Michael,  geologist,  b.  in  Cork,  Ire-
land, 29  Sept.,  1808;  d.  in  Tuscaloosa,  Ala.,  30
March,  1857.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  his
youth,  and  after  an  unsuccessful  experience  in
farming  was  graduated  at  Rensselaer  polytech-
nic institute  in  1835.  Subsequently  he  taught  in
Somerset  county,  Md.,  and  also  followed  civil  en-
gineering. In  1844  he  was  appointed  state  geolo-
gist of  South  Carolina,  and  in  1847  he  was  called
to  the  chair  of  mineralogy,  geology,  and  agricul-
tural chemistry  in  the  University  of  Alabama.
This  professorship  he  held  until  his  death,  and  in
1848  he  was  appointed  state  geologist  of  Alabama.
The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him,  and  he
was  a  member  of  the  Boston  society  of  natural  his-
tory and  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science.  His  published  reports  in-
clude "  Geological  and  Agricultural  Survey  of  the
State  of  South  Carolina  "  (Columbia,  1844) ;  "  Re-
port on  the  Geology  of  South  Carolina"  (1848);
"First  Biennial  Report  on  the  Geology  of  Ala-
bama" (Tuscaloosa,  1850);  "Geological  Map  of
Alabama"  (1853);  and  "  Second  Biennial  Report  of
the  Geology  of  Alabama,"  edited  by  John  W.  Mal-
lett  (Montgomery,  1858).  With  Francis  S.  Holmes
he  issued  "  Fossils  of  South  Carolina "  (10  parts,
Charleston,  1855-7).

TUPAC-AMARU  (too'-pak-ah'-mah-roo),  mem-
ber of  the  Peruvian  inca  family,  b.  in  Cuzco  about
1540;  d.  there  in  1573.  He  was  the  second  son  of
Manco  Inca  Yupanqui,  who,  after  the  execution  of
Atahualpa,  had  been  recognized  by  Pizarro  as  suc-
cessor to  the  throne.  After  his  father's  death  the
eldest  son,  Sayri-Tupac,  submitted  to  the  Spanish
rule,  and  was  baptized  and  rewarded  by  a  tract  of
land  and  an  Indian  commandery  at  Urubamba ;
but  Tupac-Amaru  refused  to  renounce  his  family
claims,  and  retired  to  the  mountains  of  Vilca-
bamba.  When  Sayri-Tupac  died,  the  family  claims
devolved  upon  Tupac- Amaru,  and  as  the  Indians
recognized  nim  as  the  legitimate  successor  to  the
throne  of  the  incas,  the  viceroy,  Francisco  de  To-
ledo, resolved  to  capture  the  prince.  In  1572,
under  pretext  of  sending  auxiliaries  to  Chili,  he
ordered  250  men  to  march  against  the  district  of
Vilcabamba,  where  they  began  hostilities  against
Tupac-Amaru.  The  latter  resisted  in  self-defence,
and,  after  he  had  been  defeated  several  times,  and
his  means  of  subsistence  had  been  cut  off,  fled  with


his  family  and  some  followers  to  the  mountain-
fastnesses,  where  he  thought  himself  secure.  But
receiving  notice  of  his  retreat,  Capt.  Martin  do
Loyola,  with  twenty  men,  crossed  at  night  the
mountain-stream  that  defended  the  inca's  retreat,
and  captured  the  camp  by  surprise,  carrying  the
unhappy  prince  with  his  family  as  prisoners  to
Cuzco.  There  the  judge,  Gabriel  Loarte,  by  the
viceroy's  order,  began  a  criminal  process  against
Tupac,  under  the  pretext  that  he  had  incited  an
armed  revolt,  and  he  was  condemned  to  death  and
beheaded  at  Cuzco,  while  his  children  were  trans-
ported as  prisoners  to  Spain. — The  name  Tupac-
Amaru  II.  was  adopted  by  Jose  Gabriel  Condor-
canqui,  who,  claiming  to  be  a  lineal  descendant  of
the  incas,  raised  a  rebellion  against  the  Spaniards
in  1780,  and  was  executed  in  1781.

TUPAC  INCA  YUPANCJUI  (too-pak-ing-kah-
yoo-pang'-ke),  eleventh  inca  of  Peru,  b.  in  Cuzco
about  1420 ;  d.  there  in  1483.  He  was  a  son  of  the
inca  Yupanqui  and  Mama  Chimpu  Ocllo,  and  suc-
ceeded his  father  on  the  throne  in  1453,  beginning
his  reign  by  visiting  the  different  provinces  of  his
empire,  in  which  undertaking  he  spent  four  years.
After  gathering
an  army  of  more
than  40,000  men
at  Cajamarca,  he
conquered  theter-
ritories  of  Moya-
bamba,  Chacha-
poyas,  Ayabaca,
and  Huancabam-
ba,  and,  on  his
return  to  Cuzco,
completed  the
construction  of
the  famous  fort-
ress of  Sacsahu-
ana,  which  had
been  begun  under
the  reign  of  his
father.  Some

years  afterward
he  marched  again  to  the  conquest  of  the  northern
tribes  and  subjugated  Huanuco  and  the  CaRari  ter-
ritory. In  his  old  age  he  sent  another  army  north-
ward, but  remained  in  Cuzco,  giving  the  command
to  his  eldest  son,  Huayna  Capac,  who  conquered
Quito  and  Pasto,  and  by  whom  he  was  succeeded.

TUPPER,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Stoughton,
Mass.,  in  August,  1738;  d.  in  Marietta,  Ohio,  in
June,  1792.  He  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  French
war  of  1756-'63,  and  afterward  taught.  Soon  after
the  battle  of  Lexington  he  was  a  major  at  Boston,
and  distinguished  himself  in  a  boat  expedition  at
Castle  island,  Boston  harbor.  He  became  a  lieu-
tenant-colonel, 4  Nov.,  1775,  colonel  of  the  11th
Massachusetts  early  in  1776,  and  in  August  of  the
same  year  commanded  the  gun-boats  and  galleys  on
the  North  river.  He  served  under  Gen.  Horatio
Gates  at  Saratoga,  was  at  the  battle  of  Monmouth
in  1778,  and  was  brevetted  a  general  before  the
close  of  the  war.  With  Gen.  Rufus  Putnam  he
originated  the  Ohio  land  company,  was  appointed
in  1785  surveyor  of  Ohio  lands,  and  served  against
Shays's  rebellion  in  1786.  He  settled  at  Marietta,
Ohio,  in  1787,  and  became  a  judge  in  1788. — His
son,  Edward  W.,  was  a  brigadier-general  of  Ohio
volunteers,  and  served  under  Gen.  Harrison  in
1812. He  died  at  Gallipolis,  Ohio,  in  1823.

TUPPER,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Corn-
wallis,  Nova  Scotia,  6  Aug.,  1794 ;  d.  in  Aylesford,
N.  S.,  19  Jan.,  1881.  He  was  ordained  to  the  work
of  the  Baptist  ministry,  17  July,  1817,  and  was


TUPPER


TUPPER


181


editor  of  the  " Baptist  Magazine "  in  1832-6.  He
was  a  liberal  contributor  to  the  press  during  the
sixty-three  years  of  his  ministry,  and  gained  a
reputation  for  scholarly  attainments.  In  1859  he
had  read  critically  the  whole  Bible  in  eight  lan-
guages and  the  New  Testament  in  ten.  Among
his  published  writings  are  "  Scriptural  Baptism "
(Halifax,  N.  S.,  1850)  and  "Expository  Notes
on  the  Syriac  Version  of  the  Scriptures." — His
son,  Sir  Charles,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Am-
herst, Nova  Scotia,  2  July,  1821,  was  educated  at
various  private  and  public  schools,  and  at  Hor-
ton  academy,  Wolfville,  N.  S.  He  studied  medi-
cine in  Nova  Scotia,  and  subsequently  in  Edin-
burgh university,  where  he  gained  the  highest
honors,  and  in  1843  became  a  fellow  of  the  Royal*
college  of  surgeons,  immediately  returned  home,
began  to  practise  in  his  native  town,  and  soon
stood  at  the  head  of  his  profession,  and  was  presi-
dent of  the  Canadian  medical  association  from  its
formation  in  1857  till  1870.  He  was  a  Conserva-
tive in  politics,  but  took  no  active  part  in  public
matters  until  1855,  when  he  was  elected  to  the
provincial  legislature  for  the  county  of  Cumber-
land, his  opponent  being  Joseph  Howe,  a  Liberal.
At  once  Tupper  took  a  marked  position  in  the
legislature,  and  when  in  1856  the  Johnston  cabi-
net was  formed  he  became  provincial  secretary
of  Nova  Scotia,  serving  till  1860,  and  identified
himself  with  such  measures  as  the  abolition  of
the  monopoly  in  mines  and  minerals,  representa-
tion by  population,  and  consolidation  of  the  jury
law.  In  1858  he  went  to  England  on  a  mission
connected  with  the  Intercolonial  railway,  and
while  in  that  country  he  approached  several
statesmen  on  the  subject  of  confederation  of  the
British  North  American  provinces.  In  1864  Dr.
Tupper  became  prime  minister  of  Nova  Scotia,
which  post  he  held  until  1867.  During  those  three
years  he  passed  the  free-school  law,  which  is  still
in  operation  in  Nova  Scotia.  In  1864  Dr.  Tupper
was  the  active  spirit  in  the  maritime  union  move-
ment, and  he  went  with  his  fellow-delegates  to  the
conference  at  Charlottetown,  Prince  Edward  isl-
and, where  he  took  a  noteworthy  part  in  the  dis-
cussions that  followed.  Later  in  the  year  he  went
to  the  conference  at  Quebec,  where  a  broader
scheme  was  debated,  and  where  it  was  decided  to
unite  Upper  and  Lower  Canada,  Nova  Scotia,  and
New  Brunswick  in  one  dominion,  Prince  Edward
island  declining  to  enter  the  compact.  Dr.  Tup-
per was  also  a  member  of  the  conference  that  met
in  London  in  1866-'7,  where  the  terms  of  union
were  settled  in  detail.  In  London  Dr.  Tupper  car-
ried on  a  vigorous  contest  with  Joseph  Howe,  who,
abandoning  the  "dream  of  his  boyhood" — con-
federation— had  become  chief  of  the  Nova  Scotia
anti-Confederates. Howe  was  answered  by  the

{>amphlets  and  speeches  that  he  himself  had  pub-
ished  in  former  years,  and  his  famous  pamphlet,
"  Confederation,  Considered  in  Relation  to  the  In-
terests of  the  Empire,"  found  its  principal  ques-
tioner in  Tupper's  "  Letter  to  the  Earl  of  Carnar-
von "  (London,  1866).  Dr.  Tupper  was  created  a
companion  of  the  Bath  (civil)  in  1867.  Owing  to
press  of  duties,  he  declined  re-election.  Sir  John
A.  Macdonald,  in  forming  his  first  Canadian  min-
istry, offered  Dr.  Tupper  a  portfolio ;  but  he  de-
clined it,  and  sat  in  the  commons  as  a  private  mera-
•ber  until  June,  1870,  when  he  entered  the  cabinet
as  president  of  the  council.  In  1868  he  declined
the  chairmanship  of  the  Intercolonial  railway,  and
in  the  same  year,  in  behalf  of  the  Dominion  gov-
ernment, he  went  to  London  to  oppose  Mr.  Howe,
who'  had  gone  there  to  urge  the  imperial  authori-


cyZ'<a/i&sf  i/ttAy4-e^


ties  to  grant  Nova  Scotia  permission  to  leave  the
confederacy.  In  1872  Tupper  became  minister  of
inland  revenue,  which  office  he  relinquished  in
the  following  year  to  assume  the  department  of
customs,  holding
it  till  November,
when  the  Conser-
vatives passed  out
of  power.  In  Jan-
uary, 1874,  Tup-
per was  elected  by
his  old  constitu-
ents for  the  ninth
time.  In  1878  he
organized  the  can-
vass for  the  coin-
ing elections,  the
"  National  poli-
cy "  —  protection
to  native  indus-
tries— proving  his
strongest  battle-
cry.  The  contest
resulted  in  a  re-
turn of  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald  to  power,  and  in
October.  Dr.  Tupper  took  office  as  minister  of  pub-
lic works.  This  portfolio  he  held  until  the  passing
of  the  act  to  divide  that  department  in  1879,  after
which  he  was  minister  of  railways  and  canals
until  24  May,  1884.  On  24  May,  1879,  he  was
created  a  knight  of  the  order  of  St.  Michael  and
St.  George  by  the  Marquis  of  Lome,  acting  in  be-
half of  the  queen.  In  1880  Sir  Charles  visited
England  with  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald  and  John  H.
Pope  for  the  purpose  of  negotiating  for  the  con-
struction of  the  Canadian  Pacific  railway,  the  re-
sult being  that  the  compact  was  ratified  by  parlia-
ment, and  most  of  the  subsequent  acts  that  led  to
the  completion  of  the  road  were  introduced  by
him.  In  1883,  while  yet  minister  of  railways,  Sir
Charles  was  appointed  high  commissioner  for  Can-
ada in  London.  The  question  arising  as  to  the
legality  of  his  holding  both  posts  at  the  same  time,
an  act  was  passed  in  parliament  relieving  hiin  from
penalties  under  the  independence  of  parliament
act.  At  the  close  of  the  session  Sir  Charles  re-
signed his  seat  in  the  cabinet  and  went  to  London
to  resume  his  duties  as  high  commissioner.  He
received  a  diploma  of  honor  for  special  services  in
connection  with  the  international  fisheries  exhibi-
tion in  London,  and  holds  a  patent  of  rank  and
Srecedence  from  the  queen  as  an  ex-councillor  of
Tova  Scotia.  Party  exigency  soon  demanded  his
return,  and  in  response  to  the  call  of  his  chief  he
re-entered  active  politics,  becoming  a  member  of
the  house  of  commons  for  Cumberland  county,  and
minister  of  finance,  his  appointment  bearing  date
27  Jan.,  1887.  He  was  appointed  executive  com-
missioner for  Canada  at  the  international  exhibi-
tion at  Antwerp  in  1885,  and  at  the  colonial  and
Indian  exhibition  at  London  in  1886.  In  Janu-
arv,  1886.  he  received  the  grand  cross  of  the  order
of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George,  and  in  1887  he  was
appointed  by  the  imperial  government  a  commis-
sioner to  negotiate  a  treatv  with  the  government
of  the  United  States  in  relation  to  the  Canadian
fisheries,  his  colleagues  being  Sir  Lionel  Sackville-
West,  British  minister  at  Washington,  and  the
Right  Hon.  Joseph  Chamberlain.  The  commis-
sioners concluded  their  labors  in  February,  1888.
He  carried  a  bill  through  the  Canadian  parliament
for  the  ratification  of  the  treaty,  where  it  was
passed  in  both  houses  without  division.  Sir
Charles  Tupper  performed  the  duties  of  finance
minister  of  Canada  until  25  May,  1888,  when  he


182


TUPPER


TURELL


resigned  his  office  and  seat  in  the  house  of  com-
mons and  returned  to  London  as  high  commis-
sioner for  Canada.  This  post  he  still  (1889)  holds.
His  county  has  regularly  returned  him  to  parlia-
ment fourteen  times.  Sir  Charles  has  identified
himself  with  all  the  chief  measures  of  the  govern-
ment, and  has  been  instrumental  in  carrying
through  parliament  the  act  prohibiting  the  manu-
facture and  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  in  the
northwest  territories,  the  consolidation  railway  act
of  1879,  the  act  granting  a  charter  to  the  Canadian
Pacific  railway  company  in  1881,  the  act  of  1884
granting  a  loan  to  that  company,  the  railway  sub-
sidies acts  of  1883-'4,  the  act  of  1884  respecting  an
agreement  between  the  province  of  British  Colum-
bia and  the  Dominion  of  Canada,  and  the  customs
act  of  1887,  inaugurating  a  policy  of  protection  and

firomotion  of  the  manufacture  of  iron  and  steel,
n  1862  he  was  appointed  by  act  of  parliament  a
governor  of  Dalhousie  college,  Halifax,  and  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  Acadia  college,
N.  S.,  in  1882,  and  from  Cambridge  in  1886.
On  29  Aug.,  1888  Sir  Charles  was  created  a  baro-
net of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain
and  Ireland,  for  services  in  connection  with  the
fisheries  treaty  at  Washington. — His  son,  Charles
Hibbert,  b.  in  Amherst,  Nova  Scotia,  3  Aug.,
1855,  was  educated  at  McGill  college  university,
Montreal,  and  at  Harvard.  In  1878  he  was  called
to  the  bar  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  entered  politics  for
the  first  time  in  the  Liberal-Conservative  interest
in  June,  1882,  when  he  was  elected  to  the  house  of
commons  for  the  county  of  Pictou.  In  June,  1888,
he  was  sworn  as  a  member  of  the  privy  council  of
Canada,  and  invited  by  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald  to
enter  his  government  as  minister  of  marine  and
fisheries.  On  presenting  himself  for  re-election  he
was  returned  by  acclamation.

TUPPER,  Henry  Allen,  clergyman,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  O,  29  Feb.,  1828.  His  father,
Tristram,  a  merchant  of  Charleston,  was  at  one
time  president  of  the  South  Carolina  railroad.
The  son  was  educated  in  part  at  Charleston  col-
lege, and  was  graduated  at  Madison  university,
N.  Y.,  in  1848,  and  at  its  theological  seminary  in
1850.  Having  entered  the  ministry,  he  became,
after  three  years'  service  in  Graniteville,  S.  C,  pas-
tor of  the  Baptist  church  at  Washington,  Ga.,  in
which  relation  he  continued  for  nearly  twenty  years.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  chaplain  of  the  9th
Georgia  regiment  of  the  Confederate  army.  In
1872  he  was  made  corresponding  secretary  of  the
Foreign  missionary  board  of  the  Southern  Baptist
convention,  with  his  residence  in  Richmond,  Va.
He  still  (1889)  holds  this  office,  and  is  a  trustee  of
Richmond  college.  In  1870  Madison  university
conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  Besides
various  published  sermons  and  addresses,  Dr.  Tup-
per  is  the  author  of  "  The  First  Century  of  the
First  Baptist  Church  of  Richmond,  Va."*  (Phila-
delphia, 1880),  "  Foreign  Missions  of  the  Southern
Baptist  Convention"  (1880);  and  "Truth  in  Ro-
mance" (Baltimore,  1887).

TURCHIN,  John  Basil,  or  Iran  Tasilevitch
Turchininoff,  soldier,  b.  in  the  province  of  Don,
Russia,  30  Jan.,  1822.  He  entered  the  artillery-
school  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1836,  was  graduated
in'  1841,  and  entered  the  horse-artillery  service  as
an  ensign.  He  participated  in  the  Hungarian
campaign,  in  1849  entered  the  military  academy
for  officers  of  the  general  staff,  was  graduated  in
1852,  and  was  assigned  to  the  staff  of  the  Imperial
guards.  During  the  Crimean  war  he  was  promoted
till  he  reached  the  grade  of  colonel,  was  senior
staff-officer  of  the  active  corps,  and  prepared  the


plan  that  was  adopted  for  the  defence  of  the  coast
of  Finland.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in
1856,  and  was  employed  in  the  engineer  depart-
ment of  the  Illinois  Central  railroad  company  until
19  June,  1861,  when  he  was  appointed  colonel  of
the  19th  Illinois  volunteers.  He  served  with  his
regiment  in  Missouri,  Kentucky,  and  Alabama,
where  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  capture  of
Huntsville  and  Decatur.  He  was  promoted  to  be
a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  17  July,  1862,
served  in  the  cavalry  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumber-
land, and  resigned,  10  Oct.,  1864.  After  the  close
of  the  war  he  was  a  solicitor  of  patents  in  Chicago
till  1870,  for  the  next  three  years  was  employed  as
a  civil  engineer,  and  in  1873  he  established  the
Polish  colony  of  Radone,  in  Washington  county,
111.,  where  he  now  (1889)  resides  on  a  farm.  He  is
an  occasional  contributor  of  scientific  and  military
articles  to  periodicals.  In  January,  1865,  he  wrote
"  Military  Rambles,"  a  series  of  criticisms,  issued
monthly  at  Chicago,  and  he  has  also  published
"  The  Campaign  and  Battle  of  Chickamauga "
(Chicago,  1888).

TURCOTTE,  Joseph  Edonard,  Canadian
member  of  parliament,  b.  in  Nicolet  in  1808;  d.
in  Three  Rivers,  20  Dec,  1864.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1834,  and  was  an
unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  legislative  assembly
of  Canada  for  the  county  of  Nicolet,  but  afterward
represented  various  constituencies  in  that  body
for  many  years.  After  having  been  solicitor-gen-
eral, he  was  in  1862  elected  speaker  of  the  legisla-
tive assembly  of  Canada.  Mr.  Turcotte  was  noted
for  his  eloquence  as  a  parliamentary  speaker.  He
was  mainly  instrumental  in  securing  the  construc-
tion of  the  Arthabasca  branch  railroad,  planned  a
railway  to  connect  the  Grand  piles  on  St.  Maurice
river  with  Three  Rivers,  and  was  an  active  agent
in  establishing  the  Radnor  iron-works  in  the  dis-
trict of  Three  Rivers. — His  son,  Henry  Rene  Ar-
thur, b.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  19  Jan.,  1846,  was
educated  at  the  Jesuit's  college  in  Montreal  and  at
Stonyhurst  college,  England.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Quebec  in  June.  1867,  and  was  ap-
pointed queen's  counsel  in  1879.  He  has  been
mayor  of  Three  Rivers,  was  speaker  of  the  legisla-
tive assembly  of  the  province  of  Quebec  from  4
June,  1878,  till  December,  1881,  and  was  appointed
a  member  of  the  executive  council,  29  Jan.,  1887.
He  carried  through  several  measures  amending
the  civil  code  and  simplifying  legal  procedure.

TURELL,  Ebenezer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  5  Feb.,  1702 ;  d.  in  Medford,  Mass.,  8  Dec,
1778.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1721,  and
was  minister  of  Medford,  Mass.,  from  25  Nov.,
1724,  till  his  death.  He  was  eminent  as  a  preacher
and  patriot.  Mr.  Turell  published  "  Sermon  at  the
Ordination  of  Rev.  S.  Cook  "  (Boston,  1740) ;  "  Dia-
logue About  the  Times"  (1742);  and  "Life  and
Character  of  the  Rev.  Benjamin  Colman  "  (1749);
and  he  also  collected  and  published  poems  by  his
wife,  with  a  memoir  of  her  (Boston,  1735).  A  tract
of  his  on  "  Witchcraft "  is  in  the  "  Massachusetts
Historical  Collections." — His  wife,  Jane,  daughter
of  Rev.  Benjamin  Colman,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  25
Feb.,  1708 ;  d.  in  Medford,  Mass.,  26  March,  1735,
displayed  precocious  mental  powers  at  an  early
age,  wrote  poetry  at  eleven,  and  on  11  Aug.,  1726,
married  Mr.  Turell.  She  afterward  wrote  eulogies
on  Sir  Richard  Blackmore's  works,  and  on  "  The
Incomparable  Mr.  Waller,"  "  An  Invitation  into
the  Country  in  Imitation  of  Horace,"  and  some
prose  articles.  Her  poems  were  collected  and  pub-
lished by  her  husband,  with  a  memoir  of  her  life
(Boston,  1735). A  notice  of  her  by  Prof.  John


TURGEON


TURNBULL


183


Wilson  will  be  found  in  his  "  Noctes  Ambro-
sianae  "  (5  vols.,  New  York,  1854).

TURGEON,  Pierre  Flavian,  R.  C.  archbishop
of  Quebec,  b.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  12  Nov.,  1787;  d.
there,  25  Aug..  1867.  From  1808  till  1820  he  was
secretary  to  Bishop  Joseph  Octave  Plessis,  and  on
29  April,  1810,  was  ordained  priest.  For  many-
years  he  taught  in  the  Seminary  of  Quebec  until  he
became,  by  appointment  and  bulls  of  Pope  Gregory
XVI.,  bishop  and  coadjutor  of  the  archbishop  of
Quebec.  He  was  consecrated,  under  the  title  of
Sidyme  in  Quebec,  on  11  May,  1834.  In  1849-'50
he  was  administrator  of  the  diocese,  and  in  the
latter  year  became  archbishop,  and  was  vested  with
the  pallium  on  11  June,  1851.  He  resigned  his
office  in  1855,  owing  to  impaired  health.

TURGOT,  Anne  Robert  Joseph  (toor-go),
Baron  de  l'Aulne,  French  statesman,  b.  in  Paris,
10  May,  1727;  d.  there,  20  March,  1781.  He  stud-
ied for  the  church  and  was  prior  of  Sorbonne  in
1749,  but  resigned  in  1751,  was  made  deputy  attor-
ney-general and  councillor  in  the  parliament  of
Paris  in  1752,  a  master  of  the  tribunal  of  the  re-
quests in  1753,  and  intendant  of  Limousin  in
1761.  He  made  many  improvements  in  the  ad-
ministration of  that  province,  and  was  named,  20
July,  1774.  secretary  of  the  navy.  During  his
short  administration  he  devised  a  plan  that  after-
ward gave  a  vigorous  impulse  to  the  prosperity  of
the  French  colonies  in  America.  On  24  Aug.,
1774,  he  succeeded  Abbe  Terray  as  comptroller  of
the  finances.  He  set  immediately  to  work  to  re-
form abuses  and  put  France  upon  a  sound  finan-
cial basis.  He  found  the  greatest  opposition  at
court  and  in  the  king's  council  to  carrying  on  his
proposed  reforms  that  might  have  averted  the
revolution  of  1789,  and  there  were  riots  in  Paris
and  other  cities  in  May,  1775.  Louis  XVI.,  who
said,  "  Only  M.  Turgot  and  I  love  the  people,"
held  a  levee  of  justice  at  the  parliament  of  Paris,
12  May,  1776,  and  obliged  that  body  to  register
Turgot's  edicts  on  finance.  The  Count  d'Artois,
Louis  XVI.'s  aunts,  and  Count  de  Maurepas  secured
Turgot's  dismissal,  12  May,  1776,  and  he  retired  to
Paris,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  philosophical
labors.  Owing  to  his  friendship  for  Benjamin
Franklin  and  his  love  for  the  cause  of  freedom,
he  was  in  part  instrumental  in  1778  in  bringing
about  the  treaty  of  alliance  with  the  United  States,
and  composed,  at  the  request  of  Richard  Price,  with
whom  he  corresponded  to  the  last,  "Reflexions
sur  la  situation  des  Americains  des  Etats-Unis  "
(Paris,  1779).  At  the  request  of  Franklin  he
wrote  "  Traite  des  vrais  principes  de  l'imposi-
tion"  (1780).  Turgot's  principal  works  are
"  Lettre  sur  le  papier  monnaie  "  (1745) :  "  Sur  la
tolerance  "  (1752) ;  "  Reflexions  sur  la  formation
et  la  distribution  des  richesses"  (1771) ;  and  "  Sur
la  liberte  du  commerce  des  grains  "  (1772).  His
life  has  been  written  by  the  Marquis  de  Condorcet
(London,  1786),  and  his  complete  works  were
edited  by  Pierre  Samuel  Dupont  de  Nemours
(9  vols.,  Paris,  1808-'ll).

TURGOT,  Etienne  Francois  (toor'-go),  Mar-

3uis  de  Coismont,  French  statesman,  b.  in  Paris,  2
une.  1721 ;  d.  there,  21  Oct.,  1789.  After  serving  for
some  time  with  the  Knights  of  Malta,  he  was  created
on  his  return  to  France  in  1764  brigadier  of  the
armies  of  the  king.  He  made  a  proposal  to  the
French  minister,  Choiseul.  to  regenerate  the  colony
of  Cayenne  by  establishing  in  Guiana  a  new  settle-
ment under  the  name  of  "  France  equinoxiaie,"
strong  enough  to  resist,  without  any  aid  from  the
mother  country,  an  attack  from  any  quarter,  and
even  to  give  succor  to  the  other  American  colonies


in  case  of  need.  Turgot  expected  that  such  a  colony,
if  successful,  would  counterbalance  the  recent  loss
of  Canada.  The  plan  was  adopted,  and  Turgot
received  the  title  of  governor-general  of  French
Guiana;  but  the  measures  for  its  execution  were
badly  carried  out,  the  colonists  perished  in  crowds,
and  loud  complaints  met  him  on  his  arrival  as
to  the  oppression  of  the  intendant  of  the  new
colony,  Chauvallon.  He  arrested  the  latter  and
sent  him  a  prisoner  to  France.  Turgot  remained
about  four  months,  during  which  he  made  fruit-
less efforts  to  remedy  the  evils  that  preyed  on  the
settlement.  His  health  failed  him,  and  he  was
forced  to  return  to  France,  where  he  confirmed  the
reports  that  had  already  reached  the  government
that-  it  was  impossible  to  realize  the  projects  so
lightly  adopted  in  such  a  country  as  Guiana.  He
was  for  some  time  imprisoned  on  the  complaint  of
Chauvallon,  and,  on  his  release,  lived  in  retirement.
He  wrote  several  works,  memoirs,  and  pamphlets,
among  them  "  Memoire  sur  la  flore  de  la  Guiane  "
(Paris,  1766)  and  "Observations  sur  Fespece  de
resine  elastique  de  l'lle  de  France,  semblable
a  celle  de  Cayenne  "  (1769).

TURINI,  Giovanni  (too-re'-ne),  sculptor,  b.
near  Verona,  Italy,  23  May,  1841.  He  studied
sculpture  at  Milan  and  Rome,  and  subsequently
became  professor  in  Milan.  During  the  war  with
Austria  in  1866  he  served  as  a  volunteer  in  the  4th
regiment  of  Garibaldi's  army.  Later  he  came  to
this  country  and  settled  in  New  York.  In  1867  he
exhibited  a  group  of  statuary  entitled  "  Angelica
and  Medora  "  at  the  World's  fair  in  Paris,  and  in
1882  he  made  a  bust  of  Leo  XIII.  for  the  Vatican
in  Rome.  The  statue  of  Garibaldi  erected  in  Wash-
ington square  by  the  Italians  of  New  York  city
was  designed  by  him.  It  was  unveiled  in  June,
1888,  and  accepted  by  Mayor  Abram  S.  Hewitt.

TURNBULL,  Laurence,  physician,  b.  in  Shotts,
Lanarkshire,  Scotland,  10  Sept.,  1821.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Philadelphia  college  of  pharmacy
in  1842,  taking  as  his  thesis  "Salicine,"  which  he
had  found  in  the  populus  tremuloides,  and  then  en-
gaged in  the  business  of  manufacturing  chemicals.
For  his  success  in  the  production  of  citrate  of
iron  he  received  an  award  of  merit  from  the
Franklin  institute,  and  he  also  discovered  that
biborate  of  sodium  would  bleach  colored  oils  and
ointments.  Entering  the  office  of  Dr.  John  K.
Mitchell,  he  studied  medicine,  and  was  graduated
at  the  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1845.  He  was
appointed  resident  physician  of  the  Philadelphia
hospital  in  1845,  and  was  out-door  physician  to  the
guardians  of  the  poor  in  1846-'8,  also  vaccine  phy-
sician to  the  city  of  Philadelphia  in  1847-'50.
Meanwhile,  in  1848-'50,  he  was  lecturer  on  chem-
istry applied  to  the  arts  in  Franklin  institute,  and
from  1857  till  1887  he  was  physician  to  the  depart-
ment of  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear  in  the  Howard
hospital.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was
a  volunteer  surgeon  in  the  hospital-department  ser-
vice on  Potomac  river,  for  the  relief  of  the  Penn-
sylvania troops,  in  Emory  hospital,  and  at  Fort
Monroe.  Dr.  Turnbull  has  made  a  specialty  of  dis-
eases of  the  ear,  and  is  aural  surgeon  of  the  Jeffer-
son medical  college  hospital,  and  superintendent  of
the  ear  clinic  in  1877-88.  Besides  holding  mem-
bership in  various  medical  societies,  he  presided
over  the  section  in  otology  of  the  American  medi-
cal association  in  1880,  anil  of  the  British  medical
association  in  1881 ;  and  he  was  chosen  delegate  to
the  section  in  otology  of  the  British  medical  asso-
ciation in  1888,  and  to  the  congress  of  otology  that
convened  in  Brussels,  Belgium,  in  September,  1888.
Dr.  Turnbull  has  contributed  largely  to  medical


184


TURNBULL


TURNBULL


literature,  and,  in  addition  to  memoirs  "  On  the  Use
of  Belladonna,"  and  "  On  Whooping-Cough,"  he
has  published  "  The  Electro-Magnetic  Telegraph,
with  an  Historical  Account  of  its  Rise,  Progress,
and  Present  Condition  "  (Philadelphia,  1859) ;  "  De-
fective and  Impaired  Vision,  with  the  Clinical  Use
of  the  Ophthalmoscope  in  their  Diagnosis  and
Treatment"  (1859);  "Hints  and  Observations  on
Military  Hvgiene  "  (1862) ;  "  Imperfect  Hearing
and  Hygiene  of  the  Ear  "  (1871) ;  "  The  Nature  and
Treatment  of  Nervous  Deafness,"  with  an  addi-
tional translation  of  Duchenne's  work  on  the  same
subject  (1874) ;  "  A  Clinical  Manual  of  the  Diseases
of  the  Ear  "  (1881) ;  and  "  A  Manual  of  Anaesthetic
Agents  and  their  Employment  in  the  Treatment  of
Disease  "  (1885).— -His  son,  Charles  Smith,  phy-
sician, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10  Nov.,  1847,  was
graduated  at  the  Philadelphia  central  high-school
in  1868,  and  at  the  auxiliary  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1869,  with  the  de-
gree of  Ph.  D.,  also  at  the  medical  department  of
the  same  university  in  1871.  During  the  following
year  he  was  surgeon  to  the  U.  S.  geological  survey
in  Wyoming  and  Montana  territories,  and  in
1873-'4  he  was  resident  surgeon  of  the  New  York
ophthalmic  and  aural  institute.  The  years  1874-'5
were  spent  in  study  in  the  ophthalmic  and  aural
departments  of  the  Imperial  general  hospital  in
Vienna,  and  on  his  return  he  settled  in  Philadel-
phia, devoting  his  attention  entirely  to  the  practice
of  ophthalmology  and  otology.  Dr.  Turnbull  is
chief  of  the  aural  department  of  Jefferson  medical
college,  and  ophthalmic  and  aural  surgeon  to  the
Howard,  St.  Christopher,  German,  and  Jewish  hos-

Eitals,  and  the  Home  for  incurables.  He  is  a  mem-
er  of  the  county,  state,  and  National  medical  so-
cieties, and  is  a  fellow  of  the  Philadelphia  college
of  physicians,  and  is  associate  editor  in  charge  of
the  department  of  otology  in  the  "  Annual  of  the
Universal  Medical  Sciences"  (Philadelphia,  1888).
During  his  residence  abroad  he  contributed  letters
to  the  "  Medical  and  Surgical  Reporter  "  of  Phila-
delphia, and  he  translated  Arlt's  "  Injuries  of  the
Eye  and  their  Medico-Legal  Aspects"  (Philadel-
phia, 1878) ;  Gruber's  "  Tenotomy  of  the  Tensor
Tympani  Muscle  "  (1879) ;  and  Bruner's  "  On  the
Methods  of  Connections  of  the  Ossicles  "  (1880).

TURNBULL,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  White-
burn,  Linlithgowshire,  Scotland,  10  Sept.,  1809 ;  d.
at  Hartford,  Conn.,  20  Nov.,  1877.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Glasgow  university,  and  studied  theology
under  Dr.  Thomas  Chalmers  at  Edinburgh.  While
thus  engaged  he  became  a  Baptist,  and  preached
for  a  short  time  in  Scotland  and  England.  In  1833
he  came  to  this  country,  settling  as  pastor  of  the
Baptist  church  in  Danbury,  Conn.  After  brief
pastorates  here,  in  Detroit,  Hartford,  and  Boston,
ne  returned  in  1845  to  Hartford,  as  minister  of
the  1st  Baptist  church,  which  relation  continued
for  twenty-four  years.  Leaving  the  pastorate  in
1869,  he  preached  in  various  places,  and  served  as
secretary  of  the  Connecticut  Baptist  state  conven-
tion. In  1851  he  received  from  Madison  university
the  degree  of  D.  D.  He  was  for  several  years  joint
editor  of  the  "  Christian  Review,"  and,  besides  nu-
merous contributions  to  the  periodical  press,  was
the  author  of  "The  Theatre"  (Boston,  1840);
"  Olympia  Morata  "  (1842) ;  Alexandre  R.  Vinet's
"  Vital  Christianity,"  translated,  with  an  introduc-
tion and  notes  (1846) ;  "  The  Genius  of  Scotland  "
(New  York,  1847) ;  "  The  Genius  of  Italy  "  (1849) ;
"  Theophany,  or  the  Manifestation  of  God  in  Christ "
(Hartford,  1851) ;  "  Vinet's  Miscellanies "  (New
York,  1852) ;  "  Pulpit  Orators  of  Prance  and  Swit-
zerland" (1853) ;  "The  Student  Preacher  "  (1854) ;


"  The  World  We  Live  in  "  (1855) ;  "  Christ  in  His-
tory, or  the  Central  Power  "  (Boston,  1856) ;  and
"  Life  Pictures,  or  Sketches  from  a  Pastor's  Note-
Book  "  (New  York,  1857).  He  also  edited  Sir  Will-
iam Hamilton's  "  Discussions  on  Philosophy."

TURNBULL,  Robert  James,  political  writer,
b.  in  New  Smyrna,  Fla.,  in  January,  1775 ;  d.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  15  June,  1833.  He  was  the  son
of  a  British  physician,  who  obtained  grants  from
the  government  in  1772  to  establish  a  Greek  colony
in  Florida.  About  15,000  Greeks,  Moravians,  and
other  inhabitants  of  the  Mediterranean  islands
were  induced  to  emigrate,  and  they  founded  New
Smyrna,  so  named  in  honor  of  Mrs."  Turnbull,  who
was  of  Greek  descent  and  a  native  of  Smyrna.
The  project  was  unsuccessful,  and  Dr.  Turnbull
forfeited  his  grants  by  adhering  to  the  cause  of  the
colonies  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  when  he
settled  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  The  son  was  educated
in  England,  and  then  studied  law  in  Charleston  and
Philadelphia.  After  his  admission  to  the  bar  he
practised  in  Charleston  until  1810,  when  he  retired
to  a  large  plantation  in  the  country.  While  in
Europe  he  wrote  a  "  Visit  to  the  Philadelphia
Penitentiary "  (London,  1797),  which  was  trans-
lated into  French  (Paris,  1800),  and  attracted  at-
tention both  at  home  and  abroad.  He  became  a
leader  in  the  nullification  movement,  and  wrote
a  series  of  articles  on  that  subject  in  1827  for  the
"  Charleston  Mercury,"  which  were  afterward  issued
as  "  The  Crisis,"  and  became  the  text-book  of  the
nullification  party.  Mr.  Turnbull  was  "reputed
the  ablest  writer  in  favor  of  the  principle  of  nulli-
fication." He  argued  that  "  each  state  has  the  un-
questionable right  to  judge  of  the  infractions  of
the  constitution,  and  to  interpose  its  sovereign
power  to  arrest  their  progress  and  to  protect  its
citizens,"  which  principle  he  incorporated  in  his
treatise  on  "The  Tribunal  of  Dernier  Ressort"
(1830).  In  1831  he  was  a  member  of  the  Free-
trade  convention  that  assembled  at  Columbia,  S.  C,
and  wrote  the  report  of  that  body,  and  he  was  ac-
tive in  the  similar  convention  in  Charleston  in
February,  1832.  He  delivered  an  oration  before  an
assemblage  of  the  nullification  party  that  showed
its  influence  in  the  subsequent  election,  and  in
November  of  the  same  year  he  was  a  delegate  to
the  convention  of  the  people  of  South  Carolina
that  passed  the  nullifying  ordinance,  and  prepared
the  address  of  that  convention  to  the  people.  After
the  proclamation  of  President  Jackson  was  received
in  South  Carolina  he  was  the  first  to  enlist  when
volunteers  were  called  for,  in  addition  to  the  or-
ganized militia,  to  resist  the  National  government.
A.  monument  was  erected  to  his  memory  in  Charles-
ton by  his  political  admirers  and  associates.

TURNBULL,  William,  engineer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  9  Oct.,  1800:  d.  in  Wilmington,  N.  C,
9  Dec,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1819,  and  entered  the  army  as  2d
lieutenant  in  the  artillery.  After  serving  in  garri-
son at  Fort  McHenry  for  a  year  he  was  on  topo-
graphical duty  until  1832,  being  made  in  1831  as-
sistant topographical  engineer,  with  the  brevet  of
captain.  From  1832  till  1843  he  was  superintending
topographical  engineer  of  the  construction  of  the
Potomac  aqueduct.  This  work,  one  of  the  earliest
of  the  important  undertakings  of  American  engi-
neers, gave  Col.  Turnbull  a  high  rank  among  his
professional  associates.  The  piers  of  the  aqueduct
were  founded  by  coffer-dams  on  rock,  sometimes
covered  by  twenty  feet  of  mud,  and  nearly  forty
feet  below  the  water  surface.  He  was  made  major,
7  July,  1838.  and  had  charge  of  the  repairs  of  the
Potomac  (long)  bridge  in  1841-3. Subsequently  he


TURNBULL


TURNER


185


had  charge  of  Lake  Ontario  harbor  improvement,
the  extension  of  Buffalo  harbor,  and  inspection  of
harbor  improvements  on  Lake  Champlain,  Lake
Ontario,  and  Lake  Erie.  In  the  war  with  Mexico
he  was  topographical  engineer  of  the  army  under
Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  and  was  engaged  in  the  siege
of  Vera  Cruz,  the  castles  of  Cerro  Gordo,  Pedregal,

and  Churu-
busco,  and
the  operations
that  ended
with  the  cap-
ture of  the
city  of  Mexi-
co. His  ser-
vices gained
for  him  the
brevetsoflieu-
tenant  -  colo-
nel and  colo-
nel. During
1848-9  he  had
charge  of  the
construction  of  the  New  Orleans  custom-house,
and  he  was  assistant  in  the  topographical  bureau
at  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1850-'2  and  1853-'4,
where  he  examined  into  the  practicability  of  bridg-
ing Susquehanna  river  at  Havre  de  Grace,  and  the
expediency  of  an  additional  canal  around  the  Falls
of  Ohio.  He  was  light-house  engineer  for  Oswego
harbor,  N.  Y.,  in  1853-'5,  in  charge  of  harbor  im-
provements of  Lake  Champlain,  Lake  Ontario,  and
the  eastern  part  of  Lake  Erie  in  1853-'6,  and  of
the  improvement  of  Cape  Fear  river,  N.  C,  in
1856-7.  The  illustration  shown  above  represents
the  Potomac  aqueduct  as  designed  by  him.  Among
his  various  government  reports  that  were  published
was  one  "  On  the  Survey  and  Construction  of  the
Potomac  Aqueduct,"  with  twenty-one  plates  (Wash-
ington, 1838). — His  son,  Charles  NesMt,  engineer,
b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  14  Aug.,  1832 ;  d.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  2  Dec,  1874,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1854,  and  made  2d  lieutenant
of  topographical  engineers.  He  was  on  the  sur-
vey of  the  boundary-line  between  the  United  States
and  Mexico  in  1854-'6,  on  that  of  the  northern
lakes  in  1856-'9,  and  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
as  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  in  1859-'60.
During  the  civil  war  he  served  at  first  on  the  staff
of  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler  and  in  the  Department
of  the  Gulf,  after  which,  in  1863-4,  he  was  with  the
Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  received  his  promo-
tion as  captain  of  topographical  engineers,  14  July,
1862,  and  was  transferred  to  the  corps  of  engineers
on  3  March,  1863.  In  June,  1864,  he  was  chief  en-
gineer of  the  cavalry  corps,  during  Gen.  Philip  H.
Sheridan's  raid,  and  later  chief  engineer  of  the
8th  army  corps.  He  received  the  brevets  of  major,
lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel  for  his  services,  and
after  the  war  served  on  the  repairs  of  Fort  Hamil-
ton. Col.  Turnbull  resigned  on  31  Dec,  1865,  and
engaged  in  the  commission  business  in  Boston,
Mass.,  where  he  continued  until  his  death.

TURNBULL,  William  Paterson,  ornitholo-
gist, b.  in  Fala,  Scotland,  20  June,  1830 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5  July,  1871.  He  was  educated
at  the  high-school  in  Edinburgh.  For  many  years
he  occupied  himself  in  collecting  a  complete  library
of  works  that  relate  to  American  ornithology,  and
also  in  securing  manuscript  letters  and  original
drawings  of  Alexander  Wilson.  His  home  was  in
Philadelphia,  where  he  was  a  member  of  the  Acad-
emy of  natural  sciences.  He  published  "  Birds  of
East  Lothian "  (Glasgow),  and  "  Birds  of  East
Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey  "  (1869).


TURNER,  Charles  Coche,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Virginia  about  1805  ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  4  March,
1861.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  10
May,  1820,  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  17  May,
1828,  and  served  in  the  sloop  "  Vandalia,"  suppress-
ing piracy,  and  in  the  Seminole  war  in  1834-'5.
He  was  in  the  sloop  "  Peacock  "  in  the  East  Indies
in  1836-'8,  during  which  time  he  had  a  narrow
escape  on  a  reef  in  the  Persian  gulf,  in  which  it
was  necessary  to  throw  the  guns  overboard  in  order
to  save  the  ship.  He  commanded  the  store-ship
"Erie"  in  1844-7,  visited  the  Mediterranean,
African,  and  Pacific  squadrons,  and  assisted  in
operations  for  the  conquest  of  California  during
the  Mexican  war.  He  was  promoted  to  master-
commandant,  22  March,  1847,  served  on  ordnance
duty  in  Washington  in  1849-51,  was  fleet-captain
in  the  Mediterranean  squadron  in  1852-3,  and
commanded  the  sloop  "  Levant "  on  the  coast  of
Africa  in  1853-'6.  He  was  on  waiting  orders  in
1857,  and  served  at  the  Washington  navy-yard
from  1857  till  1860.

TURNER,  Charles  Yardley,  artist,  b.  in  Bal-
timore, Md.,  25  Nov.,  1850.  He  came  to  New
York  in  1872  and  studied  at  the  Academy  of  de-
sign for  three  years.  He  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Art  students'  league,  and  remained  there
until  1878,  in  which  year  he  went  abroad.  In  Paris
he  studied  under  Jean  Paul  Laurens,  Michael
Munkacsy  (forming,  with  some  other  students,  the
"  Munkacsy  school  "),  and  Leon  Bonnat.  In  1881
he  returned  to  New  York  and  first  exhibited  at
the  National  academy  the  following  year.  He
gained  the  Hallgarten  prize  by  the  "Courtship
of  Miles  Standish "  in  1883,  was  also  elected  an
associate  of  the  academy,  and  in  1886  was  made
an  academician.  His  works  in  oil  include  "The
Grand  Canal  at  Dordrecht,"  "The  Days  that  are
No  More,"  and  "Afternoon  Tea"  (1882);  "Doro-
thy Fox  "  and  "  Preparing  for  Yearly  Meeting  "
(1883) ;  and  "  The  Last  of  the  Montauks,"  "  Han-
nah Thurston,"  and  "  The  Bridal  Procession,"  from
"  Miles  Standish  "  (1886).  Of  his  water-colors  the
principal  are  "  Dordrecht  Milkmaid  "  (1882) ;  "  En-
gaged "  (1885) :  "  Martha  Hilton  "  (1886) :  and  "At
the  Ferry  "  (1887).  Mr.  Turner  has  of  late  given
much  attention  to  etching.

TURNER,. Daniel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Rich-
mond, Staten  island,  N.  Y.,  in  1794 ;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  4  Feb.,  1850.  He  entered  the  navy  as
a  midshipman,  1  Jan.,  1808,  and  was  promoted  to
lieutenant,  12  March.  1813.  He  served  on  the  lakes
with  Com.  Oliver  H.  Perry,  and  commanded  the
brig  "  Caledonia  "  in  the  victory  of  10  Sept.,  1813,
on  Lake  Erie,  for  which  he  received  a  silver  medal
from  congress  and  a  sword  from  the  state  of  New
York.  In  the  next  season,  1814,  he  served  on  Lakes
Huron  and  Superior,  where  he  commanded  a  boat
expedition,  and  captured  two  forts  and  several  prize
vessels.  On  5  Sept.,  1814,  while  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  schooner  "  Scorpion  "  on  Lake  Huron,
his  vessel  was  captured  by  a  stratagem,  and  he  was
slightly  wounded.  After  the  war  he  cruised  in  the
frigate  "Java"  on  the  Mediterranean  station  in
1815-18.  He  commanded  the  schooner  "  Nonesuch  "
in  the  Mediterranean  squadron  in  1820-'4,  was
promoted  to  master-commandant,  5  March,  1825,
was  commissioned  captain,  3  March.  1835,  com-
manded the  "  Constitution  "  on  the  Pacific  station
in  1839-41,  and  was  commodore  of  the  Brazil
squadron  in  1843-'6.  He  had  charge  of  the  Ports-
mouth navy-yard  in  1846-9.  Capt.  Turner  was  in-
trusted with  negotiations  in  various  countries,  and
he  received  the  commendation  of  the  government
for  the  manner  in  which  his  duties  were  performed.


186


TURNER


TURNER


TURNER,  Douglas  Kellogg,  clergyman,  b.  in
Stockbridge,  Mass.,  17  Dec,  1823.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1843  and  studied  theology  in  An-
dover  theological  seminary  and  Yale  divinity-
school.  In  1846-'8  he  taught  in  Neshaminy,  Pa.,
and  he  was  ordained  on  18  April,  1848,  as  pastor
of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Hartsville,  Pa.  He
remained  connected  with  this  parish  until  his  res-
ignation in  1873.  In  1873  he  became  correspond-
ing secretary  and  librarian  of  the  Presbyterian
historical  society.  He  has  published  "The  His-
tory of  the  Neshaminy  Church  from  1726  to  1876  "
(Philadelphia,  1876)  and  historical  papers.

TURNER,  Edward,  jurist,  b.  in  Fairfax  coun-
ty, Va.,  25  Nov.,  1778 ;  d.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  23
May,  1860.  He  was  educated  at  Transylvania  uni-
versity and  studied  law.  In  1802  he  emigrated  to
Mississippi  and  settled  in  Natchez,  where  he  began
the  practice  of  his  profession.  The  governor  of
the  territory  appointed  Turner  his  aide-de-camp,
and  soon  afterward  he  became  clerk  of  the  terri-
torial house  of  representatives,  also  acting  as  the
governor's  private  secretary.  In  1803  he  was  ap-
pointed register  of  the  land-office,  and  in  1811  he
was  elected  to  the  legislature  from  Warren  county.
He  was  chosen  city  magistrate  of  Natchez  and
president  of  the  board  of  select-men  in  1813,  and
after  1815  was  sent  for  several  terms  to  the  legis-
lature as  a  representative  from  Adams  county.  In
1818  he  was  elected  to  the  first  legislature  that  as-
sembled under  the  state  government,  and,  except
for  one  year,  when  he  was  attorney-general  of  the
state,  he  continued  a  member  of  the  house  until
1822,  during  which  time  he  was  twice  elected
speaker.  He  was  appointed  judge  of  the  criminal
court  of  Adams  county  in  1822,  in  1824  judge  of
the  supreme  court  of  Mississippi,  and  in  1829  chief
justice,  which  place  he  held  until  he  was  super-
seded by  the  amended  constitution  of  1832.  He
was  chancellor  of  the  state  from  1834  till  1839,  in
1840  was  again  elected  judge  of  the  supreme  court,
and  at  the  expiration  of  his  term  in  1843  was
chosen  to  the  state  senate.  Judge  Turner  was  ap-
pointed in  1815  by  the  legislature  to  prepare  a  di-
gest of  the  statute  laws  of  the  territory,  which  was
completed  and  adopted  in  1816.  This  digest  con-
tains all  the  statutes  in  force  at  that  period,  and
is  entitled  "  Statutes  of  the  Mississippi  Territory  "
(Natchez,  1816).

TURNER,  Henry  McNeal,  A.  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Newberry  Court-House,  S.  C,  1  Feb.,  1833.  He
is  of  African  descent.  After  he  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1853  his  native  eloquence  created  quite
a  sensation,  and  in  1858  he  was  admitted  into  the
Missouri  conference  of  the  African  Methodist  Epis-
copal church,  and  transferred  to  the  Baltimore
conference.  He  studied  four  years  as  a  non-ma-
triculated student  in  Trinity  college,  and  was  sta-
tioned at  Israel  church,  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1863.
He  greatly  assisted  in  the  organization  of  the  1st
colored  regiment,  U.  S.  infantry,  of  which  Presi-
dent Lincoln  commissioned  him  the  chaplain.  At
the  close  of  the  civil  war  President  Johnson  com-
missioned him  to  a  chaplaincy  in  the  regular  army,
but  he  declined.  He  was  sent  into  Georgia  to  as-
sist in  the  work  of  reconstruction,  called  the  first
Republican  state  contention,  and  was  elected  twice
to  the  Georgia  legislature.  In  1869  he  was  ap-
pointed postmaster  of  Macon,  but  resigned,  and  in
the  same  year  was  made  coast  inspector  of  customs.
In  1876  he  was  elected  book  agent  of  his  denomi-
nation, and  in  1880  he  became  bishop.  His  chief
work  is  "  Methodist  Polity."

TURNER,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Southampton
county, Va.,  20  Dec, 1766;  d. in  Bloomsbury,


Warren  co.,  N.  C,  15  Jan.,  1824.  He  early  re-
moved with  his  parents  to  Bute  (now  Warren)
county,  N.  C,  and  there  received  such  education  as
the  common  schools  of  that  district  afforded.  Dur-
ing the  Revolutionary  war  he  served  with  Na-
thaniel Bacon  in  a  company  of  North  Carolina  vol-
unteers commanded  by  Col.  John  Macon.  His
public  career  began  by  his  election  to  the  legisla-
ture in  1798,  with  re-election  in  1799  and  1800,
and  was  continued  by  his  service  in  the  upper
house  in  1801-'2.  He  was  then  chosen  governor
of  North  Carolina,  which  place  he  held  until  1805.
Gov.  Turner  was  then  elected  as  a  Democrat  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  and  served  from  4  March,  1805,  till
1816,  when  he  retired  on  account  of  failing  health.
— His  son,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Warren  county,
N.  C,  21  Sept.,  1796;  d.  at  Mare  island,  Cal.,  21
July,  1860,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1814,  and  entered  the  army  as  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  corps  of  artillery.  He  served  during
the  second  war  with  England  as  acting  assistant
engineer  in  erecting  temporary  defences  for  New
York  city,  after  which  he  was  ordered  to  Platts-
burg.  On  the  reduction  of  the  army,  he  resigned
on  17  May,  1815,  and  then  spent  two  years  at  Will-
iam and  Mary  college.  He  was  elected  to  the
lower  branch  of  the  North  Carolina  legislature,
serving  from  1819  till  1823.  Mr.  Turner  was
elected  to  congress,  and  served  from  3  Dec,  1827,
till  3  March,  1829,  after  which,  in  1847-54,  he  was
principal  of  the  Warrenton,  N.  C,  female  seminary.
His  last  office  was  that  of  superintending  engineer
of  the  construction  of  the  public  works  at  Mare
island  navy-yard,  San  Francisco  harbor,  which  he
held  from  the  establishment  of  that  navy-yard  in
1854  till  the  time  of  his  death.

TURNER,  John  Wesley,  soldier,  b.  in  Saratoga
county,  N.  Y.,  19  July,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1855,  and  assigned  to
the  1st  artillery.  He  took  part  with  his  battery  in
the  war  against  the  Seminoles  in  1857-'8,  and  served
in  garrisons  till  1861,  when  he  was  promoted  1st
lieutenant,  and  then  captain  and  commissary  of
subsistence,  in  which  capacity  and  in  command  of
a  breaching  battery  in  the  reduction  of  Fort  Pu-
laski he  rendered  valuable  service.  He  was  ap-
pointed colonel  and  chief  of  staff  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  South,  was  active  in  the  operations
against  Fort  Wagner  and  Fort  Sumter,  and  in  Sep-
tember, 1863,  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of
volunteers.  Gen.  Turner  assumed  command  of  a
division  of  the  10th  corps,  Army  of  the  James,  par-
ticipating in  the  campaigns  in  front  of  Richmond
till  August,  1864.  Subsequently  he  served  as  chief
of  staff  in  the  Department  of  North  Carolina  and
Virginia  till  March,  1865,  when,  in  command  of
an  independent  division  of  the  24th  corps,  he  was
present  in  the  closing  incidents  of  the  war,  termi-
nating in  the  surrender  at  Appomattox.  He  was
brevetted  major  "  for  gallant  and  meritorious
services "  at  Fort  Wagner,  lieutenant-colonel  for
similar  services  "  in  action  at  the  explosion  of  the
Petersburg  mine,"  colonel  for  the  capture  of  Fort
Gregg,  major-general  of  volunteers  "for  gallant
and  meritorious  service  on  several  occasions  before
the  enemy,"  and  brigadier-general  and  major-gen-
eral, U.  S.  army,  for  services  "  in  the  field  during
the  rebellion."  Gen.  Turner  was  mustered  out  of
the  volunteer  service  in  September,  1866,  was  depot
commissary  at  St.  Louis  till  1871,  and  on  duty  in
the  Indian  Department  till  4  Sept.  of  that  year,
when  he  resigned  from  the  army.  Since  that  time
he  has  been  engaged  as  a  civil  engineer,  and  since
1877  he  has  been  a  street  commissioner  and  mem-
ber of  the  board  of  public  works  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.


TURNER


TURNER


187


TURNER,  Nat,  insurgent,  b.  in' Virginia  about
1800 ;  d.  in  Jerusalem.  Va.,  11  Nov..  1831.  He  was
a  negro  slave  who  believed  himself  chosen  of  the
Lord  to  lead  his  people  to  freedom.  For  a  long
time  he  claimed  to  have  heard  voices  in  the  air
and  to  have  seen  signs  in  the  sky.  Portents  were
written  on  the  fallen  leaves  of  the  woods  and  in
spots  of  blood  upon  the  corn  in  the  field  to  inform
him  of  a  divine  mission.  In  his  Bible,  which  he
knew  by  heart,  he  found  prophecies  of  the  great
work  he  was  called  upon  to  do.  He  was  regarded
as  having  unusual  mental  power  and  resources,  but
he  failed  to  make  plans  that  promised  success.
Taking  six  men  into  his  confidence  in  the  autumn
of  1831,  he  set  out  at  an  appointed  time  to  go
from  house  to  house  and  kill  every  white  person,
irrespective  of  age  or  sex,  to  inspire  universal  ter-
ror, and  arouse  the  whole  slave  population.  They
began  at  Turner's  own  home,  where  they  killed  his
master,  and  then,  going  to  other  plantations,  were
joined  by  other  slaves.  An  advance-guard  on
horseback  surrounded  each  house  in  turn,  holding
it  until  their  followers  on  foot,  armed  with  axes,
scythes,  and  muskets,  came  up  to  complete  the
work  of  destruction,  while  the  horsemen  rode  on
to  the  next  house.  In  forty-eight  hours  fifty-five
white  persons  were  killed  without  loss  to  the  ne-
groes, whose  numbers  had  increased  to  sixty.  The
insurgents  then  moved  toward  Jerusalem,  where
they  expected  to  find  plenty  of  fire-arms  and  to  be
joined  by  large  numbers ;  but  they  separated  and
were  attacked  by  two  bodies  of  white  men  and  dis-
persed. Turner  escaped  to  the  woods,  and,  after
spending  nearly  two  months  in  hiding,  was  cap-
tured, taken  to  Jerusalem,  and  after  a  trial  hanged.
This  outbreak,  known  as  the  Southampton  insur-
rection, resulted  in  the  trial  of  fifty-three  negroes,
of  whom  seventeen  were  hanged,  and  many  others,
suspected  of  complicity,  were  tortured,  burned,
shot,  and  mutilated.  Terror  spread  through  the
states  as  far  west  as  Kentucky,  and  south  and
southwest  to  Georgia  and  Louisiana ;  but  no  evi-
dences were  ever  discovered  of  a  concerted  move-
ment among  the  slaves.

TURNER,  Peter,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Rhode
Island,  17  Feb.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17
Feb.,  1871.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,
4  March,  1823,  became  a  passed  midshipman,  23
March,  1829,  and  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  21
June,  1832.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  was  pres-
ent at  the  fall  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  participated  in
the  boat  expedition  at  Tuspan  and  the  second  ex-
pedition at  Tabasco,  where  he  served  with  credit.
He  commanded  the  store-ship  "  Southampton  "  in
the  Pacific  squadron  in  1851-'2.  He  was  placed
on  the  reserved  list  in  1855,  and  was  on  waiting
orders  until  1861,  when  he  was  commissioned  com-
mander on  1  July,  and  was  governor  of  the  naval
asylum  at  Philadelphia  during  the  civil  war.  He
was  promoted  to  commodore,  25  July,  1862.

TURNER,  Philip,  surgeon,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  25  Feb.,  1740;  d.  in  New  York  city,  20
April,  1815.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at  the  age  of
twelve,  and  adopted  by  Dr.  Elisha  Tracy,  under
whom  he  studied  medicine  and  whose  daughter  he
married.  In  1759  he  was  appointed  an  assistant
surgeon  to  a  provincial  regiment  that  served  under
Gen.  Jeffrey  Amherst  at  Fort  Ticonderoga.  After
the  peace  of  1763  he  settled  in  Norwich,  where  at
the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  was
unrivalled  as  a  surgeon.  In  1775  he  was  the  first
surgeon  of  the  Connecticut  troops  before  Boston,
and  in  1776  he  accompanied  the  Continental  army
to  New  York,  attending  it  at  the  battles  of  Long
Island  and  White  Plains. Dr.  Turner  was ap-


pointed surgeon-general  of  the  Eastern  department
in  1777,  and  filled  that  post  with  great  ability
till  near  the  close  of  the  Revolutionary  war.  He
then  resumed  his  private  practice  in  Norwich,  but
removed  in  1800  to  New  York  citv,  and  soon  after-
ward was  appointed  a  surgeon  to  the  staff  of  the
U.  S.  army  and  stationed  on  Manhattan  island.
Dr.  Turner  was  interred  with  military  honors  in
the  church-yard  of  St.  Paul's  in  New  York  city.

TURNER,  Samuel  Hnlbeart,  clergyman,  b.
in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  23  Jan.,  1790;  d.  in  New
York  city,  21  Dec,  1861.  He  entered  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania,  was  graduated  in  1807,
studied  for  the  ministry  in  the  Episcopal  church
for  three  years  under  Bishop  White's  direction,
and  was  ordained  deacon  in  St.  Paul's  church,
Philadelphia,  27  Jan.,  1811,  by  Bishop  White,  and
priest  in  1814  by  the  same  bishop.  He  accepted  a
call  to  the  Episcopal  church  in  Chestertown,  Md.,
and  served  in  that  post  in  1812-'17.  He  was
appointed  superintendent  of  the  theological  school
in  Philadelphia  in  1818,  and  had  Alonzo  Potter
(afterward  bishop  of  Pennsylvania)  as  his  first
pupil.  At  the  close  of  the  same  year  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  historic  theology  in  the  Gen-
eral theological  seminary  of  the  Episcopal  Church,
toward  establishing  and  endowing  which  efforts
were  then  and  subsequently  made  to  good  purpose.
In  1820  the  institution  was  removed  to  New  Haven,
Conn.,  but  at  the  close  of  1821  it  was  brought  back
again  to  New  York  city.  The  seminary  was  reor-
ganized and  Dr.  Turner  was  appointed  professor  of
biblical  learning  and  interpretation  of  Holy  Scrip-
tures. He  occupied  this  post  until  the  time  of  his
death.  In  1830  he  was  appointed  professor  of  the
Hebrew  language  and  literature  in  Columbia  col-
lege, but  there  was  little  or  no  call  for  active  ser-
vice at  any  time.  The  professor  delivered  in  1831
a  course  of  three  lectures  on  the  Hebrew  language,
which  were  afterward  printed.  Dr.  Turner  was
always  a  diligent  student,  especially  in  his  own  de-
partment, and  published  a  large  number  of  works
in  the  way  of  scripture  exposition  and  in  defence  of
his  views  of  theology  and  church  principles.  They
include  "  Notes  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  '
(New  York,  1824:  enlarged  ed.,  1853);  "Compan-
ion to  the  Book  of  Genesis  "  (1841) ;  "  Biographical
Notices  of  the  Most  Distinguished  Jewish  Rabbis  "
(1847) ;  "  Essay  on  our  Lord's  Discourse  at  Caper-
naum, in  St.  John's  Gospel,  with  Strictures  on
Cardinal  Wiseman's  Lectures  on  the  Real  Pres-
ence "  (1851) :  "  Thoughts  on  the  Origin,  Charac-
ter, and  Interpretation  of  Scripture  Prophecy "
(1852) ;  "  St,  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  Greek
and  English,  with  Commentary  "  (1852) ;  "  Epistle
to  the  Ephesians,  with  Commentary "  (1856) ;
"Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  with  Commentary"
(1856) ;  and  "  Spiritual  Things  compared  to  Spirit-
ual "  (1859).  In  conjunction  with  Rev.  Dr.  Will-
iam R.  Whittingham,  he  translated  "  Jahn's  Intro-
duction to  the  Old  Testament "  (1827)  and  "  In-
troduction to  Sacred  Philology  and  Interpretation,
by  Dr.  Gottlieb  J.  Planck  "  (1834).  He  published
also  various  sermons  on  special  occasions,  tractates,
articles  in  reviews,  etc.  Shortly  after  his  death
was  published  "  Autobiography  of  Samuel  H.
Turner.  D.  D."  (New  York,  1863).

TURNER,  Thomas,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  23  Dec,  1808 ;  d.  in  Glen  Mills,  Pa..
24  March,  1883.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman, 21  April,  1825,  became  a  passed  midship-
man, 4  June,  1831,  and  was  commissioned  a  lieu-
tenant, 22  Dec,  1835.  He  served  in  the  frigate
"Macedonian"  in  the  exploring  expedition  of
1837-8,  and  in  the  frigate  " Columbia,"  the  flag-


188


TURNER


TURPIN


ship  of  the  East  India  squadron,  in  1838-'41,  dur-
ing which  time  he  participated  in  the  destruction
of  the  Malay  pirates'  towns  of  Quallat  Battoo  and
Mucke,  on  the  island  of  Sumatra.  1  Jan.,  1839.  He
commanded  the  store-ship  "  Fredonia,"  of  the  Gulf

squadron,  from  June
till  October,  1847,
was  then  transferred
to  the  sloop  "Al-
bany," and  com-
manded the  schoon-
er "  Reefer  "  in  the
attack  on  Tuspan  in
April,  1847.  He  was
promoted  to  com-
mander, 14  Sept.,
1855,  and  had  charge
of  the  sloop  "Sara-
toga," on  the  Home
squadron,  in  1858-
'60.  On  6  March,
1860,  he  captured
•^-  f*^.  at  Vera Cruz the

jf/jf/s  steamers "  Mira-

G/.  CS  frOV?***- mon"  and  "Mar-
ques de  Habana,"
which  had  been  purchased  in  Spain  by  Gen.  Mira-
mon,  and  had  attempted  to  blockade  the  port  of
Vera  Cruz  in  the  interests  of  the  revolutionary

farty.  He  commanded  the  armored  ship  "  New
ronsides"  in  the  South  Atlantic  squadron,  and
was  highly  commended  for  the  skill  and  ability
with  which  he  handled  this  vessel  in  the  attacks
on  the  forts  at  Charleston,  7  April,  1863,  and  in
other  operations  there  until  August,  1863.  He  was
promoted  to  commodore,  13  Dec,  1862,  and  to  rear-
admiral,  24  June,  1868,  and  commanded  the  South
Pacific  squadron  in  1868-'70  during  the  great  earth-
quake in  Peru,  where  he  rendered  timely  assistance
to  the  sufferers.  He  was  retired,  21  April,  1870,
after  forty-five  years  of  active  service.

TURNER,  William  Wadden,  philologist,  b.
in  London,  England,  23  Oct.,  1810;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  29  Nov.,  1859.  He  came  to  New
York  in  1818,  and,  after  a  public-school  education,
was  apprenticed  to  the  carpenter's  trade,  but  sub-
sequently became  a  printer.  At  the  age  of  twen-
ty-six he  was  master  of  French,  Latin,  German,
and  Hebrew.  Afterward  he  studied  Arabic  with
Prof.  Isaac  Nordheimer,  and  they  proposed  to  write
together  an  Arabic  grammar,  but,  receiving  no
encouragement,  they  prepared  instead  "  A  Critical
Grammar  of  the  Hebrew  Language  "  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1838) ;  and  "  Chrestomathy :  or  A  Gram-
matical Analysis  of  Selections  from  the  Hebrew
Scriptures,  with  an  Exercise  in  Hebrew  Compo-
sition "  (1838),  also  a  "  Hebrew  and  Chaldee  Con-
cordance to  the  Old  Testament "  (1842).  In  or-
der to  superintend  the  printing  of  these  books,
Mr.  Turner  removed  to  New  Haven,  as  the  only
sufficient  supply  of  oriental  type  was  to  be  found
there  and  at  Andover.  He  was  engaged  in  setting
the  type  during  the  day,  and  spent  his  evenings  in
preparing  the  manuscript.  On  the  completion  of
the  works,  Mr.  Turner  added  to  his  linguistic  at-
tainments a  knowledge  of  Sanskrit  and  most  of  the
other  chief  Asiatic  languages,  and  later  he  turned
his  attention  to  the  languages  of  the  North  Amer-
ican Indians.  He  edited  a  "Vocabulary  of  the
Jargon  or  Trade  Language  of  Oregon''  (1853),
and  "  Grammar  and  Dictionary  of  the  Yoruba  Lan-
guage "  (1858),  which  was  issued  by  the  Smithso-
nian institution.  In  1842  he  was  elected  professor
of  oriental  literature  in  Union  theological  semina-
ry, New  York  city*  and  he  continued  in  that  office


until  1852,  when  he  was  called  to  Washington  by
the  commissioner  of  patents  to  take  charge  of  the
library  of  that  department.  He  was  a  member  of
the  American  oriental  society,  and  secretary  of
the  National  institute  for  the  promotion  of  science.
Mr.  Turner  was  considered  in  his  day  the  most
skilful  proof-reader  in  the  United  States.  In
addition  to  the  literary  labors  that  have  been  al-
ready mentioned,  he  translated  from  the  German
Friedrich  L.  G.  von  Raumer's  "  America  and  the
American  People"  (New  York,  1845),  and  was  as-
sociated with  Dr.  P.  J.  Kaufmann  in  the  transla-
tion of  the  12th  German  ed.  of  Ferdinand  Mackel-
dey's  "Compendium  of  Modern  Civil  Law"  (Lon-
don, 1845).  He  also  translated  William  Freund's
"  Latin-German  Lexicon  "  for  Ethan  A.  Andrews's
"  Latin-English  Lexicon  "  (New  York,  1851).

TURNE  Y,  Hopkins  Lacey,  senator,  b.  in  Smith
county,  Tenn.,  3  Oct.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Winchester,  Tenn.,
1  Aug.,  1857.  He  was  apprenticed  as  a  boy  to  the
tailor's  trade,  and  in  1818  served  in  the  war  against
the  Seminole  Indians.  When  he  became  of  age  he
was  unable  to  write,  but  began  the  study  of  law,
and,  after  admission  to  the  bar,  practised  in  Win-
chester. In  1828  he  was  chosen  to  the  legislature,
and  he  was  annually  re-elected  until  1838.  He  was
then  chosen  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,  and  served
from  4  Sept.,  1837,  till  3  March,  1843,  after  which
he  was  U.  S.  senator  from  Tennessee  from  1  Dec,
1845,  till  3  March,  1851.

TURPIE,  David,  senator,  b.  in  Hamilton  coun-
ty, Ohio,  8  July,  1829.  He  was  graduated  at  Ken-
yon  in  1848,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1849,  and  began  practice  at  Logansport.  Ind.
He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1852,  was
appointed  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
1854,  and  of  the  circuit  court  in  1856,  which  post
he  resigned.  He  was  again  a  member  of  the  state
house  of  representatives  in  1858,  and  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate  from  Indiana  as  a  Democrat  in
place  of  Jesse  D.  Bright,  who  had  been  expelled,
serving  from  22  Jan.  till  3  March,  1863.  He  was
chosen  for  the  full  term  in  the  spring  of  1887.

TURPIN,  Louis  Georges  Francois,  French
naval  officer,  b.  in  Nantes,  20  July,  1790;  d.  in
Toulon,  7  Oct.,  1848.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a
cabin-boy  when  ten  years  old,  was  promoted  mid-
shipman in  1808,  lieutenant  in  1812,  and  in  1820-'2
performed  three  remarkable  voyages  to  the  Wind-
ward islands  and  Brazil,  making  valuable  astro-
nomical observations  and  preparing  charts  of  the
Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the  South  American  coast,
which  are  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  navy  de-
partment at  Paris.  In  1822-3  he  participated  as
1st  lieutenant  in  the  expedition  around  the  world
under  Bougainville,  a  grandson  of  the  noted  navi-
gator, and  he  afterward  commanded  a  sloop-of-war
in  the  battle  of  Navarin.  He  became  captain  in
1831  and  commodore  in  1837,  and  was  second  com-
mander in  1838  under  Baudin  of  the  expedition  to
Mexico,  taking  part  in  the  capture  of  San  Juan  de
Ulua,  28  Nov.,  1838.  He  was  promoted  rear-
admiral,  5  Feb.,  1843,  and  was  afterward  naval
prefect  of  Toulon.

TURPIN,  Pierre  Jean  Francois,  French
botanist,  b.  in  Vire,  Calvados,  France,  11  March,
1775 ;  d.  in  Paris,  1  May,  1840.  He  enlisted  when
he  was  fourteen  years  old  in  the  battalion  of  Cal-
vados, and  sailed  with  it  for  Santo  Domingo  in
1794.  There  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  the
botanist  Poiteau,  who  gave  him  lessons  in  botany.
After  studying,  with  great  care,  the  flora  of  the
island,  he  returned  to  France,  but  received  permis-
sion some  time  afterward  to  pay  a  second  visit  to
Santo  Domingo. He  next  explored  the  flora  of


TURREAU  DE  GARAMBOUVILLE


TUTTLE


189


the  island  of  Tortuga,  funds  for  the  purpose  hav-
ing been  supplied  by  the  consul  of  the  United
States.  He  spent  more  than  a  year  there,  and
made  a  rich  collection  of  plants  and  designs.
Poiteau  went  to  the  United  States  in  1800,  and
Turpin  was  pharmacist  to  the  French  army  in
Santo  Domingo  during  Leclerc's  expedition,  and
then  sailed  for  the  United  States,  where  he  became
a  teacher  in  New  Orleans  and  Philadelphia,  and,
meeting  Baron  von  Humboldt,  returned  with  him
to  Prance.  He  afterward  executed  the  icono-
graphic  part  of  several  of  Humboldt's  works.  Tur-
pin wrote  many  works,  among  them  "  Lecons  de
flore"  (Paris,  1819);  "Essai  d'une  iconographie
eleraentaire  et  philosophique  des  vegetaux,  avec  un
texte  explicatif  "  (1820);  and  "Iconographie  vege-
tale.  ou  organisation  des  vegetaux"  (1841).

TURREAU  DE  GARAMBOUVILLE,  Louis
Marie,  Baron  de  Linieres,  French  soldier,  b.  in
France  in  1756;  d.  in  Conches,  department  of  the
Eure,  15  Dec,  1816.  He  entered  the  army  in
youth,  fought  under  Count  Rochambeau  for  Ameri-
can independence,  and  attained  the  rank  of  cap-
tain. He  served  as  a  general  of  division  in  Ven-
dee, Italy,  and  Switzerland,  and  in  1804  was  made
a  baron.  He  was  minister  to  the  United  States  in
1804-'ll,  and  vainly  attempted  to  induce  the  gov-
ernment of  this  country  to  adopt  a  French  policy.
After  his  return  he  published  "  Apercu  sur  la  situ-
ation politique  des  Etats-Unis"  (1815),  a  bitter  cri-
tique of  the  government  of  the  United  States,
which  he  says  in  the  preface  "  the  author  has  stud-
ied eight  years  without  being  able  to  comprehend
it."  Some  time  before  his  death  he  retired  to  his
estate  at  Conches,  in  the  department  of  the  Eure.
He  also  published  "  Memoires  pour  servir  a  l'his-
toire  de  la  guerre  de  la  Vendee  "  (1815).

TUTHILL,  Louisa  Cornelia,  author,  b.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  6  July,  1798;  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,
1  June,  1879.  Her  maiden  name  was  Huggins,
and  in  1817  she  married  Cornelius  Tuthill,  lawyer,
who  was  for  two  years  editor  of  the  "  Microscope  "
and  died  in  1825.  During  the  last  thirty  years  of
her  life  she  resided  at  Princeton.  She  contrib-
uted anonymously  to  magazines,  and  among  other
works  published  "  James  Somers,  the  Pilgrim's
Son  "  (Boston,  1827) ;  "  Mary's  Visit  to  Boston  "
(1829)  ;  "  Ancient  Architecture  "  (New  Haven,
1830);  "  Calisthenics "  (Hartford,  1831);  "Young
Lady's  Home  "  (New  Haven,  1841) ;  "  I  will  be  a
Lady  "  (Boston.  1845) ;  "  I  will  be  a  Gentleman  "
(1846) ;  "  A  Strike  for  Freedom  "  (1848) ;  a  series  of
"  Tales  for  the  Young  "  (1844-'50) ;  a  new  series
for  the  young  (1852-'4) ;  "  True  Manliness,  or
the  Landscape  Gardener  "  (1865) ;  and  "  The  Young
Lady  at  Home  and  in  Society  "  (New  York,  1869).
With  others  she  prepared  "The  Juvenile  Library
for  Boys  and  Girls,"  and  edited  "  Young  Lady's
Reader "  (New  Haven,  1840) ;  "  Mirror  of  Life  "
(Philadelphia,  1848) ;  and  "  Beauties-  of  De  Quin-
cey  "  (Boston,  1861). Many  of  her  books  were  re-

Eublished  in  England. — Her  daughter,  Cornelia,
.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  9  April,  1820;  d.  in  New
York,  11  Aug.,  1870,  married  John  L.  Pierson,  of
New  York,  in  1866,  and  published  many  popular
books  for  the  young.

TUTTLE,  Albert  Henry,  naturalist,  b.  in  Cuya-
hoga Falls,  Ohio,  19  Nov.,  1844.  He  was  gradu-
ated in  the  scientific  course  at  the  State  college  of
Pennsylvania  in  1868,  and  during  the  two  years
following  was  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  the
State  normal  school  in  Platteville,  Wis.  In  1870
he  became  instructor  of  microscopy  in  Harvard,
and  in  1874  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  zoSlogy
and  comparative  anatomy  in  Ohio  state  university,


where  he  remained  for  fourteen  years.  As  a  mem-
ber of  the  faculty  of  that  institution  from  its  or-
ganization, in  addition  to  establishing  one  of  the
earliest  laboratories  for  biological  work  in  the
western  states,  he  took  a  large  part  in  the  devel-
opment of  the  university  and  in  fixing  its  policv,
as  well  as  devoting  considerable  labor  to  the  de-
termination and  establishment  of  intimate  rela-
tions between  it  and  the  public  schools  of  the
state.  In  1888  he  was  elected  professor  of  bi-
ology and  agriculture  at  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia. Prof.  Tuttle  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the
Royal  microscopical  society  of  London  in  1882,
and  in  the  same  year  was  a  vice-president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, having  charge  over  the  section  of  microscopy.
He  has  written  for  scientific  and  educational  peri-
odicals, and  is  the  author  of  reports  of  state  com-
missions of  which  he  has  been  a  member.

TUTTLE,  Charles  Wesley,  astronomer,  b.  in
Newfield,  Me.,  1  Nov.,  1829 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
17  July,  1881.  He  was  educated  in  the  schools  of
his  native  town  and  in  Dover,  where  he  .learned  the
trade  of  a  carpenter  with  his  uncle,  devoting  his
leisure  to  study.  While  still  a  lad  he  constructed
a  telescope,  which  was  a  remarkable  piece  of  mech-
anism considering  that  he  had  never  seen  such  an
instrument.  He  removed  to  Cambridge  in  1849,  in
1850  entered  the  observatory  at  Harvard  as  a  stu-
dent,, and  was  in  1851  appointed  assistant  observer.
Owing  to  impaired  eyesight,  he  was  forced  to  re-
sign his  post,  and  then  studied  law  at  Harvard.
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1856,  and  practised
in  Newburyport,  and  afterward  in  Boston  until  his
death.  In  1855  he  was  sent  to  England  in  charge,
with  his  friend  Sidney  Coolidge,  of  a  chronometric
expedition  of  the  U.  S.  coast  survey  for  determin-
ing the  difference  of  longitude  between  Liverpool
and  Cambridge.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of
A.  M.  in  1854,  and  Dartmouth  that  of  Ph.  D.  in
1880.  His  leisure  was  devoted  to  historical  and
antiquarian  research,  and  he  won  a  high  reputation
as  an  original  investigator.  He  was  active  in  pro-
curing the  act  of  incorporation  of  the  Prince  so-
ciety, of  which  he  was  treasurer  and  corresponding
secretary,  and  was  a  member  of  various  historical
societies,  before  which  he  frequently  read  papers.
He  delivered  the  bi-centennial  address  before  the
New  Hampshire  historical  society  in  1880,  in  com-
memoration of  the  establishment  of  the  first  civil
government  over  that  province  in  1680.  He  fre-
quently delivered  lectures  upon  astronomy,  and
contributed  largely  to  astronomical  journals.  He
was  the  author  of  a  monograph  on  "  Cant.  John
Mason,  the  Founder  of  New  Hampshire,  edited,
with  historical  illustrations,  by  John  Ward  Dean,
and  published  by  the  Prince  society  (Boston,  1SS7).
— His  brother,  Horace  Parnell,  astronomer,  b.  in
Newfield,  York  co.,  Me.,  24  March,  1839,  was  edu-
cated by  his  brother  in  Cambridge.  He  entered
the  U.  S.  navy,  and  became  acting  assistant  pay-
master, 17  Feb.,  1863,  assistant  paymaster,  2  July,
1864,  paymaster,  4  May,  1866,  and  was  honorably
dismissed  on  3  March,  1875.  In  1857  he  invented
a  method  of  inserting  a  steel  rifled  core  into  brass
or  iron  cannon,  which  method  is  extensively  used
by  European  governments,  but  a  patent  for  which
was  refused  bv  the  U.  S.  patent-office.  In  1861  he
devised  a  method  of  signalling  at  long  distances
by  using  flashes  made  by  a  Drummond  light,  to
correspond  with  the  dots  "and  dashes  of  the  Morse
telegraph  system.  He  discovered  thirteen  comets
between  1857  and  1866,  and  in  1861-2  the  asteroids
MaTa  and  Clvtie.  At  present  he  is  assistant  com-
puter in  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory. Mr.  Tuttle


190


TUTTLE


TWACHTMAN


/muJ^hiuMb


has  computed  "  Pay  Tables  of  the  United  States
Navy  "  (Washington,  1872).

TUTTLE,  Daniel  Sylvester,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Windham,  Greene  co.,  N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,  1837.  He
was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1857,  entered  the
General  theological  seminary,  New  York,  and  com-
pleted his  course  in  1862. He  was  ordered  deacon

by  Bishop  Hora-
tio Potter,  29  Jan.,

1862,  and  ordain-
ed priest  in  Zion
church,  Morris,
Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,
in  which  parish
he  had  served
during  his  diacon-
ate,  by  the  same
bishop, 19 July,

1863.  He  remain-
ed rector  of  this
church  until  his
consecration  to
the  episcopate.
He  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.
from  Columbia  in
1866.  Dr.  Tuttle
was  consecrated
missionary  bishop

of  Montana,  Idaho,  and  Utah,  in  Trinity  chapel,
New  York,  1  May,  1867.  In  1868  he  was  elected  to
the  bishopric  of  Missouri,  but  declined.  In  1880
Montana  was  set  off  as  a  separate  missionary  juris-
diction, and  Idaho  and  Utah  remained  under  the
charge  of  Bishop  Tuttle.  In  1884  Columbia  college
appointed  him  as  its  representative  at  the  tercente-
nary of  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  For  years
Bishop  Tuttle  has  been  active  in  the  discussion  of
the  Mormon  question  in  Utah.  On  the  death  of
Bishop  Robertson,  of  Missouri,  which  occurred  1
May,  1886,  Bishop  Tuttle  was  again  elected  to  the
episcopate,  and  was  transferred,  becoming  the  third
bishop  of  Missouri.

TUTTLE,  Herbert,  educator,  b.  in  Benning-
ton, Vt.,  29  Nov.,  1846.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Vermont  in  1869,  followed  journal-
ism till  1880,  was  a  lecturer  in  the  University  of
Michigan  in  1880-'l,  and  has  since  been  associate
professor  of  the  history  and  theory  of  politics
and  of  international  law  in  Cornell.  He  has  pub-
lished "  German  Political  Leaders  "  (New  York  and
London,  1876) ;  "  History  of  Prussia  to  the  Acces-
sion of  Frederic  the  Great"  (Boston,  1884);  and
"History  of  Prussia  under  Frederic  the  Great"
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1888).

TUTTLE,  Hudson,  author,  b.  in  Berlin  Heights,
Erie  co.,  Ohio,  4  Oct.,  1836.  He  was  educated  at
the  common  schools  and  the  Homoeopathic  college,
Cleveland,  Ohio.  He  has  contributed  extensively
to  spiritualistic  papers  and  to  secular  and  sci-
entific journals,  and  has  made  original  observa-
tions in  microscopy.  He  has  published  "  Life  in
the  Spheres  "  (New  York,  1855) ;  "  Arcana  of  Na-
ture" (Boston,  1859);  "Career  of  the  God-Idea"
(1869);  "Career  of  the  Christ-Idea"  (1869);  "Ca-
reer of  Religious  Ideas"  (New  York,  1869);  "Ori-
gin and  Development  of  Man"  (Boston,  1871);
"Stories  for  Children"  (Toledo,  1874);  "The  Cross
and  Steeple  "  (1875) ;  and  several  novels,  including
"  Clair,  a  Tale  of  Mormon  Perfidy"  (Chicago,  1881);
"  Heloise:  Love  or  Religion  "  (1882) ;  and  "  Camile,
or  Love  and  Labor "  (1882). — His  wife,  Emma
Rood,  b.  in  Braceville,  Trumbull  co.,  Ohio,  21
July,  1839,  was  educated  at  Western  Reserve  semi-
nary, Farmington,  Ohio,  and  at  Hiram  college.


Mrs.  Tuttle  has  been  a  constant  contributor  to
newspaper  literature,  has  worked  for  the  ethical
education  of  the  young,  and  also  with  great  zeal  to
effect  some  reform  in  the  manner  of  treating  ani-
mals. She  has  been  successful  as  a  lecturer,  an
elocutionist,  and  a  reader,  and  has  composed  many
songs,  which  have  been  set  to  music  and  published,
the  best-known  being  "  The  Unseen  City,"  "  Beau-
tiful Claribel,"  "My  Lost  Darling,"  and  "We
shall  meet  Our  Friends  in  the  Morning."  Many
of  her  poems  are  popular  as  selections  for  recita-
tion. She  has  published  "  Blossoms  of  Our  Spring  "
(Boston,  1864);  "Gazelle"  (1866);  "The  Lyceum
Guide  "  (1870) ;  "  Stories  for  Our  Children  "  (Toledo,
1874) ;  and  "  Poems :  From  Soul  to  Soul "  (1888).

TUTTLE,  James  Madison,  soldier,  b.  in  Sum-
merfield,  Monroe  co.,  Ohio,  24  Sept.,  1823.  He  was
brought  up  on  a  farm  in  Iowa,  afterward  engaged
in  trade  in  Van  Buren  county  in  the  same  state,
was  elected  its  sheriff  in  1855,  and  in  1859  recorder
and  treasurer.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war  he
joined  the  2d  Iowa  regiment  as  a  captain,  and  be-
came successively  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel.
He  served  with  credit  at  Fort  Donelson,  and  at
Shiloh  commanded  a  brigade  until  Gen.  William
H.  L.  Wallace  was  mortally  wounded,  after  which
he  led  the  2d  division.  For  his  services  in  these
battles  he  was  promoted  brigadier-general,  9  June,
1862.  He  afterward  commanded  at  Cairo,  111.,  and
resigned,  14  June,  1864.

TUTTLE,  Joseph  Farrand,  educator,  b.  in
Bloomfield,  Essex  co.,  N.  J.,  12  March,  1818.  He
was  graduated  at  Marietta  college,  Ohio,  in  1841,
and  at  Lane  theological  seminary,  Cincinnati,  in
1844,  and  was  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  at
Delaware,  Ohio,  in  1845-'7,  and  Rockaway,  N.  J.,
in  1847-'62.  Since  1863  he  has  been  president  of
Wabash  college,  Crawfordsville,  Ind.,  and  his  chief
work  has  been  in  connection  with  the  enlargement
of  this  institution.  He  has  been  five  times  a  com-
missioner to  the  general  assembly  of  the  Presby-
terian church  since  1850,  a  trustee  of  Wabash  col-
lege since  1862,  and  of  Lane  theological  seminary
since  1863.  He  has  published  "  The  Life  of  William
Tuttle,  compiled  from  Autobiography  under  the
name  of  John  Homespun"  (New  York.  1852) ;  "  The
Way  Lost  and  Found  "  (1870) ;  "  Annals  of  Morris
County,  N.  J.."  and  other  articles  prepared  for  the
New  Jersey  historical  society  and  published  in  its
"  Proceedings,"  and  addresses,  review  articles,  etc.

TUTW1LER,  Henry  (tut-wy-ler),  educator,  b.
in  Harrisonburg,  Va.,  16  Nov.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Greene
Springs,  Ala.,  22  Sept.,  1884.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1829,  and  studied
law,  but  never  practised.  He  was  professor  of
mathematics  in  the  University  of  Alabama  from
its  organization  in  1831  till  1837,  professor  in  the
Industrial  college  at  Marion,  Ala.,  in  1837-'9,  and
professor  of  mathematics  and  chemistry  in  La-
grange college,  Ala.,  in  1837-'47.  In  the  autumn
of  1847  he  established  at  Greene  Springs,  Ala.,  a
high-school  for  boys  and  young  men,  where  he
continued  with  great  success  until  his  death.  He
was  frequently  offered  the  presidency  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Alabama  and  similar  institutions.  He
wrote  much  for  journals  and  periodicals,  and  was
one  of  the  first  discoverers  in  this  country  of  the
wonderful  temporary  star  T  Coronoe  Borealis.

TWACHTMAN,  John  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  4  Aug.,  1853.  His  art  studies  were
begun  at  the  Cincinnati  school  of  design  in  1873-'4,
and  during  1874-'5  he  was  a  pupil  of  Frank  Du-
veneck.  in  the  same  city.  During  1875-'8  he  stud-
ied at  the  academy  in  Munich  under  Ludwig  LOfftz,
and  for  a  year  under  Duveneck  in  Venice. In  1880


TWEED


TWIGGS


191


he  went  abroad  again,  and  during  1883-5  he  was
a  pupil  at  the  Eeole  Julien,  Paris,  under  Gustave
Rodolphe  Clarence  Boulanger  and  Jules  Joseph
Lefebvre.  In  1886  he  returned  to  the  United
States.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Society
of  American  artists  in  1879,  and  at  the  society's
exhibition  in  1888  gained  the  Webb  prize  for  his
"  Windmills,"  which  now  belongs  to  Smith  college,
Northampton,  Mass.  Other  works  by  him  are
"  Arque  la  Bataille,"  "  Winter,"  "  The  Pond,"  and
"  On  the  Seine."

TWEED,  William  Marcy,  politician,  b.  in
New  York  city,  3  April,  1823;  d.  there,  12  April,
1878.  He  was  the  son  of  a  chair-maker,  and,  after
receiving  a  common-school  education,  learned  the
same  trade  himself.  He  assisted  in  organizing
"Americus"  fire-engine  company  No.  6,  known
commonly  as  "  Big  Six,"  and  became  its  foreman  ;
and  it  was  his  popularity  in  this  capacity  that  first
made  him  a  power  in  local  politics.  He  was  an
alderman  of  New  York  in  1852-3,  served  in  con-
gress in  1853-5,  was  supervisor  of  the  city  and
chairman  of  the  board  in  1856,  school  commissioner
in  1856-'7,  deputy  street  commissioner  in  1861-'70,
and  state  senator  in  1867-'71.  In  1870  he  was  ap-
pointed commissioner  of  the  department  of  public
works  in  New  York  city,  and  while  in  this  office
he  organized,  with  others,  the.  "  ring  "  of  which  he
was  chief,  he  and  his  associates  appropriating  vast
sums  of  public  money.  These  corrupt  practices
were  exposed,  and  on  28  Oct.,  1871,  Mr.  Tweed  was
arrested  on  a  civil  suit  that  was  brought  by  Charles
O'Conor  in  behalf  of  the  city.  He  furnished  bail
in  $1,000,000,  and  in  November  of  the  same  year
he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  but  did  not  take
his  seat.  On  16  Dec.  he  was  arrested  on  a  criminal
charge  of  fraud,  but  was  released  on  $5,000  bail.
The  first  of  the  suits  against  him  was  tried,  30
Jan.,  1873,  the  jury  disagreeing ;  but  on  19  Nov.  he
was  found  guilty  of  fraud,  and  sentenced  by  Judge
Noah  Davis  to  twelve  years'  imprisoment  on  as
many  different  counts  (a  year  for  each  count)  in
the  penitentiary  on  Blackwell's  island,  and  to  pay
a  fine  of  $12,550.  In  April,  1875,  an  action  was
instituted  against  him  in  behalf  of  the  people  of
New  York  for  the  recovery  of  $6,000,000,  and  judg-
ment was  rendered  for  this  amount  with  interest.
On  15  June  his  further  imprisonment  was  declared
illegal  by  the  court  of  appeals,  on  the  assumption
that  the  lower  court  had  exceeded  its  powers  in  its
cumulative  sentence,  and  his  discharge  was  ordered.
He  was  then  required  to  furnish  bail  in  $3,000,000
pending  the  civil  suits,  and  in  default  of  this  was
confined  in  Ludlow  street  jail.  He  escaped  on  4
Dec,  1875,  succeeded  in  reaching  Cuba,  and  thence
went  to  Spain,  where  he  was  arrested  by  the  Span-
ish government,  and,  being  delivered  to  officers  of
the  United  States,  was  brought  back  to  New  York
and  recommitted  to  Ludlow  street  jail,  where  he
remained  a  prisoner  till  his  death.

TWEEDALE,  William,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Beith,  Ayrshire,  Scotland,  18  May,  1823.  He  came
with  his  parents  to  New  York  in  1833,  and  was
graduated  at  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  in
1853.  In  1855  he  was  a  bridge  engineer  and  con-
tractor in  Chicago,  and  in  1859,  having  obtained
the  contract  for  the  construction  of  bridges  and
buildings  on  the  Dubuque  and  Sioux  City  railway,
he  removed  to  the  former  place.  At  the  opening
of  the  civil  war  he  raised  a  company  for  an  engi-
neer regiment,  and  was  mustered  in  as  captain.
He  was  engaged  in  the  engineering  operations
against  New  Madrid,  which  resulted  in  its  capture,
and  cut  a  passage  for  a  fleet  of  transports  across  the
lower  end  of  Island  No.  8. This  was  used  for  the


transportation  of  troops  across  the  river  from  New
Madrid  to  operate  against  Island  No.  10,  and  re-
sulted in  the  evacuation  of  the  latter.  He  was  in
command  of  advanced  parties  of  engineers  with
Gen.  John  Pope's  division  in  the  siege  of  Corinth,
and  in  the  pursuit  that  followed  its  evacuation
under  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson.  He  was  after-
ward engaged  in  the  reconstruction  of  railroads,
dredging  of  rivers,  and  the  removal  of  debris  at
various  points  on  Mississippi  river.  He  was  pro-
moted brevet-colonel  of  volunteers.  13  March,  1865,
and  was  mustered  out  on  31  May  the  same  year.
He  moved  to  Topeka,  Kansas,  in  1867,  superin-
tended the  erection  of  the  east  wing  of  the  state
capitol  in  1867-8,  and  the  west  wing  in  1879-80,
and  was  engineer  of  the  bridge  across  the  Kansas
river  at  Topeka.

TW1BILL,  George  W.,  artist,  b.  in  Lampeter,
Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  about  1806 ;  d.  in  New  York,  15
Feb.,  1836.  He  began  to  study  with  Henry  In-
man  in  1828,  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  Na-
tional academy  in  1832,  and  an  academician  the
following  year.  The  academy  owns  his  portrait  of
John  Trumbull,  painted  in  1835,  and  in  the  New
York  historical  society  hangs  the  portrait  of  Fitz-
Greene  Halleck,  painted  from  the  original  by  In-
man,  also  in  the  possession  of  that  association.
Thomas  S.  Cummings  wrote  of  him :  "  Of  the  young
artists  of  the  day  there  were  none  more  promising
than  Twibill.  His  portraits  in  oil  in  small  were  of
excellence  seldom  equalled."

TWICHELL,  Ginery,  member  of  congress,  b.
in  Athol,  Mass.,  26  Aug.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Brookline,
Mass.,  23  July,  1883.  He  was  educated  at  the
public  schools,  engaged  in  the  business  of  carrying
the  mails  in  1830,  and  was  the  first  to  establish
a  daily  line  of  coaches  between  Boston  and  Brat-
tleboro,  Vt.  He  afterward  made  important  mail
contracts  with  the  U.  S.  government.  In  1847  he
became  connected  with  the  Boston  and  Worcester
railway,  of  which  he  was  chosen  superintendent  in
1848,  and  president  in  1857.  He  afterward  sat  in
congress  for  three  consecutive  sessions  in  1867-'73,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Republican.

TWIGGS,  David  Emanuel,  b.  in  Richmond
county,  Ga.,  in  1790 ;  d.  in  Augusta,  Ga.,  15  Sept.,
1862. '  His  father,  Gen.  John  Twiggs,  raised  a
brigade  at  his
own  expense  at
the  opening  of
the  Revolu-
tion. The  son
was  appointed
captain  in  the
8th  infantrv,  12
March,  1*812,
became  major
of  the  28th  in-
fantry, 21  Sept.,

1814,  and  was
disbanded,  15
June,  1815.  He
was  reinstated
on  2  December,

1815,  as  captain
in  the  7th  in-
fantry, served
throughout  the
war  with  Great
Britain,  and  be-
came major  of  the  1st  infantry,  14  May,  1825,  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  4th  infantry,  15  July,  1831,
and  colonel,  2d  dragoons,  8  June,  1836.  He  served
in  the  Mexican  war  under  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  at
Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma,  was  promoted


^-f/ry^yo


192


TWING


TYLER


brigadier-general,  30  June,  1846,  and  brevetted  ma-
jor-general for  gallantry  at  Monterey  and  presented
with  a  sword  by  congress.  Being  transferred  to  Gen.
Winfield  Scott's  army,  he  commanded  a  brigade  at
Vera  Cruz.  During  the  operations  against  the  city  of
Mexico  he  led  the  2d  division  of  regulars,  and  in  1848
he  was  military  governor  of  Vera  Cruz.  He  was  in
command  of  the  Department  of  Texas  in  February,
1861,  and  surrendered  his  army  and  military  stores
to  the  Confederate  Gen.  Ben.  McCulloch,  for  which
he  was  dishonorably  dismissed  from  the  army.  He
was  appointed  a  major-general  in  the  Confederate
army,  22  May,  1861,  and  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  district  of  Louisiana,  but  resigned  toward
the  end  of  the  year. — His  brother,  Levi,  soldier,  b.
in  Richmond  county,  Ga.,  21  May,  1793;  d.  in
Chapultepec,  Mexico,  13  Sept.,  1847,  was  educated
at  Franklin  college  in  his  native  state,  which  he
left  to  serve  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  in  1813  joined
the  marine  corps  as  2d  lieutenant.  He  was  in  the
frigate  "  President "  under  Com.  Stephen  Decatur
on  her  last  cruise,  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  and
by  his  skill  elicited  the  applause  of  his  commander.
On  2  June,  1847,  he  enlisted  as  a  volunteer  in  the
Mexican  war,  and  was  killed  at  Chapultepec.

TWING,  Alvin  Tabor,  clergyman,  b.  in  Top-
sham,  Vt.,  9  Feb.,  1811 :  d.  in  New  York,  11  Nov.,
1882.  He  was  educated  at  Kimball  union  acade-
my, Meriden,  N.  H.,  at  the  University  of  Vermont,
and  studied  theology  under  the  direction  of  Bishop
John  H. Hopkins,  by  whom  he  was  ordained  a

Eriest  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1837.
le  was  afterward  rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Ver-
gennes,  Vt.,  and  of  Trinity  church.  West  Troy,
N.  Y.,  and  in  1840  took  charge  of  Trinity  church,
Lansingburg,  N.  Y.,  where  he  continued  twenty-
three  years.  In  November,  1863,  he  was  appointed
to  present  the  claims  of  the  domestic  mission  field
throughout  the  country,  and  in  August,  1866,  he
became  secretary  and  general  agent  of  the  domes-
tic committee  of  the  board  of  missions,  continuing
as  such  till  1877,  when  the  office  of  general  agent
was  discontinued,  and  he  was  elected  secretary.  He
organized  a  domestic  missionary  army  in  1865,
which  enrolled  many  thousands  of  children,  in
1867  established  "  The  Young  Christian  Soldier,"
in  1868  organized  "  The  ladies'  domestic  mission-
ary relief  association,"  and  in  1870  he  introduced
"mite-chests,"  which  in  a  few  years  brought  into
the  treasury  of  the  domestic  committee  $74,000.
He  succeeded  in  infusing  a  spirit  of  enthusiasm
for  missions  into  a  large  part  of  the  church.  In
1864  Hobart  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.

TWINING,  Alexander  Catlin,  engineer,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  5  July,  1801 ;  d.  there,  22  Nov.,
1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1820,  was  a
tutor  there  in  1824-*6,  and  professor  of  mathe-
matics, civil  engineering,  and  astronomy  at  Middle-
bury  college  from  1839  till  1849.  He  was  employed
as  a  civil  engineer  on  various  railways  and  canals,
and  invented  the  first  practical  method  of  pro-
ducing ice  in  considerable  quantities  by  artificial
means.  He  claimed  to  have  first  established  the
theory  of  the  cosmical  origin  of  meteors,  and  was
devoted  to  abstruse  problems  in  higher  mathe-
matics. He  was  the  author  of  papers  on  the  doc-
trine of  parallels  and  other  points  in  mathematics.
For  several  years  preceding  his  death  he  lectured
on  constitutional  law  in  the  Yale  law-school. — His
son,  Kingsley,  clergyman,  b.  in  West  Point,  N.  Y.,
18  July,  1832,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1853,  and
at  Yale  theological  seminary  in  1856,  and  was  a
resident  licentiate  at  Andover  seminary  in  1857.
He  held  pastorates  in  Congregational  churches  in
Hinsdale,  Mich.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  Cambridge-


port,  Mass.,  and  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1872-'6.  He
spent  1876-'8  in  Europe,  and  two  years  later  he  be-
came literary  editor  of  the  New  York  "  Independ-
ent," a  position  which  he  still  retains.

TYDINGS,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Anne
Arundel  county,  Md.,  16  June,  1783 ;  d.  in  Bullitt
county,  Ky.,  3  Oct.,  1865.  His  father,  Keely  Ty-
dings,  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution.  The  son
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1807,  joined  the  Balti-
more conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
south,  in  1809,  and  the  Kentucky  conference  in
1826.  He  labored  in  many  fields,  and  was  held  in
high  esteem  for  his  talents  and  success  as  a  preach-
er. He  was  a  member  of  the  Louisville  conference
at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  wrote  a  work  on
"  Apostolical  Succession,"  which  was  favorably  re-
ceived (Louisville,  1844).

TYLER,  Bennet,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middlebury,
Conn.,  10  July,  1783 ;  d.  in  South  Windsor,  Conn.,  14
May,  1858.  He  was  the  son  of  a  farmer,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1804,  and,  after  studying  theology,
was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  South
Britain,  Conn.,  from  1808  till  1822.  From  that
date  until  1828  he  was  president  of  Dartmouth
college,  and  was  pastor  of  the  2d  Congregational
church  in  Portland,  Me.,  from  1828  till  1833.  The
controversy  on  the  "new  divinity"  awakened  by
the  writings  of  Rev.  Nathaniel  W.  Taylor,  of
whom  he  was  the  principal  opponent,  resulted  in
the  formation  of  a  pastoral  union  in  September,
1833,  by  the  Connecticut  clergymen,  who  held  to
Dr.  Taylor's  opinions  and  the  resolution  of  the
other  faction  to  found  a  theological  seminary  in
East  Windsor,  in  which  he  was  president  and  pro-
fessor of  Christian  theology  from  1833  until  his
death.  Middlebury  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1823.  His  principal  works  are  "  History  of  the
New  Haven  I  heology.  in  Letters  to  Clergymen  "
(Hartford,  1837);  "A  Review  of  Day  on  the  Will"
(1837) ;  "  Memoir  of  Rev.  Asahel  Nettleton.  D.  D."
(1844) ;  "  Nettleton's  Remains  "  (1845) ;  "  A  Trea-
tise on  the  Sufferings  of  Christ "  (New  York,  1845) ;
"  A  Treatise  on  New  England  Revivals "  (1846) ;
and  two  series  of  "  Letters  to  Dr.  Horace  Bush-
nell  on  Christian  Nurture"  (1847-'8).  After  his
death  his  "  Lectures  on  Theology  "  were  published
with  a  memoir  by  his  son-in-law,  the  Rev.  Nahum
Eale,  D.  D.  (Boston,  1859).

TYLER,  Charles  Humphrey,  soldier,  b.  in
Virginia  in  1826 ;  d.  in  West  Point,  Ga.,  17  April,
1865.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1848,  and  became  2d  lieutenant  in  the
2d  dragoons,  25  April,  1849.  He  served  in  garrison
in  the  cavalry-school  at  Carlisle,  Pa.,  on  frontier
duty,  and  in  the  Utah  expedition  of  1857-9.  On  28
June,  1861,  he  was  promoted  captain,  but  he  was
dismissed  from  the  army  on  1  June,  1861,  for  de-
serting his  post.  He  then  entered  the  Confederate
service,  became  a  brigadier-general,  and  was  killed
in  battle  at  West  Point,  Ga.

TYLER,  Daniel,  engineer,  b.  in  Brooklyn,
Windham  co.,  Conn.,  7  Jan.,  1799  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  30  Nov.,  1882.  His  father  served  in  the
Revolutionary  army,  and  his  mother  was  a  grand-
daughter of  Jonathan  Edwards.  After  graduation
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1819,  as  2d  lieuten-
ant of  light  artillery,  he  served  in  garrison  in  New
England  in  1819-24,  and  on  the  reorganization  of
the  army,  1  June,  1821,  he  was  made  2d  lieutenant  in
the  5th  infantry.  In  1824-'6  he  served  in  the  Fort
Monroe  artillery-school  for  practice,  of  which  he
was  for  a  time  adjutant.  He  became  1st  lieutenant
in  the  1st  artillery  on  6  May,  1824,  and  in  1826
commanded  the  Pikesville  arsenal,  near  Baltimore,
Md. While  there  he  translated  from  the  French


(thsn


D  APP1£T0N  &  C?


TYLER


TYLER


193


a  work  on  "Manoeuvres  of  Artillery,"  which  led  I
to  his  being  sent  to  Europe  in  January,  1828,  to
obtain  data  for  a  more  comprehensive  work  for  the
regular  army.  In  April,  1829,  he  was  admitted
into  the  artillery-school  of  practice  at  Metz,  and
began  a  translation  of  the  latest  French  system  of
artillery.  The  task  was  completed  at  the  end  of  a
year,  and  300  lithographed  copies  in  three  volumes
were  sent  to  the  war  department  in  Washington,
D.  C.  He  also  collected  copies  of  every  drawing
and  memoir  connected  with  the  French  system  of
field,  siege,  sea-coast,  and  mountain  artillery  at  a
personal  expense  of  about  $2,000,  which  he  offered
to  the  government  at  Washington,  provided  a
board  should  adopt  the  system  for  the  U.  S.  artil-
lery. This  was  not  done,  but  he  received  from  the
government  $1,600  for  his  collection  of  drawings.
After  his  return  in  1829  he  was  kept  on  ordnance
duty  to  prepare  a  translation  of  the  "School  of
the  Driver,"  which  in  the  French  service  is  separate
from  the  artillery.  In  1830  he  was  sent  to  the
Springfield  armory  to  report  upon  the  manufacture
of  small  arms,  and  he  was  a  member  of  the  board
that  met  to  reorganize  the. national  armories.  In
1832  he  was  made  superintendent  of  the  inspectors
of  contract  arms.  lie  resigned  on  31  May,  1834,
became  president  of  an  iron  and  coal  company  in
Lycoming  county,  Pa.,  and  was  sent  to  Great
Britain  to  examine  the  methods  of  coal -mining
and  operating  furnaces  and  rolling-mills.  On  his
return  in  1835  he  erected  the  first  coke  hot-blast
furnace  that  was  built  in  this  country,  and  suc-
ceeded in  making  pig-iron,  but  the  operations  of
the  company  were  suspended.  In  1840  he  became
president  of  the  Norwich  and  Worcester  railroad,
and  completed  the  road. In  1843  he  was  appointed

E  resident  and  engineer  of  the  Morris  canal  and
anking  company.  In  1845-'9  he  was  president
of  the  Macon  and  Western  railroad,  and  he  was
afterward  superintending  engineer  of  the  Dauphin
and  Susquehanna  railroad  and  coal  company  and
of  the  Auburn  and  Allentown  railroad,  and  presi-
dent and  engineer  of  the  Schuylkill  and  Susque-
hanna railroad  company.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  became  colonel  of  the  1st  Connecti-
cut volunteers,  23  April,  1861,  and  commanded  a
division  at  the  battles  of  Blackburn's  Ford  and
Bull  Run,  18-21  July,  1861.  He  was  mustered  out
at  the  expiration  of  service  on  11  Aug.,  1861,  but
was  reappointed  in  the  U.  S.  volunteer  service,
with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  on  13  March,
1862.  He  served  with  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi,
engaged  in  the  siege  of  Corinth  from  29  April
till  8  June,  1862,  organized  volunteer  regiments  in
Connecticut  from  13  Aug.  till  15  Sept.,  1862,  served
on  the  military  commission  that  investigated  Gen.
Don  Carlos  Buell's  campaign  in  Kentucky  and
Tennessee,  24  Nov.,  1862,  till  10  May,  1863,  and
guarded  the  upper  Potomac,  and  was  in  command
of  Harper's  Ferry  and  Maryland  Heights  in  June.
Afterward  he  was  in  command  of  troops  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  and  of  the  district  of  Delaware,  and
resigned  his  commission  on  6  April,  1864.  Gen.
Tyler  then  travelled  extensively  in  the  south,  in
Cuba,  and  in  Europe,  and  on  his  return  in  1872
founded  large  cotton  and  iron  manufactories  in
Alabama,  and  built  the  town  of  Anniston,  Ala.  In
1873-'9  he  was  president  of  the  Mobile  and  Mont-

f ornery  railroad. Subsequently  he  invested  in
'exas  land,  and  established  the  "  Capote  farm  "  of
20,000  acres,  which  was  his  winter  residence.

TYLER,  Erastus  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  West  Bloom-
field,  Ontario  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  April,  1822. He  re-
moved to  Ohio,  and  was  educated  at  Granville  col-
lege. In  1845  he  engaged  in  business,  which  he
vol  vi. — 13


continued  until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.
He  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  7th  Ohio  vol-
unteers in  April,  1861,  and  led  his  men  into  west-
ern Virginia,  where  he  was  assigned  by  Gen.  Fred-
erick W.  Lander  to  a  brigade,  which  he  command-
ed with  credit  at  Cross  Lanes,  W.  Va.,  26  Aug.,  1861,
Winchester,  Va.,  23  March,  1862,  and  Port  Repub-
lic, Va.,  9  June,  1862.  He  commanded  a  brigade
at  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  where  he  was
wounded,  13  Dec,  1862.  On  14  May,  1862,  he  was
made  brigadier-general,  and  on  24  Aug.,  1865,  was
mustered  out  of  service.

TYLER,  John,  tenth  president  of  the  United
States,  b.  at  Greenway,  Charles  Citv  co.,  Va.,  29
March,  1790 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  18  Jan.,  1862.
He  was  the  second  son  of  Judge  John  Tyler  and
Mary  Armistead.  In  early  boyhood  he  attended
the  small  school  kept  by  a  Mr.  McMurdo,  who  was
so  diligent  in  his  use  of  the -birch  that  in  later
years  Mr.  Tyler  said  "  it  was  a  wonder  he  did  not
whip  all  the  sense  out  of  his  scholars."  At  the
age  of  eleven  young  Tyler  was  one  of  the  ring-
leaders in  a  rebellion  in  which  the  despotic  Mc-
Murdo was  overpowered  by  numbers,  tied  hand
and  foot,  and  left  locked  up  in  the  school-house
until  late  at  night,  when  a  passing  traveller  effected
an  entrance  and  released  him.  On  complaining
to  Judge  Tyler,  the  indignant  school-master  was
met  with  the  apt  reply,  "  Sic  semper  tyrannis  !  "
The  future  president  was  graduated  at  William
and  Mary  in  1807.  At  college  he  showed  a  strong
interest  in  ancient  history.  He  was  also  fond  of
poetry  and  music,  and,  like  Thomas  Jefferson,  was
a  skilful  performer  on  the  violin.  In  1809  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  had  already  begun  to
obtain  a  good  practice  when  he  was  elected  to  the
legislature,  and  took  his  seat  in  that  body  in  De-
cember, 1811.  He  was  here  a  firm  supporter  of
Mr.  Madison's  administration,  and  the  war  with
Great  Britain,  which  soon  followed,  afforded  him
an  opportunity  to  become  conspicuous  as  a  forci-
ble and  persuasive  orator.  One  of  his  earliest  pub-
lic acts  is  especially  interesting  in  view  of  the
famous  struggle  with  the  Whigs,  which  in  later
years  he  conducted  as  president.  The  charter  of
the  first  Bank  of  the  United  States,  established  in
1791,  was  to  expire  in  twenty  years;  and  in  1811
the  question  of  renewing  the  charter  came  before
congress.  The  bank  was  very  unpopular  in  Vir-
ginia, and  the  assembly  of  that  state,  by  a  vote  of
125  to  35,  instructed  its  senators  at  Washington,
Richard  Brent  and  William  B.  Giles,  to  vote  against
a  recharter.  The  instructions  denounced  the  bank
as  an  institution  in  the  founding  of  which  congress
had  exceeded  its  powers  and  grossly  violated  state
rights.  Yet  there  were  many  in  congress  who,
without  approving  the  principle  upon  which  the
bank  was  founded,  thought  the  eve  of  war  an  in-
opportune season  for  making  a  radical  change  in
the  financial  system  of  the  nation.  Of  the  two
Virginia  senators,  Brent  voted  in  favor  of  the  re-
charter,  and  Giles  spoke  on  the  same  side,  and  al-
though, in  obedience  to  instructions,  he  voted  con-
trary to  his  own  opinion,  he  did  so  under  protest.
On  14  Jan.,  1812,  Mr.  Tyler,  in  the  Virginia  legis-
lature, introduced  resolutions  of  censure,  in  which
the  senators  were  taken  to  task,  while  the  Virginia
doctrines,  as  to  the  unconstitutional  character  of
the  bank  and  the  binding  force  of  instructions,
were  formally  asserted.

Mr.  Tyler  married,  29  March,  1813,  Letitia,  daugh-
ter of  Robert  Christian,  and  a  few  weeks  after-
ward was  called  into  the  field  at  the  head  of  a
company  of  militia  to  take  part  in  the  defence  of
Richmond  and  its  neighborhood,  now  threatened


194


TYLER


TYLER


by  the  British.  This  military  service  lasted  for  a
month,  during  which  Mr.  Tyler's  company  was
not  called  into  action.  He  was  re-elected  to  the
legislature  annually,  until  in  November,  1816,
he  was  chosen  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.
house  of  representatives.  In  the  regular  election
to  the  next  congress,  out  of  200  votes  given  in
his  native  county,  he  received  all  but  one.  As  a
member  of  congress  he  soon  made  himself  con-
spicuous as  a  strict  constructionist.  When  Mr.
Calhoun  introduced  his  bill  in  favor  of  internal
improvements,  Mr.  Tyler  voted  against  it.  He  op-
posed the  bill  for  changing  the  per  diem  allowance
of  members  of  congress  to  an  annual  salary  of
$1,500.  He  opposed,  as  premature,  Mr.  Clay's  pro-
posal to  add  to  the  general  appropriation  bill  a
provision  for  $18,000  for  a  minister  to  the  prov-
inces of  the  La  Plata,  thus  committing  the  United
States  to  a  recognition  of  the  independence  of  those
revolted  provinces.  He  also  voted  against  the
proposal  for  a  national  bankrupt  act.  He  con-
demned, as  arbitrary  and  insubordinate,  the  course
of  Gen.  Jackson  in  Florida,  and  contributed  an
able  speech  to  the  long  debate  over  the  question  as
to  censuring  that  gallant  commander.  He  was  a
member  of  a  committee  for  inquiring  into  the  af-
fairs of  the  national  bank,  and  his  most  elaborate
speech  was  in  favor  of  Mr.  Trimble's  motion  to  is-
sue a  scire  facias  against  that  institution.  On
all  these  points  Mr.  Tyler's  course  seems  to  have
pleased  his  constituents ;  in  the  spring  election  of
1819  he  did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  issue  the
usual  circular  address,  or  in  any  way  to  engage  in
a  personal  canvass.  He  simply  distributed  copies
of  his  speech  against  the  bank,  and  was  re-elected
to  congress  unanimously.

The  most  important  question  that  came  before
the  16th  congress  related  to  the  admission  of
Missouri  to  the  Union.  In  the  debates  over  this
question  Mr.  Tyler  took  ground  against  the
imposition  of  any  restrictions  upon  the  exten-
sion of  slavery.  At  the  same  time  he  declared
himself  on  principle  opposed  to  the  perpetuation
of  slavery,  and  he  sought  to  reconcile  these  posi-
tions by  the  argument  that  in  diffusing  the  slave
population  over  a  wide  area  the  evils  of  the  in-
stitution would  be  diminished  and  the  prospects
of  ultimate  emancipation  increased.  "  Slavery,"
said  he,  "  has  been  represented  on  all  hands  as  a
dark  cloud,  and  the  candor  of  the  gentleman  from
Massachusetts  [Mr.  Whitman]  drove  him  to  the
admission  that  it  would  be  well  to  disperse  this
cloud.  In  this  sentiment  I  entirely  concur  with
him.  How  can  you  otherwise  disarm  it?  Will
you  suffer  it  to  increase  in  its  darkness  over  one
particular  portion  of  this  land  till  its  horrors  shall
burst  upon  it?  Will  you  permit  the  lightnings  of
its  wrath  to  break  upon  the  south,  when  by  the
interposition  of  a  wise  system  of  legislation  you
may  reduce  it  to  a  summer's  cloud?  New  York
and  Pennsylvania,  he  argued,  had  been  able  to
emancipate  their  slaves  only  by  reducing  their  num-
ber by  exportation.  Dispersion,  moreover,  would
be  likely  to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  the  black
man,  for  by  making  his  labor  scarce  in  each  particu-
lar locality  it  would  increase  the  demand  for  it,
and  would  thus  make  it  the  interest  of  the  master
to  deal  fairly  and  generously  with  his  slaves.
To  the  objection  that  the  increase  of  the  slave
population  would  fully  keep  up  with  its  territorial
expansion,  he  replied  by  denying  that  such  would
be  the  case.  His  next  argument  was  that  if  an
old  state,  such  as  Virginia,  could  have  slaves,  while
a  new  state,  such  as  Missouri,  was  to  be  prevented
by  Federal  authority  from  having  them,  then  the


old  and  new  states  would  at  once  be  placed  upon
a  different  footing,  which  was  contrary  to  the
spirit  of  the  constitution.  If  congress  could  thus
impose  one  restriction  upon  a  state,  where  was  the
exercise  of  such  a  power  to  end  ?  Once  grant  such
a  power,  and  what  was  to  prevent  a  slave-holding
majority  in  congress  from  forcing  slavery  upon
some  territory  where  it  was  not  wanted?  Mr.
Tyler  pursued  the  argument  so  far  as  to  deny
"  that  congress,  under  its  constitutional  authority
to  establish  rules  and  regulations  for  the  terri-
tories, had  any  control  whatever  over  slavery  in
the  territorial  domain."  (See  life,  by  Lyon  G.
Tyler,  vol.  i.,  p.  319.)  Mr.  Tyler  was  unquestion-
ably foremost  among  the  members  of  congress
in  occupying  this  position.  When  the  Missouri
compromise  bill  was  adopted  by  a  vote  of  134  to
42.  all  but  five  of  the  nays  were  from  the  south,
and  from  Virginia  alone  there  were  seventeen,  of
which  Mr.  Tyler's  vote  was  one.  The  Richmond
"  Enquirer "  of  7  March,  1820,  in  denouncing  the
compromise,  observed,  in  language  of  prophetic
interest,  that  the  southern  and  western  representa-
tives now  "  owe  it  to  themselves  to  keep  their  eyes
firmly  fixed  on  Texas ;  if  we  are  cooped  up  on  the
north,  we  must  have  elbow-room  to  the  west."

Mr.  Tyler's  further  action  in  this  congress  re-
lated chiefly  to  the  question  of  a  protective  tariff,
of  which  he  was  an  unflinching  opponent.  In  1821,
finding  his  health  seriously  impaired,  he  declined
a  re-election,  and  returned  to  private  life.  His
retirement,  however,  was  of  short  duration,  for  in
1823  he  was  again  elected  to  the  Virginia  legisla-
ture. Here,  as  a  friend  to  the  candidacy  of  Will-
iam H.  Crawford  for  the  presidency,  he  disap-
proved the  attacks  upon  the  congressional  caucus
begun  by  the  legislature  of  Tennessee  in  the  in-
terests of  Andrew  Jackson.  The  next  year  he  was
nominated  to  fill  the  vacancy  in  the  United  States
senate  created  by  the  death  of  John  Taylor ;  but
Littleton  W.  Tazewell  was  elected  over  him.  He
opposed  the  attempt  to  remove  William  and  Mary
college  to  Richmond,  and  was  afterward  made  suc-
cessively rector  and  chancellor  of  the  college,  which
Erospered  signally  under  his  management.  In
•ecember,  1825,  he  was  chosen  by  the  legislature
to  the  governorship  of  Virginia,  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  he  was  re-elected  by  a  unanimous  vote.
A  new  division  of  parties  was  now  beginning  to
show  itself  in  national  politics.  The  administra-
tion of  John  Quincy  Adams  had  pronounced  itself
in  favor  of  what  was  then,  without  much  regard
to  history,  described  as  the  "  American  system  "
of  government  banking,  high  tariffs,  and  internal
improvements.  Those  persons  who  were  inclined
to  a  lpose  construction  of  the  constitution  were
soon  drawn  to  the  side  of  the  administration,  while
the  strict  constructionists  were  gradually  united
in  opposition.  Many  members  of  Crawford's  party,
under  the  lead  of  John  Randolph,  became  thus
united  with  the  Jacksonians,  while  others,  of  whom
Mr.  Tyler  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished,
maintained  a  certain  independence  in  opposition.
It  is  to  be  set  down  to  Mr.  Tyler's  credit  that  he
never  attached  any  importance  to  the  malicious
story,  believed  by  so  many  Jacksonians,  of  a  cor-
rupt bargain  between  Adams  and  Clay.  (See
Adams,  John  Q.,  Clay,  Henry,  and  Jackson,  An-
drew.) Soon  after  the  meeting  of  the  Virginia
legislature,  in  December,  1826,  the  friends  of
Clay  and  Adams  combined  with  the  members
of  the  opposite  party  who  were  dissatisfied  with
Randolph,  and  thus  Mr.  Tyler  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate  by  a  majority  of  115  votes  to
110. Some indiscreet  friends of  Jackson  now


TYLER


TYLER


195


attempted  to  show  that  there  must  have  been
some  secret  and  reprehensible  understanding  be-
tween Tyler  and  Clay ;  but  this  scheme  failed
completely.  In  the  senate  Mr.  Tyler  took  a  con-
spicuous stand  against  the  so-called  "  tariff  of
abominations"  enacted  in  1828,  which  Benton,  Van
Buren,  and  other  prominent  Jacksonians,  not  yet
quite  clear  as  to  their  proper  attitude,  were  in-
duced to  support.  There  was  thus  some  ground
for  the  opinion  entertained  at  this  time  by  Tyler,
that  the  Jacksonians  were  not  really  strict  con-
structionists. In  February,  1830,  after  taking  part
in  the  Virginia  convention  for  revising  the  state
constitution,  Mr.  Tyler  returned  to  his  seat  in  the
senate,  and  found  himself  first  drawn  toward  Jack-
son by  the  veto  message  of  the  latter,  27  May,  upon
the  Maysville  turnpike  bill.  He  attacked  the  irreg-
ularity of  Jackson  s  appointment  of  commissioners
to  negotiate  a  commercial  treaty  with  Turkey  with-
out duly  informing  the  senate.  On  the  other  hand,
he  voted  in  favor  of  confirming  the  appointment
of  Van  Buren  as  minister  to  Great  Britain.  In
the  presidential  election  of  1832  he  supported  Jack-
son as  a  less  objectionable  candidate  than  the
others,  Clay,  Wirt,  and  Floyd.  Mr.  Tyler  disap-
proved of  nullification,  and  condemned  the  course
of  South  Carolina  as  both  unconstitutional  and
impolitic.  At  the  same  time  he  objected  to  Presi-
dent Jackson's  famous  proclamation  of  10  Dec,
1832,  as  a  "  tremendous  engine  of  federalism,"  tend-
ing to  the  "consolidation"  of  the  states  into  a  single
political  body.  Under  the  influence  of  these  feel-
ings he  undertook  to  play  the  part  of  mediator  be-
tween Clay  and  Calhoun,  and  in  that  capacity  ear-
nestly supported  the  compromise  tariff  introduced
by  the  former  in  the  senate,  12  Feb.,  1833.  On
the  so-called  "  force  bill,"  clothing  the  president
with  extraordinary  powers  for  the  purpose  of  en-
forcing the  tariff  law,  Mr.  Tyler  showed  that  he
had  the  courage  of  his  convictions.  When  the  bill
was  put  to  vote,  20  Feb.,  1833,  some  of  its  oppo-
nents happened  to  be  absent;  others  got  up  and
went  out  in  order  to  avoid  putting  themselves  on
record.  The  vote,  as  then  taken,  stood :  yeas,
thirty-two ;  nay,  one  (John  Tyler).

As  President  Jackson's  first  term  had  witnessed
a  division  in  the  Democratic  party  between  the
nullifiers  led  by  Calhoun  and  the  unconditional
upholders  of  the  Union,  led  by  the  president  him-
self, with  Benton,  Blair,  and  Van  Buren,  so  his
second  term  witnessed  a  somewhat  similar  division
arising  out  of  the  war  upon  the  United  States
bank.  The  tendency  of  this  fresh  division  was  to
bring  Mr.  Tyler  and  his  friends  nearer  to  co-opera-
tion with  Mr.  Calhoun,  while  at  the  same  time  it
furnished  points  of  contact  that  might,  if  occasion
should  offer,  be  laid  hold  of  for  the  purpose  of
forming  a  temporary  alliance  with  Mr.  Clay  and
the  National  Republicans.  The  origin  of  the  name
"  Whig,"  in  its  strange  and  anomalous  application
to  the  combination  in  1834,  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact
that  it  pleased  the  fancy  of  President  Jackson's  op-
ponents to  represent  him  as  a  kind  of  arbitrary  ty-
rant. On  this  view  it  seemed  proper  that  they  should
be  designated  "Whigs,"  and  at  first  there  were  some
attempts  to  discredit  the  supporters  of  the  admin-
istration by  calling  them  "Tories."  On  the  ques-
tion of  the  bank,  when  it  came  to  the  removal  of
the  deposits,  Mr.  Tyler  broke  with  the  administra-
tion. Against  the  bank  he  had  fought,  on  every
fitting  occasion,  since  the  beginning  of  his  public
career.  In  1834  he  declared  emphatically :  "  I  be-
lieve the  bank  to  be  the  original  sin  against  the
constitution,  which,  in  the  progress  of  our  history,
has  called  into  existence  a  numerous  progeny  of


usurpations.  Shall  I  permit  this  serpent,  however
bright  its  scales  or  erect  its  mien,  to  exist  by  and
through  my  vote?"  Nevertheless,  strongly  as  he
disapproved  of  the  bank,  Mr.  Tyler  disapproved
still  more  strongly  of  the  methods  by  which  Presi-
dent Jackson  assailed  it.  There  seemed  at  that
time  to  be  growing  up  in  the  United  States  a
spirit  of  extreme  unbridled  democracy  quite  foreign
to  the  spirit,  in  which  our  constitutional  govern-
ment, with  its  carefully  arranged  checks  and  limi-
tations, was  founded.  It  was  a  spirit  that  prompted
mere  majorities  to  insist  upon  having  their  way,
even  at  the  cost  of  overriding  all  constitutional
checks  and  limits.  This  spirit  possessed  many
members  of  Jackson's  party,  and  it  found  expres-
sion in  what  Benton  grotesquely  called  the  "demos
krateo"  principle.  A  good  illustration  of  it  was
to  be  seen  in  Benton's  argument,  after  the  election
of  1824,  that  Jackson,  having  received  a  plurality
of  electoral  votes,  ought  to  be  declared  president,
and  that  the  house  of  representatives,  in  choosing
Adams,  was  "  defying  the  will  of  the  people."

In  similar  wise  President  Jackson,  after  his  tri-
umphant re-election  in  1832,  was  inclined  to  in-
terpret his  huge  majorities  as  meaning  that  the
people  were  ready  to  uphold  him  in  any  course
that  he  might  see  fit  to  pursue.  This  feeling  no
doubt  strengthened  him  in  his  determined  attitude
toward  the  nullifiers,  and  it  certainly  contributed
to  his  arbitrary  and  overbearing  method  of  deal-
ing with  the  bank,  culminating  in  1833  in  his  re-
moval of  the  deposits.  There  was  ground  for
maintaining  that  in  this  act  the  president  exceeded
his  powers,  and  it  seemed  to  illustrate  the  tend-
ency of  unbridled  democracy  toward  despotism,
under  the  leadership  of  a  headstrong  and  popular
chief.  Mr.  Tyler  saw  in  it  such  a  tendency,  and
he  believed  that  the  only  safeguard  for  constitu-
tional government,  whether  against  the  arbitrari-
ness of  Jackson  or  the  latitudinarianism  of  the
National  Republicans,  lay  in  a  most  rigid  adherence
to  strict  constructionist  doctrines.  Accordingly,
in  his  speech  of  24  Feb.,  1834,  he  proposed  to  go
directly  to  the  root  of  the  matter  and  submit  the
question  of  a  national  bank  to  the  people  in  the
shape  of  a  constitutional  amendment,  either  ex-
pressly forbidding  or  expressly  allowing  congress
to  create  such  an  institution.  According  to  his
own  account,  he  found  Clay  and  Webster  ready  to
co-operate  with  him  in  this  course,  while  Calhoun
held  aloof.  Nothing  came  of  the  project ;  but  it
is  easy  to  see  in  Mr.  Tyler's  attitude  at  this  time
the  basis  for  a  short-lived  alliance  with  the  National
Republicans,  whenever  circumstances  should  sug-
gest it.  On  Mr.  Clay's  famous  resolution  to  censure
the  president  he  voted  in  the  affirmative.  In  the
course  of  1835  the  seriousness  of  the  schism  in  the
Democratic  party  was  fully  revealed.  Not  only
had  the  small  body  of  nullifiers  broken  away,  un-
der the  lead  of  Calhoun,  but  a  much  larger  party
was  formed  in  the  southern  states  under  the  ap-
pellation of  "  state-rights  Whigs."  They  differed
with  the  National  Republicans  on  the  fundamental
questions  of  tariff,  bank,  and  internal  improve-
ments, and  agreed  with  them  only  in  opposition
to  Jackson  as  an  alleged  violator  of  the  consti-
tution. Even  in  this  opposition  they  differed
from  the  party  of  Webster  and  Clay,  for  they
grounded  it  largely  upon  a  theory  of  state  rights
which  the  latter  statesmen  had  been  far  from  accept-
ing. The  "state-rights  Whigs"  now  nominated
Hugh  L.  White,  of  Tennessee,  for  president,  and
John  Tyler  for  vice-president.  The  National  Re-
publicans wishing  to  gather  votes  from  the  other
parties,  nominated  for  president  Gen.  William  H.


196


TYLER


TYLER


Harrison  as  a  more  colorless  candidate  than  Web-
ster or  Clay.  The  Democratic  followers  of  Jackson
nominated  Van  Buren,  who  received  a  large  ma-
jority of  both  popular  and  electoral  votes,  in  spite
of  the  defections  above  mentioned.  There  was  a
great  deal  of  bolting  in  this  election.  Massachu-
setts threw  its  vote  for  Webster  for  president,  and
South  Carolina  for  Willie  P.  Mangum.  Virginia,
which  voted  for  Van  Buren,  rejected  his  colleague,
Richard  M.  Johnson,  and  cast  its  twenty  -  three

electoral  votes
for  William
Smith,  of  Ala-
bama, for  vice-
president.  Mr.
White  obtain-
ed the  elec-
toral votes  of
Tennessee  and
Georgia,  twen-
tv-six  in  all,
but  Mr.  Tyler
made  a  better
showing ;  he
carried,  be-
sides these  two  states,  Maryland  and  South  Caro-
lina, making  forty-seven  votes  in  all.  The  uneven-
ness  of  the  results  was  such  that  the  election  of  a
vice-president  devolved  upon  the  senate,  which
chose  Mr.  Johnson.  In  the  course  of  the  year  pre-
ceding the  election  an  incident  occurred  which  em-
phasized more  than  ever  Mr.  Tyler's  hostility  to
the  Jackson  party.  Benton's  famous  resolutions
for  expunging  the  vote  of  censure  upon  the  presi-
dent were  before  the  senate,  and  the  Democratic
legislature  of  Virginia  instructed  the  two  senators
from  that  state  to  vote  in  the  affirmative.  As  to
the  binding  force  of  such  instructions  Mr.  Tyler
had  long  ago,  in  the  case  of  Giles  and  Brent,  above
mentioned,  placed  himself  unmistakably  upon  rec-
ord. His  colleague,  Benjamin  Watkins  Leigh,  was
known  to  entertain  similar  views.  On  receiving
the  instructions,  both  senators  refused  to  obey  them.
Both  voted  against  the  Benton  resolutions,  but  Mr.
Leigh  kept  his  seat,  while  Mr.  Tyler  resigned  and
retur-ned  home,  29  Feb.,  1836.  About  this  time  the
followers  of  Calhoun  were  bringing  forward  what
was  known  as  the  "  gag  resolution  "  against  all  peti-
tions and  motions  relating  in  any  way  to  the  aboli-
tion of  slavery.  (See  Atherton,  Charles  G.)  Mr.
Tyler's  resignation  occurred  before  this  measure
was  adopted,  but  his  opinions  on  the  subject  were
clearly  pronounced.  He  condemned  the  measure
as  impolitic,  because  it  yoked  together  the  question
as  to  the  right  of  petition  and  the  question  as  to
slavery,  and  thus  gave  a  distinct  moral  advantage
to  the  Abolitionists.  On  the  seventh  anniversary
of  the  Virginia  colonization  society,  10  Jan.,  1838,
he  was  chosen  its  president.  In  the  spring  election
of  that  year  he  was  returned  to  the  Virginia  legis-
lature. In  January,  1839,  his  friends  put  him  for-
ward for  re-election  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  in  the
memorable  contest  that  ensued,  in  which  William
C.  Rives  was  his  principal  competitor,  the  result
was  a  deadlock,  and  the  question  was  indefinitely
postponed  before  any  choice  had  been  made.

Meanwhile  the  financial  crisis  of  1837 — the  most
severe,  in  many  respects,  that  has  ever  been  known
in  this  country — had  wrecked  the  administration
of  President  Van  Buren.  The  causes  of  that  crisis,
indeed,  lav  deeper  than  any  acts  of  any  adminis-
tration. The  primary  cause  was  the  sudden  devel-
opment of  wild  speculation  in  western  lands,  con-
sequent upon  the  rapid  building  of  railroads,  which
would  probably  have  brought  about  a  general  pros-


tration of  credit,  even  if  President  Jackson  had
never  made  war  upon  the  United  States  bank.
But  there  is  no  doubt  that  some  measures  of  Jack-
son's administration — such  as  the  removal  of  the
deposits  and  their  lodgment  in  the  so-called  "  pet
banks,"  the  distribution  of  the  surplus  followed  by
the  sudden  stoppage  of  distribution,  and  the  sharp-
ness of  the  remedy  supplied  by  the  specie  circular
— had  much  to  do  with  the  virulence  of  the  crisis.
For  the  moment  it  seemed  to  many  people  that  all
the  evil  resulted  from  the  suppression  of  the  bank,
and  that  the  proper  cure  was  the  reinstatement  of
the  bank,  and  because  President  Van  Buren  was
too  wise  and  clear-sighted  to  lend  his  aid  to  such
a  policy,  his  chances  for  re-election  were  ruined.
The  cry  for  the  moment  was  that  the  hard-hearted
administration  was  doing  nothing  to  relieve  the
distress  of  the  people,  and  there  was  a  general
combination  against  Van  Buren.  For  the  single
purpose  of  defeating  him,  all  differences  of  policy
were  for  the  moment  subordinated.  In  the  Whig
convention  at  Harrisburg.  4  Dec,  1839,  no  plat-
form of  principles  was  adopted.  Gen.  Harrison
was  again  nominated  for  the  presidency,  as  a  can-
didate fit  to  conciliate  the  anti-Masons  and  Na-
tional Republicans  whom  Clay  had  offended,  and
Mr.  Tyler  was  nominated  for  the  vice-presidency
in  order  to  catch  the  votes  of  such  Democrats  as
were  dissatisfied  with  the  administration.  In  the
uproarious  canvass  that  followed  there  was  prob-
ably less  appeal  to  sober  reason  and  a  more  liberal
use  of  clap-trap  than  in  any  other  presidential
contest  in  our  history.  Borne  upon  a  great  wave
of  popular  excitement,  "  Tippecanoe,  and  Tyler
too,  were  carried  to  the  White  House.  By  the
death  of  President  Harrison,  4  April,  1841,  just  a
month  after  the  inauguration,  Mr.  Tyler  became
president  of  the  United  States.  The  situation
thus  developed  was  not  long  in  producing  startling
results.  Although  no  platform  had  been  adopted
in  the  nominating  convention,  it  soon  appeared
that  Mr.  Clay  and  his  friends  intended  to  use  their
victory  in  support  of  the  old  National  Republican
policy  of  a  national  bank,  a  high  tariff,  and  internal
improvements.  Doubtless  most  people  who  voted
for  Harrison  did  so  in  the  belief  that  his  election
meant  the  victory  of  Clay's  doctrines  and  the  re-
establishment  of  the  United  States  bank.  Mr.  Clay's
own  course,  immediately  after  the  inauguration,
showed  so  plainly  that  he  regarded  the  election  as
his  own  victory  that  Gen.  Harrison  felt  called  upon
to  administer  a  rebuke  to  him.  "  You  seem  to  for-
get, sir,"  said  he,  "  that  it  is  I  who  am  president."
Tyler,  on  the  other  hand,  regarded  the  Whig
triumph  as  signifying  the  overthrow  of  what  he
considered  a  corrupt  and  tvrannical  faction  led  by
Jackson.  Van  Buren,  and  Benton ;  he  professed  to
regard  the  old  National  Republican  doctrines  as
virtually  postponed  by  the  alliance  between  them
and  his  own  followers.  In  truth,  it  was  as  ill-yoke'd
an  alliance  as  ever  was  made.  The  elements  of  a
fierce  quarrel  were  scarcely  concealed,  and  the  re-
moval of  President  Harrison  was  all  that  was
needed  to  kindle  the  flames  of  strife.  "  Tyler  dares
not  resist,"  said  Clay ;  "  I'll  drive  him  before  me."
On  the  other  hand,  the  new  president  declared :  "  1
pray  vou  to  believe  that  my  back  is  to  the  wall,
and  that,  while  I  shall  deplore  the  assaults.  I  shall,
if  practicable,  beat  back  the  assailants " ;  and  he
was  as  good  as  his  word.  Congress  met  in  extra
session,  31  May,  1841,  the  senate  standing  28  Whigs
to  22  Democrats,  the  house  133  Whigs  to  108
Democrats.  In  his  opening  message  President
Tyler  briefly  recounted  the  recent  history  of  the
United  States  bank,  the  sub-treasury  system,  and


TYLER


TYLER


197


other  financial  schemes,  and  ended  with  the  precau-
tionary words :  "  I  shall  be  ready  to  concur  with  you
in  the  adoption  of  such  system  as  you  may  propose,
reserving  to  myself  the  ultimate  power  of  reject-
ing any  measure  which  may,  in  my  view  of  it,  con-
flict with  the  constitution  or  otherwise  jeopard
the  prosperity  of  the  country,  a  power  which  I
could  not  part  with,  even  if  I  would,  but  which  I  will
not  believe  any  act  of  yours  will  call  into  requisi-
tion." Congress  disregarded  the  warning.  The
ground  was  cleared  for  action  by  a  bill  for  abol-
ishing Van  Buren's  sub-treasury  system,  which
passed  both  houses  and  was  signed  by  the  presi-
dent. But  an  amendment  offered  by  Mr.  Clay,
for  the  repeal  of  the  law  of  1836  regulating  the
deposits  in  the  state  banks,  was  defeated  by  the
votes  of  a  small  party  led  by  William  C.  Rives.
The  great  question  then  came  up.  On  constitu-
tional grounds,  Mr.  Tyler's  objection  to  the  United
States  bank  had  always  been  .that  congress  had  no
power  to  create  such  a  corporation  within  the
limits  of  a  state  without  the  consent  of  the  state
ascertained  beforehand.  He  did  not  deny,  how-
ever, the  power  of  congress  to  establish  a  district
bank  for  the  District  of  Columbia,  and,  provided
the  several  states  should  consent,  there  seemed  to
be  no  reason  why  this  district  bank  should  not  set
up  its  branch  offices  all  over  the  country.  Mr.
Clay's  so-called  "fiscal  bank"  bill  of  1841  did  not
make  proper  provision  for  securing  the  assent  of
the  states,  and  on  that  ground  Mr.  Rives  proposed
an  amendment  substituting  a  clause  of  a  bill
suggested  by  Thomas  Ewing,  secretary  of  the
treasury,  to  the  effect  that  such  assent  should
•  be  formally  secured.  Mr.  Rives's  amendment
was  supported  not  only  by  several  "state-rights
Whigs,"  but  also  by  senators  Richard  H.  Bayard
and  Rufus  Choate,  and  other  friends  of  Mr.  Web-
ster. If  adopted,  its  effect  would  have  been  con-
ciliatory, and  it  might  perhaps  have  averted  for  a
moment  the  rupture  between  the  ill-yoked  allies.
The  Democrats,  well  aware  of  this,  voted  against
the  amendment,  and  it  was  lost.  The  bill  incor-
porating the  fiscal  bank  of  the  United  States  was
then  passed  by  both  houses,  and  on  16  Aug.  was
vetoed.  An  attempt  to  pass  the  bill  over  the  veto
failed  of  the  requisite  two-third  majority.

The  Whig  leaders  had  already  shown  a  disposi-
tion to  entrap  the  president.  Before  the  passage
of  Mr.  Clay's  bill,  John  Minor  Botts  was  sent  to
the  White  House  with  a  private  suggestion  for  a
compromise.  Mr.  Tyler  refused  to  listen  to  the
suggestion  except  with  the  understanding  that,
should  it  meet  with  his  disapproval,  he  should  not
hear  from  it  again.  The  suggestion  turned  out  to
be  a  proposal  that  congress  should  authorize  the
establishment  of  branches  of  the  district  bank  in
any  state  of  which  the  legislature  at  its  very  next
session  should  not  expressly  refuse  its  consent  to
any  such  proceeding ;  and  that,  moreover,  in  case
the  interests  of  the  public  should  seem  to  require
it,  even  such  express  refusal  might  be  disregarded
and  overridden.  By  this  means  the  obnoxious  in-
stitution might  first  be  established  in  the  Whig
states,  and  then  forced  upon  the  Democratic  states
in  spite  of  themselves.  The  president  indignantly
rejected  the  suggestion  as  "a  contemptible  subter-
fuge, behind  which  he  would  not  skulk."  The  de-
vice, nevertheless,  became  incorporated  in  Mr.
Clay's  bill,  and  it  was  pretended  that  it  was  put
there  in  order  to  smooth  the  way  for  the  presi-
dent to  adopt  the  measure,  but  that  in  his  un-
reasonable obstinacy  he  refused  to  avail  himself  of
the  opportunity.  After  his  veto  of  16  Aug.  these
tortuous  methods  were  renewed. Messengers  went


to  and  fro  between  the  president  and  members  of  his
cabinet  on  the  one  hand,  and  leading  Whig  members
of  congress  on  the  other,  conditional  assurances  were
translated  into  the  indicative  mood,  whispered
messages  were  magnified  and  distorted,  and  pres-
ently appeared  upon  the  scene  an  outline  of  a  bill
that  it  was  assumed  the  president  would  sign.
This  new  measure  was  known  as  the  "  fiscal  corpo-
ration "  bill.  Like  the  fiscal  bank  bill,  it  created
a  bank  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  with  branches
throughout  the  states,  and  it  made  no  proper  pro-
vision for  the  consent  of  the  states.  The  president
had  admitted  that  a  "  fiscal  agency  "  of  the  United
States  government,  established  in  Washington  for
the  purpose  of  collecting,  keeping,  and  disbursing  •
the  public  revenue,  was  desirable  if  not  indispensa-
ble ;  a  regular  bank  of  discount,  engaged  in  com-
mercial transactions  throughout  the  states,  and
having  the  United  States  government  as  its  prin-
cipal share-holder  and  Federal  officers  exerting  a
controlling  influence  upon  its  directorship,  was  an
entirely  different  affair — something,  in  his  opinion,
neither  desirable  nor  permissible.  In  the  "  fiscal
corporation"  bill  an  attempt  was  made  to  hood-
wink the  president  and  the  public  by  a  pretence  of
forbidding  discounts  and  loans  and  limiting  the
operations  of  the  fiscal  agency  exclusively  to  ex-
changes. While  this  project  was  maturing,  the
Whig  newspapers  fulminated  with  threats  against
the  president  in  case  he  should  persist  in  his  course ;

Erivate  letters  warned  him  of  plots  to  assassinate
im,  and  Mr.  Clay  in  the  senate  referred  to  his  res-
ignation in  1836,  and  asked  why,  if  constitutional
scruples  again  hindered  him  from  obeying  the  will
of  the  people,  did  he  not  now  resign  his  lofty  posi-
tion and  leave  it  for  those  who  could  be  more  com-
pliant? To  this  it  was  aptly  replied  by  Mr.  Rives
that  "  the  president  was  an  independent  branch  of
the  government  as  well  as  congress,  and  was  not
called  upon  to  resign  because  he  differed  in  opin-
ion with  them."  Some  of  the  Whigs  seem  really
to  have  hoped  that  such  a  storm  could  be  raised
as  would  browbeat  the  president  into  resigning,
whereby  the  government  would  be  temporarily
left  in  the  hands  of  William  L.  Southard,  then
president  pro  tempore  of  the  senate.  But  Mr.
Tyler  was  neither  to  be  hoodwinked  nor  bullied.
The  "  fiscal  corporation  "  bill  was  passed  by  the
senate  on  Saturday,  4  Sept.,  1841 ;  on  Thursday,
the  9th,  the  president's  veto  message  was  received ;
on  Saturday,  the  11th,  Thomas  Ewing,  secretary  of
the  treasury,  John  Bell,  secretary  of  war,  George
E.  Badger,  secretary  of  the  navy,  John  J.  Critten-
den, attorney-general,  and  Francis  Granger,  post-
master-general, resigned  their  places.  The  ad-
journment of  congress  had  been  fixed  for  Monday,
the  13th,  and  it  was  hoped  that,  suddenly  con-
fronted by  a  unanimous  resignation  of  the  cabinet
and  confused  by  want  of  time  in  which  to  appoint
a  new  cabinet,  the  president  would  give  up  the
game.  But  the  resignation  was  not  unanimous,
for  Daniel  Webster,  secretary  of  state,  remained
at  his  post,  and  on  Monday  morning  the  president
nominated  Walter  Forward,  of  Pennsylvania,  for
secretary  of  the  treasury;  John  McLean,  of  Ohio,
for  secretary  of  war;  Abel  P.  Upshur,  of  Virginia,
for  secretary  of  the  navy;  Hugh  S.  Legare,  of
South  Carolina,  for  attorney-general ;  and  Charles
A.  Wickliffe,  of  Kentucky,  for  postmaster-general.
These  appointments  were  duly  confirmed.

Whether  the  defection  of  Mr.  Webster  at  this
moment  would  have  been  so  fatal  to  the  president
as  some  of  the  Whigs  were  inclined  to  believe,  may
well  be  doubted,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that
his  adherence  to  the  president  was  of  great  value.


198


TYLER


TYLER


By  remaining  in  the  cabinet  Mr.  Webster  showed
himself  too  clear-sighted  to  contribute  to  a  victory
of  which  the  whole  profit  would  be  reaped  by  his
rival,  Mr.  Clay,  and  the  president  was  glad  to  re-
tain his  hold  upon  so  strong  an  element  in  the
north  as  that  which  Mr.  Webster  represented.
Some  of  the  leading  Whig  members  of  congress
now  issued  addresses  to  the  people,  in  which  they
loudly  condemned  the  conduct  of  the  president
and  declared  that  "  all  political  connection  between
them  and  John  Tyler  was  at  an  end  from  that  day
forth."  It  was  open  war  between  the  two  depart-
ments of  government.  Although  many  Whig  mem-
bers, like  Preston,  Talmadge,  Johnson,  and  Mar-
shall, really  sympathized  with  Mr.  Tyler,  only  a
few,  commonly  known  as  "the  corporal's  guard,"
openly  recognized  him  as  their  leader.  But  the
Democratic  members  came  to  his  support  as  an
ally  against  the  Whigs.  The  state  elections  of
1841  showed  some  symptoms  of  a  reaction  in
favor  of  the  president's  views,  for  in  general  the
Whigs  lost  ground  in  them.  As  the  spectre  of  the
crisis  of  1837  faded  away  in  the  distance,  the  peo-
ple began  to  recover  from  the  sudden  and  over-
mastering impulse  that  had  swept  the  country  in
1840,  and  the  popular  enthusiasm  for  the  bank
soon  died  away.  Mr.  Tyler  had  really  won  a  vic-
tory of  the  first  magnitude,  as  was  conclusively
shown  in  1844,  when  the  presidential  platform  of
the  Whigs  was  careful  to  make  no  allusion  what-
ever to  the  bank.  On  this  crucial  question  the  doc-
trines of  paternal  government  had  received  a  crush-
ing and  permanent  defeat.  In  the  next  session  of
congress  the  strife  with  the  president  was  renewed :
but  it  was  now  tariff,  not  bank,  that  furnished
the  subject  of  discussion.  Diminished  importa-
tions, due  to  the  general  prostration  of  business,
had  now  diminished  the  revenue  until  it  was  insuffi-
cient to  meet  the  expenses  of  government.  The
Whigs  accordingly  carried  through  congress  a  bill
continuing  the  protective  duties  of  1833,  and  provid-
ing that  the  surplus  revenue,  which  was  thus  sure
soon  to  accumulate,  should  be  distributed  among
the  states.  But  the  compromise  act  of  1833,  in
which  Mr.  Tyler  had  played  an  important  part,
had  provided  that  the  protective  policy  should
come  to  an  end  in  1842.  Both  on  this  ground,  and
because  of  the  provision  for  distributing  the  sur-
plus, the  president  vetoed  the  new  bill.  Congress
then  devised  and  passed  another  bill,  providing
for  a  tariff  for  revenue,  with  incidental  protection,
but  still  contemplating  a  distribution  of  the  surplus,
if  there  should  be  any.  The  president  vetoed  this
bill.  Congress  received  the  veto  message  with  great
indignation,  and  on  the  motion  of  ex- President  John
Q.  Adams  it  was  referred  to  a  committee,  which  con-
demned it  as  an  unwarrantable  assumption  of
power,  and  after  a  caustic  summary  of  Mr.  Tyler's
acts  since  his  accession  to  office,  concluded  with  a
reference  to  impeachment.  This  report  called
forth  from  the  president  a  formal  protest ;  but  the
victory  was  already  his.  The  Whigs  were  afraid
to  go  before  the  country  in  the  autumn  elections
with  the  tariff  question  unsettled,  and  the  bill  was
accordingly  passed  by  both  houses,  without  the
distributing  clause,  and  was  at  once  signed  by  the
president.  The  distributing  clause  was  then  passed
in  a  separate  bill,  but  a  ''pocket  veto"  disposed
of  it.  Congress  adjourned  on  31  Aug.,  1842,  and
in  the  elections  the  Whig  majority  of  twenty-five
in  the  house  of  representatives  gave  place  to  a
Democratic  majority  of  sixty-one.

On  the  remaining  question  of  National  Republi-
can policy,  that  of  internal  improvements,  the  most
noteworthy  action  of  President  Tyler  was  early  in


1844,  when  two  river-and-harbor  bills  were  passed  by
congress,  the  one  relating  to  the  eastern,  the  other  to
the  western  states.  Mr.  Tyler  vetoed  the  former,
but  signed  the  latter,  on  the  ground  that  the  Mis-
sissippi river,  as  a  great  common  highway  for  the
commerce  of  the  whole  country,  was  the  legitimate
concern  of  the  national  government  in  a  sense  that
was  not  true  of  any  other  American  river.  An  un-
successful attempt  was  made  to  pass  the  other  bill
over  the  veto.  The  rest  of  Mr.  Tyler's  administra-
tion was  taken  up  with  the  Ashburton  treaty  with
Great  Britain  (see  Webster,  Daniel),  the  Oregon
question,  and  the  annexation  of  Texas.  Texas  had
won  its  independence  from  Mexico  in  1836.  and
its  governor,  as  well  as  the  majority  of  its  inhabi-
tants, were  citizens  of  the  United  States.  From  a
broad  national  standpoint  it  was  in  every  way  de-
sirable that  Texas,  as  well  as  Oregon,  should  be-
long to  our  Federal  Union.  In  the  eastern  states
there  was  certainly  a  failure  to  appreciate  the  value
of  Oregon,  which  was  nevertheless  claimed  as  in-
disputably our  property.  On  the  other  hand,  it
was  felt,  by  a  certain  element  in  South  Carolina,
that  if  the  northern  states  were  to  have  ample  room
for  expansion  beyond  the  Rocky  mountains,  the
southern  states  must  have  Texas  added  to  their
number  as  a  counterpoise,  or  else  the  existence  of
slavery  would  be  imperilled,  and  these  fears  were
strengthened  by  the  growth  of  anti-slavery  senti-
ment at  the  north.  The  Whigs,  who  by  reason  of
their  tariff  policy  found  their  chief  strength  at  the
north,  were  disposed  to  avail  themselves  of  this
anti-slavery  sentiment,  and  accordingly  declared
themselves  opposed  to  the  annexation  of  Texas.
In  the  mean  time  the  political  pressure  brought  to
bear  upon  Mr.  Webster  in  Massachusetts  induced
resignation  of  his  portfolio,  and  he  was  succeeded
in  the  state  department  by  Hugh  S.  Legare,  9
May,  1843.  In  a  few  weeks  Legare  was  succeeded
by  Mr.  Upshur,  after  whose  death,  on  28  Feb.,
1844.  the  place  was  filled  by  John  C.  Calhoun.
After  a  negotiation  extending  over  two  years,  a
treaty  was  concluded,  12  April,  1844,  with  the  gov-
ernment of  Texas,  providing  for  annexation.  The
treaty  was  rejected  by  the  senate,  by  a  vote  of  35
to  16,  all  the  Whigs  and  seven  Democrats  voting
in  the  negative.  Thus  by  the  summer  of  1844  the
alliance  between  the  Whig  party  and  Mr.  Tyler's
wing  of  the  Democrats  had  passed  away.  At  the
same  time  the  division  among  the  Democrats,
which  had  become  marked  during  Jackson's  ad-
ministration, still  continued ;  and  while  the  oppo-
sition to  Mr.  Tyler  was  strong  enough  to  prevent
his  nomination  in  the  Democratic  national  con-
vention, which  met  at  Baltimore  on  27  May,  1844,
on  the  other  hand  he  was  able  to  prevent  the  nomi-
nation of  Mr.  Van  Buren,  who  had  declared  himself
opposed  to  the  immediate  annexation  of  Texas.  The
result  was  the  nomination  of  James  K.  Polk,  as  a
kind  of  compromise  candidate,  in  so  far  as  he  be-
longed to  the  "  loco-foco  "  wing  of  the  party,  but
was  at  the  same  time  in  favor  of  annexation.  On
the  same  day,  27  May,  another  convention  at  Balti-
more nominated  Mr.  Tyler  for  a  second  term.  He
accepted  the  nomination  in  ordter  to  coerce  the
Democrats  into  submitting  to  him  and  his  friends  a
formal  invitation  to  re-enter  the  ranks ;  and  accord-
ingly a  meeting  of  Democrats  at  the  Carleton  house,
New  York,  on  6  Aug.,  adopted  a  series  of  resolu-
tions commending  the  principal  acts  of  his  admin-
istration, and  entreating  that  in  the  general  interests
of  the  opposition  he  should  withdraw.  In  response
to  this  appeal,  Mr.  Tyler  accordingly  withdrew  his
name.  The  northern  opposition  to  the  annexation
of  Texas  seemed  to  have  weakened  the  strength  of


TYLER


TYLER


199


the  Whigs  in  the  south,  and  their  candidate,  Henry-
Clay,  declared  himself  willing  to  see  Texas  admit-
ted at  some  future  time.  But  this  device  cut  both
ways ;  for  while  it  was  popular  in  the  south,  and  is
supposed  to  have  acquired  for  Clay  many  pro-
slavery  votes,  carrying  for  him  Tennessee,  North
Carolina,  Delaware,  and  Maryland  by  bare  majori-
ties, it  certainly  led  many  anti-slavery  Whigs  to
throw  away  their  votes  upon  the  "  Liberty"  candi-
date, James  G.  Birney,  and  thus  surrender  New
York  to  the  Democrats.  The  victory  of  the  Demo-
crats in  November  was  reflected  in  the  course  pur-
sued in  the  ensuing  congress.  One  of  the  party
watchwords,  in  reference  to  the  Oregon  question,
had  been  "  fifty-four  forty,  or  fight,"  and  the  house
of  representatives  now  proceeded  to  pass  a  bill  or-
ganizing a  territorial  government  for  Oregon  up  to
that  parallel  of  latitude.  The  senate,  however,  laid
the  bill  upon  the  table,  because  it  prohibited  sla-
very in  the  territory.  A  joint  resolution  for  the
annexation  of  Texas  was  passed  by  both  houses.
Proposals  for  prohibiting  slavery  there  were  de-
feated, and  the  affair  was  arranged  by  extending
the  Missouri  compromise-line  westward  through
the  Texan  territory  to  be  acquired  by  the  annexa-
tion. North  of  that  line  slavery  was  to  be  pro-
hibited ;  south  of  it  the  question  was  to  be  deter-
mined by  the  people  living  on  the  spot.  The  reso-
lutions were  signed  by  President  Tyler,  and  in-
structions in  accordance  therewith  were  despatched
by  him  to  Texas  on  the  last  day  of  his  term  of
office,  3  March,  1845.  The  friends  of  annexation
defended  the  constitutionality  of  this  proceeding,
and  the  opponents  denounced  it.

After  leaving  the  White  House,  Mr.  Tyler  took
up  his  residence  on  an  estate  that  he  had  purchased
three  miles  from  Greenway,  on  the  bank  of  James
river.  To  this  estate  he  gave  the  name  of  "  Sher-
wood Forest,"  and  there  he  lived  the  rest  of  his
life. (See  illustration  on  page  196.) In  a  letter

Jublished  in  the  Richmond  "  Enquirer "  on  17
an.,  1861,  he  recommended  a  convention  of  border
states— including  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,
Indiana,  Illinois,  and  Iowa,  as  well  as  Delaware,
Maryland,  Virginia,  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  and  Mis-
souri— for  the  purpose  of  devising  some  method  of
adjusting  the  difficulties  brought  on  by  the  seces-
sion of  South  Carolina.  The  scheme  adopted  by
this  convention  was  to  be  submitted  to  the  other
states,  and,  if  adopted,  was  to  be  incorporated  into
the  Federal  constitution.  In  acting  upon  Mr.  Ty-
ler's suggestion,  the  Virginia  legislature  enlarged
it  into  a  proposal  of  a  peace  convention  to  be  com-
posed of  delegates  from  all  the  states.  At  the
same  time  Mr.  Tyler  was  appointed  a  commissioner
to  President  Buchanan,  while  Judge  John  Robert-
son was  appointed  commissioner  to  the  state  of
South  Carolina,  the  object  being  to  persuade  both
parties  to  abstain  from  any  acts  of  hostility  until
the  proposed  peace  convention  should  have  had  an
opportunity  to  meet  and  discuss  the  situation.  In
discharge  of  this  mission  Mr.  Tyler  arrived  on  23
Jan.  in  Washington.  President  Buchanan  declined
to  give  any  assurances,  but  in  his  message  to  con-

fress,  on  28  Jan.,  he  deprecated  a  hasty  resort  to
ostile  measures.  The  peace  convention,  consist-
ing of  delegates  from  thirteen  northern  and  seven
border  states,  met  at  Washington  on  4  Feb.  and
chose  Mr.  Tyler  as  its  president.  Several  resolu-
tions were  adopted  and  reported  to  congress,  27
Feb. ;  but  on  2  March  they  were  rejected  in  the
senate  by  a  vote  of  28  to  7,  and  two  days  later  the
house  adjourned  without  having  taken  a  vote  upon
them.  On  28  Feb.,  anticipating  the  fate  of  the
resolutions  in  congress,  Mr.  Tyler  made  a  speech


on  the  steps  of  the  Exchange  hotel  in  Richmond,
and  declared  his  belief  that  no  arrangement  could
be  made,  and  that  nothing  was  left  for  Virginia
but  to  act  promptly  in  the  exercise  of  her  powers
as  a  sovereign  state.  The  next  day  he  took  his  seat
in  the  State  convention,  where  he  advocated  the
immediate  passing. of  an  ordinance  of  secession.
His  attitude  seems  to  have  been  substantially  the
same  that  it  had  been  twenty-eight  years  before,
when  he  disapproved  the  heresy  of  nullification,
but  condemned  with  still  greater  emphasis  the
measures  taken  by  President  Jackson  to  suppress
that  heresy.  This  feeling  that  secession  was  unad-
visable,  but  coercion  wholly  indefensible,  was  shared
by  Mr.  Tyler  with  many  people  in  the  border  states.
On  the  removal  of  the  government  of  the  southern
Confederacy  from  Montgomery  to  Richmond,  in
May,  1861,  he  was  unanimously  elected  a  member
of  the  provisional  congress  of  the  Confederate
states.  In  the  following  autumn  he  was  elected  to
the  permanent  congress,  but  he  died  before  taking
his  seat.  His  biography  has  been  ably  written  by
one  of  his  younger  sons,  Lyon  Gardiner  Tyler,
"  Letters  and  Times  of  the  Tylers  "  (2  vols.,  Rich-
mond, 1884-'5).  See  also  "  Seven  Decades  of  the
Union,"  by  Henry  A.  Wise  (Philadelphia,  1872).—
His  wife,  Letitia  Christian,  b.  at  Cedar  Grove,
New  Kent  co.,  Va.,  12  Nov.,  1790 ;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  9  Sept.,  1842,  was  the  daughter  of  Rob-
ert Christian,  a  planter  in  New  Kent  county,  Va.
She  married  Mr.  Tyler  on  29  March,  1813,  and  re-
moved with  him  to  his  home  in  Charles  City  coun-
ty. When  he  became  president  she  accompanied
him  to  Washington ;  but  her  health  was  delicate,
and  she  died  shoi'tly  afterward.  Mrs.  Tyler  was
unable  to  assume  any  social  cares,  and  the  duties
of  mistress  of  the  White  House  devolved  upon  her
daughter-in-law,  Mrs.  Robert  Tyler.  She  possessed
great  beauty  of  person  and  of  character,  and,  before
the  failure  of  her  health,  was  especially  fitted  for
a  social  life. — Their  son,  Robert,  b.  in  New  Kent
county,  Va.,  in  1818:  d.  in  Montgomery,  Ala.,  3
Dec,  1877,  was  educated  at  William  and  Mary,  and
adopted  the  profession  of  law.  He  married  Pris-
eilla,  a  daughter  of  Thomas  Apthorpe  Cooper,  the
tragedian,  in  1839,  and  when  his  father  became
president  his  wife  assumed  the  duties  of  mistress
of  the  White  House  till  after  Mrs.  John  Tyler's
death,  when  they  devolved  upon  her  daughter,
Mrs.  Letitia  Semple.  Mr.  Tyler  removed  to  Phila-
delphia in  1843,  practised  law  there,  and  held  sev-
eral civil  offices.  In  1844  he  was  elected  president
of  the  Irish  repeal  association.  A  little  later  he
became  prothonotary  of  the  supreme  court  of
Pennsylvania,  and  in  1858  he  was  chairman  of  the
Democratic  executive  committee  of  the  state.  He
removed  to  Richmond  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  and  was  appointed  register  of  the  treasury.
After  the  war  he  edited  the  "Mail  and  Adver-
tiser "  in  Montgomery,  Ala.  He  published  "  Ahas-
uerus,"  a  poem  (New  York,  1842) ;  "  Death,  or  Me-
dora's  Dream,"  a  poem  (1843);  "Is  Virginia  a
Repudiating  State?  and  the  States'  Guarantee,"
two  letters  (Richmond,  Va.,  1858).— President  Ty-
ler's second  wife,  Julia  Gardiner,  b.  on  Gardi-
ner's island,  near  Easthampton,  N.  Y,  in  1820,  was
the  eldest  daughter  of  David  Gardiner,  a  descend-
ant of  the  Gardiners  of  Gardiner's  island.  She  was
educated  at  the  Chegary  institute.  New  York  city,
spent  several  months  in  Europe,  and  in  the  winter
of  1844  accompanied  her  father  to  Washington,
D.  C.  A  few  weeks  afterward  he  was  killed  by  the
explosion  of  a  gun  on  the  war-steamer  "Prince-
ton," which  occurred  during  a  pleasure  excursion
in  which  he  and  his  daughter  were  of  the  presi-


200


TYLER


TYLER


^--yte&tv  %/ *C<^C£s?~\


dential  party.  His  body  was  taken  to  the  White
House,  and  Miss  Gardiner,  being  thrown  in  the
society  of  the  president  under  these  peculiar  cir-
cumstances, be-
came the  object  of
his  marked  atten-
tion, which  result-
ed in  their  mar-
riage in  New  York
city,  26  June,  1844.
For  the  succeeding
eight  months  she
presided  over  the
White  House  with
dignity  and  grace,
her  residence  there
terminating  with  a
birth-night  ball  on
22  Feb.,  1845.  Mrs.
Tyler  retired  with
her  husband  to
"  Sherwood  For-
est "  in  Virginia  at  the  conclusion  of  his  term,  and
after  the  civil  war  resided  for  several  years  at  her
mother's  residence  on  Castleton  Hill,  Staten  island,
and  subsequently  in  Richmond,  Va.  She  is  a  con-
vert to  Roman  Catholicism,  and  devoted  to  the
charities  of  that  church. — Her  son,  Lyon  Gardi-
ner, b.  in  Charles  City  county,  Va.,  in  August,  1853,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1875,
and  then  studied  law.  During  his  college  course
he  was  elected  orator  of  the  Jefferson  society,  and
obtained  a  scholarship  as  best  editor  of  the  "Vir-
ginia University  Magazine."  In  January,  1877,  he
was  elected  professor  of  belles-lettres  in  William
and  Mary  college,  which  place  he  held  until  No-
vember, 1878,  when  he  became  head  of  a  high-
school  in  Memphis,  Tenn.  He  settled  in  Rich-
mond, Va.,  in  1882,  and  entered  on  the  practice  of
law,  also  taking  an  active  interest  in  politics.  He
was  a  candidate  for  the  house  of  delegates  in  1885,
and  again  in  1887,  when  he  was  elected.  In  that
body  he  advocated  the  bills  to  establish  a  labor
bureau,  to  regulate  child  labor,  and  to  aid  William
and  Mary  college. In  1888  he  was  elected  presi-


dent of  William  and  Mary,  which  office  he  now
fills.  He  has  published  "  The  Letters  and  Times
of  the  Tvlers  "  (2  vols.,  Richmond,  1884-'5).

TYLER,  Moses  Coit,  educator,  b.  in  Griswold,
Conn.,  2  Aug.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1857,  studied  theology  there  and  at  Andover,
and  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church,
Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  in  1860-'2.  He  was  profes-
sor of  the  English  language  and  literature  in  the
University  of  Michigan  in  1867-'81,  and  since  that
time  has  occupied  the  chair  of  American  history
in  Cornell  university.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  St.  Andrew's,
Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  16  Oct.,  1881,  by  Bishop  Harris,
and  priest  in  St.  John's,  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  in  1883,  by


Bishop  Coxe.  In  1873-'4  he  was  literary  editor  of
"  The  Christian  Union  "  in  New  York,  and  he  has
contributed  to  reviews  and  magazines.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  I).  from  Wooster  univer-
sity in  1875,  and  that  of  L.  H.  D.  from  Columbia
in  1888.  Prof.  Tyler  has  published  "Brawnville
Papers"  (Boston,  1868) ;  "  History  of  American  Lit-
erature "  (first  2  vols.,  New  York,  1878) ;  "  Manual
of  English  Literature  "  (1879) ;  and  "  Life  of  Pat-
rick Henry  "  (Boston,  1888).

TYLER,  Ransom  Hebbard,  author,  b.  in  Ley-
den,  Franklin  co.,  Mass.,  18  Nov.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Ful-
ton, Oswego  co.,  N.  Y.,  27  Nov.,  1881.  At  an  early
age  he  removed  with  his  parents  to  Oswego  county,
was  educated  at  Mexico  academy,  N.  Y.,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  his
profession  in  Fulton,  where  he  was  also  president
of  a  bank.  He  held  various  local  offices,  including
those  of  district  attorney  and  county  judge  for
Oswego  county,  and  was  also  a  general  in  the  New
York  state  militia.  He  travelled  in  Europe,  Asia,
and  Africa.  Hamilton  gave  him  the  degree  of
M.  A.  in  1853.  Judge  Tyler  edited  the  "  Oswego
Gazette,"  contributed  to  magazines,  law-journals,
and  newspapers,  and  published  "  The  Bible  and
Social  Reform,  or  the  Scriptures  as  a  Means  of
Civilization"  (Philadelphia,  1863);  "American  Ec-
clesiastical Law"  (Albany,  1866);  "Commentaries
on  the  Law  of  Infancy  and  Covertures  "  (1868) :
"  Ejectment  and  Adverse  Enjoyment "  (1870) ;  "  Ty-
ler on  Usury,  Pawns,  and  Loans"  (1873);  "Ty-
ler on  Boundaries,  Fences,  and  Window-Lights"
(1874);  "On  Fixtures"  (1877);  and  biographical
sketches  of  early  settlers  of  Oswego  county.

TYLER,  Robert  Ogden,  soldier,  b.  in  Greene
county,  N.  Y.,  22  Dec,  1831 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
1  Dec,  1874.  When  he  was  seven  years  old  his
parents  took  him  to  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  he  was
appointed  from  that  state  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1853.  He
was  assigned  to  the  3d  artillery,  and  served  on
frontier  duty  till  the  civil  war,  being  engaged
against  hostile  Indians  in  the  Spokane  expedition
of  1858.  In  April,  1861,  he  was  on  the  expedition
to  relieve  Fort  Sumter,  and  witnessed  its  bombard-
ment, and  on  17  May,  after  opening  communica-
tion through  Baltimore  in  command  of  a  light
batteiy,  after  the  attack  on  the  6th  Massachusetts
regiment,  he  was  made  assistant  quartermaster
with  rank  of  captain,  and  served  in  the  defences
of  Washington.  On  29  Aug.,  at  the  special  request
of  the  Connecticut  authorities,  he  was  allowed  by
the  war  department  to  undertake  the  reorganiza-
tion of  the  4th  Connecticut  regiment,  which  had
become  demoralized,  and  was  commissioned  its
colonel.  Under  Col.  Tyler  the  regiment  became
one  of  the  best  in  the  army,  and  in  January,  1862,
it  was  made  the  2d  Connecticut  heavy  artillery.
With  it  he  took  part  in  the  peninsular  campaign,
and  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  he  was  made  brigadier-general
of  volunteers.  At  Fredericksburg  he  had  charge
of  the  artillery  of  the  centre  grand  division  and
was  brevetted  major  for  gallantry,  and  on  2  May,
1863,  he  was  given  command  of  the  artillery  reserve
of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  In  this  capacity  he
did  efficient  service  at  Chancellorsville,  at  Gettys-
burg, where  two  horses  were  shot  under  him.  and
in  the  Rapidan  campaign.  He  was  subsequently
a  division  commander  in  the  22d  corps,  covering
Washington,  and  in  May,  1864.  was  assigned  a  di-
vision of  heavy  artillery  that  acted  as  infantry.
On  19  May,  while  on  the  extreme  right  in  the  ac-
tions about  Spottsylvania.  he  drove  back  an  attack
of  Ewell's  corps,  and  was  publicly  thanked,  with
his  men,»by  Gen.  Meade  for  "  gallant  conduct  and


TYLER


TYLER


201


brilliant  success."  At  Cold  Harbor  he  led  a  brigade !
of  picked  regiments  and  received  a  severe  wound
in  the  ankle  which  lamed  him  for  life  and  perma-
nently shattered  his  constitution.  He  saw  no  more
active  service.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  had
received  the  brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  Get-
tysburg, colo-
nel for  Spott-
sylvania,  major-
general  of  volun-
teers and  briga-
dier-general, IT.
S.  army,  for
Cold  Harbor,  and
major  -  general,
U.  S.  army,  for
servicesthrough-
outthewar.  The
Connecticut  leg-
islature thanked
him  in  a  resolu-
tion, and  the  citi-
zens of  Hartford
presented  him
with  a  sword.
After  the  war
Gen.Tylerserved
as  chief  in  the
quartermaster's  department  successively  at  Charles-
ton, Louisville,  San  Francisco,  New  York  city,  and
Boston,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.

TYLER,  Royall,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  18
July,  1757;  d.  in  Brattleborough,  Vt.,  16  Aug..
1826.  He  studied  law  in  the  office  of  John  Adams
and  was  for  a  short  time  aide  to  Gen.  Benjamin
Lincoln,  in  which  station  he  served  in  the  Shays
rebellion  in  1786.  In  1790  he  settled  as  a  lawyer
in  Guilford,  Vt.  In  1794  he  was  made  a  judge  of
the  supreme  court,  and  in  1800  he  became  chief
justice.  Judge  Tyler  published  "  Reports  of  Cases
in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Vermont "  (2  vols.,  1809).
He  was  also  a  successful  dramatist  and  the  author
of  "  The  Contrast,"  the  first  American  play  ever
acted  on  a  regular  stage  by  an  established  company
of  comedians.  In  this  comedy  the  Yankee  dialect
and  story-telling,  now  very  familiar,  were  first  em-
ployed. It  was  produced  in  New  York  in  1786.
He  also  wrote  "  May-Day,  or  New  York  in  an
Uproar  "  (1787) ;  "  The  Georgia  Spec,  or  Land  in
the  Moon  "  (1797) ;  .and  "  The  Algerine  Captive,"
a  fictitious  memoir  (2  vols.,  1799).  Judge  Tyler
contributed  to  the  "  Farmer's  Weekly  Museum,"
published  at  Walpole,  N.  H.,  a  melange  of  light
verse  and  social  and  political  squibs  purporting  to
come  "  from  the  shop  of  Messrs.  Colon  and  Spon-
dee." He  contributed  to  the  "  Portfolio  "  "  An  Au-
thor's Evenings,"  a  series  of  papers  that  were  sub-
sequently collected  in  a  volume  and  entitled  "  The
Spirit  of  the  Farmer's  Museum  and  Lay  Preach-
er's Gazette."  He  also  wrote  for  the  "  New  Eng-
land Galaxy  "  and  other  journals,  besides  compos-
ing a  variety  of  songs,  odes,  and  prologues. — His
son,  Edward  Royall.  clergyman,  b.  in  Guilford,
Vt.,  in  1800 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  28  Sept.,
1848,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1825  and  at  the
divinity-school  in  1828.  He  was  pastor  of  the
South  church  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  from  1827  till
1832,  and  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Cole-
brook,  Conn.,  in  1833-'6.  In  1836-7  he  was  agent
of  the  American  anti-slavery  society.  From  1838
till  1842  he  was  editor  of  the  "Connecticut  Ob-
server," and  he  was  the  founder,  editor,  and  pro-
prietor of  the  "  New  Englander."

TYLER,  Samuel,  author,  b.  in  Prince  George
county,  Md.,  22  Oct.,  1809  ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,


15  Dec,  1878.  His  father,  Grafton,  was  a  tobacco-
planter.  The  son  was  educated  at  Dr.  James  Car-
nahan's  school  in  Georgetown,  devoting  himself
especially  to  Greek.  He  studied  at  Middlebury  in
1827,  and,  after  reading  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in_1831,  and  began  to  practise  in  Frederick,  Md.
In  1852  he  was  elected  one  of  three  commissioners
to  simplify  the  pleadings  and  practice  in  all  the
courts  of  the  state,  and  rendered  important  service
in  this  capacity.  His  report,  a  profound  discus-
sion on  the  relative  merits  of  the  common  and  civil
law,  won  wide  approbation.  In  1867  he  was  elected
professor  of  law  in  Columbian  college  (now  univer-
sity), Washington,  D.  C,  which  office  he  held  until
his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
the  College  of  South  Carolina  in  1858,  and  from
Columbia  in  1859.  Early  devoting  himself  to  meta-
physics, he  contributed  articles  on  this  subject  to
various  magazines,  one  of  which,  a  "  Discourse  on
the  Baconian  Philosophy,"  published  in  the  •'  Prince-
ton Review,"  was  afterward  issued  in  book-form
(Baltimore,  1844).  This  "  Discourse  "  gained  him
the  friendship  and  correspondence  of  Sir  William
Hamilton,  the  Scottish  philosopher,  who  wrote  to
the  author  in  1848,  advising  him  to  abandon  the
practice  of  law  and  to  devote  himself  exclusively
to  philosophy.  On  the  death  of  her  husband,  Lady
Hamilton  presented  Mr.  Tyler  with  a  portrait  of
Sir  William  as  a  token  of  her  esteem.  He  also
published  "  Robert  Burns  as  a  Poet  and  as  a  Man  "
(New  York,  1848) ;  "  The  Progress  of  Philosophy  in
the  Past  and  in  the  Future  "  (Philadelphia,  1858  ;
2d  ed.,  1868) ;  and  a  "  Memoir  of  Roger  Brooke
Tanev"  (Baltimore,  1872).

TYLER,  William,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Derbv,
Vt.,  5  June,  1806 ;  d.  in  Providence  R.  I..  18  June,
1849.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  became  a  Roman
Catholic,  with  his  parents  and  all  the  members  of
his  family.  He  was  educated  at  a  seminary  that
was  conducted  by  his  uncle,  the  Rev.  Virgil  Bar-
ber, at  Claremont.  N.  H.,  studied  theology  under
the  guidance  of  Bishop  Fenwick,  and  was  ordained
a  priest  in  1828.  He  was  stationed  at  the  cathe-
dral at  Boston  for  several  years,  and  was  then  sent
to  Aroostook,  but  returned  to  Boston,  and  was  ap-
pointed vicar-general.  In  1843  the  new  diocese  of
Hartford  was  created,  and  Father  Tyler  was  nomi-
nated its  first  bishop.  He  was  consecrated  on  17
March,  1844,  and  went  to  Providence,  R.  I.,  which
he  made  his  episcopal  residence.  Although  he  was
subject  to  constant  illness,  his  administration  was
active  and  successful,  and,  principally  through  the
aid  he  received  from  missionary  societies  in  Eu-
rope, he  increased  largely  the  number  of  churches
and  priests.  Bishop  Tyler  took  part  in  the  sixth
and  seventh  councils  of  Baltimore.

TYLER,  William  Seymour,  clergyman,  b.  in
Hartford,  Susquehanna  co.,  Pa.,  2  Sept.,  1810.  Job,
his  ancestor,  was  an  early  settler  of  Andover,  Mass.
After  graduation  at  Amherst  in  1830,  William  was
tutor  there  until  1834.  and  studied  in  Andover  theo-
logical seminary.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1836,  and  from  that  date  until  1847  was  professor
of  Latin  and  Greek  at  Amherst,  but  since  1847  he
has  been  professor  of  Greek  only.  On  6  Oct..  1859,
he  was  ordained  without  charge' by  a  Congregation-
al council  at  Amherst,  and,  although  he  was  never
a  pastor,  he  has  frequently  preached  in  turn  with
the  other  professors  of  the  college,  and  often  as  a
supplv  for  churches.  He  has  twice  visited  Europe
and  the  East.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1857,  and  Amherst  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1871.
He  is  the  author  of  "  Germania  and  Agricola  of
Tacitus  with  Notes  for  Colleges  "  (New  York,  1847;
enlarged  eds.,  1852  and  1878) ;  "  Histories  of  Taci-


202


TYNDALE


TYNG


tus "  (1848) ;  "Prayer  for  Colleges"  (1854;  revised
and  enlarged  repeatedly) ;  "  Plato's  Apology  and
Crito "  (1859) ;  "  Memoir  of  Dr.  Henry  Lobdell,
Missionary  to  Assvria  "  (Boston,  1859) ;  "  Theology
of  the  Greek  Poetis "  (1867) ;  "  Plutarch  on  the  De-
lay of  the  Deity,"  with  Prof.  Horatio  B.  Hackett
(New  York,  1867) ;  "  Address  at  Semi-Centennial  of
Amherst  College,  with  other  Addresses  on  that
Occasion "  (1871) ;  "History  of  Amherst  College"
(1873) ;  "  Demosthenes  de  Corona  "  (Boston,  1874) ;
"Demosthenes's  Philippics  and  Olynthiacs  "(1875);
and  nine  books  of  the  "  Iliad  "  (New  York,  1886).

TYNDALE,  Hector,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
24  March,  1821 ;  d.  there,  19  March,  1880.  His  fa-
ther was  a  merchant  engaged  in  the  importation  of
china  and  glassware,  and  young  Tyndale  succeeded
to  the  business  in  1845,  in  partnership  with  his
brother-in-law,  Edward  P.  Mitchell.  He  made  sev-
eral tours  of  Europe,  inspecting  closely  all  the
chief  factories,  and  becoming  practically  familiar
with  the  whole  art  of  pottery.  His  natural  taste,
thus  cultivated,  made  him  a  most  expert  con-
noisseur, and  led  to  his  selection  in  1876  as  one  of
the  judges  of  that  section  of  the  Centennial  exhi-
bition, in  which  capacity  he  wrote  the  elaborate
report  on  pottery.  His  private  collection  was  one
of  the  most  complete  in  the  country.  He  first  be-
came interested  in  politics  in  1856  as  a  Free-soiler,
and  was  a  member  of  the  first  Republican  commit-
tee in  Philadelphia.  He  was  not  an  Abolitionist,
and  had  neither  knowledge  of  nor  sympathy  with
John  Brown's  raid,  but  when  Mrs.  Brown  came  to
Philadelphia  on  her  way  to  pay  her  last  visit  to  her
husband  and  bring  back  his  body  after  his  execu-
tion, she  was  without  escort  and  was  believed  to  be
in  personal  danger.  An  appeal  was  made  to  Tyn-
dale, who  at  once  accepted  the  risks  and  dangers
of  escorting  her.  In  the  course  of  this  self-im-
posed duty  he  was  subjected  to  insults  and  threats,
and  on  the  morning  of  the  execution  was  shot  at
by  an  unseen  assassin.  It  had  been  threatened  in
the  more  violent  newspapers  of  the  south  that
John  Brown's  body  should  not  be  restored  to  his
friends,  but  ignominiously  treated,  and  a  "nigger's"
body  substituted  for  his  friends.  When  the  coffin
was  delivered  to  Tyndale  by  the  authorities,  he
refused  to  receive  it  until  it  was  opened  and  the
body  was  identified.  He  was  in  Europe  when  he
heard  the  news  of  the  firing  on  Port  Sumter,  and
at  once  returned  home  and  offered  his  services  to

the  government.
He  was  commis-
sioned major  of
the  28th  Pennsyl-
vania regiment  in
June,  1861,  and  in
August  was  put
in  command  of
Sandy  Hook,  op-
posite Harper's
Ferry.  The  regi-
ment fought  in
twenty-four  bat-
tles and  nineteen
smaller  engage-
ments, in  all  of
which  Tyndale
took  part,  except

x^V/ -y •(/  / rf when  he  was  dis-

/  Y&O/Oy  u>tAM6p6i>t£s abled  by  wounds.
W  He  was  promoted

v  to  lieutenant-col-

onel in  April,  1862,  and  served  in  Gen.  Nathaniel
P.  Banks's  corps  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  under
Gen.  John  Pope  at  Chantilly  and  the  second  battle


of  Bull  Run,  and  later  in  Gen.  Joseph  K.  F.  Mans-
field's corps.  At  Antietam.  as  the  senior  officer,  he
commanded  a  brigade  in  Gen.  George  S.  Greene's
division  of  the  12th  corps,  holding  the  ground  in
front  of  the  Dunker  church  against  three  separate
assaults  of  the  enemy,  in  which  the  brigade  cap-
tured seven  battle-flags  and  four  guns.  Early  in
the  day  he  received  a  wound  in  the  hip,  but  he
kept  the  field  until  the  afternoon,  when  he  was
struck  in  the  head  by  a  musket-ball  and  carried
off  the  field.  For  "conspicuous  gallantry,  self-
possession,  and  good  judgment  at  Antietam "  he
was  promoted  to  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
29  Nov.,  1862.  After  slow  and  partial  recovery
from  his  wounds  he  applied  for  active  duty,  and  in
May,  1863,  was  assigned  to  a  brigade  under  Gen.
Erasmus  D.  Keyes  near  Yorktown.  and  served  with
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  until  September,  when
he  was  sent  with  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker  to  the  relief
of  Chattanooga.  In  the  battle  of  Wauhatchie  he
carried  by  a  bayonet  charge  a  hill  (subsequently
known  as  Tyndale's  hill),  thus  turning  the  flank  of
the  enemy  and  relieving  Gen.  John  W.  Geary's  di-
vision from  an  assault  by  superior  numbers.  He
also  participated  in  the  series  of  battles  around
Chattanooga,  and  in  the  march  to  the  relief  of
Knoxville.  He  was  sent  home  on  sick-leave  in
May,  1864,  and,  finding  his  disability  likely  to  be
lasting,  he  resigned  in  August.  In  March,  1865,  he
was  bre vetted  major-general  of  volunteers  for  gal-
lant and  meritorious  services  during  the  war.  In
1868  he  was  the  Republican  nominee  for  mayor  of
Philadelphia,  and  was  defeated  by  68  votes  in  a
poll  of  more  than  120,000.  In  1872  his  kinsman,
Prof.  John  Tyndall,  of  London,  delivered  a  series
of  lectures  in  this  country,  and  resolving  to  devote
the  proceeds  to  the  establishment  of  a  fund  "  for
the  promotion  of  science  in  the  United  States  by
the  support  in  European  universities  or  elsewhere
of  American  pupils  who  may  evince  decided  talents
in  physics,"  he  appointed  Gen.  Tyndale  with  Prof.
Joseph  Henry  and  Dr.  Edward  L.  Youmans  trus-
tees. Prof.  Tyndall  in  1885  changed  the  trust  and
established  three  scholarships,  in  Harvard,  Colum-
bia, and  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  The  last-
named  institution  called  its  share  the  Hector  Tyn-
dale scholarship  in  physics.

TYNER,  James  Noble,  postmaster-general,  b.
in  Brookville,  Ind.,  17  Jan.,  1826.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Brookville  academy  in  1844,  and  from  1846
till  1854  was  associated  with  his  father  in  business.
He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1857,  and  practised  in  Peru,  Ind.  He  was  secre-
tary of  the  Indiana  senate  in  1857-61,  a  presiden-
tial elector  in  1860,  and  from  1861  till  1866  served
as  a  special  agent  of  the  post-office  department.
He  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  to  fill
the  vacancy  caused  by  the  election  of  Daniel  D.
Pratt  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  served  from  1869  till
1875,  being  a  member  of  the  committees  on  appro-
priations and  post-offices.  President  Grant  then
appointed  him  second  assistant  postmaster-general,
and  from  the  resignation  of  Marshall  Jewell  till
the  end  of  Grant's  administration,  3  March,  1877,
he  was  postmaster-general.  In  April,  1877,  he  be-
came first  assistant  postmaster-general,  which  office
he  resigned  in  October,  1881.  Mr.  Tyner  was  the
delegate  from  the  United  States  to  the  Interna-
tional postal  congress  in  Paris  in  1878.

TYNG,  Dudley  Atkins,  lawyer,  b.  in  Newbury-
port,  Mass.,  3  Sept.,  1760;  d.  there,  1  Aug.,  1829.
He  was  a  son  of  Dudley  Atkins,  and  changed  his
name  on  inheriting  the  estates  of  James  Tyng^
of  Tyngsborough,  Mass.  After  serving  as  U.  S.
collector  of  Newburyport,  he  succeeded  Ephraim


TYNG


TYRKER


203


Williams  as  reporter  of  the  Massachusetts  supreme
court,  holding  this  office  until  his  death.  He
edited  "  Reports  of  the  Supreme  Judicial  Court  of
Massachusetts,  September,  1804,  to  March,  1822 "
(17  vols.,  Newburyport,  1805-23).— His  son,  Ste-

Sihen  Higginson,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newburyport,
lass.,  1  March,  1800;  d.  in  Irvington,  N.  Y.,  4  Sept.,
1885,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1817,  and  for

two  years  was  oc-
cupied in  mercan-
tile pursuits.  He
then  studied  the-
ology in  Bristol,
R.  I.,  under  the  di-
rection and  over-
sight of  Bishop
Griswold  in  1819-
'21,  and  was  or-
dained to  the  min-
istry of  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal
churchbythesame
bishop,  4  March,
1821.  His  first  par-
ish was  in  George-
town, D.  C,  in
1821-'3,  and  then

-$-y  V *¥/* (7* ^e  was  rec*or  °*

JcZrfs/Lm  </~C-  Jfts^iag  Queen  Anne  par-
'  *  ish,  Prince  George
co.,  Md.,  in  1823-'9.  He  was  called  to  the  rector-
ship of  St.  Paul's  church,  Philadelphia,  in  1829,
then  to  the  Church  of  the  Epiphany  in  1833,  where
he  served  for  twelve  years.  In  1844  he  was  invited
to  St.  George's  church,  New  York  city,  where,  en-
tering upon  his  duties  in  1845,  he  labored  for  more
than  thirty  years  as  rector,  and  was  retired  as  rec-
tor emeritus  in  1878.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  in  1832,  and  from
Harvard  in  1851.  He  was  distinguished  for  elo-
quence in  the  pulpit,  and  also  for  able  and  effective
temperance  and  patriotic  addresses.  For  many
years  he  was  a  leader  among  that  part  of  the  clergy
known  as  low  churchmen.  He  was  active  in  or-
ganizing the  Evangelical  knowledge  society,  the
American  church  missionary  society,  and  the  Evan-
gelical education  society,  and  was  editor  for  several
years  of  "  The  Episcopal  Recorder  "  and  "  The  Prot-
estant Churchman."  Dr.  Tyng  held  a  ready  pen,  and
gublished  numerous  volumes  of  interest  and  value,
hief  among  these  were  "  Lectures  on  the  Law
and  the  Gospel "  (Philadelphia,  1832) ;  "  Memoir
of  Rev.  Gregory  T.  Bedell"  (1835):  "Sermons
preached  in  the  Church  of  the  Epiphany  "  (1839 ;
republished  as  "  The  Israel  of  God,  1854) ;  "  Recol-
lections of  England  "  (New  York,  1847) ;  "  Christ
is  All,"  sermons  (1852) :  "  The  Rich  Kinsman  :  the
History  of  Ruth,  the  Moabitess  "  (London,  1856) ;
"  Forty  Years'  Experience  in  Sunday  -  Schools "
(New  York,  1860) :  "  The  Captive  Orphan :  Esther,
the  Queen  of  Persia"  (1860);  "The  Prayer-Book
Illustrated  by  Scripture"  (8  vols.,  1863-'7);  "The
Child  of  Prayer,  a  Father's  Memorial  of  D.  A.
Tvng "  (1866) ;  and  "  The  Office  and  Duty  of  a
Christian  Pastor"  (1874). Bishop  Bedell,  of  Ohio,

Eublished  an  interesting  "Memorial  of  the  Rev.
»r. Tyng"  (New  York,  1886),  and  his  son,  C.
Rockland  Tyng,  is  writing  his  life. — Stephen  Hig-

finson's  son,  Dudley  Atkins,  clergyman,  b.  in
rince  George  countv,  Md.,  12  Jan.,  1825;  d.  in
Brookfield,  near  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19  April,  1858,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1843,  studied  theology  at  Alexandria  seminary,
Va.,  and  took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church  in  1846. He  was  assistant  to  his  father  at


St.  George's  church,  New  York,  held  charges  in
Columbus,  Ohio,  Charlestown,  Va..  and  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  and  was  rector  of  the  Church  of  the  Epiph-
any, Philadelphia,  from  1854  until  shortly  be-
fore his  death,  when  he  was  obliged  to  leave  his
pastorate  in  consequence  of  his  opposition  to  sla-
very. A  new  parish,  under  the  title  of  the  Church
of  the  Covenant,  was  then  organized  for  him.  He
was  also  known  as  a  lecturer  on  religious  and  secu-
lar subjects.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Vital  Truth
and  Deadly  Error"  (Philadelphia,  1852);  "Chil-
dren of  the  Kingdom,  or  Lectures  on  Family  Wor-
ship "(1854;  republished  as  "God  in  our  Dwell-
ing." London,  4th  ed.,  1859);  and  "Our  Coun-
try's Troubles  "  (Philadelphia,  1856-'7 ;  New  York,
1864).  See  "  The  Child  of  Prayer,  a  Father's  Me-
morial of  the  Rev.  Dudley  A.  Tyng."  by  Stephen
H.  Tyng  (New  York  and  London,  1858).  His  death
was  the  result  of  an  accident. — Another  son  of
Stephen  Higginson,  Stephen  Higginson,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  June.  1839,  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1858,  studied  theology  at
the  Alexandria  seminary,  Va.,  and  was  ordained
deacon,  8  May,  1861.  He  assisted  his  father  at  St.
George's  church,  New  York,  in  1861— '3,  was  made
priest,  It  Sept.,  1863,  and  became  rector  of  the
Church  of  the  Mediator,  New  York.  In  1864  he
served  in  the  U.  S.  army  as  chaplain  of  the  12th
New  York  volunteers.  In  1865  he  organized  the
parish  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  New  York,  building,
on  Forty-second  street,  a  church  that  was  replaced
by  a  larger  edifice  in  1873-'4,  and  of  which  he  had
charge  till  his  resignation  in  April,  1881.  After
that  he  was  manager  of  the  interests  of  a  large
insurance  company  in  Paris,  and  he  still  (1889)  re-
sides there.  In  1867  Dr.  Tyng  was  tried  by  an  ec-
clesiastical tribunal  for  preaching  in  a  Methodist
church  in  New  Jersey,  which  was  a  violation  of
the  canon  law  of  the  church.  He  was  found  guilty,
and  was  censured  by  the  bishop  of  New  York.  An
official  account  of  this  trial  was  published  by  the
diocese  of  New  York  (1868). He  took  an  active

Sart  in  the  revival  movement  of  1875,  directed  by
loody  and  Sankey,  and  in  the  summer  of  1876  he
began  Sunday  services  in  a  tent  near  his  church.
He  was  also  active  in  building  mission-chapels.  In
1864-'70  he  edited  "The  Working  Church"  and
"  The  Christian  at  Work."  Williams  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1872,  and  he  was  a  trustee  of
that  college  from  1872  till  1884.  He  has  published
"  The  Square  of  Life  "  (New  York,  1876) ;  "  He  will
Come  "  (1877) ;  and  several  volumes  of  sermons  en-
titled "  The  Peoples'  Pulpit."

TYNG,  Edward,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Massachu-
setts in  1683 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1755.
His  father,  Edward,  a  councillor,  was  appointed
governor  of  Annapolis,  N.  S.,  but  was  captured  by
the  French  on  his  passage  and  taken  to  France,
where  he  died.  The  son  was  commissioned  captain
of  the  south  and  north  batteries  and  fortifications
in  Boston  on  16  April,  1740,  and,  succeeding  Capt.
Southac  as  commander  of  the  vessel  "Prince  of
Orange,"  he  took  the  first  privateer  on  this  coast,
24  June,  1744.  He  commanded  the  frigate  "  Mas-
sachusetts "  in  the  expedition  against  Cape  Breton
in  1745,  and  was  made  commodore  of  the  pro-
vincial fleet.  He  also  captured  the  "  Vigilante,"  a
French  man-of-war  of  sixty-four  guns.

TYRKER.  the  German  foster-father  of  Leif,
son  of  Eric  the  Red,  lived  in  the  11th  century.
He  accompanied  Leif  on  his  voyage  of  discovery
in  the- year  1000.  After  the  Scandinavian  naviga-
tor had  built  Leifsbudir,  near  the  present  site  of
Newport,  R.  I.,  as  is  supposed  by  many,  he  divid-
ed his  men  into  two  parties,  which  alternated


204


TYSON


TYTLER


in  exploring  the  neighborhood.  He  cautioned  his
followers  to  keep  together  and  return  to  sleep  at
their  quarters.  But  one  evening  Tyrker  did  not
return  with  his  party.  In  great  sorrow  Leif,  at
the  head  of  twelve  men,  went  in  search  of  him.
He  had  not  gone  far  when  he  discovered  the  old
German,  evidently  greatly  excited  and  gesticulat-
ing wildly.  "  Why,  my  fosterer,"  cried  Leif,
"  have  you  come  so  late  ?  What  made  you  leave
your  companions!  "  Tyrker  answered  in  German,
but,  remembering  that  the  Scandinavians  could
not  understand  him,  he  spoke,  after  some  time,  in
Norsk.  "  I  have  not  gone  very  far ;  still  I  have
some  news  for  you.  I  have  discovered  vines  loaded
with  grapes."  "Are  you  telling  the  truth,  my
fosterer  1  exclaimed  Leif.  "  I  am  sure  of  telling
the  truth,"  he  returned, "  for  in  my  native  land
there  are  vines  in  plenty."  This  caused  Leif  to
give  the  country  the  name  of  Vinland.  See  Adam
of  Bremen's  "  Historia  Ecclesiastiea."

TYSON,  Elisha,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery county,  Pa.,  in  1749 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
16  Feb.,  1824.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  and  an  early  member  of  the  Maryland
society  for  the  abolition  of  slavery,  appeared  fre-
quently before  the  judicial  tribunals  in  behalf  of
negroes,  and  procured  the  passage  of  several  laws
to  ameliorate  their  condition.  In  1818  he  retired
from  business  to  devote  his  attention  to  the  aboli-
tion movement,  and  established  the  Protection  so-
ciety of  Maryland,  to  insure  the  colored  population
of  the  state  the  enjoyment  of  their  legal  privileges.
See  his  "  Life,"  by  a  citizen  of  Baltimore  (Bal-
timore, 1825). — His  grandson,  Philip  Thomas,
chemist,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  23  June,  1799;  d.
there.  16  Dec,  1877,  was  educated  in  his  native  city.
At  the  beginning  of  the  gold  fever  he  went  to
California,  and  there  made  numerous  geological  re-
searches. On  his  return  he  published  "Geology
and  Industrial  Resources  of  California"  (Balti-
more, 1851).  In  1856  he  was  appointed  state  agri-
cultural chemist,  which  place  he  held  until  1860,
and  in  that  capacity  made  two  biennial  reports
that  were  published  by  the  house  of  delegates  of
Maryland  (2  vols.,  Annapolis,  1860-'2).  He  was
first  president  of  the  Maryland  academy  of  sciences,
and  contributed  papers  to  its  proceedings.

TYSON,  James,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  26  Oct.,  1841.  His  father,  Henry  (1815-'72),
was  graduated  at  Pennsylvania  medical  college  in
1843,  and  practised  in  Reading  until  his  death.
He  was  active  in  prison-reform,  and  established  the
first  Sundav-school  in  the  Hicksite  Society  of
Friends.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Haverford
college,  Pa.,  in  1860,  and  at  the  medical  department
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1863.  He
was  appointed  lecturer  on  microscopy  there  in  1868,
and  on  urinary  chemistry  in  1870.  In  1870-'8  he
was  professor  of  physiology  and  microscopy  in  the
Pennsylvania  college  of  dental  surgery.  On  the
organization  of  the  new  university  hospital  in
1874  he  was  made  lecturer  on  pathological  anat-.
omy  and  histology.  In  1876  he  was  elected  pro-
fessor of  general  pathology  and  morbid  anatomy
in  the  medical  department  of  the  university.  He
is  now  (1889)  dean  of  the  medical  faculty,  president
of  the  board  of  the  Philadelphia  hospital,  and  a
member  of  various  medical  societies.  In  1871-2
he  assisted  in  editing  the  "  Philadelphia  Medical
Times,"  and  he  also  edited  four  volumes  of  the  pub-
lications of  the  Pathological  society  of  Philadelphia
(1871-'7).  In  addition  to  numerous  papers  on  his-
tology and  pathology,  and  clinical  lectures,  he  has
published  "  The  Cell  Doctrine :  its  Historv  and
Present  State  "  (Philadelphia,  1870) ;  "  An  Intro-


duction to  Practical  Histology  "  (1873) ;  "  Practical
Examination  of  the  Urine "(1875);  and  "A  Trea-
tise on  Bright's  Disease  and  Diabetes  "  (1881).

TYSON,  Job  Roberts,  lawver,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  8  Feb.,  1803;  d.  at  Woodlawn  Hall,
Montgomery  co.,  Pa.,  27  June,  1858.  Entering
business  at  an  early  age,  he  devoted  his  leisure  to
self-education,  became  a  proficient  linguist,  and
taught  in  Hamburg.  Pa.,  and  afterward  in  the  first
public  school  of  the  state,  which  was  established
in  1822.  At  this  period  he  was  director  of  the
public  schools  of  Pennsylvania,  a  member  of  the
prison  society,  manager  of  the  apprentice's  library,
and  among  the  first  to  organize  the  temperance
movement  in  Pennsylvania.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1827,  and  became  solicitor  for  the
Pennsylvania  railroad,  the  completion  of  which  had
been  secured  mainly  through  his  efforts.  He  was
a  member  of  the  city  council  and  of  the  legislature,
and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving
from  3  Dec,  1855,  till  3  March,  1857.  Dickinson
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1851.  Mr.  Tyson
was  instrumental  in  the  publication  of  the  archives
of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  vice-president  of  the
Historical  society  of  Pennsylvania,  and  vice-pro-
vost of  the  Philadelphia  law  academy.  He  was
the  author  of  an  "Essay  on  the  Penal  Laws  of
Pennsylvania  "  (Philadelphia,  1827) ;  "  The  Lottery
System  of  the  United  States  "  (1833) :  "  Social  and
Intellectual  State  of  the  Colony  of  Pennsylvania
Prior  to  1743  "  (1843) ;  "  Discourse  on  the  200th
Anniversary  of  the  Birth  of  William  Penn  "  (1844) ;
"  Letters  on  the  Resources  and  Commerce  of  Phila-
delphia "  (1852) ;  and  a  "  Report  on  the  Arctic  Ex-
plorations of  Dr.  Elisha  K.  Kane."  with  a  resolu-
tion to  provide  for  the  publication  of  Dr.  Kane's
book  by  congress,  which  was  adopted  by  the  house.
His  reports  on  the  Delaware  breakwater,  and  sug-
gestions for  improvement  of  the  navigation  of  that
river,  exhibit  a  clear  comprehension  of  the  com-
mercial interests  of  his  state  and  city.  He  had
collected  material  for  a  history  of  Pennsylvania.

TYTLER,  James,  scholar,  b.  in  Brechin,  For-
farshire, Scotland,  in  1747 ;  d.  near  Salem,  Mass.,
in  1805.  He  was  educated  for  the  church,  and
afterward  for  the  medical  profession.  He  was
commonly  called  "  Balloon  Tytler,"  from  being  the
first  in  Scotland  to  ascend  in  a  fire-balloon  on  the
plan  of  Montgolfier.  He  belonged  to  the  Friends
of  the  People,  and,  to  avoid  political  persecution,
fled  to  Ireland  about  1793,  and  to  this  country
about  1796.  He  was  drowned  near  Salem,  Mass.
Robert  Burns  describes  him  as  "a  mortal  who,
though  he  drudges  about  Edinburgh  as  a  common
printer,  with  leaky  shoes,  a  sky-lighted  hat,  and
knee-buckles  as  unlike  as  George-by-the-grace-of-
God  and  Solomon-the-son-of-David,  yet  that  same
unknown  mortal  is  author  and  compiler  of  three
fourths  of  Elliot's  pompous  '  Encyclopaedia  Bri-
tannica,'  which  he  composed  at  half  a  guinea  a
week  ! "  Besides  contributing  to  magazines,  he
was  the  author  of  anonymous  works  and  of  popular
songs,  including  "  I  ha'e  laid  a  Herring  in  Saut,"
or"  I  canna  Come  ilka  Day  to  Woo,  and  "  The
Pleasures  of  the  Abbey."  His  publications  include
"  Essays  on  the  Most  Important  Subjects  of  Natu-
ral and  Revealed  Religion,"  which  he  set  in  type
without  manuscript  in  Holvrood  (Edinburgh,
1772);  "System  of  Geography "  (1788);  "History
of  Edinburgh";  "Geographical,  Historical,  and
Commercial  Grammar"  (2  vols.):  "Review  of
Dritchken's  Theory  of  Inflammation";  "Answer
to  Paine's  '  Age  of  Reason  '  " ;  "  On  the  Excise  "  ;
"  System  of  Surgerv  " ;  and  "  Treatise  on  the  Plague
and  Yellow  Fever"  (Salem.  1799).


UBILLA


UHLE


205


u


UBILLA,  Andres  (oo-beel'-yah),  Mexican  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Guipuzcoa,  Spain,  about  1540;  d.  in
Chiapa,  Mexico,  in  1601.  He  went  in  his  youth
with  his  parents  to  Mexico,  where  he  entered  the
Dominican  order  in  1559,  and  was  graduated  in
law  and  theology  in  15G8.  He  became  professor
of  theology  in  the  University  of  Mexico,  superior
of  the  convents  of  Mexico  and  Oaxaca,  rector  of
the  College  of  San  Luis  de  la  Puebla,  and  provin-
cial of  his  order  in  1582.  In  1589  he  went  to
Spain  to  complain  against  the  viceroy,  the  Mar-
quis of  Villamanrique,  who  was  oppressing  the  In-
dians, and  by  his  dispute  with  the  audiencia  of
Guadalajara  threatened  to  precipitate  a  civil  war.
Ubilla  was  well  received  by  King  Philip  II.,  ob-
taining the  removal  of  Villamanrique  and  the
appointment  of  Luis  de  Velasco.  Shortly  after
his  return  to  Mexico,  Ubilla  was  appointed  bishop
of  Chiapa  and  consecrated  in  1592.  He  founded
during  his  government  a  convent  for  the  nuns  of
the  Incarnation,  extended  his  cathedral,  and  added
to  his  diocese  the  province  of  Soconusco,  which
had  belonged  to  Guatemala.  In  1600  he  was
named  bishop  of  Michoacan,  but  he  died  before
receiving  the  papal  bull  of  confirmation.  Besides
many  Latin  works  on  ecclesiastical  law  which  are
in  the  Dominican  convent  of  Oaxaca,  he  wrote
"  El  Sitio  y  Destruccion  de  Jerusalem  por  Tito  y
Vespasiano,"  a  manuscript  in  the  Aztec  language,
which  formerly  was  in  the  Franciscan  convent  of
Texcoco,  but  is  now  preserved  in  the  National  li-
brary of  Mexico.

UFFENBACH,  Bernard  von  (oof-fen-bok).
German  historian,  b.  in  Liebenthal  in  1691 ;  d.  in
Vienna  in  1759.  He  received  his  education  at
Vienna,  became  a  Jesuit  when  he  was  twenty-three
years  of  age,  and  in  1722  was  sent  to  the  South
American  missions.  After  residing  for  some  time
at  Montevideo,  where  he  learned  the  Indian
tongues,  he  became  a  missionary  among  the  Gua-
ranis,  with  whom  he  lived  about  twenty  years.  He
also  studied  the  customs,  manners,  and  habits  of
the  Indians,  took  detailed  notes  of  his  observations
and  of  the  natural  resources  of  the  country,  and
formed  valuable  collections  in  natural  history.  He
returned  to  Germany  about  1745,  and  was  pre-
sented to  Prince  Lichtenstein,  who  appointed  him
librarian.  Father  Uffenbach  lived  in  Vienna,  be-
came a  favorite  in  society,  and  was  received  at  the
imperial  court,  where  he  narrated  stories  of  Indian
life  and  the  experiences  of  the  early  Spanish  ad-
venturers. His  works  include  "  Historia  de  Gua-
ranibus "  (2  vols.,  Vienna,  1755),  and  "  Guarani
Lexicon,"  which  is  considered  as  the  only  reliable
monument  that  is  left  of  the  Guarani  language
(1756).  In  his  "  Litteraeannuas  Societatis  Jesu,"  sent
from  South  America  from  1739  till  1744,  and  after-
ward collected  and  edited  by  Johann  Theophilus
Bushing  (1785),  are  to  be  found  interesting  details
about  the  country  of  the  Guaranis  and  the  Jesuit
missions  in  South  America.  Uffenbach's  collections
in  natural  history  are  preserved  in  the  museum  at
Vienna,  and  were  utilized  for  an  "Historia  natu-
ralis  Americae  meridionalis  "  (4  vols.,  Vienna,  1790).

UGARTE,  Juan  (oo-gar'-tay),  Mexican  clergy-
man, b.  in  San  Miguel,  Teguzigalpa,  Honduras.  22
July,  1662 ;  d.  in  San  Pablo,  Sonora,  29  Dec,  1730.
ne  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  August,  1679,
and  was  afterward  professor  of  Latin  in  Zacatecas
and  of  philosophy  in  Mexico,  where  he  learned  the
Indian  languages. In  1700  he  devoted  himself  to


the.  Californian  missions,  and  spent  about  thirty
years  in  evangelizing  the  natives.  Finding  that
the  guard  of  soldiers  that  accompanied  him  de-
terred them  from  approaching  him,  he  dismissed  it
after  reaching  the  country  of  the  Yaquis,  where  he
founded  the  missions  of  San  Javier,  San  Pablo,
Santa  Rosalia,  and  San  Miguel.  He  then  joined
Father  Salvatierra  in  Loreto,  and  was  successful  in
his  missionary  labors,  teaching  the  natives  agricul-
ture, the  art  of  spinning  and  weaving,  how  to  build
cottages,  and  even  how  to  prepare  vessels  for  sea.
In  1705  he  visited  the  coast  of  Sinaloa  to  find  a
good  port  for  the  Manilla  fleet,  but  without  suc-
cess, and  .in  1708  was  directed  by  the  Spanish  gov-
ernment to  explore  the  Gulf  of  California.  With
the  aid  of  his  converts,  he  built  a  vessel  which  he
called  the  "  Triumph  of  the  Cross,"  and  manned  it
with  twenty-six  Chinese  and  native  Californians.
He  landed  among  the  Tepoquis  and  Seris,  by  whom
he  was  well  received,  and  reached  the  mouth  of
Colorado  river,  which  violent  storms  prevented
him  from  ascending.  After  encountering  many
dangers,  the  little  vessel  returned  to  Loreto.
Ugarte  was  successful  in  the  object  of  his  mission.
He  proved  that  California  was  a  peninsula,  gave
for  the  first  time  a  proper  idea  of  the  coast,  and
noted  such  places  as  would  be  afterward  suitable
for  missionary  stations.  He  subsequently  founded
several  missions,  of  which  the  principal  were  San
Luis  de  Gonzaga,  consisting  of  two  villages,  and
Our  Lady  of  Guadalupe,  of  six  villages.  He  wrote
"  Noticia  del  Viage  de  la  Balandra  nombrada  el
Triumfo  de  la  Santa  Cruz,  hecho  en  1709  al  Golfo
de  Californias,  y  Costa  del  Sur  de  la  America  Sep-
tentrional "  and  "  Diarios,  Relaciones,  y  Cartas  ae
las  Cosas  de  Californias."  Miguel  Venegas  used
these  manuscripts  in  his  "  Historia  de  Californias."

UHLAND,  Maximilian  (oo'-lond),  called
Father  Bernardino  de  San  Jose,  German  mis-
sionary, b.  near  Crefeld  about  1475 ;  d.  in  Mexico
in  1538.  He  became  a  Franciscan  friar,  and,  being
assigned  to  the  American  missions,  went  to  His-
paniola  in  1520  with  the  newly  appointed  Bishop
Geraldini.  After  learning  the  Indian  language,  he
was  attached  to  a  mission  in  the  interior,  but  as  he
opposed  the  policy  of  the  conquerors,  which  brought
about  the  depopulation  of  the  island,  he  was  or-
dered to  leave  the  country,  and  went  to  New  Spain
in  1526.  There  he  was  appointed  guardian  of  the
newly  founded  convent  of  Santiago  de  Tlaltelolco,
but  subsequently  he  was  sent  to  labor  in  Guate-
mala. In  1535  he  was  a  member  of  the  commission
headed  by  Father  Betanzos  which  laid  before  Pope
Paul  III.  the  wretched  condition  of  the  Indians.
Uhland,  who  was  a  Latinist  of  reputation,  was  in-
structed to  speak  before  the  congregation  of  the
propaganda,  and  induced  the  pope  to  issue  his  cele-
brated bull  entitled  "  Veritas  Ipsa,"  This  for  a
time  improved  the  condition  of  the  Indians,  but
the  promoters  of  the  bull  were  never  forgiven  by
the  Spanish  authorities,  and  Uhland,  to  avoid  per-
secution, on  his  return  to  Mexico  did  not  leave  his
convent  till  his  death.  He  left  a  valuable  manu-
script, which  is  preserved  in  the  National  library
at  Paris,  entitled  •'  Historia  de  la  fundacion  de  la
provincia  de  Santiago  de  Tlaltelolco."

UHLE,  Albrecht  Bernhard  (oo'-le),  artist,  b.  in
Chemnitz,  Saxonv,  15  Oct.,  1847.  He  was  brought
to  the  United  States  in  1851,  and  had  his  first
instruction  in  art  from  his  father,  and  at  the  Penn-
sylvania academy  of  fine  arts. During  1867-75


206


UHLER


ULLOA


he  was  engaged  principally  in  photography.  He
went  in  1875  to  Munich,  where  he  studied*  at  the
academy  under  Ferdinand  Barth  and  Alexander
Wagner  until  1877,  in  which  year  he  went  to
Italy.  In  the  same  year  he  returned  to  Philadel-
phia and  opened  a  studio.  He  visited  Paris  in
1879,  returning  the  following  year.  He  is  the
instructor  of  the  portrait  class  at  the  Pennsyl-
vania academy,  and  has  become  known  as  an  ex-
cellent artist.  Among  his  portraits  are  those  of
Isaac  Lea  and  Peter  McCall(  1879);  Joseph  Leidy,
painted  for  the  Academy  of  natural  sciences
(1882) ;  Wayne  McVeagh,  for  the  department  of
justice,  Washington  (1884) ;  and  John  D.  Lank-
enau,  for  the  German  hospital,  Philadelphia  (1886).
UHLER,  Philip  Reese  (you'-ler),  naturalist,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  3  June,  1835.  He  studied  natu-
ral science  at  Harvard  under  Louis  Agassiz  in  1863,
and  was  assistant  in  charge  of  entomology  at  that
institution  and  librarian  of  the  Museum  of  com-

Sarative  zoology.  Subsequently  he  returned  to
ialtimore,  and  in  1876  he  became  an  associate  in
natural  sciences  at  Johns  Hopkins  university.  He  is
also  librarian  of  the  Peabody  institute  in  that  city.
Mr.  Uhler  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  has
been  corresponding  secretary  and  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  Maryland  academy  of  sciences  in  1873,
which  place  he  has  since  held,  except  during  1884^'8.
His  papers  on  geology,  entomology,  and  other  natu-
ral sciences  have  been  published  in  the  journals  of
most  of  the  learned  societies  of  the  United  States
and  Canada,  in  the  annual  reports  to  the  trustees
of  Harvard,  and  as  special  reports  in  the  volumes
of  the  U.  S.  geological  survey.  He  translated  and
edited,  with  a  glossary,  Dr.  Hermann  A.  Hagen's
"  Synopsis  of  Neuroptera  of  North  America,"  issued
by  the  Smithsonian  institution  (Washington,  1861).
ULLMANN,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Wilming-
ton, Del.,  28  April,  1810.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1829,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  practised  in  New  York,  where  he  was  master
in  chancery  from  1839  till  1844.  In  1854  he  was
the  candidate  of  the  American  or  Know-Nothing
party  for  governor  of  New  York,  and  received  a
very  large  vote.  In  1861  he  raised  the  78th  New
York  volunteers,  in  which  he  served  as  colonel,
was  captured  in  August,  1862,  and  confined  in
Libby  prison  until  October  of  that  year,  when  he
was  released  on  parole.  He  was  promoted  briga-
dier-general on  13  Jan.,  1863,  and  ordered  to  ap-
point a  cadre  of  officers  and  to  go  to  Louisiana  to
raise  five  regiments  of  colored  troops,  afterward
increased  to  a  corps.  This  was  the  first  order  is-
sued by  the  U.  S.  government  for  the  raising  of
colored  troops.  He  was  brevetted  major-general  of
U.  S.  volunteers  on  13  March,  1865,  was  mustered
out,  24  Aug.,  1865,  and  was  made  major-general  in
November,  1865.  Gen.  Ullmann  received  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  from  Madison  university  in  1861.

ULLOA,  Antonio  de  (ool-lo'-ah),  Spanish  naval
officer,  b.  in  Seville,  12  Jan.,  1716;  d.  on  the  island
of  Leon,  3  July,  1795.  After  studying  at  Seville,
he  entered  the  navy  in  1733,  and  was  ordered  to
serve  under  the  French  astronomers  who  measured
an  arc  of  the  meridian  in  South  America.  With
Jorge  Juan  he  sailed  from  Cadiz  in  May,  1735,
and  arrived  in  Carthagena  five  months  before  the
French  scientists,  but  occupied  his  time  with  bo-
tanical explorations.  In  the  geodetic  observations
that  followed,  which  were  begun  in  June,  1736,
and  continued  four  years,  Ulloa  was  attached  to
La  Condamine,  the  head  of  the  expedition.  In
September.  1740,  in  the  midst  of  their  astronomi-
cal observations,  the  Spanish  officers  were  called
away  by  the  war  with  England,  and  received  orders


from  the  viceroy  to  put  the  port  of  Callao  in  a
state  of  defence,  and  in  1742  he  organized  the
forces  at  Guayaquil  against  the  British  under  Ad-
miral Anson  which  captured  Payta.  For  two
years  afterward  he  cruised,  in  command  of  a  frig-
ate, along  the  coast  of  Chili  and  the  island  of
Juan  Fernandez,  and  on  his  return  to  Quito  in
1744,  where  he  found  only  Godin,  the  other
French  academicians  having  terminated  their  la-
bors, he  assisted  in  the  observation  of  the  comet
that  appeared  in  that  year.  In  October,  1745,  he
embarked  at  Callao  on  a  French  merchant  vessel
which  entered  for  repairs  in  the  harbor  of  Louis-
burg,  Canada,  decoyed  by  the  French  flag  which
the  victorious  English  floated  on  the  fortress.  He
was  taken  prisoner,  and  his  valuable  collections
were  confiscated,  but  he  was  released  in  England
and  recovered  his  collections  through  the  interces-
sion of  the  Royal  society  of  London,  which  elected
him  an  associate  member  in  1746.  On  his  return
to  Spain  in  July  he  was  promoted  post-captain,  and
appointed  superintendent  of  the  mercury-mines  at
Jalapa  in  Peru.  He  was  made  rear-admiral  in  1760,
and  became  in  1764  governor  of  Louisiana,  which
had  just  been  ceded  by  France ;  but,  failing  in  his
efforts  to  win  over  the  colonists  to  Spain,  he  was
recalled  in  1766.  In  1770  he  was  made  lieutenant-
general  of  the  naval  forces,  and  in  1779  he  was  sent
with  a  fleet  to  the  Azores  with  sealed  orders  to
proceed  to  Havana  and  take  command  of  an  expe-
dition for  the  reconquest  of  Florida.  But,  being
entirely  occupied  with  scientific  observations.  Ul-
loa forgot  to  open  his  sealed  orders,  and,  return-
ing to  Cadiz  after  a  cruise  of  two  months,  was  ar-
rested and  tried  by  a  court-martial  in  December,
1780,  which  acquitted  him,  but  recommended  him
for  land  duty.  During  the  remainder  of  his  life
Ulloa  was  president  of  the  naval  school  for  cadets
at  Cadiz.  Ulloa  formed  the  first  cabinet  of  natural
history  in  Spain  and  the  first  school  of  metallurgy,
established  at  Legovia  a  factory  where  cloth  was
made  from  American  products,  and  founded  a  na-
val observatory  at  San  Fernando,  and  other  use-
ful institutions.  His  works  include  "Relacion  his-
torica  del  viage  a  la  America  Meridional  y  observa-
ciones  sobre  Astronomia  y  Fisica  "  (5  vols.,  Madrid,
1748 ;  with  Jorge  Juan,  French  translation,  Paris,
1752;  English,  London,  1758);  "Noticias  Ameri-
canas ;  entretenimientos  phisico-historicos,  sobre  la
America  Meridional  y  la  Septentrional"  (1772);
"  Observaciones  hechas  en  el  oceano  sobre  un  eclipse
de  sol  con  el  anillo  refractario"  (1779;  French
translation,  Toulouse,  1780);  and  "La  Marina  y
fuerzas  navales  de  la  Europa  y  del  Africa"  (1781).
David  Barry  published  in  1828  a  secret  memoir  on
South  America  which  he  claimed  to  be  Ulloa's
work,  but  its  authenticity  is  doubted.

ULLOA,  Francisco  de,  Spanish  friar,  b.  in
Andalusia  about  1498 ;  d.  in  Seville  in  1574.  He
united  with  the  Dominicans  at  Salamanca,  and
was  among  the  few  that  accompanied  Bishop  Vi-
cente Valverde  when  he  sailed  for  Cuzco  in  1538.
Ulloa  was  afterward  prior  of  a  convent  in  Lima,
and  visitor  of  the  order.  Having  learned  the  In-
dian dialects,  he  explored  the  country,  founded
convents  at  Arequipa  and  Huanuco,  and  preached
the  gospel  to  the  Indians  in  their  own  language
with  success.  His  influence  was  great  in  Peru,
and  Gonzalo  Pizarro  undertook  to  win  him  over  to
his  cause,  but  Ulloa  rejected  his  offers,  and  joined
Pedro  de  La  Gasca.  The  latter  despatched  Ulloa
with  letters  and  proclamations  for  the  officials  and
inhabitants  along  the  coast,  and  instructed  him  to
buy  supplies  and  prepare  everything  for  the  ad-
vance of  the  royal  army. Ulloa's  mission  was  so


ULLOA


UNANDER


207


successful  that  Pizarro  sent  a  party  of  cavalry  that
succeeded  in  taking  him  a  prisoner,  and  he  was  car-
ried to  Lima,  where  he  was  imprisoned  and  suf-
fered greatly.  When  peace  was  restored,  La  Gasca
despatched  Ulloa  to  Spain,  in  1549,  but  he  shortly
afterward  returned  to  this  country  and  went  to
Caracas,  being  later  made  visitor  of  the  province
of  Guatemala.  Toward  the  close  of  his  life  he  re-
tired to  Seville,  where  he  died  with  the  reputa-
tion of  a  saint.  He  wrote  a  curious  account  of  his
voyage  from  Panama  to  Peru,  published  in  the
44th  volume  of  Antonio  Salva's  collection,  and  con-
tributed memoirs  to  the  council  of  the  Indies,
printed  in  "  Cartas  de  Indias"  (Madrid,  1872).

ULLOA,  Francisco  de,  Spanish  explorer,  d.  on
the  Pacific  coast  in  1540.  He  went  to  Mexico  with
Hernan  Cortes,  and  did  good  service  in  the  fleet
that  the  latter  constructed  on  Lake  Texcoco  for
the  siege  and  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  Of
his  later  life  little  is  known,  except  that  when
Cortes,  on  his  return  from  Spain,  resolved  to  make
new  conquests  on  the  northern  Pacific  coast,  he
constructed  in  Acapulco  the  ship  "  Santa  Agueda,"
of  which  he  gave  the  command,  together  with  that
of  two  caravels,  to  Ulloa,  with  orders  to  explore
the  coast  as  far  northward  as  possible,  and  to  ob-
tain all  the  necessary  information  about  the  coun-
try. Ulloa  sailed  from  Acapulco  on  8  July,  1539,
entered  on  28  Aug.  the  Gulf  of  California,  where
he  lost  a  vessel  in  a  storm,  and,  after  putting  for
repairs  into  the  Bay  of  Santa  Cruz,  which  he  left
on  12  Sept.,  discovered  Cape  Rojo,  San  Andres  and
Santa  Marta  (now  Cape  Tosco),  San  Lazaro  and
San  Eugenio,  and  the  island  of  Cedros  or  Cerros.
After  despatching  a  messenger  to  Cortes,  who  had
meanwhile  sailed  for  Spain,  Ulloa  set  out  again
for  the  north.  On  5  April,  1540,  he  parted  com-
pany with  his  consort,  which  arrived  safely  at
Santiago  toward  the  end  of  April.  Some  assert
that  he  was  never  heard  of  afterward,  but  others
say  that  he  advanced  fifty  miles  farther  than  Cape
San  Quentin,  30°  30'  north  latitude,  and  anchored
safely  at  Acapulco  on  30  May  following.  The
latter  narratives  state  that  he  was  killed  shortly
afterward  by  a  soldier  whom  he  had  slighted. The

i'ournal  of  the  expedition,  written  by  his  clerk,
Francisco  Preciado,  under  the  title  "Relacion  de
los  descubrimientos,  hechos  por  Don  Francisco  de
Ulloa  en  un  viage  por  la  Mar  del  Morte,  en  el
navio  Santa  Agueda."  was  preserved  in  the  ar-
chives of  Seville  and  translated  into  Italian  by
Ramusio  in  the  third  volume  of  his  "  Voyages,"  and
into  English  by  James  Burney  in  his  "  History  of
the  Discoveries  in  the  South  Sea  "  (London,  1803),
under  the  title  "  The  Voyage  of  the  Right  Wor-
shipful Knight  Francisco  de  Ulloa,  with  Three
Ships,  set  forth  at  the  Expense  of  the  Right  Noble
Fernando  Cortes,  Marquis  del  Valle,  by  the  Coast
of  Nueva  Galicia,  Culiacan,  into  the  Gulf  of  Cali-
fornia, called  el  Mar  Berniego,  as  also  to  the  West
of  Cape  California  as  far  as  30  degrees  North,  be-
gun from  Acapulco,  the  8th  of  July,  1539."

ULPHILAS,  Herman  (ool-fee'-lahs),  German
naturalist,  b.  in  Paderborn,  Westphalia,  in  1702 ;
d.  in  Berlin  in  1761.  He  followed  the  sea  in  the
Dutch  service,  visited  the  Antilles,  Guiana.  South
America,  and  Batavia,  and  held  offices  at  Batavia,
St.  Eustatius,  and  Demerara.  He  made  valuable
collections  in  natural  history,  which  he  presented
to  the  Museum  of  natural  history  at  Berlin.  To-
ward the  close  of  his  life  he  was  editor  of  the
"  Magazin  f iir  Naturwissenschaft."  His  works  in-
clude "  Historia  naturalis  Americana  "  (Leipsic,
1756)  and  "  Abhandlung  iiber  die  baumartigen
Schotenpflanzen  des  Orinoco-Thales  "  (1757).


ULRICH,  Charles  Frederick,  artist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  18  Oct.,  1858.  He  began  his  art
studies  at  Cooper  institute  and  the  National  acad-
emy, New  York,  and  during  1875-81  continued
them  under  Ludwig  Lofftz  and  Wilhelm  Linden-
schrait  in  Munich.  In  1879  he  gained  a  bronze
medal  at  the  academy  there.  For  several  years  he
followed  his  profession  in  New  York,  but  about
1884  he  went  to  Venice,  Italy.  He  was  elected  an
associate  of  the  National  academy  in  1883,  and  re-
ceived the  Thomas  B.  Clarke  prize  there  the  fol-
lowing year  for  his  "In  the  Land  of  Promise."
He  has  executed  several  carefully  and  truthfully
painted  genre  pictures,  among  which  are  "The
Wood-Engraver"  (1882);  "The  Glass-Blowers"
and  "The  Carpenter"  (1883);  "A  Dutch  Type-
Setter";  "The  Waifs"  (1885);  and  "Washing  of
Feet  in  the  Venice  Cathedral."

UMBSCHEIDEN,  Franz,  journalist,  b.  in
Gruenstadt,  Rhenish  Bavaria,  Germany,  in  1821 ;
d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  13  Dec.  1874.  He  was  educated
at  the  Universities  of  Heidelberg  and  Munich,  where
he  studied  law  and  national  economy,  and  in  1848
took  an  active  part  in  revolutionary  movements,
travelling  and  making  inflammatory  speeches,  on
account  of  one  of  which  on  the  death  of  Robert
Blum  he  was  compelled  to  flee  to  France.  When
the  revolution  began  in  Rhenish  Bavaria  he  re-
turned, served  in  the  army,  and  was  present  at  the
occupation  of  Worms  and  at  the  storming  of  Lan-
dau, after  which  he  went  to  Baden  under  Gen.
Franz  Sigel,  and  afterward  to  Switzerland,  where
he  became  a  private  tutor. Being  expelled  to  ap-

Sease  Louis  Napoleon  in  1852,  he  went  to  Newarlt,
\.  J.,  and  taught  there.  During  the  Fremont  can-
vass in  1856  he  joined  the  Republican  party,  but
in  1859  he  co-operated  with  the  Democrats.  In
1860  he  became  editor  of  the  New  York  "  Staats-
Zeitung,"  which  post  he  held  until  1864,  when  he
established  the  Newark  "  Volksmann."  In  1867  he
was  editor  of  the  "  New  Jersey  Democrat,"  and  he
again  edited  the  "  Volksmann "  in  1869-74.

UNANDER,  Eric,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sweden ;  d.
after  1759.  He  arrived  at  Philadelphia  with  Rev.
Israel  Acrelius,  the  Swedish-American  historian,
6  Nov.,  1749,  and  took  charge  of  Swedish  Lutheran
congregations  at  Racoon  and  Penn's  Neck,  in  New
Jersey,  where  he  labored  under  Acrelius  and  after-
ward as  regular  pastor  until  1756.  His  parish  em-
braced a  wide  extent  of  territory.  He  conducted
services  in  Swedish  and  English  almost  every  Sun-
day, held  catechetical  examinations  once  a  year  in
every  family  that  was  connected  with  his  extended
parish,  and  visited  other  Swedish  settlements  on
Delaware  bay,  at  Salem,  along  Timber  creek,  and
other  places.  Of  his  labors  Acrelius  says:  "One
who  has  seen  his  toil  and  labor,  his  zeal  and  dili-
gence, and  thus  under  long-continued  sickness,
can  safely  testify  that  during  the  time  that  Mr.
Unander  lived  in  Racoon  he  did  not  eat  the  bread
of  idleness."  When  Provost  Acrelius  returned  to
Sweden  he  desired  to  accompany  him.  but,  as  the
affairs  of  the  congregations  did  not  allow  the  loss
of  two  pastors  at  once,  he  was  Avilling  to  remain.
He  therefore  became  the  successor  of  Acrelius  at
Christina  in  the  year  1756,  receiving  his  commis-
sion the  previous  vear.  He  continued  as  pastor  un-
til 1759.  The  church  at  Christina,  now  Wilming-
ton, Del.,  known  as  "Old  Swedes'  Church"  (see
illustration),  has  an  interesting  history.  In  1638  the
first  colony  of  Swedes  arrived,  settled  along  Chris-
tina creek,  and  built  Fort  Christina  on  the  site  of
the  present  city  of  Wilmington.  The  fort  un-
doubtedly did  double  service,  both  as  a  place  of
defence  and  a  place  of  worship. Rev.  Reorus  Tor-


208


UNANGST


UNCAS


killus  was  the  first  pastor,  who  arrived  with  the
first  colony.  On  28  May,  1698,  the  erection  of  a
new  church  was  begun  at  Christina  back  of  the  fort.
In  the  following  year  the  new  church  was  dedi-
cated under  the  name  of  Trinity  Lutheran  church.

Rev.  Eric  Tobias
Bjorck  was  the
pastor  at  the  time.
The  historian  Ac-
relius  describes
the  building  as
follows  :  "  The
church  is  of  gran-
ite, and  is  sixty
feet  long,  thirty
feet  broad,  and
twenty  feet  high.
The  wall  is  six  feet
thick  in  the  foun-
dation and  three
feet  at  the  win-
dows, as  well  as
above  them.  In
the  church  there
are  five  large  arched  windows  and  three  arched
doors."  The  following  inscription  (in  Latin)  is
found  on  the  west  gable :  "  1698.  If  God  be  for  us,
who  can  be  against  us?  In  the  reign  of  William
III.,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  England.  Will-
iam Penn  being  Proprietary;  William  [Markham],
Deputy-Governor.  The  most  illustrious  King  of
Swedes,  Charles  XL,  now  of  most  glorious  mem-
ory, having  sent  hither  Eric  Tobias  Bjorck  of  West-
mania,  pastor  of  the  place."  The  ground  for  the
church  was  given  by  John  Stalcop.  who  was  then
one  of  the  church  wardens.  To  this  was  added  an
additional  purchase  of  land  in  1699  of  250  acres
for  a  parsonage  and  support  of  the  pastor.  The
first  grant  of  land  was  for  a  Lutheran  church,  and
the  further  purchase  was  made  by  the  Lutheran
congregation  for  their  own  and  descendants'  use.
The  congregation  was  presided  over  by  Lutheran
pastors  until  the  year  1792,  when  a  pastor  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  took  charge  of  the
congregation.  The  church  is  still  in  a  good  state  of
preservation  and  is  used  for  divine  worship.  The
town  of  Wilmington  is  built  on  the  church-glebe
that  was  once  owned  by  Trinity  congregation.

UNANGST,  Elias,  missionary,  b.  in  Lehigh
valley,  Pa.,  in  1824.  He  was  graduated  at  Penn-
sylvania college,  Gettysburg,  in  1854,  and  at  the
theological  seminary  there  in  1857,  and  in  the  lat-
ter year  was  ordained  to  the  Lutheran  ministry.
He  was  tutor  in  the  college  during  his  theological
course  in  1854-'7.  In  1878  he  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Wittenberg  college,  Springfield,
Ohio.  Dr.  Unangst  has  been  actively  and  success-
fully engaged  as  a  missionary  at  Guntur,  India,
since  1857.  In  1871  he  visited  the  United  States,
but  after  a  stay  of  several  months  he  returned  to
India.  He  is  now  at  the  head  of  the  mission  sta-
tions of  the  general  synod.  He  has  rendered  im-
portant service  in  the  translation  of  the  New  Tes-
tament into  the  language  of  the  Telugus,  has  also
translated  various  tracts  and  hymns  into  the  same
language,  and  published  a  "  Historical  Sketch  of
the  American  Evangelical  Lutheran  Missions  in
India"  (1879).  .

UNANUE,  Jos6  Hip61ito  (oo-nah'-noo-ay),
Peruvian  scientist,  b.  in  Arica,  13  Aug.,  1758 ;  tl.
in  Lima,  15  July,  1833.  He  was  destined  by  his
parents  for  the  priesthood,  and  was  sent  to  Lima
to  study,  but  there  his  uncle  persuaded  him  to  be-
come a  physician.  He  founded  the  anatomical
museum  of  Lima,  and,  as  a  professor  of  the  medi-


cal college,  took  part  in  the  publication  of  the
"  Mercurio  Peruano,"  editing  several  articles  under
the  pseudonym  of  "Ariosto."  He  was  cosmog-
rapher  of  the  viceroyalty,  and  in  this  post  took,
from  1793  till  1797,  the  census  of  Peru  and  pub-
lished a  political,  ecclesiastic,  and  military  guide
to  the  country.  He  was  greatly  esteemed  by  all
the  European  scientists  that  visited  Peru,  and  a

Elant,  "  Unanuea  febrifuga,"  was  named  in  his
onor.  He  founded  the  medical  college  of  San
Fernando,  for  which  service  he  was  appointed  hon-
orary physician  of  the  royal  chamber.  After  the
beginning  of  the  revolution  he  favored  the  patriot
cause,  and  in  1812  was  elected  deputy  to  the  Span-
ish cortes  for  Arequipa.  When  the  independent
government  was  installed,  Unanue  was  appointed
minister  of  the  treasury,  and  afterward  he  was
president  of  the  first  constituent  congress,  vice-
president  of  the  Society  of  the  friends  of  the
country,  and  a  member  of  the  council  of  state.  He
possessed  the  confidence  of  Bolivar,  and  when  the
latter  abandoned  Peru  he  appointed  Unanue  presi-
dent of  the  council  of  ministers,  which  governed
the  country.  He  was  honorary  member  of  the  sci-
entific societies  of  Munich,  Madrid,  Philadelphia,
and  New  York,  and  wrote  "  Ensayos  sobre  la  edu-
cacion  de  la  Juventud  "  (Lima,  1826),;  ••  Principios
de  Geometria,  Logica,  Metafisica  v  Etica  "  (1827) ;
"  Defensa  del  sistema  fisico  de  Newton  "  (1828) ;
"  El  Verdadero  Peruano  "  (1829) ;  "  Observaciones
sobre  el  Clima  de  Lima  "  (1830) ;  and  "  Los  Andes
libres  "  (1832).

UNCAS,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  the  Pequot  settle-
ment, Connecticut,  about  1588 ;  d.  there  in  1682.
He  was  a  Pequot  by  birth,  but  rebelled  against  his
chief,  Sassacus,  was  expelled  from  his  tribe,  and,
gathering  a  band  of  malcontents,  became  their
head,  calling  his  followers  Mohegans,  an  ancient
title  that  the  Pequots  once  bore.  His  territory  lay
to  the  east  and  north  of  Lyme,  Conn.  He  con-
quered the  Nipmucks  in  northern  and  northeastern
Connecticut  and  the  adjacent  parts  of  Massachu-
setts, adding  their  country  to  his  own.  He  then
made  overtures  to  the  colonists,  signed  a  treaty  of

Seace  with  them,  and  in  1637  accompanied  Col.  John
lason's  expedition  against  the  Pequots,  proving
a  powerful  auxiliary.  He  afterward  received  part
of  the  Pequot  lands  as  his  reward,  but,  when  the
war  was  over,  manifested  so
much  sympathy  for  his  for-
mer tribe  that  he  was  sus-
pected of  infidelity  by  the
English.  He  soon  reinstated
himself  in  their  confidence,
and  the  Pequots  forthwith
attempted  to  assassinate
him.  Uncas  accordingly  at-
tacked and  conquered  Se-
quasson,  sachem  of  the  Con-
necticut river,  and  bravely
defended  himself  in  a  con-
stant warfare  with  the  neigh-
boring tribes.  His  princi-
pal opponent  at  that  time
was  the  great  Narragansett

chief  Miantonomo,  who,  jealous  of  his  intimacy  with
the  colonists,  and  eager  to  prove  the  superiority
of  his  people  to  the  Mohegans,  invaded  Uncas  s
territory  with  1,000  men.  He  was  incited  to  this
bv  Samuel  Gorton,  a  settler,  who  for  "  his  damna-
ble errors"  had  been  banished  from  the  Plymouth
and  Massachusetts  colonies.  Hastily  collecting  all
his  force,  about  500  warriors,  Uncas  marched  to
the  unequal  conflict.  The  armies  met  on  the
plain  about  a  mile  west  of  Yantic  river  falls,  and


UNDERHILL


UNDERWOOD


209


the  fight  was  about  to  begin  when  Uncas  ad-
vanced and  demanded  a  parley,  with  Miantonomo.
"  You  have,"  said  he,  "  a  number  of  brave  warriors
with  you,  and  so  have  I  with  me.  It  is  a  pity  that
our  warriors  should  be  killed  in  a  private  quarrel
between  their  chiefs.  Step  forward  like  a  brave
man,  as  you  profess  to  be,  and  let  us  fight  the  bat-
tle ourselves.  If  I  fall,  the  Mohegans  shall  serve
the  Narragansetts.  But  if  Uncas  kills  Miantonomo
the  Narragansetts  shall  be  mine."  Miantonomo
declined  the  single  combat,  a  furious  fight  ensued
in  which  the  Mohegans  were  victorious,  and  Mian-
tonomo was  captured.  Uncas  took  him  to  Hart-
ford to  consult  with  the  colonial  authorities  as  to
what  should  be  done  with  him.  The  commissioners
decided  that  "  there  could  be  no  safety  for  Uncas
in  the  event  of  Miantonomo's  liberation,  but  that
by  secret  treachery  or  open  force  his  life  would  be
in  continual  danger."  Six  elders  and  six  clergy-
men of  Massachusetts  decided  that  the  Narragan-
sett  chief  should  be  put  to  death.  Acting  on  their
instructions,  Miantonomo  was  taken  to  Norwich
and  brained  with  a  tomahawk  by  Uncas's  brother,
in  his  presence  and  that  of  two  Englishmen,  in
September,  1643.  Rev.  Richard  Hyde  in  1669  said
in  a  letter  that  after  Miantonomo's  death  Uncas
cut  a  piece  out  of  his  shoulder  and  ate  it,  but  this
had  no  authority  but  rumor.  The  colonists  sent
a  detachment  of  soldiers  to  defend  the  Mohe-
gans against  the  tribes  that  on  all  sides  combined
against  them.  For  two  years  Uncas  fought  against
the  Mohawks,  Pocomotocks,  and  Narragansetts.
defending  himself  with  bravery  and  skill.  In  1656
he  was  besieged  in  his  stronghold  on  Connecticut
river  by  the  Narragansett  chief  Pessacus,  and
nearly  forced  by  hunger  to  surrender,  but  almost
at  the  last  moment  he  was  relieved  by  an  Eng-
lish ensign,  Thomas  Leffingwell,  who  managed  to
reach  him  at  night  in  a  canoe  laden  with  provis-
ions. In  gratitude  for  this  assistance,  he  gave
Leffingwell  a  deed  of  all  the  lands  upon  which  the
town  of  Norwich,  Conn.,  now  stands.  Leffingwell
afterward  sold  it  to  a  company.  Although  Uncas
was  too  old  to  be  of  much  service  during  King
Philip's  war,  his  son,  Oneco,  with  200  Mohegan
warriors  and  a  greater  number  of  subjugated  Pe-
quots,  marched  with  Maj.  John  Talcott  to  Brook-
field  and  Hadley,  and  at  the  latter  place  aided  in
defeating  700  of  King  Philip's  force.  Uncas  was
never  in  favor  with  the  clergy,  by  one  of  whom  in
1674  he  is  described  as  "  an  old  and  wicked,  wilful
man,  who  had  always  been  an  opposer  of  praying
to  God."  But  on  one  occasion  he  so  far  yielded
to  the  influence  of  a  good  missionary  as  to  ask  his
prayers  for  rain  during  a  continued  drought.
When  it  fell  the  next  day,  he  professed  himself  al-
most ready  to  adopt  the  Christian  religion.  Al-
though he  was  cruel  and  tyrannical,  Uncas  had  a
conception  of  the  obligation  of  a  treaty  that  was
possessed  by  no  other  Indian.  He  kept  faith  with
the  colonists  in  all  their  warfare  with  other  tribes,
and  was  a  singularly  generous  and  magnanimous
foe.  His  admirers  claim  that  great  injustice  has
been  done  him  by  historians,  who  almost  unani-
mously praise  Miantonomo  at  his  expense.  A
granite  obelisk  was  erected  to  his  memory  in  Nor-
wich in  1825,  the  foundation-stone  being  laid  by
Gen.  Andrew  Jackson.  See  "  Uncas  and  Mian-
tonomo," by  William  L.  Stone  (New  York,  1842).

UNDERHILL,  Edward  Fitch,  stenographer,  b.
in  Woleott,  N.  Y.,  20  April,  1830.  He  was  self-
educated,  at  nineteen  years  of  age  became  a  steno-
graphic reporter  on  the  St.  Louis  press,  and  in
1853-'62  was  connected  with  the  "Tribune"  and
"  Times  "  of  New  York  city,  becoming  war-corre-

VOL.  VI. 14


spondent  of  the  latter,  and  subsequently  its  Wash-
ington correspondent.  He  was  one  of  the  first
court  reporters  in  the  United  States,  and  in  1860
procured  the  passage  of  a  law  that  made  stenog-
raphers officers  of  the  courts  in  New  York  city,
which  practice  has  since  been  adopted  by  the
county  courts  and  by  nearly  every  state  in  the
Union.  In  1865  he  also  procured  the  passage  of  a
law  to  regulate  the  salaries  of  court  stenographers.
He  has  been  official  stenographer  of  the  legisla-
ture for  five  years,  of  the  Constitutional  conven-
tion in  1867-8,  of  the  state  supreme  court  for  eight
years,  and  of  the  surrogate's  court  from  1872  till
the  present  time.  He  has  been  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  has  written  much  in  prose  and  verse,
chiefly  humorous.

UNDERHILL,  John,  colonist,  b.  in  Warwick-
shire, England ;  d.  in  Oyster  Bay,  Long  Island,
N.  Y.,  about  1672.  He  served  in  the  Netherlands
and  at  Cadiz,  came  to  New  England  with  John
Winthrop  in  1630,  and  was  a  representative  in  the
assembly  from  Boston.  He  was  appointed  by  Sir
Henry  Vane  to  command  the  colony's  troops,  and
with  Capt.  John  Mason  destroyed  the  Indian  forts
at  Mystic  in  1637  and  broke  the  power  of  the  Pe-
quots.  Being  banished  from  Boston  on  account  of
his  religious  opinions,  he  went  to  England  and
was  made  in  1641  governor  of  Exeter  and  Dover,
but  returned  to  this  country,  removed  to  Stam-
ford, Conn.,  and  afterward  in  1646  to  Flushing,
Long  Island.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  court  in
New  Haven  in  1643,  was  assistant  justice  there,
and  held  an  important  command  during  the  hos-
tilities with  the  Dutch  and  Indians,  1643-'6.  In
1665  he  was  a  delegate  from  Oyster  Bay  to  Hemp-
stead, and  he  was  at  one  time  under-sheriff  of  the
North  Riding  of  Yorkshire.  The  Mantinenoc  In-
dians gave  him  150  acres  of  land,  which  is  still
owned  by  his  descendants.  He  published  "  Newes
from  America,"  an  account  of  the  Pequot  war
(London,  1638).

UNDERWOOD,  Adin  Ballon,  soldier,  b.  in
Milford,  Mass.,  19  May,  1828  ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
14  Jan.,  1888.  His  ancestors  came  to  Hingham  be-
fore 1637  and  afterward  settled  in  Watertown.
His  father,  Orison,  was  a  brigadier-general  of  mili-
tia. After  graduation  at  Brown  in  1849  the  son
studied  law  at  Harvard,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1853,  and  settled  in  Boston  in  1855.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  was  active  in  raising
recruits,  and  he  was  appointed  captain  in  the  2d
Massachusetts  infantry  in  April,  1861.  He  became
major  in  the  33d  regiment  in  July,  1862,  lieuten-
ant-colonel and  colonel  in  the  same  year,  partici-
pated in  the  battles  of  Fredericksburg.  Chaneel-
Jorsville,  and  Gettysburg,  and  served  under  Gen.
Joseph  Hooker  at  Lookout  Mountain,  but.  being
dangerously  wounded,  was  disabled  from  further
field  duty.  He  was  appointed  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  on  13  Jan.,  1863,  received  the  brevet
of  major-general  of  volunteers  on  13  Aug.,  1865,
and  was  mustered  out  on  10  July,  1866.  For  near-
ly twenty  years  he  was  surveyor  of  the  port  of
Boston.  Gen.  Underwood  published  "  Three  Years'
Service  of  the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  Infant-
ry" (Boston,  1881).

UNDERWOOD,  Francis  Henry,  author,  b.  in
Enfield,  Mass.,  12  Jan.,  1825.  He  was  educated
partly  at  Amherst,  then  taught  in  Kentucky,  read
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  returned
to  Massachusetts  in  1850,  and  thenceforward  took
an  active  part  in  the  anti-slavery  cause.  He  was
clerk  of  the  Massachusetts  senate  in  1852,  and  af-
terward literary  adviser  of  the  publishing-house  of
Phillips,  Sampson,  and  Co. He  conceived  the  idea


210


UNDERWOOD


UNDERWOOD


of  uniting  the  literary  force  of  the  north  to  the
Free-soil  movement  by  means  of  a  magazine,  and
after  several  years  of  effort  was  the  means  of  secur-
ing the  eminent  writers  that  made  the  fame  of
the  "  Atlantic  Monthly."  He  assisted  in  the  man-
agement of  that  magazine  for  two  years,  until  the
firm  with  which  he  was  connected  came  to  an  end.
He  was  then  (1859)  elected  clerk  of  the  superior
court  in  Boston,  which  post  he  held  for  eleven
years,  when  he  resigned  and  entered  private  busi-
ness, chiefly  to  obtain  more  leisure  for  literary
work.  His  studies  have  been  mainly  in  Eng-
lish literature,  but  his  writings  cover  a  wide  field.
He  served  for  thirteen  years  in  the  school  board  of
Boston.  In  1885  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at
Glasgow,  Scotland.  His  lectures  on  "American
Men  of  Letters "  and  his  occasional  speeches,  such
as  that  before  the  Glasgow  Ayrshire  society  "  On
the  Memory  of  Burns,"  have  been  much  admired.
In  1888  the  University  of  Glasgow  conferred  on
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  His  works  include
a  "Hand-Book  of  English  Literature"  (Boston,
1871) ;  "  Hand  -  Book  of  American  Literature  "
(1872);  "Cloud  Pictures,"  a  series  of  imaginative
stories,  chiefly  musical  (1872) ;  "  Lord  of  Himself,"
a  novel  of  old  times  in  Kentucky  (1874) ;  "  Man
Proposes,"  a  novel  (1880) ;  "  The  True  Story  of  Exo-
dus, an  abridgment  of  the  work  by  Brugsch-Bey
(1880) ;  and  biographical  sketches  of  Longfellow
(1882),  Lowell  (1882),  and  Whittier  (1883).  Dr.
Underwood  is  engaged  upon  an  elaborate  popular
history  of  English  literature.— His  second  cousin,
Lucius  Marcus,  botanist,  b.  in  New  Woodstock,
N.  Y.,  26  Oct.,  1853,  was  graduated  at  the  Syracuse
university,  N.  Y.,  in  1877,  and  was  professor  of
botany  and  geology  in  Illinois  Weslevan  university
in  1880-3.  Since  1883  he  has  held  the  chair  of
botany  in  Syracuse  university.  He  is  engaged  in
the  study  of  the  ferns  and  hepaticre  of  North
America,  and  in  addition  to  numerous  articles  in
scientific  journals  he  has  published  "Systematic
Plant  Record"  (Syracuse,  1881);  "Our  Native
Perns,  and  how  to  study  Them  "  (Bloomington,  111.,
1881) ;  "  Our  Native  Ferns  and  their  Allies  "  (1882 ;
3d  ed.,  New  York,  1888) ;  and  "  Descriptive  Cata-
logue of  North  American  Hepaticae  "  (1884).  He
is  now  preparing  an  "  Underwood  Genealogy."

UNDERWOOD,  Johu  Curtiss,  jurist,  b.  in
Litchfield,  Herkimer  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1808 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  7  Dec,  1873.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Hamilton  in  1832,  and  removed  to .  Clarke
county,  Va.,  where  he  engaged  in  farming,  and  in
1856  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that  nomi-
nated John  C.  Fremont  for  president.  Being  pro-
scribed for  his  political  sentiments,  and  especially
for  his  opposition  to  slavery,  he  removed  to  New
York,  where  he  became  secretary  to  a  company  that
was  formed  to  deal  in  southern  lands.  In  1861  he
was  nominated  consul  at  Callao,  Peru,  but  he  ac-
cepted instead  the  office  of  fifth  auditor  in  the
treasury  department,  and  while  there  was  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  district  court  of  Virginia.
Early  in  the  civil  war  he  affirmed  the  right  of  the
U.  S.  government  to  confiscate  the  enemy's  proper-
ty, and  also  maintained  the  civic  rights  of  colored
citizens.  In  his  district  Jefferson  Davis  was  in-
dicted for  treason,  and  he  refused  in  June,  1866,
to  admit  the  prisoner  to  bail,  on  the  ground  that
he  was  in  custody  of  the  military  authorities.  He
still  presided  in  May,  1867,  when  the  Confeder-
ate leader  was  released.  Judge  Underwood  was
bitterly  assailed  for  his  maintenance  of  the  rights
of  colored  citizens  and  for  his  zeal  in  enforcing  the
Federal  laws,  and  was  forced  into  litigation  on
account  of  his  decree  sanctioning  confiscation.


UNDERWOOD,  John  William  Henry,  jurist,
b.  in  Elbert  county,  Ga.,  20  Nov.,  1816;  d.  in
Rome,  Ga.,  18  July,  1888.  He  studied  law  under
his  father,  Judge  William  H.  Underwood,  in  Hall
county,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  practised  in  Hab-
ersham county  for  many  years,  and  removed  to
Rome,  Ga.,  in  1851.  He  was  elected  solicitor-gen-
eral for  the  western  circuit  in  1843,  but  resigned
in  1846,  and  was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Nebraska  by  President  Buchanan,
which  post  he  declined.  He  was  elected  to  the
legislature  of  Georgia  in  1857,  was  made  speaker
of  the  house  of  representatives,  and  was  then
elected  to  congress,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1859,  till
23  Jan.,  1861,  when  he  resigned  on  the  secession
of  his  state.  In  1867  he  was  appointed  judge  of
the  Rome  circuit  by  Gov.  Charles  J.  Jenkins,  but
went  out  with  the  reconstruction  act  in  1868.  In
1874  he  was  reappointed  to  the  same  office,  and  he
was  re-elected  in  1878.  He  resigned  in  1882,  to
take  his  place  on  the  tariff  commission,  to  which
he  was  appointed  by  President  Arthur.

UNDERWOOD,  Joseph  Rogers,  senator,  b.  in
Goochland  county,  Va.,  24  Oct.,  1791 ;  d.  near
Bowling  Green,  Ky.,  23  Aug.,  1876.  He  is  a  de-
scendant of  William  Thomas  Underwood,  who  set-
tled in  Virginia  about  1680.  His  family  being
in  adverse  circumstances,  he  was  adopted  by  his
maternal  uncle,
Edward  Rogers,  a
soldier  of  the  Rev-
olution, who  had
emigrated  to  Ken-
tucky in  1783.
Removing  to  that
state  in  1803,  the
boy  was  educated
in  various  schools
and  was  gradu-
ated at  Transyl-
vania in  1811,  af-
ter which  he  stud-
ied law  in  Lex-
ington, Ky.  He
was  the  first  vol-
unteer to  be  at-
tached to  the  reg-
iment of  Colonel
William Dudley

for  co-operation  with  the  northern  army  on  the
Canada  border,  was  made  a  lieutenant,  and  when
the  captain  of  his  company  was  killed  in  Dudley's
defeat,  5  May,  1813,  the  command  devolved  upon
him.  Underwood  was  wounded,  and  with  the
remnant  of  Dudley's  regiment  was  forced  to  sur-
render. After  undergoing  cruel  treatment  from
the  Indians,  he  was  released  on  parole  and  re-
turned to  his  home,  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  the  same  year,  and  settled  in  Glasgow,  Ky.,
where  he  was  also  trustee  of  the  town  and  county
attorney  until  he  removed  to  Bowling  Green  in
1823.  He  served  in  the  legislature  in  1816-'19  and
again  in  1825-'6,  was  a  candidate  for  lieutenant-
governor  in  1828,  and  from  that  year  till  1835  was
judge  of  the  court  of  appeals.  Being  elected  to
congress  as  a  Whig,  he  served  from  7  Dec,  1835,
till  3  March,  1843,  and  in  1845  was  chosen  to  rep-
resent Warren  county  in  the  legislature,  serving  as
speaker  of  the  house.  He  was  elected  a  U.  S.
senator  as  a  Whig,  and,  after  serving  from  6  Dec,
1847,  till  3  March,  1853,  again  practised  his  pro-
fession. In  1824  and  1844  he  was  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Henry  Clay  ticket,  and  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  convention  at
Chicago  in  1864. — His  brother,  Warner  L.,  b.  in


UNDERWOOD


UPHAM


211


Goochland  county,  Va.,  7  Aug.,  1808.  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1830,  served  in  the
Kentucky  legislature  in  1848-'9,  and  was  elected  to
congress,  as  an  American,  serving  from  3  Dec,
1855,  till  3  March,  1859.— Joseph  R.'s  son,  John
Cox,  engineer,  b.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  12  Sept.,
1840,  removed  to  Kentucky  with  his  father.  Af-
ter graduation  at  Rensselaer  polytechnic  insti-
tute in  1862,  he  entered  the  Confederate  army
and  served  as  a  military  engineer  in  Virginia,
but  was  captured  in  1863  and  confined  in  pris-
ons in  Cincinnati  and  Boston  until  the  close  of
the  war.  He  then  returned  to  Kentucky,  where  he
has  since  engaged  in  engineering,  and  has  con-
tributed to  the  improvement  of  his  part  of  the
state.  He  was  engineer  in  charge  of  the  public
works  of  Warren  county,  city  engineer  of  Bowling
Green  in  1868-75,  and  mayor  of  that  town  in
1870-'2.  He  was  active  in  the  reorganization  of
the  Democratic  party  in  Kentucky,  was  a  member
of  the  state  executive  committee,  speaker  of  the
senate  in  1876,  where  his  casting-vote  defeated  the
whipping-post  bill,  and  in  1876-'80  was  lieuten-
ant-governor of  Kentucky.  Mr.  Underwood  es-
tablished the  "  Kentucky  Intelligencer  "  in  Bow-
ling Green,  but  transferred  this  journal  to  Louis-
ville, and  consolidated  it  with  the  "  Post."  In  1881
he  removed  to  Covington,  and  organized  a  daily
newspaper  publishing  company  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
where  in  1882  the  "  Daily  News,"  of  which  he  was
general  manager,  began  to  be  issued.  He  has  pub-
lished various  official  documents  in  the  form  of
pamphlets  and  reports.

UNDERWOOD,  William  Henderson,  jurist,
b.  in  Culpeper  county,  Va.,  13  Sept.,  1779 ;  d.  in
Marietta,  Ga.,  4  Aug.,  1859.  At  an  early  age  he
removed  with  his  father  to  Elbert  county,  Ga.,  ob-
tained his  education  by  his  own  exertions,  and
taught  in  a  country  school  for  several  years.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1810,  and
after  the  war  of  1812,  in  which  he  served  as  a
captain  of  volunteers,  rose  in  his  profession,  and
for  several  years  was  judge  of  the  western  circuit,
being  elected  to  this  post  in  1825.  He  was  the
leading  counsel  of  the  Cherokees  during  their  con-
troversy with  the  state  of  Georgia,  and  became
famous  in  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States
for  the  ability  with  which  he  advocated  their  cause.

UNZAGA,  Luisde  (oon-thah'-gah),  Spanish  sol-
dier, b.  about  1720 ;  d.  in  Spain  about  1790.  He
early  entered  military  service,  and,  after  taking  part
in  the  operations  of  Charles  of  Naples  against  Aus-
tria, was  promoted  brigadier,  and  in  1769  ap-
pointed governor  of  Louisiana,  to  succeed  Alexan-
der O'Reilly,  who,  by  his  rigorous  measures  against
the  opposition  to  Spanish  annexation,  had  in-
curred the  dislike  of  the  Creoles,  and  was  removed
by  the  home  government.  Unzaga,  by  his  concili-
atory policy,  soon  repaired  the  evils  that  had  arisen
under  O'Reilly,  and  in  1776  was  promoted  and
appointed  captain-general  of  Caracas,  whence  he
returned  in  1783  to  take  charge  of  the  general  gov-
ernment of  Cuba.  One  of  his  first  measures  was
to  prohibit  the  unrestrained  cutting  of  cedar- wood,
as  this  useful  tree  was  threatened  with  extinction
by  enormous  exportation  and  waste  at  home.
When,  in  the  same  year,  by  the  treaty  of  Ver-
sailles, Florida  was  restored  to  Spain,  more  than
5,000  former  residents  of  that  province,  who  had
settled  in  Cuba,  returned  to  their  homes,  and,  to
offset  this  loss  of  labor,  Unzaga  contracted  with
several  French  and  English  firms  for  the  importa-
tion of  15,000  negroes.  In  February,  1785,  he  was
superseded  by  Count  Bernardo  de  Galvez,  and  he
then  returned  to  Spain.


UPCHURCH,  John  Jorden,  mechanic,  b.  in
Franklin  county,  N.  C,  26  March,  1822;  d.  in
Steelville,  Mo  ,  18  Jan.,  1887.  His  education  was
acquired  in  a  country  school  previous  to  his  thir-
teenth year.  He  was  alternately  clerk  in  a  coun-
try store  and  a  farmer  until  1841,  when  he  married,
and  opened  a  hotel  in  Raleigh.  Trying  to  keep  a
temperance  hotel,  he  failed,  and  was  for  thirteen
years  master-mechanic  on  the  Mine  Hill  and
Schuylkill  Haven  railroad.  In  1864  he  tried  the
oil  business  and  lost  all  his  savings.  For  four
years  he  drifted  about,  and  in  1868  secured  a  situa-
tion in  the  machine-shops  of  the  Atlantic  and
Great  Western  railroad  at  Meadville,  Pa.  Here  he
prepared  the  first  ritual  and  organized  the  first
lodge  of  the  Ancient  order  of  united  workmen,  to
which  his  principal  reputation  is  due.  The  lodge
was  organized  on  27  Oct.,  1868,  with  fourteen  mem-
bers. It  has  since  spread  into  every  state  and  ter-
ritory of  the  Union,  has  more  than  150,000  mem-
bers, and  pays  out  about  $2,000,000  annually  in
benefits  to  the  families  of  deceased  members.
The  plan  that  was  devised  and  used  by  the  society
for  disbursing  sums  of  money  to  beneficiaries  was
so  original  and  proved  so  popular  as  practically  to
revolutionize  the  life-insurance  business.  Other
societies  followed,  with  many  variations  on  the
plan,  until  the  amount  of  life  insurance  that  is  now
carried  by  the  various  fraternal  beneficiary  socie-
ties is  many  times  greater  than  that  carried  by  all
the  stock-company  societies  in  the  country.  Fa-
ther Upchurch,  as  he  was  called,  subsequently  re-
moved to  Steelville,  Mo.  He  travelled  much  in  the
later  years  of  his  life,  in  the  interest  of  the  society
that  he  had  founded.

UPDIKE,  Wilkins,  lawyer,  b.  in  Kingston,
R.  I..  8  Jan.,-  1784;  d.  there,  14  Jan.,  1867.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  served  many
years  in  the  legislature,  and  was  the  author  of
"  Memoirs  of  the  Rhode  Island  Bar  "  (Boston,  1842),
and  a  "  History  of  the  Episcopal  Church  in  Narra-
gansett  Pier,  R.  I."  (New  York,  1847).

UPFOLD,  George,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Sheneley
Green,  near  Guilford,  Surrey,  England,  7  May,
1796 ;  d.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  26  Aug.,  1872.  He
came  to  the  United  States  when  he  was  eight  years
of  age,  the  family  settling  in  Albany,  N.  Y.  He
was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1814,  and  took  a
course  in  medicine  at  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  New  York  city,  receiving  his  degree  of
M.  D.  in  1816.  In  1817  he  began  the  study  of
theology  under  the  direction  of  Bishop  Hobart.
He  was  ordered  deacon  in  Trinity  church,  New
York,  21  Oct.,  1818,  by  Bishop  Hobart,  and  or-
dained priest  in  Trinity  church,  Lansingburg,
N.  Y.,  13  July,  1820,  by  the  same  prelate.  He  re-
mained in  Lansingburg  as  rector  about  two  years,
when  he  removed  to  New  York  city  and  became
rector  of  St.  Luke's  church,  which  post  he  held
for  eight  years,  when  he  was  elected  rector  of  St.
Thomas's  church.  He  removed  to  Pennsylvania  in
1831,  taking  the  rectorship  of  Trinity  church,
Pittsburg,  from  which  post  he  was  elevated  to
the  episcopate.  He  was  consecrated  first  bishop  of
Indiana,  in  Christ  church,  Indianapolis,  16  Dec,
1849.  Bishop  Upfold  received  the  degree  of
S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1831,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  the  Western  university  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1856.  His  writings  include  "  The  Last
Hundred  Years,"  a  lecture  (Pittsburg,  Pa.,  1845) ;
"  Manual  of  Devotions  for  Domestic  and  Private
Use "  (New  York,  1863) ;  and  sermons,  pastoral
letters,  and  addresses.

UPHAM,  James,  educator,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
23  Jan.,  1815. He  was  graduated  at  Waterville


212


UPHAM


UPHAM


college  (now  Colby  university),  Me.,  in  1835,  and
at  Newton  theological  seminary  in  1839.  He  was
ordained  to  the  Baptist  ministry  in  1840,  and
called,  after  two  brief  pastorates,  to  a  professor-
ship in  the  New  Hampshire  literary  institute.  His
connection  with  this  institution  continued  for
twenty  years,  during  the  last  five  of  which  he  was
its  president.  On  withdrawing  from  this  relation
in  1866  he  became  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Watch-
man and  Reflector,"  of  Boston.  He  is  now  (1889)
a  corresponding  editor  of  the  "  Religious  Herald,"
of  Richmond,  Va.  He  received  the  degree  of  1).  D.
from  Colby  university  in  1860.

UPHAM,  Joshua,  jurist,  b.  in  Brookfield,  Mass.,
14  Nov.,  1741 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  in  1808.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1763,  practised
law  in  New  York  and  Boston,  built  the  first  woollen-
mill  in  this  country,  and  introduced  the  manufac-
ture of  salt  into  some  of  the  seaboard  towns.  He
was  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Bruns-
wick at  the  organization  of  the  judiciary  of  that
province,  and  died  in  London  while  engaged  in

Bublic  business  relating  to  the  affairs  of  the  British
'orth  American  provinces.  —  His  son,  Charles
Wentworth,  author,  b.  in  St.  John,  New  Bruns-
wick, 4  May,  1802;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  14  June,
1875,  after  serving  as  an  apothecary's  apprentice,
worked  on  a  farm  in  Nova  Scotia  until  1816,  when
he  made  his  way  to  Boston. After  graduation  at

Harvard  in  1821,
and  at  the  divinity-
school  in  1824,  he
was  ordained  col-
league of  the  Rev.
John  Prince  over
the  1st  church  in
Salem,  where  he
remained  from  8
Dec,  1824,  till  he
was  forced  to  aban-
don the  ministry,
owing  to  bronchial
trouble,  8  Dec,
1844.  He  was  may-
or of  Salem  in  1852,
and  during  his
term  of  service  re-
organized the  po-
lice force,  introdu-
cing a  new  system,  and  secured  the  establishment
of  a  state  normal  school.  He  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  in  1840,  1849,  and  1859-60, and  was
president  of  the  state  senate  in  1857-8.  His  prin-
cipal effort  was  directed  to  the  interest  of  educa-
tion in  the  district  and  high  schools,  the  endow-
ment of  colleges  and  improvement  of  the  statute
laws  of  the  commonwealth,  and  he  reported  the
measures  that  made  education  a  regular  depart-
ment of  the  state  government.  In  1853  he  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention,  and
he  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving
from  5  Dec,  1853,  till  3  March,  1855.  He  was
chairman  of  a  select  committee  to  investigate  the
affairs  and  condition  of  the  Smithsonian  institu-
tion, and  in  an  elaborate  report  advocated  the
policy  of  making  it  the  foundation  of  a  valuable
library.  On  24  March,  1826,  he  married  Ann
Susan,  sister  of  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.  He  edited
the  "Christian  Register"  in  1845-'6,  contributed
to  magazines  and  reviews,  and  was  the  author
of  "Letters  on  the  Logos "  (Boston,  1828);  "Lec-
tures on  Witchcraft,  comprising  a  History  of  the
Salem  Delusion,  1692  "  (1831 ;  enlarged  ed.,  2  vols.,
1867);  "  Life  of  Sir  Henry  Vane,"  in  Sparks's
"  American  Biography  "  (1835) ;  "  Prophecy  as  an


Lsti&^sgLa  16^.  6tf<JLc*svns


Evidence  of  Christianity  "  (1835) ;  "  Life  of  John
C.  Fremont"  (1856);  "Memoir  of  Francis  Pea-
body"  (1869);  "Salem  Witchcraft  and  Cotton
Mather,  a  Reply "  (1870) ;  and  the  last  three  vol-
umes of  the  "  Life  of  Timothy  Pickering,"  begun
by  Octavius  Pickering  (4  vols.,  1867-72).
"UPHAM,  Timothy,  soldier,  b.  in  Deerfield,
N.  H.,  in  1783 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  2  Nov.,
1855.  He  was  a  descendant  of  John  Upham,  who
came  from  England  in  1635,  and  was  the  first  of
the  name  in  this  country.  His  grave-stone  is  still
standing  in  Maiden,  Mass.  Timothy's  father,  the
Rev.  Timothy  Upham,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1768,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  at  Deerfield  from  9  Dec,  1772,  until  his
death  on  21  Feb.,  1811,  and  had  three  children —
Hannah,  who  became  principal  of  the  Ontario  fe-
male seminary;  Nathaniel  (1744-1829),  who  served
in  congress  in  1817-'23;  and  Timothy,  the  subject
of  this  sketch,  who  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits
in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in  1807.  On  12  March,
1812,  he  was  appointed  major  of  the  11th  U.  S.
infantry,  and  soon  afterward  he  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  forts  and  harbor  of  Portsmouth.  In
September  he  joined  the  army  at  Plattsburg,  on  12
March,  1813,  he  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  21st  regiment  under  Col.  James  Miller,  and
at  the  sortie  from  Fort  Erie -he  commanded  the
reserve.  He  was  mustered  out  in  June,  1815,  and
from  1816  till  1829  was  collector  of  customs  for
Portsmouth.  He  was  navy  agent  in  1841-'5,  and
was  a  major-general  of  the  state  militia. — His
nephew,  Thomas  Cogswell,  metaphysician,  b.  in
Deerfield,  N.  H.,  30  Jan.,  1799 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  2  April,  1872,  was  the  son  of  Nathaniel,
and  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1818,  and  in
1821  at  Andover  theological  seminary,  where  he
remained  a  year  as  assistant  professor  of  Hebrew,
and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  in  Rochester,  N.  H.,  in  1823.  In  1824  he
became  professor  of  mental  and  moral  philosophy,
and  instructor  in  Hebrew  at  Bowdoin,  which  posts
he  held  until  1867,  afterward  retaining  the  title  of
emeritus  professor.  Wesleyan  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1843,  and  Rutgers  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1870.  He  translated  "  Biblical  Archaeology,"  by
Johann  Jahn,  with  additions  (Andover,  1823),  and
was  the  author  of  "  Elements  of  Intellectual  Phi-
losophy "  (Portland,  1827) ;  "  Ratio  Disciplina?,  or
the  Constitution  of  the  Congregational  Church"
(1829) ;  "  Elements  of  Mental  Philosophy,"  which
was  translated  into  Armenian  by  the  Rev.  Cyrus
Hamlin,  D.  D.,  and  used  as  a  text-book  in  Arme-
nian colleges  (2  vols.,  Portland  and  Boston  1831 ;
abridged  ed.,  New  York,  1863) ;  "  A  Philosophical
and  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Will,"  forming  the
third  volume  of  his  system  of  mental  philosophy
(Portland,  1834) ;  "  The  Manual  of  Peace  "  (1836) ;
"  Outlines  of  Imperfect  and  Disordered  Mental
Action  "  (New  York,  1840) ;  "  Life  and  Religious
Opinions  and  Experience  of  Madame  de  la  Motte
Guyon,  together  with  some  Account  of  the  Per-
sonal History  and  Religious  Opinions  of  Fene-
lon,  Archbishop  of  Cambray"  (2  vols.,  1847;  Lon-
don, 1854);  "Life  of  Faith"  (1848:  Liverpool,
1859) ;  "  American  Cottage  Life,"  a  series  of  po-
ems (2d  ed.,  1850);  "A  Treatise  on  Divine  Union"
(Boston,  1851 ;  London,  1858) ;  "  Religious  Max-
ims "(2d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1854);  "Letters,  writ-
ten from  Europe,  Egypt,  and  Palestine  "  (Bruns-
wick, 1855) ;  "  Life  of  Madame  Catherine  Adorna  "
(Boston,  1856);  "A  Method  of  Prayer:  an  Analy-
sis of  the  Work  so  entitled  by  Madame  de  la  Motte
Guyon  "  (London,  1859) ;  and  "  Christ  in  the  Soul "
(New  York,  1872). He  also  published  a  prize  essay


UPHAM


UPSHUR


213


on  a  "Congress  of  Nations"  (Boston,  1840),  and
contributed  to  periodicals. — His  brother,  Nathan-
iel Gookin,  jurist,  b.  in  Deerfield,  N.  H.,  8  Jan.,
1801 ;  d.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  11  Dec,  18G9,  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1820,  studied  law,  and'
began  practice  in  Bristol,  N.  H.,  but  removed  to
Concord  in  1829.  From  1833  till  1843  he  was  judge
of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Hampshire,  and  from
1843  till  1863  he  was  superintendent  of  the  Con-
cord railroad,  of  which  he  was  president  in  1863-'6.
In  1850  he  was  a  member  of  the  convention  to
amend  the  state  constitution.  He  spent  1853-'4
in  England  as  the  American  member  of  the  joint
commission  of  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain
for  the  adjustment  of  claims  against  the  respective
countries  for  all  losses  since  1814,  and  in  1862  was
the  umpire  of  a  similar  commission  between  the
United  States  and  New  Grenada.  He  was  an  ac-
tive Democrat,  but  left  his  party  at  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war.  In  1865-'6  he  was  a  member  of
the  legislature.  Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1862.  He  was  a  member,  and  for  three
years  president,  of  the  New  Hampshire  historical
society.  Judge  Upham  possessed  a  taste  for  his-
torical and  antiquarian  research,  and  published  an
"  Address  on  Rebellion,  Slavery,  and  Peace,"  deliv-
ered at  Concord,  2  March,  1864  (Concord,  1864),
and  left  unfinished  an  extensive  work  on  the  prov-
erbs of  all  lands  and  languages. — Another  brother,
Francis  William,  author,  b.  in  Rochester,  N.  H.,
10  Sept.,  1817,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1837,
studied  law  under  his  brother,  Nathaniel  G.  Up-
ham, and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Massachusetts
in  1844,  but  relinquished  his  profession,  and  in
1867-'70  was  professor  of  mental  philosophy  and
lecturer  on  history  in  Rutgers  female  college,  New
York  city.  Union  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
in  1868.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Debate  between
the  Church  and  Science,  or  the  Ancient  Hebraic
Idea  of  the  Six  Days  of  Creation ;  with  an  Essay
on  the  Literary  Character  of  Tayler  Lewis,"  pub-
lished anonymously  (Andover,  1860);  "The  Wise
Men :  who  they  were,  and  how  they  came  to  Jeru-
salem" (New  York,  1869;  4th  ed.,  1872);  "The
Star  of  Our  Lord,  or  Christ  Jesus,  King  of  all
Worlds,  both  of  Time  or  Space ;  with  Thoughts  on
Inspiration ;  and  on  the  Astronomic  Doubt  as  to
Christianity  "  (1873) ;  and  "  Thoughts  on  the  Holy
Gospels :  how  they  came  to  be  in  Manner  and  Form
as  they  are"  (1881). — Another  brother,  Albert
Gookin,  physician,  b.  in  Rochester,  N.  H.,  10  July,
1819 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  16  June,  1847,  was  gradu-
ated at  Bowdoin  in  1840,  and  at  the  medical  col-
lege in  Paris,  France,  in  1844.  He  published  a  bio-
fraphical  and  genealogical  "  History  of  the  Upham
'amily  "  (Concord,  1845).

UPHAM,  William,  senator,  b.  in  Leicester,
Mass.,  in  August,  1792 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
14  Jan.,  1853.  He  removed  with  his  father  to  Ver-
mont in  1802,  was  educated  at  the  State  university,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1812,  and
began  practice  in  Montpelier.  In  1827-8  he  served
in  the  legislature,  was  state's  attorney  for  Wash-
ington county  in  1829,  and  served  again  in  the
legislature  in  1830.  Elected  a  U.  S.  senator  as  a
Whig,  he  served  from  4  Dec,  1843,  until  his  sud-
den death  by  small-pox.

UPJOHN,  Richard,  architect,  b.  in  Shaftes-
bury, England,  22  Jan.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Garrison's,  Put-
nam co.,  N.  Y.,  16  Aug.,  1878.  He  received  a  fair  edu-
cation, and  then  was  apprenticed  to  a  builder  and
cabinet-maker,  in  which  trade  he  became  a  master-
mechanic  and  continued  at  it  until  1829.  In  that
year  he  came  to  the  United  States  and  settled  in
New  Bedford,  Mass.,  where  he  followed  his  trade.


He  removed  to  Boston  in  1833,  and  assisted  in  the
architectural  designs  of  the  city  court-house.  His
earliest  work  was  the  entrances  to  the  Boston  com-
mon, and  then  he  designed  and  built  St.  John's
church  in  Bangor,  Me.  In  1839  he  was  called  to
New  York  city  to  take  charge  of  the  proposed
alterations  in  Trinity  church,  which  were  finally
abandoned,  with  a  view  to  the  erection  of  a  new
structure.  In  the  preparation  of  the  design  for  the
new  edifice  the  power  and  scope  of  Mr.  Upjohn's
skill  were  first  made  apparent,  and  his  professional
career  as  an  architect  was  thereafter  assured.  Trin-
ity church  was  completed  in  1846,  and  was  then  the
noblest  in  conception  and  purest  in  detail  of  all
ecclesiastical  structures  in  this  country.  (See  illus-
tration, page  302.)  His  success  gained  for  him  the
building  of  other  churches  that  are  noted  for  the
purity  of  their  style,  and  are  chiefly  Gothic  Among
those  in  New  York  city  are  the  churches  of  the  As-
cension and  the  Holy  Communion,  Trinity  chapel,
and  St.  Thomas's,  and,  in  Brooklyn.  Christ  and
Grace  churches  and  the  Church  of  the  Pilgrims.
His  civic  works  were  mostly  in  the  style  of  the  Ital-
ian renaissance.  In  New  York  city  these  include
the  Trinity  building  and  the  Corn  Exchange  bank.
His  domestic  buildings  embody  many  varieties  of
style  and  are  scattered  throughout  the  country.
His  last  years  were  spent  at  Garrison's,  on  Hudson
river,  where  he  designed  St.  Philip's  church  on  the.
Highlands,  which,  on  a  small  scale,  is  typical  of
the  Gothic  tendency  of  his  taste.  Mr.  Upjohn  was
president  of  the  American  institute  of  architects
from  1857  till  1876.— His  son,  Richard  Michell,
architect,  b.  in  Shaftesbury,  England,  7  March,
1828,  came  to  New  York  in  1829.  He  attended
school  until  1846,  and  then  entered  his  father's
office.  In  1851  he  went  abroad  for  further  study,
but  in  1852  returned,  and  later  entered  into  part-
nership with  his  father.  Mr.  Upjohn  has  served
on  commissions — national,  state,  and  municipal —
that  have  been  appointed  to  consider  plans  and
to  devise  improvements.  Besides  his  association
with  his  father
in  various  arch-
itectural works,
he  has  made
many  indepen-
dent designs,
among  which
are  the  churches
of  St.  Peter,  Al-
bany ;  St.  Paul,
Brooklyn ;  Cen-
tral Congrega-
tional, Boston ;
and  the  cathe-
dral at  Fond  du
Lac,  Wis. ;  also  the  library  building  of  Hobart  col-
lege, Geneva,  N.  Y.,  the  capitol  at  Hartford,  Conn,
(shown  in  the  illustration),  and  many  other  build-
ings in  various  parts  of  the  country.

UPSHUR,  Abel  Parker,  statesman,  b.  in
Northampton  county,  Va.,  17  June,  1790;  d.  near
Washington,  D.  C,  28  Feb.,  1844.  He  received  a
classical  education,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1810,  and  practised  at  Richmond,  Va.,
until  1824,  when  he  removed  to  his  estate  in  North-
ampton county,  and  was  elected  to  the  legislature.
In  1826  he  was  appointed  a  judge  in  the  general
court  of  Virginia,  in  1829  he  was  a  member  of  the
convention  that  was  called  to  revise  the  state  con-
stitution, and  after  the  reorganization  of  the  judi-
cial system  under  that  instrument  he  was  again
elected  judge  of  the  same  court.  This  office  ho
continued  to  hold  until  1841,  when  he  was  called


214


UPSHUR


UPTON


by  President  Tyler  to  fill  that  of  secretary  of  the
navy.  On  the  resignation  of  Daniel  Webster,  in
1843,  he  was  made  secretary  of  state.  In  politics
he  belonged  to  the  extreme  state-rights  pro-slavery
school  of  the  south.  Early  in  1844  he  was  on  the
U.  S.  steamer  "  Princeton,"  on  Potomac  river,  in
company  with  the  president  and  the  other  members
of  the  cabinet,  to  witness  experiments  with  a  large
wrought-iron  gun,  which  burst  on  being  fired  the
third  time  and  killed  him  together  with  several
others.  Judge  Upshur,  besides  a  number  of  essays
and  addresses,  published  "  Brief  Inquiry  into  the
True  Nature  and  Character  of  our  Federal  Govern-
ment :  Review  of  Judge  Joseph  Story's  Commen-
taries on  the  Constitution"  (Petersburg,  Va..  1840).
— His  brother,  George  Parker,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Northampton  county,  Va.,  8  March,  1799;  d.  in
Spezzia,  Italy,  3  Nov.,  1852,  entered  the  navy  as  a
midshipman,  23  April,  1818,  was  promoted  to  lieu-
tenant, 3  March,  1827,  and  served  on  the  Brazil  sta-
tion in  the  " Lexington "  in  1832-4  at  the  attack
and  dispersion  of  the  pirates  on  Falkland  islands.
He  commanded  the  brig  "Truxtun"  on  her  first
cruise  in  the  Mediterranean  in  1843-'4,  and  served
in  the  receiving-ship  at  Norfolk  in  1844-'7.  He
was  commissioned  a  commander,  27  Feb.,  1847,
and  was  superintendent  of  the  naval  academy  at
Annapolis  in  1847-'50.  He  took  command  of  the
sloop  "Levant"  at  Norfolk,  12  July,  1852,  joined
the  Mediterranean  squadron,  and  died  on  board
ship  while  in  command  at  Spezzia. — Their  nephew,
John  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Northampton
county,  Va.,  5  Dec,  1823,  changed  his  name  from
Nottingham  to  that  of  his  mother,  Upshur,  when
he  entered  the  navy  to  gratify  her  wish,  as  the
Upshur  family  was  conspicuous  in  naval  annals.
He  became  a  midshipman,  4  Nov.,  1841,  and  cruised
in  the  sloop  "St.  Mary's"  in  1843-6,  in  which  he
joined  the  squadron  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  during
the  Mexican  war.  He  served  in  the  naval  battery
during  the  bombardment  of  Vera  Cruz,  10  to  25
March,  1847,  and  after  the  fall  of  that  city  he  at-
tended the  naval  school,  becoming  a  passed  mid-
shipman, 10  Aug.,  1847.  He  was  promoted  to
master,  18  July,  1855,  and  to  lieutenant,  14  Sept.,
1855,  served  in  the  frigate  "  Cumberland "  on
the  coast  of  Africa  to  suppress  the  slave-trade
in  1858-'9,  and  was  an  instructor  at  the  naval

academy  in  1859-
'61.  When  the  war
began  he  was  as-
signed to  the  North
Atlantic  blockading
squadron,  and  par-
ticipated in  the  cap-
ture of  the  forts  at
Hatteras  inlet  and
in  the  sounds  of
North  Carolina  in
1861.  He  was  execu-
tive officer  of  the
steam  frigate  "  Wa-
bash "  at  the  cap-
ture of  Port  Royal,
and  commanded
r  S/  >y  y />  four  boats  in  Com-

C^.  7A^Vfi^2^z^ty>- mander C. R. P.
/  Rodgers's expedi-

tion in  the  inland  coast  waters  in  the  vicinity
of  Port  Royal  and  Beaufort,  S.  C.  He  was
in  charge  of  the  steamer  "  Flambeau,"  of  the
South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  in  1862-'3  in
operations  on  the  coast  of  South  Carolina.  He
was  promoted  to  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,
1862,  assigned  to  the  steam  frigate  "  Minnesota,"


of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  in
1863-'4,  and  had  the  steamer  "A.  D.  Vance"  (a
blockade-runner  whose  name  was  changed  to  the
M  Frolic  ")  in  l864-'5,  in  which  he  took  part  in  both
engagements  at  Fort  Fisher.  He  was  promoted  to
commander,  25  July,  1866,  and  given  the  "  Frolic,"
on  the  Mediterranean  station,  in  1865-'7.  After
promotion  to  captain,  31  Jan.,  1872,  he  served  as  a
member  of  the  board  of  inspectors  in  1877-'80.
He  had  a  leave  of  absence,  during  which  he  vis-
ited Europe,  in  1880,  and  upon  his  return  was  a
member  of  the  board  of  examiners.  He  was  com-
mandant of  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  in  1882-'4,
and  commander-in-chief  of  the  Pacific  station  in
1884-'5.  He  was  promoted  to  rear-admiral,  1  Oct.,
1884,  ard  was  voluntarily  placed  on  the  retired
list,  1  June,  1885. — A  niece,  Mary  Jane  Stith,
poet,  b.  in  Accomac  county,  Va.,  7  April,  1828,  was
educated  entirely  at  home,  and  early  began  writing
for  the  press.  On  the  death  of  her  father,  in  1869,
she  removed  from  Norfolk,  Va.,  to  New  York  city,
and  on  2  July,  1870,  married  Josiah  R.  Sturges.
Mrs.  Sturges  was  one  of  the  organizers  and  the
first  president  of  the  Harlem  free  hospital  and  dis-
pensary for  women  and  children.  She  has  con-
tributed to  southern  periodicals  both  prose  and
poetry,  commonly  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Fanny
Fielding."  Her  principal  work  is  "Confederate
Notes,"  an  historical  novel,  which  appeared  anony-
mously in  1867  in  the  "  Home  Monthly,"  published
at  Nashville,  Tenn.

UPSON,  Ansel  Judd,  clergyman,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  7  Nov.,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at
Hamilton  college  in  1843,  and  began  to  study  law
in  Utica,  but  became  a  tutor  in  Hamilton  in  1845,
and  in  1849  was  made  adjunct  professor  of  rhetoric
and  moral  philosophy.  From  1853  till  1870  he
held  the  chair  of  logic,  rhetoric,  and  elocution,  and
then,  after  serving  as  pastor  of  the  2d  Presby-
terian church  in  Albany,  he  became  in  1880  pro-
fessor of  sacred  rhetoric  and  pastoral  theology  in
Auburn  theological  seminary.  Hamilton  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1870,  and  Union  that  of
LL.  D.  in  1880.  He  has  been  a  regent  of  the  State
university  since  1874.  and  a  member  of  the  gen-
eral assembly  of  his  church  in  1871  and  1877.  Dr.
Upson  has  a  high  reputation  as  an  instructor  and
trainer  of  young  men  for  public  speaking.  He  has
delivered  many  lectures,  and,  besides  contributions
to  periodicals,  has  published  numerous  addresses.

UPTON,  Emory,  soldier,  b.  in  Batavia,  Gene-
see co.,  N.  Y.,  27  Aug.,  1839 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,
Cal.,  14  March,  1881.  He  was  educated  at  Oberlin
college  and  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where
he  was  graduated  in  May,  1861,  eighth  in  a  class  of
forty-five,  and  made  2d  lieutenant  in  the  4th  artil-
lery. On  14  May  he  became  1st  lieutenant  in  the
5th  artillery.  During  the  first  year  of  the  civil  war
he  was  assigned  to  duty  in  the  defences  of  Wash-
ington, and  was  present  at  Bull  Run,  where  he  was
wounded.  He  commanded  his  battery  during  the
early  part  of  1862  in  the  Virginia  peninsular  cam-
paign, including  all  actions  to  Glendale,  and  sub-
sequently a  regiment  and  brigade  of  artillery  in
the  Maryland  campaign.  He  was  appointed  colo-
nel of  the  121st  New  York  volunteers  in  October,
1862,  and  was  conspicuously  engaged  at  the  head
of  a  brigade  of  the  6th  corps,  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, until  the  close  of  1863.  He  received  the  brevet
of  major  on  8  Nov.,  1863,  for  gallant  service  at  the
battle  of  Rappahannock  Station,  Va.  During  the
Wilderness  campaign  of  1864  he  bore  an  active

Eart,  especially  at  Spottsylvania.  where  he  won  the
revet  of  lieutenant-colonel,  U.  S.  A.,  10  May,  1864,
and  was  wounded  while  leading  the  assaulting


UPTON


UPTON


215


column  of  twelve  regiments  of  his  corps.  For  this
he  was  appointed  on  the  spot  a  brigadier-general
of  volunteers,  12  May,  1864.  He  was  present  dur-
ing the  siege  of  Petersburg,  in  the  defence  of  the

capital  in  July,
1864,  and  in  the
Shenandoah  cam-
paign, where,  while
commanding  a  di-
vision of  infantry
at  the  battle  of  the
Opequan,  he  was
severely  wounded.
On  19  "Sept.,  1864,
he  was  brevetted
colonel,  U.  S.  A.,  for
gallant  and  meri-
torious services  at
Winchester,  Va.,  19
Oct.,  1864,  and  also
received  the  brevet

*  was in command

of  the  4th  cavalry
division  under  Gen.  James  H.  Wilson  during  the
closing  operations  in  Alabama  and  Georgia.  He
became  captain  in  the  5th  regiment  of  artillery
on  22  Feb.,  1865,  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,
U.  S.  army,  on  13  March,  1865,  for  gallant  service
at  Seltna,  Ala.,  and  also  received  the  brevet  of
major-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  services  in  the  field
during  the  civil  war.  He  was  in  command  of  the
1st  cavalry  division.in  the  District  of  East  Tennes-
see in  July  and  August,  1865,  and  of  the  District
of  Colorado  from  22  Aug.,  1365,  till  30  April,  1866,
when  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service.
In  the  reorganization  he  became  lieutenant-colonel,
25th  infantry,  28  July,  1866.  He  had  employment
in  the  intervals  of  active  service  in  preparing  an
original  system  of  tactics  for  the  use  of  the  mili-
tary forces  of  the  government,  and  in  1867  his  sys-
tem for  infantry  was  adopted.  He  was  comman-
dant of  cadets  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1870-'5,  and  member  of  a  "  board  to  assimilate  the
tactics  "  in  1873,  when  his  system,  modified  for  ar-
tillery and  cavalry,  was  also  accepted.  Gen.  Upton
was  sent  on  a  tour  of  inspection  of  the  armies  of
Europe  and  Asia  in  1875-"7,  and  on  his  return  was
assigned  to  the  artillery-school  at  Fort  Monroe,
and  wrote  his  official  report,  which  was  published
by  the  government  in  1878.  He  became  colonel  of
the  4th  artillery  in  1880,  and  soon  afterward  joined
his  regiment  at  the  Presidio,  San  Francisco,  Cal.
His  mind  became  affected,  and  he  committed  sui-
cide. In  his  last  days  he  was  engaged  in  tactical
studies  and  in  writing  a  work  on  "  The  Military
Policy  of  the  United  States,"  which  is  being  pre-

Eared  for  publication  by  Gen.  James  H.  Wilson,
le  published  "  A  New  System  of  Infantry  Tactics  "
(New  York,  1867 ;  2d  ed.,  1874) ;  "  Tactics  for  Non-
Military  Bodies  "  (1870) ;  and  "  The  Armies  of  Asia
and  Europe"  (1878).  See  "Life  and  Letters  of
Major-General  Emory  Upton,"  by  Peter  S.  Michie
(New  York,  1885).

UPTON,  George  Brnce,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Eastport,  Me.,  11  Oct.,  1804;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
1  July,  1874.  He  entered  Harvard,  but  left  a
short  time  before  he  had  completed  his  course,
and  entered  business.  He  spent  about  three  years
in  Boston,  and  then  removed  to  Nantucket,  where
in  1825  he  became  partner  in  a  firm  that  manu-
factured oils  and  candles,  built  ships,  and  was  ex-
tensively engaged  in  the  sperm-whale  fisheries.
While  in  Nantucket  he  was  sent  twice  to  the  gen-


eral court,  and  he  was  elected  for  three  terms  a
member  of  the  state  senate.  In  1845  he  removed
to  Manchester,  N.  H„  where  he  established  the
Manchester  print-works,  and  in  1846  he  went  to
Boston.  He  was  treasurer  for  eight  years  of  the
Michigan  Central  railroad,  and  built  numerous  clip-
per-ships for  the  California  and  Pacific  trade.  lie
was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  of  the  state
in  1853,  and  of  the  constitutional  convention  of  the
same  year.  He  was  active  during  the  civil  war  in
measures  for  the  relief  of  the  sick  and  wounded
soldiers,  and  made  large  contributions  to  the  fund
for  procuring  recruits.  He  opposed  the  Clarendon-
Johnson  treaty  in  regard  to  the  Alabama,  and  in
an  open  letter  to  Earl  Russell  controverted  the
arguments  of  that  statesman.  He  was  a  sufferer
from  the  great  fire  in  Boston  in  1872,  but  gave
largely  to  the  fund  for  the  victims,  and  was  the
first  to  organize  measures  for  their  relief.  Mr.
Upton  was  an  active  member  of  the  New  England
historic-genealogical  society,  and  bore  most  of  the
expense  of  compiling  and  publishing  Rev.  John  A.
Vinton's  "  Upton  Memorial "  (Bath,  Me.,  1874).

UPTON,  George  Putnam,  journalist,  b.  in
Roxbury,  Mass..  25  Oct.,  1834.  He  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1854,  removed  to  Chicago,  111.,  in
1855,  and  till  1856  was  connected  with  the  "  Native
Citizen  "  in  that  place.  In  1856-'61  he  was  city
editor  of  the  "  Evening  Journal,"  and  in  1862-'81
he  was  musical  critic  of  the  Chicago  "  Tribune,"  of
which  he  has  been  an  editorial  writer  since  1872.
In  1862-'3  he  was  also  a  war-correspondent.  Mr.
Upton  was  the  first  journalist  in  Chicago  to  estab-
lish a  distinctive  department  of  musical  criticism.
He  organized  the  Apollo  musical  club  in  1872,
serving  as  its  first  president.  Besides  many  con-
tributions to  magazines,  on  art,  musical,  arid  lit-
erary topics,  he  has  published  "  Letters  of  Pere-
grine Pickle  "  (Chicago,  1869) ;  "  The  Great  Fire  "
(1872);  "Memories,  a  Story  of  German  Love,"
translated  from  the  German  of  Max  Miiller  (1879) ;
"  Woman  in  Music,"  an  essay  (Boston,  1880 ;  en-
larged ed.,  Chicago,  1886) ;  lives  of  Haydn,  Liszt,
and  Wagner,  from  the  German  of  Louis  Nohl  (3
vols.,  Chicago,  1883-'4) ;  "  The  Standard  Operas,
their  Plots,  their  Music,  and  their  Composers"
(1885);  "The  Standard  Oratorios"  (1886);  "The
Standard  Cantatas "  (1887) ;  and  "  The  Standard
Symphonies"  (1888).

UPTON,  Jacob  Kendrick,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wil-
mot,  N.  H.,  9  Oct.,  1837.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Literary  and  scientific  institution  at  New  London,
N.  H.,  in  1860,  read  law  with  a  brother  at  Man-
chester, N.  H.,  and  was  a  clerk  in  the  treasury
department.  He  rose  till  he  became  chief  clerk  of
the  department  in  March,  1877,  and  assistant  sec-
retary of  the  treasury  in  1880.  Upon  the  inaugu-
ration of  President  Cleveland  he  resigned,  and  has
since  been  a  lawyer  and  banker  in  Washington.
He  has  contributed  articles  on  financial  subjects
to  the  "American  Cyclopaedia,"  and  is  the  author
of  "  Money  in  Politics  "  (Boston,  1884).

UPTON,  James,  merchant,  b.  at  Salem,  Mass.,
31  March,  1813;  d.  there,  30  March,  1879.  He
studied  for  college  and  acquired  a  knowledge  of
French  and  the  classics,  but  entered  his  father's
counting-room  at  an  early  age  and  there  received
the  training  that  was  the  basis  of  his  fortune.  He
was  a  contributor  to  all  public  projects  in  Salem,
where  he  spent  his  life,  and  a  liberal  donor  to
Brown  university  and  Newton  theological  institute.
He  was  an  active  member  of  the  Essex  institute,  to
the  "Proceedings"  of  which  he  contributed  valu-
able papers  on  arboriculture.  In  1872  he  printed
privately  a  volume  of original music entitled


216


UPTON


URDANETA


"  Musical  Miscellanea." — His  son,  Winslow,  as-
tronomer, b.  in  Salem,  12  Oct.,  1853,  was  graduated
at  Brown  university  in  1875,  was  a  student  of  as-
tronomy at  Cincinnati  observatory  in  1875-'7,  and
received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  the  University
of  Cincinnati  in  the  latter  year.  He  was  assistant
at  the  Harvard  observatory  in  1877-9,  assistant  en-
gineer on  the  U.  S.  lake  survey  in  1879-'80,  com-
puter in  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory  in  1880-'7,  com-
puter and  assistant  professor  in  the  U.  S.  signal
office  in  1881-'4,  and  has  been  professor  of  astrono-
my in  Brown  university  since  January,  1884.  He
was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  expeditions  to  observe
eclipses  in  1878  and  1883,  and  is  a  member  of  the
principal  American  and  foreign  scientific  societies,
to  whose  publications  he  has  contributed  numer-
ous papers.  Of  these,  the  following  have  been  re-
printed :  "  Photometric  Observations  "  (Cambridge,
1879);  "The  Solar  Eclipse  of  1878"  (Salem,  1879);
"  Report  on  Observations  made  on  the  Expedition
to  Caroline  Island  to  observe  the  Total  Solar  Eclipse
of  May  6,  1883  "  (Washington.  1884) ;  "  An  Investi-
gation of  Cyclonic  Phenomena  in  New  England  "
(Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  1887) ;  "  Meteorological  Observa-
tions during  the  Solar  Eclipse,  Aug.  19, 1887  "  (1888) ;
and  "The  Storm  of  March  11-14,  1888  "  (1888).

UPTON,  Samuel,  editor,  b.  in  Middleton.  Mass.,
in  1784 ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  3  March,  1842.
His  ancestor,  John  (1620-'99),  came  to  New  Eng-
land as  early  as  1638,  and  ultimately  settled  in
what  is  now  North  Reading,  Mass.,  where  he  be-
came a  great  landed  proprietor  and  one  of  the
most  influential  citizens.  He  was  one  of  the  first
to  deprecate  the  inordinate  influence  of  the  clergy
in  the  colony,  and  was  conspicuous  for  his  opposi-
tion to  religious  tests  in  civil  matters  and  to  the
prosecutions  for  witchcraft.  He  was  ancestor  of
all  the  other  Uptons  that  are  mentioned  in  these
pages.  Samuel  engaged  in  mercantile  and  ship-
ping business,  first  at  Salem,  Mass.,  and  afterward
in  Castine  and  Bangor,  Me.,  and  Boston.  In  Maine
he  exerted  a  great  influence  in  politics  and  edited
the  Bangor  "  Gazette  "  and  "  Whig."  In  1819  he
represented  Castine  in  the  1st  general  court.  In
later  life  he  removed  to  Washington,  D.  C,  where
he  is  buried  in  the  Congressional  cemetery. — His
son,  Charles  Horace,  politician,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  23  Aug.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Geneva,  Switzerland,
in  June,  1877,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1834,
and  settled  in  Fairfax  county,  Va.,  whence  he  was
elected  to  congress  in  1860.  In  1863  he  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  consul  at  Geneva,  Switzerland. — An-
other son,  Edward  Peirce,  lawyer,  b.  in  Castine,
.  Me.,  22  July,  1816,  received  an  academic  education,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  settled  in  Virginia,
but  about  1858  removed  to  Texas.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  a  devoted  friend  of  the  Union  and
was  indicted  for  treason  against  the  Confederacy,
imprisoned  six  months,  and  shot  at  several  times.
One  of  his  sons  was  murdered  by  a  political  mob  a
year  after  the  war.  He  was  appointed  judge  of
the  18th  judicial  district  of  Texas  in  1867,  and  held
the  post  two  years. — Another  son,  Francis  Henry,
lawyer,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  25  May,  1814 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  25  June,  1876,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard law-school  in  1835  and  settled  in  New  York
city,  where  he  rose  to  eminence  in  his  profession.
During  the  civil  war  he  held  the  appointment  of
counsel  for  captors  in  prize  courts,  and  while  argu-
ing a  case  received  a  stroke  of  paralysis  from  which
he  never  recovered.  He  published  "  A  Treatise  on
the  Law  of  Trade-Marks,  with  a  Digest  and  Re-
view of  English  and  American  Authorities"  (Al-
bany, 1860),  and  "  The  Law  of  Nations  affecting
Commerce  during  War,  with  a  Review  of  the  Juris-


prudence, Practice,  and  Proceedings  of  Prize
Courts "  (New  York,  1863).  —  Francis  Henry's
daughter,  Sara  Carr,  author,  b.  1  Jan.,  1843,  re-
sides in  Washington,  D.  C,  where  she  was  for  sev-
enteen years  translator  of  modern  languages  in  the
post-office  department.  She  is  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  magazines  and  has  in  press  a  volume  of
"  Translations  from  the  French." — Another  son  of
Samuel  Upton,  Wheelock  Samuel,  lawyer,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  17  Jan.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Carrollton,  La.,
18  Oct.,  1860,  received  an  academic  education,  and
was  graduated  at  the  Harvard  law-school  in  1832,
and  settled  in  New  Orleans.  He  was  one  of  the
compilers  of  "The  Louisiana  Civil  Code"  (New
Orleans,  1838),  and  published  "  An  Address  at  New
York  "  (New  York,  1840).

UPTON,  William  W.,  jurist,  b.  in  Victor,
N.  Y.,  11  July,  1817.  He  removed  with  his  parents
to  Michigan  in  1837,  and  in  1845  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  elected  treasurer  of  Clinton  county.
He  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature  in  1847,
was  appointed  district  attorney  for  Ingham  coun-
ty in  1848,  and  was  elected  for  two  terms  of  two
years  each  in  1849  and  1851.  He  resigned  this
office  in  1852  and  went  to  California,  where  he
settled  first  at  Weaverville,  and  in  1855  in  Sacra-
mento. He  was  elected  a  representative  in  the
legislature  of  California  in  1856,  and  was  prosecut-
ing attorney  of  Sacramento  county  from  1861  till
1864.  In  1865  he  removed  to  Portland,  Orgeon,
and  was  at  once  elected  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture on  the  Republican  ticket.  He  had  been  a
Democrat  until  the  civil  war.  He  was  appointed
associate  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Oregon
in  1867,  and  was  elected  to  that  office  for  a  term
of  six  years  in  1868.  In  1872  the  legislature  or-
dered more  than  eighty  of  his  nisi  priiis  decisions
to  be  printed  and  bound  with  the  decisions  of  the
supreme  court,  and  he  became  chief  justice  the
same  year.  He  declined  a  renomination  in  1874
and  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.  In
the  presidential  controversy  of  1876,  the  vote  of
Oregon  being  in  doubt,  the  Republicans  practically
rested  their  case  before  the  electoral  commission
on  a  decision  that  had  been  rendered  by  Judge
Upton  upon  the  question  of  the  power  -of  the  gov-
ernor of  Oregon  to  exercise  judicial  functions.  A
majority  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state  differed
with  him,  but  the  electoral  commission  sustained
his  view.  In  1877  he  was  appointed  second  comp-
troller of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States,  but
in  1885  he  resigned,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  his
profession  in  Washington.  He  has  published  a
"Digest  of  Decisions  of  the  Second  Comptroller  of
the  Treasury,  1869  to  1884  "  (Washington.  1885).

URDANETA,  Andrei  (oor-dah-nay'-tah),  Span-
ish navigator,  b.  in  Villafranca,  Guipuzcoa,  in
1499;  d.  in  Mexico,  3  June,  1568.  He  early  at-
tained reputation  as  a  skilful  navigator,  and  in
1525  left  Mexico  as  chief  pilot  of  the  fleet  of  Gar-
cia de  Loaysa  in  the  expedition  to  the  Moluccas.
There  he  fought  against  the  Portuguese  till  1536,
when  he  was  sent  to  report  to  the  emperor,  but
was  shipwrecked  on  the  coast  of  Portugal,  impris-
oned in  Lisbon,  and  deprived  of  his  papers  and
valuables.  He  escaped,  and  went  to  Valladolid,
where  Charles  V.  held  his  court,  but,  unable  to
obtain  recognition  for  his  services,  he  entered  the
order  of  St.  Austin.  On  his  return  to  Mexico,  he
was  made  librarian  of  his  order.  In  1558  Philip
II.,  urged  by  the  council  of  the  Indies,  decided  to
pursue  the  conquest  of  the  Philippine  islands.
Urdaneta  being  named  to  him  as  the  person  that
best  knew  those  parts,  the  king  wrote  to  him,  in
September,  1559,  appointing  him  chief  pilot  of  the


URDANETA


URICOCHEA


217


expedition,  which,  under  Miguel  Lopez  de  Legaspi,
left  Acapulco,  21  Nov.,  1564.  After  taking  posses-
sion of  Cebu,  and  conquering  Mindoro,  Legaspi  de-
spatched Urdaneta  to  New  Spain  with  a  request
for  re-enforcements.  He  reported  afterward  to  the
king  at  Madrid  before  returning  to  his  convent  in
Mexico,  where  he  died.  He  wrote  several  memoirs
and  letters  which  are  preserved  in  the  archives  of
the  Indies  at  Seville.  Among  them  are  "  Relation
del  Viage  del  Comendador  Garcia  de  Loaysa,"  "  Re-
lacion de  la  expedition  del  Comendador  Miguel
Lopez  de  Legaspi,"  and  "  Cartas  al  rey  Felipe  II.
condescriptiones  de  los  puertos  de  Acapulco  y  Na-
vidad."  In  the  first  memoir  he  speaks  of  a  strait
which  the  French  reported  to  exist  "  north  of  the
codfish  country "  (Newfoundland  or  Labrador),
communicating  with  the  Pacific.

URDANETA,  Rafael,  Venezuelan  soldier,  b.
in  Maracaibo,  24  Oct.,  1789 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,
23  Aug.,  1845.  He  took  part  in  the  revolutionary
movement  of  1810,  on  25  July  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant, and  fought  in  the  campaigns  of  1811— '12.
In  1813,  with  the  auxiliaries  of  Cundinamarca,  he
accompanied  Bolivar  to  Venezuela.  He  entered
Caracas  on  6  Aug.,  after  which  he  was  promoted
brigadier.  In  March,  1814,  he  defended  the  city
of  Valencia  with  a  small  force  against  the  besieg-
ing army  of  4,000  men  under  Ceballos  till  he  was
relieved  on  3  April  by  Bolivar.  He  also  took
part  in  the  victorious  battle  of  Carabobo,  28  May,
1814,  and  protected  the  retreat  of  the  patriot  army
after  the  defeat  of  La  Puerta,  15  June.  He  re-
tired with  a  remnant  of  the  army  to  the  western
provinces,  but  after  being  routed  at  Mucuchies  on
7  Sept.  he  penetrated  into  New  Granada.  There
he  joined  Bolivar,  and,  after  being  promoted  ma-

i'or-general  and  sent  to  Cucuta,  he  was  defeated  in
Jalaga  in  November,  1815.  and  with  the  rest  of  his
forces  joined  Paez  in  Apure.  He  was  second  in
command  in  the  operations  against  Caracas  in
1818,  being  also  appointed  member  of  the  council
of  government  in  Angostura.  The  next  year  he
was  made  general-in-chief  of  the  army  that  was
forming  in  Margarita  from  the  German  and  Brit-
ish legions  and  native  troops,  with  which  he  oper-
ated against  Cumana  and  captured  Barcelona.  In
1821  he  obtained  the  submission  of  Maracaibo  and
Coro,  and  in  1826  was  sent  to  Venezuela,  and  op-
posed the  plans  of  Paez,  returning  to  Colombia  in
1827  as  commander  of  Cundinamarca.  He  was
also  member  of  the  constituent  congress  of  Colom-
bia, and  twice  secretary  of  war,  occupying,  from
September,  1830,  till  April,  1831,  the  executive  of
the  nation  to  fill  a  vacancy.  Shortly  afterward  he
returned  to  Venezuela,  where  he  was  successively
senator  for  the  province  of  Coro,  governor  of  Guay-
ana,  and  twice  secretary  of  war.  In  1845  he  was
sent  as  minister  to  Madrid,  but  he  died  on  his  way.
— His  cousin,  Francisco,  South  American  soldier,
b.  in  Montevideo,  3  Aug.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Bogota  in
1861,  entered  the  military  service  in  his  youth,  and
fought  against  the  British  in  1806-'7.  In  1809  he
was  called  by  his  uncle,  Martin  Urdaneta,  to  Bo-
gota, where  he  entered  the  Spanish  service,  but  he
joined  the  patriot  cause  in  1810.  In  1819  he  par-
ticipated in  the  campaign  of  Cauca,  becoming  in
1820  governor  of  Popayan,  and  in  1821  of  Antio-
quia.  In  1829  he  was  promoted  major-general.  In
1861  he  used  his  utmost  efforts  to  save  the  lives  of
the  political  prisoners  in  the  College  of  Rosario,  and
when  they  were  assassinated  before  his  eyes,  on  7
March,  he  retired  to  his  home,  where  he  soon  died.
URE,  Robert,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in  Lan-
arkshire, Scotland,  in  January,  1823.  When  he
was  nineteen  years  old  he  emigrated  to  Canada,


and  settled  at  Hamilton.  He  studied  theology,
and  was  ordained  a  minister  of  the  Free  Presbyte-
rian church  in  1850.  He  was  a  pastor  at  Streets-
ville  in  1850-62.  and'  since  the  latter  year  he  has
been  stationed  at  Goderich,  Ont.  He  was  for  two
years  a  lecturer  on  apologetics  at  Knox  college,
Toronto,  and  has  also  been  a  lecturer  on  the  same
subject  at  Queen's  university,  Kingston.  He  aided
in  bringing  about  the  union  of  the  various  Presby-
terian churches  in  Canada,  and  was  a  moderator  of
the  united  churches.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Queen's  university  in  1876.

URFE,  Gabriel  Jules  (oor-fay),  West  Indian
navigator,  b.  in  Martinique,  W.  I.,  in  1795 ;  d.  in
the  Arctic  ocean  in  1833.  He  was  educated  at
Paris,  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1810,
and  after  the  restoration  of  Louis  XVIII.,  in  1814,
was  attached  as  ensign  to  the  frigate  "  La  Rail-'
leuse"  and  sent  to  South  America.  After  assist-
ing in  re-establishing  French  consulates  in  Brazil,
Venezuela,  Mexico,  and  the  West  Indies,  he  was
a  commissioner  in  1817  to  receive  the  surrender
of  the  administration  of  French  Guiana  from  the
Portuguese,  and  afterward  took  part  in  a  campaign
to  Martinique  and  Santo  Domingo.  Later  he  was
employed  at  Madagascar  and  Bourbon,  and  in
1830  he  was  attached  to  the  department  of  charts
in  the  navy  office.  On  4  July,  1833,  he  sailed  as
second  in  command  of  the  frigate  "  La  Liloise "
with  Poret  de  Blosseville  for  an  exploration  of  the
Arctic  ocean.  They  prepared  a  chart  of  the  west-
ern coast  of  Greenland,  which  they  forwarded  in
August  following  to  Admiral  Duperre,  and  stopped
afterward  at  Vagna-Fjord,  whence  they  returned
in  October,  navigating  along  the  coast  of  Green-
land. This  was  the  last  that  was  heard  of  the
frigate,  and  the  subsequent  expeditions  that  were
sent  to  search  for  it  failed  to  discover  any  trace
of  the  navigators.  Urfe's  works  include,  besides
several  memoirs  that  are  published  in  the  "  Annales
maritimes  et  coloniales,  "Histoire  de  la  decou-
verte  du  Groenland  par  les  navigateurs  Scandi-
naves"  (Paris,  1831),  and  "Historique  de  l'occupa-
tion  Anglaise  a  la  Martinique  "  (1832).

URFE,  Louis  Edouard  d',  West  Indian  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Les  Saintes,  Guadeloupe,  in  1699 ;  d.
in  Leghorn  in  1762.  He  was  educated  in  the  col-
lege of  the  Jesuits  at  Bordeaux,  entered  that  order
in  1727,  and  was  sent  in  the  following  year  to
Guadeloupe,  where  he  resided  several  years  and
had  charge  of  the  parish  of  Capesterre.  In  1742
he  went  to  Cayenne,  founded  several  missions
among  the  Galibi  Indians,  explored  Guiana  and
the  basin  of  the  Orinoco,  and  in  1760  became
visitor  of  his  order.  He  died  at  Leghorn  during  a
voyage  for  the  purpose  of  conferring  with  the  gen-
eral of  the  Jesuits.  Urfe's  works  include  "  Gram-
maire  Galibi "  (Paris,  1755) :  "  Dictionnaire  Galibi "
(1757) ;  and  "  Histoire  des  etablissements  de  la  foi
fondes  dans  la  Guiane  ou  Nouvelle  France  meri-
dionale"(1762).

URICOCHEA,  Ezequiel  (oo-ri-ko-chay'-ah),
Colombian  scientist,  b.  in  Bogota  in  1834.  As
early  as  1846  he  obtained  in  college  the  first  prize
in  mathematics,  and  in  1849  he  went  to  the  United
States  to  finish  his  studies,  being  graduated  in
medicine  at  Yale.  In  1852  he  went  to  Germany,
and  in  1854  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Got-
tingen,  devoting  himself  specially  to  the  study  of
chemistry  and  mineralogy.  He  travelled  through
Europe  for  two  years,  and  remained  six  months  in
Brussels  to  study  astronomy  in  the  observatory  of
that  city.  In  1857  he  returned  to  his  native  coun-
try, where  he  was  professor  of  chemistry  till  1868.
He  founded  the  Society  of  naturalists  of  New


218


URQUIZA


URRUTIA


Granada,  and  is  a  member  of  several  scientific  so-
cieties, including  the  Spanish  academy  and  the
Academy  of  history  of  Madrid.  He  has  written
"Memorias  sobre  las  Antigtiedades  Neo-Granadi-
nas"  (Berlin,  1854);  "  Contribuciones  de  Colombia
a  las  Ciencias  y  a  las  Artes "  (Bogota,  1859-'61) ;
"  Mapoteca  Colombiana  "  (London,  1860) ;  "  Grama-
tica,  Frases,  y  Oraciones  de  la  lengua  Chibcha"
(Bogota,  1861) ;  "  Gramatica  de  la  lengua  Chibcha  "
(Paris,  1871) ;  "  Alfabeto  fonetico  de  la  lengua  Cas-
tellana  "  (Madrid,  1872) ;  and  several  articles  in  the
"  Mosaico."

URQUIZA,  Justo  Jos6  de  (oor-kee'-thah),  Ar-
gentine soldier,  b.  in  Arroyo  de  la  China,  near  the
capital  of  Entre  Rios,  19  March,  1800 ;  d.  in  San
Jose,  11  April,  1870,  He  was  sent  by  his  father  to
Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  received  a  good  education
in  the  Jesuit  college.  In  1820  he  established  him-
self in  business  in  his  native  village,  but  his  edu-
cation and  dexterity  in  the  use  of  arms  gave  him
power  over  his  neighbors,  and  in  one  of  the
internal  revolts  he  was  elected  commander  of  the
National  guard.  He  soon  gained  influence  in  poli-
tics, and,  as  a  defender  of  the  federal  principle,
was  favored  by  the  dictator  Rosas.  When  the  latter
gave  Manuel  Oribe  the  means  to  invade  Uruguay,
he  ordered  Urquiza  with  4,000  men  to  assist  in  the
war,  and  in  1844  the  latter  passed  the  river  Uru-
guay, obtained  partial  success  in  the  encounters  of
Arequita  and  Malbajar.  and  finally  defeated  Rivera
at  India  Muerta  on  28  March,  1845,  celebrating  his
victory  by  the  execution  of  500  prisoners.  On  his
return  he  was  elected  in  1846  governor  of  Entre
Rios,  and  by  arbitrary  measures  soon  amassed  an
enormous  fortune.  No  shop  of  any  kind  could  be
opened  without  his  permit,  which  was  only  given
to  persons  that  shared  the  profits  with  him,  and,
prohibiting  the  importation  of  wheat  into  the  state,
he  reserved  for  himself  the  exclusive  right  of  mill-
ing flour  from  the  crop  of  his  large  farms.  He
waged  a  war  against  the  Unitarians  of  Corrientes,
emulating  the  dictator  Rosas  in  cruelties,  and  soon
acquired  such  an  influence  that  he  was  in  reality
the  dictator  of  Entre  Rios.  When  in  1850  Rosas,
by  treaty  with  England  and  France,  declared  the
navigation  of  the  Parana  and  Uruguay  closed  to
foreign  flags,  Urquiza  united  with  the  governor  of
Corrientes  in  a  protest,  and  began  to  intrigue
against  the  Argentine  dictator,  and  when  Rosas,
in  the  beginning  of  1851,  went  through  the  cus-
tomary farce  of  resigning  the  executive,  in  the  ex-
pectation of  being  re-elected  with  increased  pow-
ers, Urquiza  and  Gov.  Visaroso,  of  Corrientes,
accepted  the  resignation,  and  declared  the  sover-
eignty of  the  two  states  restored.  Urquiza,  on  1
May,  issued  a  manifesto,  calling  upon  the  nation
to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the  dictator,  and  on  the
29th  of  that  month  he  concluded,  as  governor  of
Entre  Rios,  an  offensive  and  defensive  alliance  with
Brazil  and  Uruguay  against  Rosas.  He  passed
Uruguay  river  in  June  with  4,000  men,  captured
Paysandu,  and,  without  awaiting  Brazilian  re-en-
forcements, marched  against  Oribe,  who  was  still
besieging  Montevideo.  The  whole  country  rose  to
join  Urquiza,  and  Oribe,  seeing  his  cause  lost,
capitulated  on  8  Oct.  Re-enforced  by  the  Uru-
guayan and  Brazilian  armies,  and  protected  by  the
Brazilian  fleet,  Urquiza  repassed  the  Uruguay  and
Parana,  and,  on  12  Jan.,  1852,  began  his  march
with  an  army  of  30,000  men  against  Rosas.  The
latter  had  fortified  his  camps  of  Palermo  and  San-
tos Lugares,  but  in  the  final  battle  of  Monte  Case-
ros,  on  3  Feb.,  he  was  defeated  after  a  short  resist-
ance, and  fled  on  board  a  British  ship,  Urquiza
marring  his  victory  by  the  execution  of  the  valiant


Col.  Chilabert,  the  only  one  of  Rosas's  chiefs  that
had  fought  well.  On  4  Feb.  he  appointed  Dr.
Lopez  provisional  governor  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and
remained  encamped  in  Palermo,  whence  he  sent
all  the  art  treasures  that  had  been  accumulated  by
Rosas  to  his  country-seat  of  San  Jose.  On  6  April
the  governors  of  Entre  Rios,  Corrientes,  and  Buenos
Ayres,  and  a  representative  of  the  government  of
Santa  Fe,  declared  the  national  executive  restored,
and  appointed  Urquiza  provisional  director  until
the  meeting  of  a  congress.  But,  instead  of  con-
voking congress,  he  summoned  a  meeting  of  all
the  governors  at  San  Nicolas  de  los  Arroyos,  which
on  31  May  proclaimed  him  provisional  president.
On  the  return  of  Gov.  Lopez  from  San  Nicolas,
stormy  debates  followed  in  the  chamber  of  depu-
ties, 21  and  22  June,  in  which  Bartolome  Mitre,
who  had  prepared  public  opinion  by  editorial  arti-
cles in  his  paper,  "  Los  Debates,"  took  a  prominent
part.  Gov.  Lopez  resigned,  flying  to  Palermo,  and
Urquiza  on  the  23d  closed  the  office  of  "  Los  De-
bates," arbitrarily  dissolved  the  legislature,  and  his
opponents  fled  to  escape  imprisonment ;  but  when
the  dictator  left  for  Santa  Fe,  to  open  the  con-
stituent congress,  a  revolution  began  in  Buenos
Ayres  on  11  Sept.,  which  declared  the  province
independent,  electing  Valentin  Alsina  governor.
Urquiza  tried  to  subdue  the  city,  but  after  an  un-
successful campaign  raised  the  siege  on  13  July,
1853,  and  in  November  of  that  year  was  elected
constitutional  president  for  the  other  thirteen
states,  with  residence  in  Parana.  The  new  presi-
dent signed  a  treaty  with  France,  England,  and
the  United  States,  declaring  the  navigation  of  the
Parana  and  Uruguay  free  to  all  nations.  In  1859
Buenos  Ayres  was  invited  to  enter  the  union
again,  but  refused,  and  Urquiza  marched  with  the
national  troops  against  the  state,  defeating  the
forces  under  Mitre  at  Cepeda  on  23  Oct.,  1859.
Gov.  Alsina  resigned,  and  the  new  governor  agreed
to  send  deputies  to  the  congress  of  Parana,  on  con-
dition that  certain  reforms  should  be  made  in  the
Federal  constitution,  to  be  proposed  by  Buenos
Ayres.  The  latter  were  accepted  by  congress  on
25  Sept.,  1860,  and  Buenos  Ayres  sent  deputies;
but  they  were  refused  admittance  on  pretext  that
the  state  electoral  law  was  unconstitutional.  Bue-
nos Ayres  armed  again,  and  under  Gen.  Mitre  sent
her  forces  to  defend  her  territory,  when  the  new
Federal  president,  Dr.  Santiago  Derqui,  declared
war  against  the  province,  appointing  Urquiza  com-
mander-in-chief. The  opposing  armies  met  on  17
Sept.,  1861,  at  Pavon,  and  Urquiza  was  defeated,
retiring  with  his  troops  to  Entre  Rios.  After  Gen.
Mitre's  election  to  the  Federal  executive,  Urquiza
was  again  elected  governor  of  his  province,  and
fitted  up  his  country-seat  at  San  Jose  in  great
splendor,  constructing  a  large  artificial  lake  by
means  of  the  labor  of  political  prisoners.  In  this
place  he  was  surprised  by  an  armed  party,  who
assassinated  him  and  afterward  proclaimed  Gen.
Lopez  Jordan  governor.

URRUTIA,  Ienacio  J.  de  (oor-root'-yah),  Cuban
historian,  b.  in  Havana  in  1730;  d.  there  in  1798.
He  studied  law  in  his  native  city,  and  in  1755  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  He  filled  several  public  of-
fices, which  afforded  him  opportunities  to  collect
documents  and  information  about  the  history  of
the  island  of  Cuba,  and  especially  of  Havana.  In
1787  he  retired  from  public  affairs  to  devote  him-
self to  his  "  Teatro  historico,  juridico,  politico,  mili-
tar  de  la  Isla  Fernandina  de  Cuba,"  which  was  left
incomplete.  The  first  volume  was  published  in
1795,  and  several  chapters  of  the  second  appeared
in  the  reprint  of  the  first  volume  in  the  work  that


URTIAGA


USSIEUX


219


is  known  as  "Los  tres  primeros  historiadores  de
Cuba "  (Havana,  1876).  Urrutia  published  also
"Compendio  de  Memorias  para  servir  a  la  historia
de  la  Isla  Fernandina  de  Cuba"  (1791).

URTIAGA,  Pedro  (oor-tee-ah'-gah),  Mexican
missionary,  b.  in  Queretaro  about  1650 ;  d.  in  Porto
Rico  about  1720.  He  entered  the  Order  of  St.  Fran-
cis, and  set  out  for  Central  America  with  four
other  missionaries  in  1694.  He  obtained  good  re-
sults among  the  wild  Choles,  Talamanca,  and
Tologalpa  tribes,  whose  language  he  soon  learned,
and  founded  in  the  city  of  Guatemala  the  College
of  Propaganda  Fide.  In  1703  he  went  to  Spain,
and  on  his  return  in  1704  he  was  captured  by  a
British  cruiser  and  landed  on  the  coast  of  Portu-
gal. He  returned  on  foot  to  the  court  of  Madrid,
and  was  appointed  bishop  of  Porto  Rico,  in  which
city  he  died.  Besides  numerous  religious  works  of
mei'it,  which  have  been  reprinted  many  times  in
Mexico  and  Guatemala,  he  is  author  of  "  Diario  del
viage  de  los  cinco  misioneros  Franciscanos  desde
Queretaro  hasta  Guatemala  en  1694;  y  conquista
espiritual  de  los  Indios  Choles,  Talamancos  y  To-
logalpos"  (Mexico,  1702).

URUGUAY,  Paulino  Jos6  Soares  e  Souza
(oo-roo-gah'-ee),  Viscount  de,  Brazilian  statesman,
b.  in  Paris,  France,  in  1807;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,
Brazil,  15  July,  1866.  He  was  educated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Coimbra,  studied  law  in  the  Academy  of
Sao  Paulo,  Brazil,  entered  the  magistracy  in  1831,
was  a  member,  and  afterward  president,  of  the  pro-
vincial assembly  of  Rio  Janeiro,  after  the  promul-
gation of  the  additional  act  to  the  constitution.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Brazilian  parliament  in
1836-'49,  entered  the  cabinet  on  23  May,  1840,  as
minister  of  justice,  and  held  the  same  office  in
1841-'3,  prepared  the  law  of  3  Dec,  1841,  which
reformed  the  criminal  procedure  of  the  empire,  was
secretary  of  foreign  relations  in  1843-'4,  and  be-
came a  senator,  21  March,  1849.  On  8  Oct.  of  the
same  year  he  succeeded  Marquis  de  Olinda  as  sec-
retary of  foreign  relations.  He  negotiated  in  1851
the  treaty  of  alliance  between  Uruguay,  Entre-Rios,
and  Brazil,  and  treaties  of  commerce  with  Uru-
guay, Peru,  and  the  Argentine  Republic,  and  re-
signing, 6  Sept.,  1853,  was  appointed  on  8  Sept.  a
councillor  of  state,  and  created  Viscount  of  Uru-
guay and  a  grandee  of  the  first  class,  2  Dec,  1854.
He  went  to  Paris  in  the  following  year  as  minister
to  settle  the  difficult  question  of  the  frontier  be-
tween Brazil  and  French  Guiana,  returning  in  1858
to  Brazil.  He  wrote  "  Ensaios  sobre  o  Dirieto  ad-
ministrative "  (2  vols.,  Rio  Janeiro,  1862)  and
"  Estudos  praticos  sobre  o  administracao  das  pro-
vincias  do  Brazil "  (2  vols.,  1866).

USHER,  Hezekiah,  bookseller,  b.  in  England
about  1615 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  14  March,  1676.
He  was  a  citizen  of  Cambridge  in  1639,  and  in  1646
established  himself  in  Boston,  became  a  select-man
of  the  town,  and,  as  agent  for  the  Society  for  propa-
gating the  gospel,  purchased  in  England  in  1657
the  press  and  types  for  printing  Eliot's  Indian
Bible.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  Old  South  church
in  1669. — His  son,  Hezekiah,  bookseller,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  6  June,  1639 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
11  July,  1679,  was  also  engaged  in  business  in  Bos-
ton. During  the  excitement  over  witchcraft  he
was  arrested,  but  was  suffered  to  make  his  escape
from  the  colony.  His  wife  was  Bridget,  daughter
of  John  Lisle,  the  regicide,  and  widow  of  Leonard
Hoar. — Another  son,  John,  lieutenant-governor  of
New  Hampshire,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  April,
1648 ;  d.  in  Medford.  Mass.,  1  Sept.,  1726,  succeeded
his  father  in  business,  and  became  a  member  of
the  council,  a  colonel  of  militia,  and  treasurer  of


Massachusetts.  His  second  wife  was  Elizabeth,
daughter  of  Samuel  Allen,  whose  claims  to  the
New  Hampshire  patent  he  supported.  In  March,
1677,  he  acted  in  London  as  agent  for  Massachu-
setts colony  in  the  purchase  of  the  title  to  the  dis-
trict of  Maine  from  Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges.  He
was  lieutenant-governor  of  New  Hampshire  from
1692  till  1697,  and  was  reappointed  in  1702.— John's
great-great-grandson,  John  Palmer,  secretary  of
the  interior,  b.  in  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  9  Jan.,  1816;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13  April,  1889,  removed  to
Indiana,  studied  and  practised  law,  was  elected  to
the  legislature,  and  was  attorney-general  of  the
state.  He  was  appointed  1st  assistant  secretary  of
the  interior  on  20  March,  1862,  and  on  the  resigna-
tion of  Caleb  B.  Smith,  succeeded  him  as  head  of
the  interior  department  on  8  Jan.,  1863,  holding
the  office  till  15  May,  1865,  when  he  resigned,  and
resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession,  becoming
consulting  attorney  for  the  Union  Pacific  railroad.

USSHER,  Brandram  Boilean,  Canadian  R.
E.  bishop,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  6  Aug.,  1845.  He
was  educated  at  Delgany  college,  Wicklow,  and  in
private  schools.  He  early  conceived  a  love  for  the
study  of  medicine,  but  his  father  encountered  finan-
cial losses  and  his  studies  came  to  an  abrupt  close.
He  was  sent  to  New  York,  where  he  abandoned
business  at  the  end  of  a  year  and  began  the  study
of  medicine  in  Washington  and  subsequently  at
the  University  of  Michigan.  Ten  years  were  passed
in  Aurora,  111.,  where  he  practised  his  profession.
Hearing  a  sermon  by  Dwight  L.  Moody,  he  deter-
mined to  study  for  the  ministry,  and  on  9  June,
1874,  he  was  ordained  deacon  in  Christ  church,
Chicago,  by  Bishop  Cheney,  of  the  Reformed  Epis-
copal church.  Two  years  later  he  became  presby-
ter in  Emmanuel  church,  Ottawa,  Canada.  In
Canada  he  has  held  pastorates  in  Toronto  and
Montreal,  where  he  has  had  charge  of  St.  Bartholo-
mew's church  since  1878.  He  and  his  congregation
withdrew  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Reformed
Episcopal  church  in  the  United  States  and  united
their  fortunes  with  the  English  branch  of  that
body,  otherwise  called  the  Reformed  church  of
England.  The  general  synod  in  England  elected
Dr.  Ussher  to  the  episcopate,  but  he  declined.  Two
years  later  he  was  re-elected,  the  Canadian  synod
choosing  him  as  their  bishop.  On  19  June,  1882,
he  was  consecrated  in  Trinity  church,  Southend,
by  Bishop  Gregg  and  seven  presbyters.  He  re-
turned to  Canada  and  assumed  the  duties  of  his
large  diocese,  which  includes  Newfoundland.

USSIEUX,  Jacques  Gerard  des  (oos-se-uh),
French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Eu,  Normandy,  in  1719;
d.  in  Port  Royal,  Martinique,  in  1781.  He  was  a
captain  in  the  merchant  service,  and  during  the
war  of  1756  he  commanded  privateers  against  the
English,  and  defended  the  fortifications  at  the
entrance  of  St.  Lawrence  river.  After  the  con-
clusion of  peace  he  entered  the  service  of  Louis
Antoine  de  Bougainville,  who  had  obtained  from
Louis  XV.  a  grant  of  the  Falkland  islands,  carried
emigrants  there  in  1764,  and  governed  the  colony
during  Bougainville's  absence.  After  the  retro-
cession of  the  Falkland  archipelago  to  Spain  in
1766,  he  was  sent  to  make  an  exploration  of  the
coast  of  Patagonia,  and  visited  also  the  island  of
Georgia.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1778  he
again  entered  the  royal  navy  as  1st  lieutenant,  and
was  appointed  harbor-master  of  Port  Royal. He

Kublished  "Histoire  de  la  colonie  fondee  aux  iles
lalouines  par  le  capitaine  de  Bougainville,  suivie
d'une  description  de  la  cote  de  la  Patagonie,  et
d'une  relation  d'un  voyage  a  File  Saint  Pierre  et
a  la  Terre  des  Etats"  (Dieppe,  1768).


220


VAIL


VAIL


V


VAIL,  Stephen,  manufacturer,  b.  near  Morris-
town,  N.  J.,  28  June,  1780 ;  d.  there,  12  June,  1864.
He  received  ordinary  educational  advantages,  and
in  1804  became  the  owner  of  the  Speedwell  iron-
works, near  Morristown,  N.  J.  At  these  works  the
engine  of  the  "  Savannah,"  the  first  steamship  to
cross  the  Atlantic  (1819),  was  built.  Later  he  con-
tributed money  to  aid  in  the  construction  of  the
electric  telegraph,  and  at  his  place  the  first  prac-
tical exhibition  of  the  new  invention  was  made.  He
was  one  of  the  lay  officers  that  are  required  on  the
local  bench,  and  so  acquired  the  title  of  judge. —
His  son,  Alfred,  inventor,  b.  in  Morristown,  N.  J.,
25  Sept.,  1807;  d.  there,  18  Jan.,  1859,  was  edu-
cated at  Morris  academy,  and  as  a  youth  showed
a  fondness  for  study
and  investigation  in
natural  science.  In
accordance  with  the
wishes  of  his  father,
he  entered  the  Speed-
well iron-works,  but  on
attaining  his  majority
he  determined  to  pre-
pare for  the  Presbyte-
rian ministry,  and  in
consequence  was  grad-
uated at  the  Univer-
sity of  the  city  of  New
York  in  1836.  While
in  college  he  became
interested  in  the  ex-
periments that  Prof.
Samuel  F.  B.  Morse
was  then  conducting
for  the  purpose  of  per-
fecting a  system  of  telegraphy.  Vail  became  con-
vinced of  the  possibility  of  the  scheme  of  elec-
tric communication,  and  his  mechanical  knowl-
edge led  to  various  suggestions  on  his  part  to
Prof.  Morse.  This  acquaintance  developed  into  an
offer  of  partnership,  and  he  obtained  permission
to  invite  Prof.  Morse  to  Speedwell,  where  he  per-
suaded his  father  to  contribute  $2,000  toward  the
completion  of  the  apparatus.  In  1837  an  agree-
ment was  signed  by  Mr.  Vail,  in  which  it  was  stipu-
lated that  he  should  construct  at  his  own  expense,
and  exhibit  before  a  committee  of  congress,  one
of  the  telegraphs  "  of  the  plan  and  invention  of
Morse,"  and  that  he  should  give  his  time  and  per-
sonal services  to  the  work  and  assume  the  expense
of  exhibiting  the  apparatus  and  of  procuring  pat-
ents in  the  United  States.  In  consideration,  Vail
was  to  receive  one  fourth  of  all  rights  in  the
invention  in  this  country.  Thereafter,  until  con-
gress appropriated  money  for  the  building  of  the
initial  line  between  Baltimore  and  Washington,
Vail  was  active  in  developing  the  practical  parts  of
the  telegraph.  His  mechanical  knowledge  applied
to  the  experimental  apparatus  resulted  in  the  first
available  Morse  machine.  He  invented  the  first
combination  of  the  horizontal  lever  motion  to  actu-
ate a  pen,  pencil,  or  style,  and  then  devised  a  tele-
graphic alphabet  of  dots,  spaces,  and  dashes  which
it  necessitated.  The  dot-and-dash  system  had  al-
ready been  invented  by  Morse  for  use  in  a  code,
but  Mr.  Vail  claimed  that  he  was  the  first  to
apply  it  alphabetically.  He  then  devised  in  1844
the  lever  and  grooved  roller,  which  embossed  on
paper  the  alphabetical  characters  that  he  origi-
nated. In  March,  1843,  he  was  appointed  assistant


superintendent  of  the  telegraph  that  was  to  be
constructed  between  Washington  and  Baltimore
under  the  government  appropriation.  On  the  com-
pletion of  the  line  he  was  stationed  at  Baltimore,
and  there  invented  the  finger-key  and  received  at
the  Mount  Claire  depot  the  first  message  from
Washington  that  was  sent  over  the  wires,  on  24
May,  1844,  at  the  formal  opening  of  the  line.  (See
Morse,  S.  F.  B.)  The  practical  improvements  in
the  original  instrument  that  are  of  value  in  teleg-
raphy were  invented  by  Vail.  Prior  to  1837  the
apparatus  embodied  the  work  of  Morse  and  Joseph
Henry  alone.  From  1837  to  1844  it  was  a  com-
bination of  the  inventions  of  Morse,  Henry,  and
Vail,  but  gradually  the  parts  that  Morse  contrib-
uted have  been  eliminated,  so  that  the  essential
features  of  the  telegraph  of  to-day  consist  solely
of  the  work  of  Joseph  Henry  and  Alfred  Vail.
The  business  relations  that  existed  between  Morse
and  Vail  made  it  impossible'  for  the  latter  to  claim
what  might  have  been  used  against  the  validity  of
Morse's  patents.  In  the  years  that  followed,  when
Prof.  Morse  was  universally  hailed  as  the  inventor
of  the  telegraph,  the  reputation  of  his  modest  part-
ner was  allowed  to  suffer.  Amos  Kendall,  the  as-
sociate and  friend  of  both,  said,  at  the  meeting  of
the  directors  of  the  Magnetic  telegraph  company
that  was  held  to  take  action  on  the  death  of  Mr.
Vail:  "If  justice  be  done,  the  name  of  Alfred
Vail  will  forever  stand  associated  with  that  of
Samuel  F.  B.  Morse  in  the  history  and  introduc-
tion into  public  use  of  the  electro-magnetic  tele-
graph." Mr.  Vail  was  the  author  of  "  The  Ameri-
can Electro-Magnetic  Telegraph  "  (Philadelphia,
1845). — His  brother,  George,  congressman,  b.  in
Morristown,  N.  J.,  21  July,  1809 ;  d.  there,  23  May,
1875,  received  an  academic  education,  and  was  as-
sociated with  his  father  in  the  Speedwell  iron- works.
He  also  aided  his  brother,  Alfred,  with  funds  when
the  latter  was  engaged  in  perfecting  the  electric
telegraph.  In  1851  he  was  appointed  by  the  gov-
ernor of  New  Jersey  to  represent  that  state  at  the
World's  fair  in  London.  Subsequently  he  was
chosen  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  with  re-elec-
tion served  from  5  Dec,  1853,  till  3  March,  1857.
In  1858  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Glas-
gow, Scotland,  but  he  returned  to  this  country
in  1861,  settled  in  Morristown,  N.  J.,  and  was  for
many  years  a  member  of  the  court  of  pardons.

VAlL,  Stephen  Montford,  clergyman,  b.  in
Union  Dale,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  Jan.,  1818;
d.  in  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  26  Nov.,  1880.  He  was
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1838,  and  at  Union  theo-
logical seminary  in  1842,  having  in  the  mean  time
been  licensed  to  preach  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church,  and  founded  the  first  church  of  that  de-
nomination in  Brunswick,  Me.  He  became  pro-
fessor of  languages  in  Amenia  seminary  in  1843,
was  subsequently  pastor  in  Fishkill,  N.  Y.,  Sharon,
Conn.,  and  Pine  Plains,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1847-'9  was
president  of  the  New  Jersey  conference  seminary
at  Pennington.  While  occupying  that  post  he
induced,  the  trustees  of  the  institution  to  admit
women  as  pupils,  and  he  was  tried  before  the
ecclesiastical  court  of  his  church  for  advocating
in  his  writings  the  cause  of  an  educated  ministry.
He  became  professor  of  Oriental  languages  in  the
General  biblical  institute  of  the  M.  E.  church  at
Concord,  N.  H.,  in  1849,  and  held  that  chair
until  failing  health  required  his  resignation.  In
1869  he  became  U.  S.  consul  for  Rhenish  Bava-


VAIL


VAILLANT


221


ria,  travelled  extensively  in  the  East  and  Egypt,
and  on  his  return  settled  in  Southfield,  Staten
island,  N.  Y.  He  wrote  for  the  Methodist  press,
and  was  professor  of  Hebrew  in  the  Chautauqua
school  of  languages.  Genesee  college,  Lima,  N.  Y .,
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1856.  Dr.  Vail
was  an  active  member  of  the  Republican  party,
and  an  early  Abolitionist.  Previous  to  the  civil
war  he  sustained  a  long  and  able  controversy  with
Bishop  John  H.  Hopkins  on  the  subject  of  human
slavery,  the  bishop  being  an  earnest  advocate  of
that  institution.  Dr.  Vail  published  essays  on
slavery  and  church  polity,  "Outlines  of  Hebrew
Grammar,"  and  other  educational  hand-books,  and
"  Memoir  and  Remains  of  Rev.  Zenas  Caldwell "
(Boston,  1824) ;  "  Education  in  the  Methodist  Epis-
copal Church  "  (1853) ;  and  "  The  Bible  against
Slavery  "  (Concord,  N.  H.,  1864).

VAIL,  Thomas  Hubbard,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  21  Oct.,  1812.  His  parents  were
from  New  England,  and  on  the  death  of  his  father
in  1817  his  mother  returned  to  the  north.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Washington  (now  Trinity)
college  in  1831,  and  at  the  General  theological
seminary  in  New  York  in  1835,  was  ordered  dea-
con by  Bishop  Brownell  in  St.  Mark's  church,  New
Canaan,  Conn.,  29  June,  1835,  and  priest  in  Grace
church,  Boston,  by  Bishop  Griswold,  6  Jan.,  1837.
During  his  diaconate  he  served  for  a  short  time
as  assistant  minister  in  St.  James's  church,  Phila-
delphia, and  he  was  afterward  assistant  to  Dr.
Jonathan  M.  Wainwright  in  St.  Paul's  church,
Boston.  He  organized  the  parish  of  All  Saints,
Worcester,  Mass.,  became  rector  of  Christ  church,
Cambridge,in  1837,and  in  1839  of  St.  John's  church,
Essex.  In  1844  he  removed  to  Rhode  Island  and
was  made  rector  of  Christ  church,  Westerly,  where
he  remained  fourteen  years,  serving  as  deputy  to
the  General  convention  during  part  of  that  time.
In  1857  he  returned  to  Massachusetts  as  rector  of
St.  John's,  Taunton.  In  1863  he  went  to  Iowa,
taking  the  rectorship  of  Trinity  church,  Musca-
tine. The  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  was  given  him  by
Brown  in  1858,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  the  Uni-
versity of  Kansas  in  1875.  He  was  consecrated
first  bishop  of  Kansas,  15  Dec,  1864,  in  Trinity
church,  Muscatine,  Iowa.  Bishop  Vail  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Hannah,"  a  sacred  drama,  published
anonvmously  (Boston,  1839) ;  "  The  Comprehensive
Church  "  (1841  ;  3d  ed.,  New  York,  1883) ;  and
numerous  reports  of  school  committees,  charges,
addresses,  and  pastoral  letters.  He  has  edited,
with  a  memoir  of  the  author,  Rev.  Augustus  P.
Lyte's  "  Buds  of  Spring,"  poems  (Boston,  1838).

VAIL,  William  Berrian,  Canadian  member
of  parliament,  b.  in  Sussex,  New  Brunswick,  19
Dec,  1823.  He  is  a  grandson  of  Robert  Vail,  a
loyalist,  who  removed  from  the  United  States  to
New  Brunswick  at  the  close  of  the  Revolution.
He  is  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  militia,  was  a  member
of  the  executive  council  and  provincial  secretary
of  Nova  Scotia  in  1867-74,  and  on  30  Sept.,  1874,
became  a  member  of  the  privy  council  of  Canada,
and  was  appointed  minister  of  militia  and  defence.
This  portfolio  he  resigned  in  January,  1878.  He
represented  Digby  in  the  Nova  Scotia  assembly
from  1867  till  his  appointment  to  office  in  the  Do-
minion government,  when  he  was  returned  for  the
same  constituency  in  the  Canadian  parliament.
He  was  not  a  candidate  at  the  election  in  1878,  but
was  elected  in  February,  1887.  He  is  a  Liberal,
favors  free-trade  relations  with  all  countries,  and
the  maintenance  of  the  integrity  of  the  British
empire.  Mr.  Vail's  father,  John  C.  Vail,  was  a
representative  in  the New  Brunswick house  of


assembly  for  twenty-five  years;  and  his  brother,
Arnold  Vail,  M.  D.,  was  a  member  of  the  house  for
fifteen  years,  for  eight  years  speaker,  and  at  his
death,  in  July,  1886,  was  a  member  of  the  executive
and  legislative  councils  of  New  Brunswick.

VAILL,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  3  July,  1750 ;  d.  in  Killingworth,  Conn.,  21
Nov.,  1838.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  removed
to  Litchfield  from  Southold,  Long  Island,  about
1730.  In  1772  the  son  went  to  Hanover,  N.  H.,
travelling  most  of  the  way  on  foot,  with  the  inten-
tion of  preparing  for  Dartmouth,  and  defraying
his  expenses  by  working  in  a  saw-mill.  He  was
graduated  in  1778,  studied  divinity  in  Northbury
(now  Plymouth),  Conn.,  and  was  licensed  to  preach
in  May,  1779.  From  9  Feb.,  1780,  till  his  death
he  was  pastor  of  the  church  at  Hadlyme,  Conn.,
where  he  also  gave  some  time  to  teaching.  He
made  two  missionary  tours,  one  in  1792  to  Ver-
mont, and  another  in  1807  to  the  "Black  river
country"  in  New  York.  After  1832  he  was  given
a  colleague.  Mr.  Vaill  contributed  to  the  "  Con-
necticut Evangelical  Magazine,"  under  the  pen-
names  of  "Senex"  and  "  Jethro,"  wrote  for  other
periodicals,  and,  besides  sermons,  published  a  nar-
rative poem  entitled  "  Noah's  Flood,"  with  some
minor  poetical  pieces  (1796).  See  "  Memoir  of  the
Life  and  Character  of  the  Rev.  Joseph  Vaill,"  by  Rev.
Isaac  Parsons  (New  York,  1839). — His  son,  Joseph,
clergyman,  b.  in  Hadlyme,  Conn.,  in  1790 ;  d.  in
Palmer,  Mass.,  22  Feb.,  1869,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1811,  taught  in  Litchfield  and  Salisbury,
Conn.,  and  studied  theology  with  his  father.  He
was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Brim-
field  in  1814-34,  and  again  in  1837-41,  in  Port-
land, Me.,  in  1834-'7,  and  at  Palmer,  Mass.,  from
1854  until  1868.  In  1841-'5  he  was  financial  agent
for  Amherst  college,  and  during  that  period  of
financial  embarrassment  he  raised  for  its  endow-
ment the  sum  of  $100,000.  Amherst  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1851.  In  the  autumn  before  his
death  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of  Massachu-
setts. He  published  "  Sermons  "  (Springfield,  1861).

VAILLANT,  Auguste  Nicolas  (val-yong),
French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Paris,  France,  2  July,
1793 ;  d.  in  France,  1  Nov.,  1858.  He  entered  the
navy  and  rose  rapidly  in  the  service,  but  was  re-
tired in  1816  on  suspicion  of  being  a  Bonapart-
ist.  He  was  restored  in  1818,  and  sent  to  French
Guiana  to  study  the  best  method  of  colonizing
that  country.  He  made  a  thorough  explora-
tion of  the  banks  of  Maroni  river,  and  produced  a
memoir  with  a  map  of  that  river,  the  course  of
which  had  been  till  then  almost  unknown.  After
serving  in  various  parts  of  Europe  and  Africa,  he
was  made  in  February,  1836,  commander  of  the
"  Bonite,"  in  which  vessel  he  sailed  round  the
globe,  returning  to  France  in  November,  1837.  In
1838  he  was  made  captain,  took  part  in  the  expe-
dition to  Mexico,  and,  after  the  capture  of  San  Juan
de  Ulua,  was  appointed  commander  of  this  fortress
and  the  station  of  Vera  Cruz.  After  the  conclu-
sion of  peace  with  Mexico  he  was  engaged  in  the
La  Plata  expedition,  and  occupied  Montevideo.
He  was  minister  of  marine  during  the  early  part
of  1851,  and  gave  a  vigorous  impulse  to  the  colo-
nial policy  of  France.  The  same  year  he  was  ap-
pointed governor-general  of  the  French  Antilles
and  commander  of  the  stations  in  these  quarters
and  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  He  was  then  trans-
ferred to  the  government  of  Martinique,  but  was
forced  by  ill  health  to  return  to  France  in  1853,  to
the  regret  of  the  colony,  which  his  administration
had  greatly  benefited.  '  An  account  of  his  voyage
of  circumnavigation  was  published  under  the  title


222


VAILLANT


VALDES


"  Voyage  autour  du  monde  execute  sur  la  corvette
la  Bonite"  (11  vols.,  Paris,  1840-'8).

VAILLANT,  Francois  Le,  South  American
explorer,  b.  in  Paramaribo,  Dutch  Guiana,  in  1753;
d.  in  La  Noue,  near  Sezanne,  France,  22  Nov.,
1824.  He  was  the  son  of  a  French  consul,  and
showed  from  early  youth  a  strong  desire  for  ad-
venture, sometimes  wandering  alone  in  the  forests
for  weeks.  On  his  father's  return  to  Europe,  in
1763,  he  studied  natural  history  at  Metz,  and,  sail-
ing for  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  1780,  tried  to  trav-
erse Africa  by  travelling  northward  in  1780-'4.
Later  he  revisited  Guiana,  where  he  owned  a  large
estate.  He  was  imprisoned  during  the  reign  of  ter-
ror, and  settled  afterward  at  La  Noue.  His  works
include  "Voyage  dans  Finterieur  de  lAfrique  "  (2
vols.,  Paris,  1790),  and  "  Second  voyage  dans  l'in-
terieur  de  lAfrique  "  (3  vols.,  1796),  both  of  which
were  translated  into  several  languages;  "Histoire
naturelle  des  oiseaux  dAfrique"  (6  vols.,  1796-
1812) ;  "  Histoire  naturelle  des  oiseaux  de  paradis  "
(1801-6) ;  " Histoire  naturelle  des  cotingas  et  des
todiers  "  (1804) ;  and  "  Histoire  naturelle  des  calaos  "
(1804).  The  last  three  describe  species  of  birds  that
inhabit  Guiana.  Le  Vaillant  contributed  to  the
Paris  academy  of  science  several  papers  concern-
ing South  America,  including  a  "  Memoire  sur  les
coleopteres  de  la  Guiane"  (1818).

VALADES,  Diego  (vah-lah'-days),  Mexican  mis-
sionary, b.,  according  to  some  authors,  in  Spain,  but,
according  to  others,  in  Tlaxcala,  Mexico,  about
1520;  d.  in  Italy  about  1590.  He  entered  the
Franciscan  order,  became  a  missionary  to  the
Chichimec  Indians,  was  superior  of  the  convent  of
Tlaxcala,  and  on  account  of  his  learning  was  sent  to
Rome  in  1570  as  resident  procurator-general  of  his
order.  He  edited  Father  Jean  Focher's  "  Itinera-
rium  Catholicum "  (1574),  but  his  reputation  rests
on  his  remarkable  work  "  Rhetorica  Qhristiana  ad
concionandi  et  orandi  usum  aceommodata,  quae
quidem  ex  Indorum  Historia  maxime  deprompta
sunt"  (Perugia,  1579;  Rome,  1587),  in  which  he
describes  the  Indian  customs,  the  ornaments  of  the
Mexican  temples,  and  the  human  sacrifices  that
were  offered  in  them,  while  at  the  same  time  he
praises  highly  the  intellect  and  advanced  civiliza-
tion of  the  Aztecs  and  Tlaxcalans.

VALDES,  Antonio  Jose,  Cuban  historian,  b.
at  Matanzas  in  1770;  d.  in  Mexico  in  1824.  He
received  his  education  in  Havana  and  was  succes-
sively a  goldsmith,  clerk  in  a  commercial  house,  a
printer,  a  teacher,  and  finally  a  journalist.  After
an  eventful  life  in  his  native  country  he  went  to
Buenos  Ayres  in  1818,  where  he  founded  a  success-
ful newspaper,  "  El  Censor,"  but  in  1820  he  went
to  Mexico,  and  the  Emperor  Iturbide  appointed
him  in  1822  his  court  printer.  Valdes  published
"  Principios  generales  de  la  lengua  castellana"  (Ha-
vana, 1806) ;  "  Historia  General  de  la  Isla  de  Cuba
y  en  especial  de  la  Habana  "  (1811 ;  reprinted  in  the
work  "  Los  tres  primeros  historiadores  de  Cuba,"
1876);  and  many  educational  works,  which  were
used  as  text-books  in  the  schools  of  the  island.

VALDES,  Gabriel  de  la  Concepcidn,  known
as  "  Placido,"  Cuban  poet,  b.  in  Havana  in  1809  ;
d.  there,  28  June,  1844.  He  was  the  son  of  a  col-
ored man  and  passed  the  first  years  of  his  life  in
poverty  and  want.  His  early  education  was  en-
tirely neglected,  but  in  later  years  he  obtained
some  instruction  by  desultory  reading.  When  he
was  seventeen  years  old  he  was  already  known  as  a
remarkable  irnprovisatore.  In  1836  he  fixed  his
residence  in  the  city  of  Matanzas,  and  began  to
publish  his  poems  in  the  newspapers  and  literary
reviews. These  poems  revealed  at  once  a  lyrical


C^Zacidc


poet  of  no  mean  value,  and  gave  him  a  wide  repu-
tation, which  extended  to  all  Spanish-American
countries.  Some  patriotic  lines  of  his  cost  Placido
several  months  of  imprisonment  under  Gen.  Tacon's
government.  In
1844  he  was  ac-
cused of  being
implicated  in  a
supposed  conspi-
racy of  the  col-
ored race  against
the  whites,  un-
der Gen.  O'Don-
nell's  adminis-
tration ;  and,  al-
though it  has
been  proved  of
late  that  Placido
had  nothing  to
do  with  the  plot,
of  whose  exist-
ence there  have
never  been  con-
clusive proofs,  he
and  nineteen  of
his  unfortunate
fellow  -  citizens
were  shot  as  trait-
ors. His  poems
have  passed  through  numerous  editions  in  Cuba,  as
well  as  in  Spain.  Mexico,  South  America,  and  the
United  States.  The  first  edition  was  published  in
Matanzas  in  1838,  another  enlarged  edition  appeared
in  the  same  city  in  1842,  and  the  most  complete  edi-
tion was  published  in  Havana  in  1886.  The  poems
of  Placido  have  been  translated  into  French  by
Auguste  Fontanes,  and  published  in  one  volume
(Paris,  1866).  Many  of  them  have  been  translated
into  English,  German,  Italian,  and  Portuguese.  The
best  is  his  prayer,  composed  on  the  eve  of  death,
and  recited  by  him  on  his  way  to  the  place  of  exe-
cution. This  was  translated  into  English  by  Mary
Weston  Chapman.  Valdes  is  one  of  the  most  popu-
lar and  best  known  of  the  Spanish-American  poets.
VALDES,  Ger6nimo  (val-days'),  Spanish  sol-
dier, b.  in  Villarin,  Asturias,  in  1784;  d.  in  Mad-
rid in  1857.  He  was  finishing  his  law  studies  in
the  University  of  Oviedo  in  1808,  when  Napoleon
forced  Charles  IV.  and  Ferdinand  VII.  to  abdicate.
Valdes  took  an  active  part  with  his  fellow-students
in  the  rising  of  the  principality,  being  appointed
by  the  provincial  junta  to  organize  the  Asturian
militia.  With  that  body  he  took  part  in  the  whole
peninsular  campaign  against  the  French,  till  the
retreat  of  Marshal  Soult  across  the  Pyrenees  in
1813,  obtaining  the  rank  of  colonel  for  his  valor  in
the  battle  of  Albuera,  16  May,  1811.  When,  after
the  battle  of  Waterloo,  he  saw  no  prospect  of
quick  promotion  in  Europe,  he  solicited  transfer
to  the  Peruvian  army,  and  on  8  May,  1816,  sailed
from  Cadiz  in  the  expedition  of  Gen.  Jose  de  La
Serna  as  adjutant  on  the  general  staff.  When
Serna  assumed  the  command-in-chief  of  the  army
of  upper  Peru,  Valdes  was  ordered  to  organize  the
general  staff,  and  took  part  in  the  campaign  of
Salta  and  the  retreat  of  Jujui.  He  defended  the
coast  of  Arica  in  1822  with  3,000  men,  and  defeat-
ed Gen.  Alvarado,  who  had  been  sent  to  oppose  his
progress  at  Torata,  20  Jan.,  1823,  and  at  Moque-
gua  on  21  Jan.,  for  which  actions  he  was  pro-
moted brigadier.  In  the  following  June  he
marched  from  Lima  with  great  rapidity,  arriving
at  La  Paz  in  fifty-seven  days,  and\  engaged  Gen.
Santa  Cruz  at  Zepita  on  25  Aug. ;  and,  although
driven  back,  he  restrained  the  enemy  and  was  able


VALDES


YALDIVIA


223


to  effect  his  junction  with  Serna.  In  February,
1824,  he  was  detached  against  Gen.  Olafieta  when
the  latter  pronounced  against  the  viceroy,  and  was
occupied  in  putting  down  this  movement,  when,
after  the  battle  of  Junin,  6  Aug.,  1824,  he  received
orders  from  Serna  to  join  the  main  army  in  Cuzco.
He  assisted  with  his  division  in  the  battle  of  Aya-
cucho,  9  Dec,  1824,  and,  executing  an  able  counter-
march, fell  on  the  left  wing  of  the  patriots  under
Gen.  La  Mar,  which  was  already  wavering  when
he  was  routed  by  the  republican  cavalry  under
Gen.  William  Miller.  After  the  capitulation  of
the  viceroy,  Valdes  was  transported  with  the  rest
of  the  army  to  Europe,  promoted  by  the  king  ma-
jor-general, and  created  Viscount  of  Torata.  At
the  death  of  Ferdinand  VII.  in  1833  he  was  gov-
ernor of  Carthagena,  and,  after  proclaiming  Isa-
bella II.,  he  marched  to  the  north  as  commander-
in-chief,  taking  part  in  the  whole  campaign  against
the  Carlists.  He  was  senator  for  Valencia  and
captain-general  of  several  provinces  with  the  rank
of  lieutenant-general  until  1840,  when  he  was  ap-
pointed governor-general  of  Cuba.  During  his
administration  he  improved  the  fortifications  of
Havana,  constructed  the  military  hospital,  and
subdued  a  dangerous  rising  of  the  negro  slaves.
He  was  recalled  by  the  provisional  government  in
1843,  and  returned  to  Europe,  where  he  was  made
by  the  young  queen  Count  of  Villarin.

VALDES,  Jose"  Manuel,  Peruvian  physician,
b.  in  Lima  about  1780 ;  d.  there  in  1840.  He  was
of  negro  parentage,  and  studied  in  the  convent  of
San  Ildefonso  under  the  protection  of  an  Augus-
tinian  friar,  but  chose  the  medical  profession,  as
the  church,  the  army,  and  the  civil  service  were
closed  to  him  by  the  prejudices  of  the  time.  In
1807  he  was  graduated  in  medicine  in  the  Uni-
versity of  San  Marcos,  where  he  read  one  of  his
three  dissertations  that  were  afterward  printed  in
Madrid.  Besides  practising  his  profession,  he  also
wrote  poetry,  most  of  which  is  mystic  or  religious.
He  published  "  Disertacion  sobre  el  Cancro  Uteri-
no  "  (Madrid,  1815) ;  "  Disertacion  sobre  la  Menin-
gitis de  los  Ninos  "  (1815) ;  "  Disertacion  sobre  la
Disenteria"  (1815);  "Poesias  sagradas"  (Lima,
1819 ) ;  "La  Fe  de  Cristo  triunfante  en  Lima "
(1822) ;  "  Poesias  espirituales,  escritas  a  beneficio  y
para  el  uso  de  las  personas  sencillas  y  piadosas "
(1833) ;  and  "  Salterio  Peruano,  6  Parafrasis  de  los
ciento  cincuenta  Salmos  de  David  "  (1836).

VALDES  Y  SIERRA,  Gerdnimo,  Cuban  R.
C.  bishop,  b.  in  Gijon,  Spain,  in  1646 ;  d.  in  Ha-
vana in  1729.  After  finishing  his  theological
studies  and  receiving  sacred  orders,  he  was  a  pro-
fessor in  the  University  of  Alcala  until  1706,  when
he  was  appointed  bishop  of  Cuba.  He  founded  in
Havana  in  1710  the  San  Isidro  hospital,  and  in
1711  an  asylum  for  foundlings,  and  caused  to  be
constructed  the  monastery  of  Santa  Teresa.  In
1722  he  established  in  Santiago  de  Cuba  a  college
and  seminary  which  was  at  first  devoted  only  to
theological  students,  but  afterward  it  was  opened
also  to  lay  instruction.  He  also  founded  several
churches  in  other  cities  and  spent  a  great  deal  of
his  income  in  public  charities.

VALDEVIEIRA,  Miguel  (val-day-ve-ay'-e-
rah),  Portuguese  soldier,  b.  in  Portugal  about
1480 ;  d.  in  Sao  Vicente,  Brazil,  in  1540.  He  was
a  soldier  in  Cabral's  expedition  to  Brazil  in  1500,
and  for  mutinous  conduct  was  abandoned  with
one  companion  near  the  present  site  of  Porto  Se-
guio.  They  were  adopted  by  the  Tupi  Indians,
and  afterward  rendered  great  services  to  explorers.
Valdevieira,  who  had  reformed,  entered  the  Fran-
ciscan order,  and assisted  in  the  foundation  of


Sao  Vicente,  where  he  died.  He  left  a  valuable
manuscript,  "  Viagem  da  provincia  da  Vera  Cruz,"
in  which  he  recounts  his  adventures  with  the  In-
dians during  his  exile  in  the  territory  of  Vera  Cruz,
as  Cabral  named  the  country  at  its  discovery.

YALDIVIA,  Luis  de  (val-de'-ve-ah),  Spanish
missionary,  b.  in  Grenada,  Spain,  in  1561 ;  d.  in
Valladolid,  Spain,  5  Nov.,  1642.  He  became  a
Jesuit  in  1581,  and,  after  finishing  his  studies,  was
sent  by  his  superiors  to  Peru.  He  was  successive-
ly master  of  novices  and  professor  of  theology,  and
labored  for  many  years  among  the  Indians  of  Chili
and  Peru.  He  attained  a  perfect  mastery  over  the
Indian  dialects  of  those  countries,  and  his  works
are  of  philological  value.  He  returned  to  Spain
in  1621.  He  wrote  "Arte  y  gramatica  de  la
lengua  que  corre  en  todo  el  reyno  de  Chile  con  un
vocabulario  y  confesionario  "  (Lima,  1606);  "Cate-
cismo  en  lengua  Alentina"  (1602);  "Arte,  gra-
matica, vocabulario,  &c,  en  lengua  Chilena  y  en  las
dos  lenguas  Alentiac  y  Milcocoyae,  que  son  las  mas
generales  de  la  provincia  de  Cuyo  en  el  reyno  de
Chile,  y  que  hablan  los  Indios  Guarpes  y  otros  "
(1608) ;  "  Relacion  de  la  entrada  del  presidente  D.
Alonso  de  Ribera  desde  Arauco  a  concluir  paces
con  los  Chilenos  "  (1608) ;  "  Relacion  de  su  entrada
en  el  reyno  de  Chile  para  apaciguar  aquellos  rebel-
des"  (1612);  and  various  other  theological,  histori-
cal, and  linguistic  works.

YALDIVIA,  Pedro  de,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in
Serena,  Estremadura,  about  1490;  d.  in  Tucapel,
Chili,  1  Jan.,  1554.  He  served  in  the  wars  of  Italy
and  Flanders,  went  with  Georg  von  Spire  to
Venezuela,  and  afterward  served  under  Pizarro  in
Peru,  taking  an  active  part  in  the  campaign  against
the  elder  Almagro  in  1537,  in  which  he  was  ap-
pointed mariscal.  As  such  he  participated  in  the
battle  of  Salinas,  6  April,  1538,  and  was  rewarded
by  Pizarro  with  permission  to  conquer  Chili.  While
he  was  preparing  an  expedition,  Pedro  Sanchez  de
Hoz  arrived  from  Spain  with  a  royal  grant  of  the
same  country.  To  avoid  difficulties,  Pizarro  ad-
vised the  two  competitors  to  join  their  interests,
and  on  28  Dec,  1539,  a  contract  of  partnership
was  signed.  Valdivia  soon  gathered  a  considerable
number  of  adventurers,  and  purchased  arms,  be-
ginning the  march  to  the  south  in  January,  1540.
On  the  edge  of  the  desert  of  Atacama  he  met,  in
August,  Sanchez  de  Hoz,  who  had  been  able  to
gather  only  horses,  without  finding  followers ;  so,
despairing  of  his  success,  he  sold  the  animals  and
his  share  in  the  enterprise  to  Valdivia.  The  latter
resolved  to  avoid  the  road  over  the  Andes,  which
had  proved  fatal  to  Almagro's  army,  and  set  out
resolutely  through  the  desert.  After  a  march  of
five  months,  and  suffering  great  privations,  they
arrived  in  a  beautiful  valley,  called  by  the  natives
Mapocho,  and  there  Valdivia  founded,  on  12  Feb.,
1541,  the  city  ot  Santiago.  He  had  himself  ap-
pointed governor  of  the  territory  by  the  council  of
the  new  city,  when  the  news  of  the  assassination  of
Pizarro  arrived.  At  the  mouth  of  the  river  Acon-
cagua he  constructed  a  ship  to  send  to  Peru  for
further  supplies,  but  he  was  obliged  to  return  in
haste  to  Santiago  to  subdue  a  mutiny.  Afterward
he  marched  against  the  Indians,  who  had  begun  to
resist  the  invaders,  and  defeated  them  at  Cacha-
poal,  returning  in  time  to  relieve  the  capital,  which
was  hard  pressed  bv  the  cacique  Michimalonco.
The  resistance  of  the  Indians  became  daily  stronger,
and  as  the  vessel  that  he  had  constructed  in  Acon-
cagua had  been  destroyed  by  the  natives,  Valdivia
sent,  in  1542,  Alonso  de  Monroy,  with  five  follow-
ers, overland  to  Peru  for  re-enforcements,  but,  on
account  of  the  disturbance  in  that  country  in  con-


224


VALDIVIESO


VALDIVIESO  Y  ZANARTU


sequence  of  the  defeat  of  the  younger  Almagro  by
Vaca  de  Castro,  Monroy  could  not  obtain  much
aid,  and  returned  in  September,  1543,  with  only
seventy  horsemen,  sending  also  a  vessel  with  pro-
visions and  ammunition  to  the  port  of  Aconcagua.
During  the  following  years  Valdivia  made  good
progress  in  the  occupation  of  the  country,  founded
in  the  valley  of  Coquimbo  a  town,  which  he  called
Serena,  and  subdued  the  country  to  the  south  of
the  river  Maule.  To  obtain  further  resources,  he
sent  to  Peru,  and  in  1547  received  some  aid,  with
the  alarming  news  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro's  rebellion,
and  the  viceroy  NuQez  de  Vela's  defeat  and  death.
The  envoy  also  brought  a  letter  from  Pizarro,  to
whose  brother  Valdivia  owed  his  post,  soliciting
the  latter's  assistance ;  but,  knowing  that  a  royal
commissioner,  De  la  Gasca,  had  arrived  in  Peru,
and  judging  that  Pizarro's  cause  was  lost,  Valdivia
resolved  to  offer  his  services  to  the  royal  army,  and,
leaving  Francisco  de  Villagra  in  charge  of the

fovernment,  he  sailed  on  10  Dec,  1547,  for  Peru,
le  was  well  received  by  President  la  Gasca,  and,
given  a  place  in  the-  royal  army,  as  by  his  long  ex-
perience he  alone  was  thought  able  to  oppose  the
military  talent  of  Carvajal.  Owing  to  him,  the
battle  of  Saesahuana  was  easily  won,  9  April,  1548,
and,  notwithstanding  his  obligations  to  the  family
of  Pizarro,  he  voted  in  the  council  of  war  for  Gon-
zalo's  execution.  He  was  rewarded  for  his  services
with  the  royal  confirmation  of  his  title  as  governor,
and,  with  re-enforcements  returned  to  Chili  early
in  1549.  The  colony  was  in  a  precarious  state,  the
Araucanians  having  become  very  troublesome,
and  after  despatching  a  force  under  Francisco  de
Aguirre  across  the  Andes  to  make  conquests,  he
marched  against  the  Indians  and  defeated  them,
founding,  5  March,  1550,  in  the  Bay  of  Talcahuano
the  city  of  Concepcion,  and  afterward,  south  of
Biobio  river,  the  towns  of  Imperial,  Valdivia,  Vil-
larica,  Angol,  and  others.  Valdivia  despatched  in
1552  Capt.  Geronimo  de  Alderete  with  a  narrative
of  his  exploits  to  the  emperor  Charles  V.  By  the  ad-
vice of  the  cacique  Colocolo,  the  Araucanians  united
their  efforts,  and,  choosing  as  general-in-chief  the
famous  warrior  Caupolican,  they  fell  on  the  Span-
ish forces  in  the  south,  destroying  the  fortress  of
Tucapel,  2  Dec,  1553.  Valdivia  was  at  Concepcion
when  he  received  notice  of  this  success,  and,  be-
lieving that  he  could  easily  subdue  the  rising,  he
hurried  southward  with  only  fifty  mounted  men.
Near  the  ruins  of  the  fortress  he  gathered  the
remnant  of  the  garrison,  and  was  suddenly  at-
tacked by  the  Indians,  1  Jan.,  1554,  and,  notwith-
standing his  valorous  defence,  was  overwhelmed
by  the  successive  charges  that  the  natives  made,
according  to  the  advice  of  Lautaro.  He  was  cap-
tured, and,  although  Lautaro,  who  formerly  had
been  his  page,  tried  to  defend  him,  was  tortured
and  finally  killed.  Valdivia  was  a  man  of  educa-
tion, and  wielded  the  pen  as  well  as  the  sword.  His
letters,  written  to  the  emperor  and  preserved  in  the
archives  of  the  Indies,  are  models  of  a  vigorous  and
fluent  style,  and  of  great  historical  interest.

VALDIVIESO,  Antonio  de  (val-de-ve-ay'-so),
Central  American  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Spain ;  d.  in
Nicaragua  about  1535.  He  was  a  Dominican,  passed
some  years  as  a  missionary  in  Santo  Domingo,  and
was  then  sent  to  Mexico,  being  assigned  the  prov-
ince of  Nicaragua  as  the  scene  of  his  missionary
labors.  The  natives  of  this  country  were  much  less
savage  than  those  in  other  parts  of  America,  and
after  he  became  acquainted  with  their  language  he
was  wonderfully  successful.  His  progress,  how-
ever, was  arrested  by  an  event  that  spread  terror
throughout  the  country.  Two  young  officers,  named


Contreras,  had  revolted  because  a  royal  decree  had
forbidden  them  to  hold  Indian  "  encomiendas,"  and
in  a  short  time  made  themselves  masters  of  the
colony.  They  regarded  the  Indians  as  slaves,  and
treated  them  with  frightful  cruelty.  Valdivieso,
after  remonstrating  with  them  in  vain,  went  to
Spain  to  lay  the  matter  before  Charles  V.,  who
promised  to  put  a  stop  to  the  outrage,  and  selected
him  for  the  bishopric  of  Nicaragua.  He  was  con-
secrated in  1532,  and  sailed  some  days  afterward.
The  Contreras  received  him  with  honor,  and  con-
ducted him  with  pomp  to  the  cathedral.  For  some
time  he  lived  in  peace ;  but  Charles  V.  was  too
busy  with  his  wars  in  Europe  to  remember  his
promises  to  the  bishop,  who  found  himself  alone
in  the  struggle  with  the  two  tyrants.  At  first  he
employed  all  the  means  suggested  by  prudence,
humble  prayers,  pathetic  exljortations,  and  public
and  private  remonstrances,  and  at  last  he  threat-
ened excommunication,  and  then  the  Contreras  de-
termined to  get  rid  of  him.  He  knew  they  in-
tended to  murder  him ;  but,  seeing  that  reproofs
and  entreaties  were  useless,  he  went  to  the  cathe-
dral on  Sunday,  fulminated-  a  bull  of  excommuni-
cation against  the  tyrants  and  their  adherents,  and
declared  them  separated  from  the  assembly  of  the
faithful.  This  energetic  measure  did  not  produce
the  expected  effect.  The  Contreras,  accompanied
by  some  soldiers,  went  to  the  bishop's  house.  He
was  conversing  quietly  with  a  few  monks  of  his
order,  when  one  of  the  brothers  rushed  on  him  and
plunged  his  sword  twice  into  his  breast  up  to  the
hilt.  His  last  few  moments  were  passed  in  pray-
ing for  his  murderers.

VALDIVIESO  Y  ZANARTU,  Rafael  Valen-
tin (val-de-ve-ay'-so),  Chilian  archbishop,  b.  in
Santiago,  2  Nov.,  1804;  d.  there  in  1878.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1825,  and
appointed  attorney  of  orphans,  and  in  1829  cor-
poration counsel  for  Santiago.  In  1831  he  was
elected  deputy  to  congress,  and  served  on  a  com-
mission to  arrange  rules  of  municipal  govern-
ment under  the  constitution  of  1828.  He  also
led  the  opposition  against  a  project  to  increase
the  salary  of  the  president  of  the  republic,  and
obtained  its  rejection.  He  was  elected  in  1832*  a
member  of  the  court  of  appeals  before  he  had  at-
tained the  required  age.  In  June,  1834,  he  entered
the  church,  and  after  ordination  was  appointed
chaplain  of  the  Invalid  home.  In  1837  he  went
as  a  missionary  to  the  natives  of  the  Chiloe  archi-

Eelago,  and  later  accompanied  Bishop  VicuHa  on
is  episcopal  visit  to  the  northern  provinces  as  his
secretary.  He  attained  note  as  a  pulpit  orator,
and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  papers  "  La
Revista  Catolica "  and  "  El  Boletin  Eclesiastico."
In  1838  he  was  offered  the  bishoprics  of  Ancud
and  Serena,  both  of  which  he  declined.  When  the
University  of  Chili  was  founded  in  1842,  Valdivieso
was  appointed  member  of  the  faculty  of  theology,
and  afterward  he  was  elected  dean.  On  the  resig-
nation of  Archbishop  Eyzaguirre  in  1852,  pub-
lic opinion  designated  Valdivieso  as  his  successor,
and  the  government  presented  him  to  the  holy  see,
where  his  election  was  confirmed,  and  in  July,  1848,
he  was  consecrated.  During  his. administration  he
introduced  many  reforms,  founded  several  religious
houses  for  orphans  and  the  care  of  patients  in  the
hospitals,  and  societies  to  protect  young  women
and  for  the  education  of  young  ladies.  He  greatly
favored  the  conciliary  seminary,  and  founded  the
Academia  de  Ciencias  Sagradas.  In  1870  he  went
to  Rome  to  assist  at  the  ecumenical  council,  where,
on  account  of  his  juridical  knowledge,  he  was
elected  to  all  the  special  committees. He  was  one


VALDUREZO


VALENTINE


225


of  the  most  learned  churchmen  of  South  America,
and,  although  he  is  thoroughly  identified  with  the
ultramontane  party,  his  memory  is  venerated  even
by  his  political  opponents  in  Chili.

VALDUREZO,  Ignacio  de  (val-doo-ray'-tho),
Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  Catalonia  in  the  first  half
of  the  lGth  century;  d.  in  Peru  toward  the  end  of
that  century.  He  labored  for  about  thirty-five
years  in  the  missions  of  the  province  of  Cocha-
bamba,  and  learned  to  decipher  the  Quipos — neck-
laces of  various  colors  intermingled  with  knots  of
different,  sizes — which  were  formerly  used  by  the
Peruvians  to  record  historical  events.  His  manu-
script was  unfortunately  lost,  and  all  that  remains
is  recorded  in  a  letter  from  Valdurezo  to  a  canon
of  Charcas,  Bartolome  Cervantes.  The  manuscripts
of  the  latter  fell  afterward  into  the  hands  of  An-
ello  Oliva,  who  utilized  them  in  his  "  Historia  del
Reyno  de  Peru."  Ferdinand  Denis,  in  his  "  Etudes
sur  les  Quipos"  (Paris,  1858),  commends  Friar
Valdurezo  for  his  discovery.

VALE,  Oilbert,  author,  b.  in  London,  England,
in  1788 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  17  Aug.,  I860.  He
was  educated  in  his  native  city  and  was  intended
for  the  church,  but  he  abandoned  preparation  for
that  profession,  came  to  the  United  States  in  1829,
and  engaged  in  teaching,  making  a  specialty  of
navigation,  and  in  lecturing,  publishing,  and  liter-
ary pursuits  in  New  York  city  and  Brooklyn.  For
several  years  he  edited  the  "  Citizen  of  the  World  "
and  subsequently  the  "  Beacon,"  a  literary  and  sci-
entific journal.  He  also  occupied  himself  with  in-
vention, and  patented  a  combined  terrestrial  globe
and  celestial  sphere  to  facilitate  the  teaching  of
astronomy.  Mr.  Vale  was  a  free-thinker,  and  his
writings  are  for  the  most  part  arguments  for  his

geculiar  tenets.  He  published  "  Fanaticism,  its
ource  and  Influence  "  (New  York,  1835),  and  the
"  Life  of.  Thomas  Paine,"  including  his  letters  to
Gen.  Washington,  which  are  suppressed  in  other
biographies  of  Paine  (1841). — His  daughter  Eu-
phemia  Vale  Blake,  author,  b.  in  Rye,  Sussex,
England,  7  May,  1824,  came  to  this  country  at  an
early  age,  was  educated  privately,  and  since  1843
has  been  occupied  in  literary  pursuits  and  in  in-
ventions. She  married  Daniel  S.  Blake  in  1863.
She  has  published  "Teeth,  Ether,  and  Chloro-
form "  (Boston,  1847) ;  "  History  of  Newburyport,
Mass."  (1854) ;  and  "  Arctic  Experiences,"  a  history
of  the  "Polaris"  expedition,  with  a  summary  of
all  preceding  expeditions  (New  York,  1874).

VALENCIA,  Martin  de  (va-len'-theah),  Spanish
missionary,  b.  in  Valencia  de  Don  Juan,  kingdom  of
Leon,  about.  1466 ;  d.  in  Ayotzingo,  Mexico,  31  Aug.,
1533.  He  became  a  Franciscan  friar  at  Mayorga,
and  was  early  distinguished  for  his  knowledge  and
austerity.  He  was  charged  in  1514  with  the  refor-
mation of  the  convent  of  Santa  Maria  de  Bonocal,
and  established  the  new  province  of  St.  Gabriel,
of  which  he  was  appointed  provincial  in  1516.
When  Hernan  Cortes  in  1523  asked  for  Francis-
can missionaries,  the  pope  named  Valencia  to  the
emperor  as  the  most  fit  to  establish  successful  mis-
sions in  the  New  World.  He  went  to  New  Spain  in
1524  with  twelve  friars,  founded  there  the  prov-
ince of  Santo  Evangelio,  learned  the  Indian  dia-
lects, and  after  1526  preached  to  the  natives  in
their  language  with  success.  He  successively
founded  convents  at  Mexico.  Tezcoco,  Vera  Cruz,
Tlalmanalco,  and  other  places,  and  justly  deserves
the  name  of  "  first  apostle  of  Mexico."  He  died
from  exhaustion  during  a  journey  from  Tehuan-
tepec  to  Mexico.  Father  Valencia's  letters  to  the
councils  of  the  Indies  are  published  in  "Cartas  de
Indias  "  (Madrid,  1872),  and  his  life  was  written  by

VOL. VI. 15


Fray  Francisco  Ximenez  under  the  title  "Vida
de  Fray  Martin  de  Valencia"  (Seville,  1535).  His
manuscript  works  include  "  Cartas  al  Papa  Adri-
ano  VI."  and  "  Cartas  al  Emperador  Carlos  V.,"
which,  besides  other  historical  documents  that  are
preserved  in  the  archives  of  Simancas,  are  often
consulted  by  writers  on  early  Mexican  history.
His  published  works  include  "  Carta  al  general  del
Orden  de  San  Francisco,  Fray  Matias  Weisen,  dan-
dole  razon  de  los  buenos  sucesos  de  la  conquista
espiritual  de  Mexico  "  (Seville,  1554),  also  in  Italian
and  Latin  translations,  and  "  Actas  de  la  primera
junta  apostolica  celebrada  en  Mexico  en  1524"
(Mexico,  1769).

VALENTIN,  Louis  (val-on-tang),  French  phy-
sician, b.  in  Soulanges,  France,  14  Oct.,  1758 ;  d.
in  Nancy,  France,  11  Feb.,  1829.  He  was  gradu-
ated in  medicine  by  the  faculty  of  Nancy  in  1787,
and  in  1790  went  to  Santo  Domingo  as  surgeon  of
a  regiment.  He  gave  particular  attention  to  the
diseases  that  were  most  prevalent  in  this  colony
and  the  means  employed  to  combat  them.  When
Cape  Francais  was  burned  in  1793,  he  lost  all  his
property,  his  library,  manuscripts,  and  a  rich  cabi-
net of  anatomy  which  he  had  just  completed,  and
escaped  with  great  difficulty  to  the  United  States,
where  he  met  his  wife,  whom  he  had  believed  to
be  murdered.  The  French  consul  placed  him  in
charge  of  the  hospitals  in  Virginia  for  the  recep-
tion of  French  sailors,  and  he  remained  in  the
United  States  until  1799.  when  he  returned  to
France  and  settled  at  Nancy.  He  was  a  volumi-
nous writer  on  medical  subjects.  Among  his
works  are  "Memoire  sur  l'incompatibilite  des  dif-
ferents  virus  dans  l'economie  animale  et  sur  leur
innocuite  par  rapport  au  danger  de  la  petite  ve-
role"  (Cape  Francais,  1792);  "Memoire  sur  le
traitement  et  l'extirpation  des  tumeurs  du  cou,
etc."  (Boston,  1792) ;  "  Coup  d'ceil  sur  la  culture
de  quelques  vegetaux  exotiques  .  .  .  et  sur  quelques
decouvertes  faites  dans  les  Etats-Unis  d'Amerique  "
(Marseilles.  1808);  "Coup  d'oeil  sur  les  differents
modes  de  traitor  le  tetanos  en  Amerique  "  (Paris,
1811);  and  "Notice  sur  l'opossum  et  sur  quelques
animaux  a  bourses"  (Marseilles,  1811).

VALENTINE,  David  Thomas,  historian,  b.  in
East  Chester,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  Sept.,
1801;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25  Feb.,  1869.  He
was  educated  at  White  Plains  academy,  went  to
New  York  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  was  employed  by
a  grocer  for  six  years,  and  then  received  the  ap-
pointment of  clerk  to  the  marine  court.  In  1831
he  became  deputy  clerk  to  the  common  council,
and  six  years  later  succeeded  to  that  office,  to
which  he  was  re-elected  under  each  succeeding
administration  till  his  death.  In  1842,  in  pursu-
ance of  a  resolution  of  the  state  legislature,  he
began  the  publication  of  a  "Manual  of  the  Cor-
poration and  Common  Council  of  New  York,"  and
for  twenty-five  years  he  issued  a  volume  annually,
each  containing'  historical  and  antiquarian  matters
relating  to  the  city,  as  well  as  pictures  and  views
illustrative  of  its  history.  He  was  also  the  author
of  a  "History  of  New  York,"  treating  of  the  prog-
ress of  the  metropolis  from  its  early  beginnings
(2  vols..  New  York,  1853-0).

VALENTINE,  Edward  Virginias,  sculptor,  b.
in  Richmond,  Va.,  12  Nov.,  1838.  He  was  educated
in  Richmond,  and  when  a  mere  boy  studied  an-
atomy at  the  medical  college  of  that  city.  His
first  desire  for  art  arose  from  a  visit  to  the  New
York  exhibition  in  1851.  After  receiving  such  in-
struction in  drawing  and  modelling  as  could  be  ob-
tained in  Richmond,  he  went  to  Europe  in  1859
to  study. Upon  his  return  he  opened  a  studio


226


VALENTINE


VALERIANOS


in  Richmond,  and  exhibited  a  statuette  of  Robert
E.  Lee.  He  made  several  ideal  heads,  among
them  "  The  Samaritan  Woman  "  and  "  Penitent
Thief,"  which  were  admired  for  their  facial  ex-
pression, and  several  portrait  busts  of  southern


leaders,  including  Gen.  Pierre  G.  T.  Beauregard,
Gen.  James  E.  B.  Stuart,  "  Stonewall "  Jackson,
Com.  Matthew  F.  Maury,  and  Gen.  Albert  Sidney
Johnston,  a  colossal  head  of  Humboldt,  a  head  of
Beethoven,  a  portrait  bust  of  Edwin  Booth,  and
"  Grief,"  a  marble  female  figure.  He  was  finally
given  the  commission  to  execute  the  marble  figure
of  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee  (see  illustration),  in  the
mausoleum  attached  to  the  chapel  of  Washing-
ton and  Lee  university  at  Lexington,  Va.  This  is
among  the  finest  pieces  of  sculpture  of  the  kind  in
the  United  States.  Another  of  his  works  is  a
group  representing  Andromache  and  Astyanax.

VALENTINE,  Milton  (val-en'-tine),  theologian,
b.  near  Uniontown,  Carroll  co.,  Md.,  1  Jan.,  1825.
He  was  graduated  at  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettys-
burg, in  1850,  and  at  the  theological  seminary  there
in  1852,  and  was  ordained  to  the  Lutheran  minis-
try by  the  synod  of  Maryland  in  1853.  During  his
theological  course  he  was  tutor  in  Pennsylvania
college  in  1850-'3,  and  supplied  the  Lutheran  con-
gregation at  Winchester,  Va.,  in  1852.  He  was  a
missionary  at  Alleghany,  Pa.,  in  1853-4,  pastor  at
Greensburg,  Pa.,  in  1854-'5,  principal  of  Emaus
institute,  Middletown,  Pa.,  in  1855-'9,  pastor  of  St.
Matthew's  congregation,  Reading,  Pa.,  in  1859-'65,
professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  and  church  poli-
ty in  the  theological  seminary  at  Gettysburg  in
1866-'8,  and  president  of  Pennsylvania  college  in
1868-'84,  and  he  has  been  professor  of  systematic
theology  and  chairman  of  the  faculty  at  Gettys-
burg theological  seminary  since  1884.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1866  from  Pennsylvania  col-
lege, and  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1886  from  Wittenberg
college,  Springfield,  Ohio.  He  is  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  the  periodicals  of  his  church,  especially
theological  reviews,  and  he  was  joint  editor  of  the
"  Lutheran  Quarterly  Review,"  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  in
1871-5  and  1880-'6.  Many  of  his  review  articles
have  been  published  separately,  and  have  had  a
wide  circulation.  Besides  these  and  numerous
baccalaureate  sermons,  he  has  issued  "  Natural  The-
ology and  Rational  Theism  "  (Chicago,  1885).

VALENZUELA,  Crisanto  (vah-lain-thoo-ay-
lah),  Colombian  patriot,  b.  in  Gambita,  Santander.
in  1777;  d.  in  Bogota,  6  July,  1816.  He  studied
in  the  College  of  San  Bartolome,  where  he  was
graduated  as  LL.  D.  in  1795,  and  became  professor
of  philosophy.  In  1803  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  the  royal  audience,  and  in  the  following
year  obtained  the  title  of  attorney  of  that  court.
When  independence  was  proclaimed,  Valenzuela
rendered  important  services  to  the  patriot  cause,
and  occupied  many  posts  under  the  republican
government,  among  which  were  those  of  deputy
and  secretary  of  congress,  secretary  of  the  senate,
and  secretary  of  foreign  relations.  He  was  the
author  of  the  famous  manifesto  of  the  Junta  de


Santa  Fe,  entitled  "  Motivos  que  han  obligado  al
Nucvo  Reino  de  Granada,  a  reasumir  su  Sobera-
nia."  Valenzuela  was  captured  at  the  entry  of
Morillo  into  Bogota.  26  May,  and  was  shot,  Morillo
declaring  in  an  official  despatch  that  all  graduates
of  colleges  in  South  America,  and  especially  law-
yers, ought  to  be  exterminated.

VALENZUELA,  Pedro  Fernandez,  Spanish
adventurer,  b.  in  Cordova,  Spain  ;  d.  in  Spain.  He
lived  in  the  16th  century.  He  came  with  Gonzalo
Jimenez  de  Quesada  to  New  Grenada,  and  was  com-
missioned by  the  latter  in  1538  to  search  for  a  suita-
ble site  on  the  prairie  of  Bogota  on  which  to  build  a
city.  After  exploring  the  country  he  found  a  place
at  the  foot  of  the  hills  that  was  afterward  called
Monserrate  and  Guadalupe,  on  a  gentle  declivity
to  which  the  name  Teusaquillo  was  given  by  the
Indians.  Quesada  was  satisfied  and  founded  there
the  city  of  Santa  Fe  de  Bogota.  He  was  the  first
to  discover  the  emerald  mines  of  Somondoco  (1537),
which  were  worked  by  the  Indians  with  wooden
shovels.  Afterward  he  contributed  largely  to  the
conquest  of  the  Chipataes  Indians,  whom  he  treated
with  cruelty.  At  the  end  of  several  years  he  re-
turned to  Spain,  filled  with  remorse  for  the  cruel
deeds  he  had  perpetrated  against  the  natives.  He
studied  for  the  priesthood,  was  ordained,  and  spent
the  remainder  of  his  life  in  solitude.

VALERIANO,  Antonio  (vah-lay-re-ah'-no),
Mexican  scholar,  b.  in  Azcapotzalco  about  1525 ;
d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1605.  He  was  a  son  of
one  of  the  caciques  of  Azcapotzalco,  who  had  in-
termarried with  the  family  of  Montezuma,  and
died  in  Cortes's  expedition  to  Hibueras.  The  boy
showed  such  a  desire  for  learning  that  he  was
one  of  the  first  Indian  youths  that  the  viceroy
Antonio  de  Mendoza  placed  in  the  imperial  col-
lege of  Santa  Cruz  de  Tlaltelolco,  which  he
founded.  Valeriano  superseded  his  Franciscan
teachers  as  professor  of  Latin  and  rhetoric,  and
also  taught  classes  in  Aztec  and  antiquarian  sci-
ence, in  which  Juan  Bautista  and  Torquemada
became  his  pupils.  On  account  of  his  influence
among  the  natives  and  his  honesty,  he  was  ap-
pointed, by  the  viceroy  Martin  Enriquez  de  Ai-
manza,  in  1570,  governor  of  the  Indians  of  Mexico,
which  place  he  held  till  his  death.  He  wrote  many
Latin  letters,  of  which  there  was  a  volume  at  the
beginning  of  the  19th  century  in  the  Jesuit  library
of  Tepozotlan,  a  "  Caton  Cristiano  "  in  Aztec,  and
the  famous  ft  Nican  mopehua,  motecpana  in  quenin
yancuican  huei  Tlamahuizoltica,  omonexiti  in  cen-
quizca  itechiposhtli  Santa  Maria,  Dios  Inantzin,
tozihuapili  Tlatocatzin  in  onca  Tepeyac  motene-
hua."  The  last  is  an  Aztec  relation  of  how  the
image  of  the  Virgin  appeared,  painted  in  flowers,
on  the  mountain  of  Tepeyac.  According  to  Carlos
de  Siguenza,  the  manuscript  in  Valeriano's  own
writing  existed  in  the  collection .  of  Fernando
Ixtlilxochitl.  Some  authorities  think  that  Valeri-
ano merely  translated  the  narrative  from  the  Span-
ish text  of  an  unknown  author.

VALERIANOS,  Apostolos,  known  as  Juan
de  Fuca,  Greek  navigator,  b.  in  Cephalonia  in
1531 ;  d.  in  Zante  in  1602.  For  thirty  years  he
served  as  a  sailor  and  pilot  in  the  Spanish  posses-
sions of  America.  In  1590  he  sailed  as  pilot  with
a  commander  that  had  been  sent  by  the  viceroy  of
Mexico  with  three  ships  to  discover  the  fabulous
Strait  of  Anian,  but  on  the  coast  of  California  the
crew  mutinied,  and  the  officers  were  forced  to  re-
turn to  Acapulco.  In  1592  Fuca  was  sent  again  on
the  same  errand  by  the  viceroy  Luis  de  Velasco,
with  one  caravel  and  an  armed  sloop.  In  latitude
48°  north  he  found  a  wide  inlet,  through  which  he


VALINIERE


VALLANDIGHAM


227


sailed  for  twenty  days,  and  discovered  many  isl-
ands. To  the  northwest  of  the  entry  to  the  straits
he  discovered  a  promontory  formed  by  high  pyra-
midical  rocks,  and,  on  landing,  found  natives  clad
in  furs.  Through  the  northern  mouth  of  the  straits.
nearly  100  miles  wide,  he  entered  the  Pacific  ocean
again,  and,  judging  that  his  commission  had  been
fulfilled,  he  returned  to  Acapulco.  Having  vainly
waited  for  several  years  for  the  just  recompense  of  his
services,he  left  the  Spanish  colonial  service,  andafter
his  return,  about  1596,  he  spoke  of  his  discovery,
in  Venice,  to  an  English  officer,  John  Douglass,  who
afterward  gave  Fuca's  diary,  "  Relacion  del  viaje
de  Juan  de  Fuca  y  descubrimiento  del  estrecho  de
Anian,"  to  Michael  Locke,  formerly  English  con-
sul in  Aleppo,  by  whom  it  was  published  (London,
1604).  This  account  of  his  voyage  was  mingled
with  such  romantic  and  improbable  tales  that  it
was  generally  disbelieved  and  taken  for  a  skilful
imposition,  until  the  trading  vessels  that  frequent
this  coast  in  the  fur-trade  rediscovered  the  inlet
and  proved  the  general  correctness  of  Fuca's  de-
scription. His  name  was  given  to  the  strait  which
connects  the  Pacific  with  the  Gulf  of  Georgia.  An
account  of  Fuca's  exploration  is  also  given  in  the  3d
volume  of  Purchas's  "  Pilgrimes."  Duflot  de  Mo-
f  ras,  in  his  "  Explorations  de  l'Oregon  et  des  Cali-
fornies  "  (Paris,  1844),  and  Navarrete  in  his  "  His-
toria  de  la  Nautica,"  also  mention  Fuca's  discovery.

VALINIERE,  Pierre  Hnet  de  la  (vah-leen-
yare),  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in  Brittany  in  1732  ;
d.  in  Canada  in  1806.  He  entered  the  Sulpitian
order  and  went  to  Quebec,  where  he  was  ordained
priest  in  1757.  After  the  English  conquest  he
excited  the  hostility  of  the  government,  and  was
sent  as  a  prisoner  to  England,  where  he  remained
eighteen  months.  He  then  returned  to  France,
but  was  received  coldly,  and  went  again  to  Canada.
He  was  advised  to  leave  the  country  by  his  supe-
riors, who  feared  complications  with  the  govern-
ment. He  then  travelled  on  foot  to  New  York,
and  became  pastor  of  the  French  and  French
Canadians  in  that  city.  Shortly  afterward  he
spent  several  years  in  travelling  through  Louisi-
ana and  part  of  Spanish  America.  In  1790  he
settled  among  the  Canadians  at  Split  Rock  Bay,
where  he  built  a  church  and  residence.  His  ec-
centricities excited  so  much  hostility  among  his
flock  that,  in  order  to  force  him  to  go  away,  they
burned  his  house  and  church.  He  published  an
account  of  his  travels  in  verse,  entitled  "  Vraie
histoire,  ou  simple  precis  des  infortunes,  pour
ne  pas  dire  persecutions  qu'a  souffert  et  souffre
encore  le  Rev.  P.  H.  de  la  V."  (Albany,  1792).

VALLADOLID,  Bernardino  de  "(val-yah-do -
leed),  Mexican  linguist,  b.  in  Valladolid,  Yucatan,
in  1617;  d.  in  Merida  in  1652.  He  entered  the
Franciscan  order  and  became  noted  for  his  elo-
quence and  knowledge  of  the  Maya  language,  so
that  his  early  death  by  a  fall  from  the  stairs  of  the
College  of  Merida  was  generally  deplored.  His
works  are  "  Dioscorides  en  Lengua  de  Yucatan  "
(Mexico,  1647)  and  "  Conclusiones  Teologicas  en
Idioma  Mavo  "  (1650).

VALLANDIGHAM,  Clement  Laird  (val-lan  -
de-gam),  politician,  b.  in  New  Lisbon,  Columbiana
co.,  Ohio,  29  July,  1820 ;  d.  in  Lebanon,  Warren
co.,  Ohio,  17  June,  1871.  He  received  an  academi-
cal education,  and  from  1838  till  1840  taught  at
Snow  Hill,  Md.  In  1840  he  returned  to  Ohio,  and
in  1842  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1845-6  he
was  a  member  of  the  Ohio  legislature,  and  from
1847  till  1849  edited  the  Dayton  "  Empire."  He
belonged  to  the  extreme  state-rights  wing  of  the
Democratic  party. He  was  a  member  of  the  Na-


tional Democratic  convention  in  1856.  In  1857  he
was  a  candidate  for  congress  against  Lewis  D.
Campbell,  and,  though  declared  defeated,  contested
the  seat  and  won  it,  serving  from  25  May,  1858,  till
3  March,  1863.  During  the  37th  congress  he  be-
came conspicuous  for  his  bold  utterances  against
the  acts  of  the  administration  in  the  conduct  of  the
war,  and  on  5  Dec,  1862,  offered  a  series  of  reso-
lutions in  which  he  declared  "  that,  as  the  war  was
originally  waged  for  the  purpose  of  defending  and
maintaining  the  supremacy  of  the  constitution  and
the  preservation  of  the  Union,  .  .  .  whosoever
should  attempt  to  pervert  the  same  to  a  war  of
subjugation,  and  for  overthrowing  or  interfering
with  the  rights  of  the  states,  and  to  abolish  slavery,
would  be  guilty  of  a  crime  against  the  constitution
and  the  Union."  These  resolutions  were  laid  on
the  table  by  a  vote  of  79  to  50.  On  14  Jan.  follow-
ing, Mr.  Vallandigham  spoke  to  the  resolutions  of
Mr.  Wright,  of  Pennsylvania,  defined  his  position
on  the  war  question,  and  said :  "  A  war  for  Union !
Was  the  Union  thus  made  f  Was  it  ever  thus  pre-
served? History  will  record  that  after  nearly  six
thousand  years  of  folly  and  wickedness  in  every
form  and  administration  of  government,  theocratic,
democratic,  monarchic,  oligarchic,  despotic,  and
mixed,  it  was  reserved  to  American  statesmanship
in  the  19th  century  of  the  Christian  era  to  try  the
grand  experiment,  on  a  scale  the  most  costly  and
gigantic  in  its  proportions,  of  creating  love  by
force,  and  developing  fraternal  affection  by  war;
and  history  will  record,  too,  on  the  same  page,  the
utter,  disastrous,  and  most  bloody  failure  of  the
experiment."  After  his  term  in  congress  expired,
Mr.  Vallandigham  returned  to  Ohio  and  made  nu-
merous speeches,  in  which  he  attacked  the  admin-
istration with  great  violence  and  bitterness.  Gen.
Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  then  commander  of  the  De-
partment of  the  Ohio,  regarded  these  demonstra-
tions of  Mr.  Vallandigham  and  his  friends  as  in-
tended to  afford  aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemy ;
and,  as  the  city  of  Cincinnati,  as  well  as  southern
Ohio  and  the  adjacent  states,  was  in  some  peril
from  the  raids  of  the  Confederates,  he  deemed  it
his  duty  to  suppress  these  demonstrations,  and  ac-
cordingly issued  an  order  declaring  that  persons
within  the  lines
that  were  found
committing  cer-
tain specified  acts
for  the  benefit  of
the  enemy  should
be  tried  as  spies
and  traitors,  and
also  said  that  the
habit  of  express-
ing sympathy  for
the  enemy  would
no  longer  be  toler-
ated in  the  depart-
ment. Mr.  Vallan-
digham replied  to
this  order  on  1
May  in  a  defiant
speech,  and  Gen.
Burnside  ordered
his  arrest.  He  was  taken  to  Cincinnati,  and,
though  he  issued  an  appeal  to  his  adherents,  was
tried  by  court-martial,  convicted,  and  sentenced  to
close  confinement  during  the  war.  President  Lin-
coln changed  the  sentence  to  a  banishment  across
the  lines.  This  affair  occasioned  much  discussion
both  in  public  assemblies  and  in  the  press.  With-
out exception,  the  Democratic  journals  denounced
the  whole  transaction. The  organs  of  the  admin-


C^£^^i££Ju^^cl^aJi^i^i^


228


VALLE


VAN  ARSDALE


istration  took  different  views,  some  maintaining
that  the  necessities  of  the  case  justified  the  meas-
ure, while  others  deprecated  the  action  of  Gen.
Burnside  and  the  military  commission.  Not  liking
his  reception  by  the  leaders  of  the  Confederacy — to
whom  he  had  given  the  assurance  that  they  would
succeed  if  their  armies  could  only  hold  out  till  an-
other election,  when  the  Democrats  would  sweep
the  Republican  administration  out  of  power,  and
make  peace — Mr.  Vallandigham  made  his  way  to
Bermuda,  and  thence  to  Canada,  where  he  re-
mained for  some  time.  While  thus  in  exile,  he  was
nominated  for  governor  by  the  Democratic  party
in  Ohio,  but  was  defeated,  his  rival,  John  Brough,
having  a  majority  of  more  than  100,000.  The  gov-
ernment made  no  objection  to  Mr.  Vallandigham's
return  to  Ohio,  and  he  was  a  member  of  the  Demo-
cratic national  convention  at  Chicago  in  1864,  and
brought  about  the  nomination  of  George  B.  McClel-
lan  and  George  H.  Pendleton.  He  was  also  a  dele-
gate to  the  National  Democratic  convention  in  1868.
His  death  was  caused  by  the  accidental  discharge
of  a  pistol  in  his  own  hand,  in  the  court-room,  with
which  he  was  illustrating  his  theory  of  the  manner
in  which  a  homicide  had  taken  place.

VALLE,  Leandro  del  (val'-yay),  Mexican  sol-
dier, b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  27  Feb.,  1833 ;  d.  in
Monte  de  las  Cruces,  23  June,  1861.  He  was  a  son
of  one  of  the  soldiers  of  the  war  of  independence,
entered  the  military  college  at  the  age  of  eleven
years,  and  in  1847  was  promoted  sub-lieutenant
by  Gomez  Farias  for  bravery  in  subduing  the
mutiny  of  La  Profesa.  He  served  in  the  war
against  the  United  States,  entered  college  again
in  1850  to  finish  his  studies,  and  in  1853  was
appointed  lieutenant  of  engineers.  He  was  pro-
moted captain  by  Santa-Anna,  but  resigned  in  con-
sequence of  the  arrest  of  his  father,  and  took  part  in
the  revolution  of  Ayutla  in  1854.  His  conduct  in
the  siege  of  Puebla,  in  1856,  was  rewarded  by  Com-
onfort  with  permission  to  travel  in  Europe ;  but
the  scanty  resources  that  were  provided  only  en-
abled him  to  visit  the  military  colleges  of  France
and  Prussia,  without  completing  his  technical
studies,  and  he  returned  in  1857.  In  1858  he  took
arms  against  the  reactionary  governments  of  Zulo-
aga  and  Miramon,  served  with  credit  in  the  cap-
ture of  Guadalajara,  and  in  May,  1859,  was  pro-
moted brigadier.  He  served  during  the  whole
campaign  till  the  final  battle  of  Calpulalpam,  24
Dec,  1860,  and  after  the  Liberal  triumph  was  elected
to  congress,  resigning  the  place  as  military  gover-
nor of  the  Federal  district.  When  the  reactionary
revolution  under  Leonardo  Marquez  and  other
guerilla  chiefs  began,  Valle,  notwithstanding  his
recent  betrothal,  left  his  seat  in  congress  to  avenge
the  assassination  of  Santos  Degollado,  and  took
the  field  as  chief  of  operations  in  the  valley  of
Mexico.  In  trying  to  surprise  the  guerilla  force
of  Galvez,  he  was  himself  surprised  by  superior
numbers  under  the  sanguinary  Marquez,  and  by
the  latter  was  ordered  to  be  shot.

VALVERDE,  Vicente  (vahl-vair'-day),  Spanish
R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Segovia  about  1490;  d.  in  Oro-
pesa,  Peru,  in  1543.  He  was  a  Dominican  friar,
and  went  to  Peru  about  1530,  although  it  is  not
certain  whether  he  accompanied  Francisco  Pizarro
from  Spain  or  arrived  at  San  Miguel  de  Piura  in
1531  with  re-enforcements  from  Panama.  Ac-
companying the  army  on  its  march  to  the  south,
he  was  "sent  by  Pizarro,  after  the  occupation  of
Cajamarca,  to  receive  the  advancing  inca,  Ata-
huallpa,  whom  he  saluted  by  means  of  an  interpre-
ter, and,  handing  him  a  missal,  explained  that  he
had  come  in  the  name  of  the  Spanish  monarch  to


convert  the  inca  to  the  true  religion.  The  latter
threw  the  book,  which  he  did  not  understand,  to
the  ground,  and  Valverde  on  his  return  incited  the
Spaniards  to  vengeance  for  the  sacrilege,  as  it  is
alleged,  causing  the  slaughter  of  more  than  2,000
Indians  and  the  capture  of  Atahuallpa,  17  Nov..
1532.  When  the  latter  was  condemned  to  death
by  a  court  that  had  been  instituted  for  the  purpose
by  Pizarro,  Valverde,  to  whom  the  sentence  was
submitted  for  consultation,  approved  it,  but,  by
his  offer  to  substitute  strangulation  for  burning
at  the  stake,  obtained  from  the  unhappy  prince
his  nominal  conversion  and  baptism  a  few  hours
before  his  death,  29  Aug.,  1533.  Valverde  assisted
in  the  entry  into  Cuzco  on  15  Nov.  of  the  same
year,  and  on  23  March,  1534,  consecrated  the
site  of  the  new  church,  which  was  later  to  be  his
cathedral.  Pizarro  gave  him  also  a  large  Indian
commandery,  where  he  showed  great  cruelty  to-
ward the  natives.  About  the  close  of  1534  he  went
to  Spain  to  assist  Pizarro's  brother,  Hernando,  in
his  negotiations  at  court,  and  while  there  he  was
named  by  the  empress-regent  in  1535  first  bishop
of  Cuzco  and  Peru,  as  the  original  appointee,  Fer-
nando de  Luque,  had  died.  In  1536  Valverde  was
also  named  protector  of  the  Indians  and  inquisitor,
and,  being  confirmed  by  the  pope,  he  repaired  to  Peru
in  the  beginning  of  1538,  taking  possession  of  his
see  after  the  execution  of  Diego  de  Almagro,
which  he  had  vainly  tried  to  prevent.  But,  instead
of  preaching  the  gospel,  he  oppressed  the  Indians,
whom  he  forced  to  work  for  the  church.  He  was
appointed  by  Pizarro  on  the  commission  to  appor-
tion lands  and  Indians  to  the  royal  officers,  and
the  licentiate,  Antonio  de  Gama,  whom  Pizarro  had
appointed  supreme  judge  of  Cuzco,  charged  Val-
verde in  a  letter  to  the  emperor,  dated  10  March,
1539,  with  arbitrary  acts  and  insisted  that  instead
of  protecting  the  natives,  he  only  sought  to  confis-
cate their  lands,  and  always  gave  the  greater  part
to  himself  and  his  assistant.  On  11  March,  1540,
he  officiated  at  the  consecration  of  the  new  cathe-
dral of  Lima.  During  the  occupation  of  Cuzco  by
the  younger  Almagro,  Valverde  retired  to  one  of
his  commanderies  at  Oropesa,  and  was  murdered
there  in  a  rising  of  the  oppressed  Indians.  While
in  Spain  he  presented  to  the  emperor,  by  order  of
Pizarro,  a  memorial  about  the  conquest  under  the
title  of  "  Relacion  de  la  Conquista  de  los  Reynos
de  Peru,"  in  which  he  claimed  that  the  Indians  could
scarcely  be  considered  as  human  beings,  as  they
had  no  souls.

VAN  ARSDALE,  John,  soldier  of  the  Revo-
lution, b.  in  Goshen.  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  Jan.,
1756;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14  Aug.,  1836.  Van
Arsdale  is  well  known  in  Revolutionary  annals  by
his  feat  of  climbing  the  flag-staff  on  the  Battery
after  the  evacuation  of  the  city  by  the  British  and
pulling  down  the  English  colors,  which  in  defi-
ance they  had  nailed  to  the  staff.  They  had  also
greased  the  pole  to  prevent  any  one  reaching  the
nag.  Van  Arsdale  had  served  throughout  the
war,  first  as  sergeant  and  then  as  captain.  He
suffered  unusual  privation  and  hardship  in  the  ex-
pedition against  Quebec  under  Benedict  Arnold,
was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner  at  the  capture  of
Fort  Montgomery  and  Fort  Clinton,  languished
many  months  in  the  Sugar-house  prison  and  in  the
hold  of  a  British  prison-ship,  and  subsequently
experienced  the  perils  of  Indian  warfare  in  several
campaigns  against  the  savages. — His  son,  John,
died  in  New  York  city,  14  Nov.,  1883,  aged  eighty-
seven  years,  on  the  eve  of  the  celebration  of  the
centennial  of  Evacuation-day,  in  which  it  was  ex-
pected he  would  take  a  prominent  part.


VANASSE  VERTEFEUILLE


VAN  BUREN


229


VANASSE  VERTEFEUILLE,  Fabien,  Cana-
dian journalist,  b.  in  St.  Davids,  Quebec,  6  Nov.,
1849.  He  was  educated  at  Nicolet  seminary,  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  Montreal  in  1875,  was  presi-
dent of  L'Institut  legal  of  Montreal  in  1873,  and
vice-president  of  the  club  Cartier  in  1877-'9.  He
is  editor  of  "L'Opinion  publique"  and  of  "Le
Monde "  in  Montreal,  and  was  president  of  the
Quebec  press  association  in  1885.  He  was  elected
for  Yamaska  to  the  Canadian  parliament,  7  July,
1879,  and  was  re-elected  in  1882  and  in  1887.  He
is  a  Conservative.

VAN  BRUNT,  Gershom  Jaques,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Monmouth  county,  N.  J.,  28  Aug.,  1798;  d.
in  Dedham,  Mass.,  17  Dec,  1863.  He  entered  the
service  as  a  midshipman  on  1  Jan.,  1818,  served  in
Com.  David  Porter  s  Mosquito  fleet  against  pirates
in  the  West  Indies,  was  made  a  lieutenant  on  3
March,  1827,  and  rose  to  be  a  commander  on  29
May,  1846,  and  commanded  the  brig  "  Etna "  in
the  Gulf  during  the  Mexican  war,  during  which  he
participated  in  the  expedition  against  Tuspan  and
the  second  expedition  against  Tobasco.  He  served
as  a  commissioner  to  survey  the  boundary-line  of
California  in  1848-'50,  and  was  promoted  a  captain
on  14  Sept.,  1855.  He  commanded  the  "  Minne-
sota," and  took  an  active  part  in  the  reduction  of
the  forts  at  Cape  Hatteras  and  in  operations  in  the
North  Carolina  sounds  and  the  blockade  of  Hamp-
ton Roads,  where  he  saved  his  ship  from  the  Con-
federate ram  "  Merrimac."  He  was  commissioned
as  commodore  on  16  July,  1862,  and  was  retired
because  of  his  age  on  28  April,  1863. — His  son,
Henry,  architect,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1832,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1854,  and  studied


architecture.  For  two  years  during  the  civil  war
he  served  in  the  navy  on  the  staff  of  the  admiral
commanding  the  North  Atlantic  squadron.  He
has  practised  his  profession  in  Boston,  Mass.,  and
of  late  years  in  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  while  retaining
his  office  in  the  former  city.  Mr.  Van  Brunt  has
occasionally  written  on  subjects  connected  with  his
art  for  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly  "  and  other  periodi-
cals. He  was  the  architect,  in  conjunction  with
William  R.  Ware,  of  Memorial  hall  (see  illustra-
tion), the  Harvard  library,  the  Medical  school,  and
the  buildings  of  the  Episcopal  theological  school
at  Cambridge,  Mass. ;  of  the  Conservatory  of  music,
Stone  hall,  and  the  sanitarium  of  Wellesley  college ;
of  the  First  church  of  Boston,  St.  Stephen's  church
at  Lynn,  St.  John's  memorial  church  at  Cambridge,
Grace  church  at  New  Bedford,  and  many  other
ecclesiastical  buildings ;  .of  public  libraries  in  Cam-
bridge and  Dedham,  Mass.,  and  East  Saginaw,
Mich.,  as  well  as  the  library  of  Michigan  univer-
sity at  Ann  Arbor.  He  is  at  present  a  member  of
the  firm  of  Van  Brunt  and  Howe,  architects  of
many  mercantile  buildings  in  the  west  and  of  sta-
tion buildings  for  the  Union  Pacific  railroad.


VAN  BUNSCHOOTEN,  Elias,  clergyman,  b.
in  New  Hackensack,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  26  Oct.,
1738;  d.  in  Sussex  county,  N.  J.,  10  Jan.,  1815.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1768,  studied
for  the  ministry  of  the  Reformed  Dutch  church,
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1773,  and  settled  first  in
Schaghticoke,  N.  Y.  On  29  Aug.,  1785,  he  was  in-
stalled as  pastor  at  Minisink,  N.  Y.,  taking  charge
also  of  two  other  churches.  In  1787  a  fourth
church  was  organized  at  a  place  called  the  Clove
in  Sussex  county,  N.  J.,  where  he  resided  in  1792.
He  gave  $17,000  for  the  education  of  candidates
for  the  ministry  in  Rutgers  college  and  the  New
Brunswick  theological  seminary.

VAN  BUREN,  James  Lyman,  soldier,  b.  in
Dunkirk,  N.  Y.,  21  June,  1837 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  13  April,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  the
New  York  free  academy  in  1856,  studied  law,  and
travelled  in  Europe,  returning  shortly  before  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  entered  the  Na-
tional army  as  a  lieutenant  of  New  York  volun-
teers, was  detailed  to  learn  the  signal  code,  and
acted  as  signal  officer  on  Gen.  John  G.  Foster's
staff  at  Roanoke  island  and  at  New  Berne.  After
the  taking  of  New  Berne  he  served  as  judge-
advocate  of  the  department  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  and  subsequently  as  military
secretary  to  Gov.  Edward  Stanly.  He  rejoined
Gen.  Burnside  after  the  battle  of  Antietam,  and
was  with  him  while  he  commanded  the  Army  of
the  Potomac,  and  afterward  in  the  East  Tennes-
see campaign.  In  1864  he  served  with  credit  in
Gen.  Grant's  campaign  against  Richmond,  receiv-
ing the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  his  bravery,
and  subsequently  that  of  colonel  for  his  services
in  the  Knoxville  campaign.  In  the  assault  on  the
works  at  Petersburg  he  gained  the  brevet  rank  of
brigadier-general.

VAN  BUREN,  John  Dash,  merchant,  b.  in
New  York  city,  18  March,  1811:  d.  in  Newburg,
N.  Y.,  1  Dec,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1829,  studied  and  practised  law,  afterward
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,  and  became  the
head  of  the  importing-house  of  Benjamin  Aymar
and  Co..  New  York  city,  retiring  about  1850."  He
aided  Sec  Salmon  P.  Chase  in  drafting  tax  and
other  financial  bills,  was  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture in  1863,  and  acted  as  Gov.  John  T.  Hoffman's
private  secretary  in  1868-72.  Mr.  Van  Buren  was
a  frequent  writer  for  the  press  on  questions  of
financial  legislation,  and  a  strong  advocate  of  a
metallic  currency. — His  son,  John  Dash,  civil  en-
gineer, b.  in  New  York  city,  8  Aug.,  1838,  studied
at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard,  and
in  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1860.  After  serving  for  a  year  as
assistant  engineer  of  the  Croton  aqueduct  in  New
York  city,  he  entered  the  engineer  corps  of  the
U.  S.  navy,  took  part  in  the  operations  on  James
river,  and  was  for  four  years  assistant  professor  of
natural  philosophy  and  of  engineering  in  the  U.  S.
naval  academy,  being  promoted  first  assistant  en-
gineer on  1  Jan.,  1865.  He  resigned  his  commis-
sion on  22  Sept.,  1868,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1869,  and  practised  law  for  a  short  time  in  New
York  city,  then  returned  to  the  profession  of  en-
gineering, was  in  charge  for  construction  in  the
department  of  docks  in  New  York  city,  was  ap-
pointed, on  a  commission  to  investigate  canals  in
1875,  and  in  1876-7  was  state  engineer  and  sur-
veyor. Besides  papers  in  the  "  Journal  of  the
Franklin  Institute"  and  the  "Transactions"  of
the  American  society  of  civil  engineers,  he  has  pub-
lished "Investigation  of  Formulas  for  Iron  Parts
of  Steam  Machinery  "  (New  York,  1869).


230


VAN  BUREN


VAN  BUREN


VAN  BUREN,  Martin,  eighth  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  Kinderhook,  Columbia  co.,
N.  Y.,  5  Dec,  1782 ;  d.  there,  24  July,  18G2.  He
was  the  eldest  son  of  Abraham  Van  Buren,  a  small
farmer,  and  of  Mary  Hoes  (originally  spelled  Goes),
whose  first  husband  was  named  Van  Alen.  Mar-
tin studied  the  rudiments  of  English  and  Latin  in
the  schools  of  his  native  village,  and  read  law  in
the  office  of  Francis  Sylvester  at  the  age  of  four-
teen years.  Rising  as  a  student  by  slow  gradations
from  office-boy  to  lawyer's  clerk,  copyist  of  pleas,
and  finally  to  the  rank  of  special  pleader  in  the
constables'  courts,  he  patiently  pursued  his  legal
novitiate  through  the  term  of  seven  years  and
familiarized  himself  with  the  technique  of  the  bar
and  with  the  elements  of  common  law.  Combin-
ing with  these  professional  studies  a  fondness  for
extemporaneous  debate,  he  was  early  noted  for  his
intelligent  observation  of  public  events  and  for  his
interest  in  politics.  He  was  chosen  to  participate
in  a  nominating  convention  when  he  was  only
eighteen  years  old.  In  1802  he  went  to  New  York
city  and  there  studied  law  with  William  P.  Van
Ness,  a  friend  of  Aaron  Burr.  He  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1803,  returned  to  Kinderhook,  and  asso-
ciated himself  in  practice  with  his  half-brother,
James  I.  Van  Alen.

Van  Buren  was  a  zealous  adherent  of  Jefferson,
and  supported  Morgan  Lewis  for  governor  of  New
York  in  1803  against  Aaron  Burr.  In  February,
1807.  he  married  Hannah  Hoes,  a  distant  kins-
woman, and  in  the  winter  of  1806-'7  he  removed
to  Hudson,  the  county-seat  of  Columbia  county,
and  in  the  same  year  was  admitted  to  practice  in
the  supreme  court.  In  the  state  election  of  1807
he  supported  Daniel  D.  Tompkins  for  governor
against  Morgan  Lewis,  the  latter,  in  the  factional
changes  of  New  York  politics,  having  come  to  be
considered  less  true  than  the  former  to  the  meas-
ures of  Jefferson.  In  1808  Van  Buren  became
surrogate  of  Columbia  county,  displacing  his  half-
brother  and  partner,  who  belonged  to  the  defeated
faction.  He  held  this  office  till  1813,  when,  on  a
change  of  party  predominance  at  Albany,  his  half-
brother  was  restored.  Attentively  watching  the
drift  of  political  events,  he  figured  in  the  councils
of  his  party  at  a  convention  held  in  Albany  early
in  1811,  when  the  proposed  recharter  of  the  United
States  bank  was  the  leading  question  of  Federal
politics.  Though  Albert  Gallatin,  secretary  of  the
treasury,  had  recommended  a  recharter,  the  pre-
dominant sentiment  of  the  Republican  party  was
adverse  to  the  measure.  Van  Buren  shared  in  this
hostility  and  publicly  lauded  the  "Spartan  firm-
ness "  of  George  Clinton  when  as  vice-president  he
gave  his  casting-vote  in  the  U.  S.  senate  against
the  bank  bill,  20  Feb.,  1811.

In  1812  Van  Buren  was  elected  to  the  senate  of
New  York  from  the  middle  district  as  a  Clinton
Republican,  defeating  Edward  P.  Livingston,  the
candidate  of  the  u  Quids,"  by  a  majority  of  200.
He  took  his  seat  in  November  of  that  year  and  be-
came thereby  a  member  of  the  court  of  errors,  then
composed  of  senators  in  connection  with  the  chan-
cellor and  the  supreme  court.  As  senator  he  stren-
uously opposed  the  charter  of  "  the  Bank  of  Ameri-
ca," which,  with  a  large  capital  and  with  the  prom-
ise of  liberal  subsidies  to  the  state  treasury,  was
then  seeking  to  establish  itself  in  New  York  and  to
take  the  place  of  the  United  States  bank.  He  up-
held Gov.  Tompkins  when,  exercising  his  extreme
Krerogative,  he  prorogued  the  legislature  on  27
[arch,  1812,  to  prevent  the  passage  of  the  bill.
Though  counted  among  the  adherents  of  the  ad-
ministration of  Madison,  and  though  committed  to


the  policy  of  declaring  war  against  Great  Britain,
he  sided  with  the  Republican  members  cf  the  New
York  legislature  when  in  1812  they  determined  to
break  from  "  the  Virginia  dynasty "  and  to  sup-
port De  Witt  Clinton  for  the  presidency.  In  the
following  year,  however,  he  dissolved  his  political
relations  with  Clinton  and  resumed  the  entente
cordiale  with  Madison's  administration.  In  1814
he  carried  through  the  legislature  an  effective  war-
measure  known  as  "  the  classification  bill,"  provid-
ing for  the  levy  of  12,000  men,  to  be  placed  at  the
disposal  of  the  government  for  two  years.  He
drew  up  the  resolution  of  thanks  voted  by  the
legislature  to  Gen.  Jackson  for  the  victory  of  New
Orleans.  In  1815,  while  still  a  member  of  the
state  senate,  he  was  appointed  attorney-general  of
the  state,  superseding  the  venerable  Abraham  Van
Vechten.  In  this  same  year  De  Witt  Clinton,  fall-
ing a  prey  to  factional  rivalries  in  his  own  party,
was  removed  by  the  Albany  council  from  the  may-
oralty of  New  York  city,  an  act  of  petty  proscrip-
tion in  which  Van  Buren  sympathized,  according
to  the  "  spoils  system  "  then  in  vogue.  In  1816  he
was  re-elected  to  the  state  senate  for  a  further  term
of  four  years,  and,  removing  to  Albany,  formed  a
partnership  with  his  life-long  friend,  Benjamin  F.
Butler.  In  the  same  year  he  was  appointed  a  re-
gent of  the  University  of  New  York.  In  the  legis-
lative discussions  of  1816  he  advocated  the  surveys
preliminary  to  Clinton's  scheme  for  uniting  the
waters  of  the  great  lakes  with  the  Hudson.

The  election  of  Gov.  Tompkins  as  vice-president
of  the  United  States  had  left  the  "  Bucktails  "  of
the  Republican  party  without  their  natural  leader.
The  people,  moreover,  in  just  resentment  at  the  in-
dignity done  to  Clinton  by  his  removal  from  the
New  York  mayoralty,  were  now  spontaneously
minded  to  make  him  governor  that  he  might  pre-
side over  the  execution  of  the  Erie  canal  which  he
had  projected.  Van  Buren  acquiesced  in  a  drift
of  opinion  that  he  was  powerless  to  check,  and.  on
the  election  of  Clinton,  supported  the  canal  policy ;
but  he  soon  came  to  an  open  rupture  with  the  gov-
ernor on  questions  of  public  patronage,  and,  array-
ing himself  in  active  opposition  to  Clinton's  re-
election, he  was  in  turn  subjected  to  the  proscrip-
tion of  the  Albany  council  acting  in  Clinton's
interest.  He  was  removed  from  the  office  of  attor-
ney-general in  1819.  He  opposed  the  re-election
of  Clinton  in  1820.  Clinton  was  re-elected  by  a
small  majority,  but  both  houses  of  the  legislature
and  the  council  of  appointment  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  anti-Clinton  Republicans.  The  office  of  at-
torney-general was  now  tendered  anew  to  Van  Bu-
ren, but  he  declined  it.  The  politics  of  New  York,
a  mesh  of  factions  from  the  beginning  of  the  cen-
tury, were  in  a  constant  state  of  swirl  and  eddy
from  1819  till  1821.  The  old  party-formations
were  dissolved  in  the  "era  of  good  feeling."  What
with  "Simon-pure"  Republicans,  Clintonian  Re-
publicans, Clintonian  Federalists,  "high-minded"
Federalists  cleaving  to  Monroe,  and  Federalists
pure  and  simple,  the  points  of  crystallization  were
too  many  to  admit  of  forming  a  strong  or  compact
body  around  any  centre.  No  party  could  combine
votes  enough  in  the  legislature  of  1818-'19  to  elect
its  candidate  for  U.  S.  senator.  Yet  out  of  this
medley  of  factions  and  muddle  of  opinions  Van
Buren,  by  his  moderation  and  his  genius  for  politi-
cal organization,  evolved  order  and  harmony  at  the
election  for  senator  in  the  following  year.  Under
his  lead  all  parties  united  on  Rufus  King,  a  Feder-
alist of  the  old  school,  who  had  patriotically  sup-
Sorted  the  war  against  Great  Britain  after  it  was
eclared,  and  who  by  his  candor  had  won  the  con-


Eng  *  iy  H  E  Hrfll  Jr.  Hew  York


O^T^y^^-^^^^^^


D-  APPLETOy  &  CO.


VAN  BUREN


VAN  BUREN


231


fidence  of  President  Monroe ;  and  Rufus  King  was
re-elected  with  practical  unanimity  at  a  time  when
he  was  fresh  from  the  hot  debate  in  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate against  the  admission  of  Missouri  without  a  re-
striction on  slavery.  His  anti-slavery  views  on
that  question  were  held  by  Van  Buren  to  "  conceal
no  plot"  against  the  Republicans,  who,  he  engaged,
would  give  "  a  true  direction  "  to  that  momentous
issue.  What  the  "true  direction"  was  to  be  he
did  not  say,  except  as  it  might  be  inferred  from
his  concurrence  in  a  resolution  of  the  legislature  of
New  York  instructing  the  senators  of  that  state
"  to  oppose  the  admission,  as  a  state  in  the  Union,
of  any  territory  not  comprised  within  the  original
boundaries  of  the  United  States  without  making
the  prohibition  of  slavery  therein  an  indispensable
condition  of  admission."  In  that  Republican  reso-
lution of  1820  "  the  Wilmot  proviso  of  1847  ap-
peared above  our  political  horizon,  but  soon  van-
ished from  sight  on  the  passage  of  the  Missouri
compromise  in  1821.

On  6  Feb.,  1821,  Van  Buren  was  elected  U.  S.
senator,  receiving  in  both  houses  of  the  legislature
a  majority  of  twenty-five  over  Nathan  Sanford,  the
Clintonian  candidate,  for  whom  the  Federalists
also  voted.  In  the  same  year  he  was  chosen  from
Otsego  county  as  a  member  of  the  convention  to
revise  the  constitution  of  the  state.  In  that  con-
vention he  met  in  debate  Chancellor  Kent,  Chief-
Justice  Ambrose  Spencer,  and  others.  Against  in-
novations his  attitude  was  here  conservative.  He
advocated  the  executive  veto.  He  opposed  manhood
suffrage,  seeking  to  limit  the  elective  franchise  to
householders,  that  this  "  invaluable  right "  might
not  be  "  cheapened  "  and  that  the  rural  districts
might  not  be  overborne  by  the  cities.  He  favored
negro  suffrage  if  negroes  were  taxed.  With  of-
fence to  party  friends,  he  vehemently  resisted  the
eviction  by  constitutional  change  of  the  existing
supreme  court,  though  its  members  were  his  bitter
political  enemies,  fie  opposed  an  elective  judici-
ary and  the  choice  of  minor  offices  by  the  people,
as  swamping  the  right  it  pretended  to  exalt.

He  took  his  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  3  Dec,  1821.
and  was  at  once  made  a  member  of  its  committees
on  the  judiciary  and  finance.  For  many  years  he
was  chairman  of  the  former.  In  March,  1822,  he
voted,  on  the  bill  to  provide  a  territorial  govern-
ment for  Florida,  that  no  slave  should  be  directly
or  indirectly  imported  into  that  territory  "  except
by  a  citizen  removing  into  it  for  actual  settlement
and  being  at  the  time  a  bona-fide  owner  of  such
slave."  Van  Buren  voted  with  the  northern  sena-
tors for  the  retention  of  this  clause ;  but  its  exclu-
sion by  the  vote  of  the  southern  senators  did  not
import  any  countenance  to  the  introduction  of
slaves  into  Florida  from  abroad,  as  such  introduc-
tion was  already  prohibited  by  a  Federal  statute
which  in  another  part  of  the  bill  was  extended  to
Florida.  Always  averse  to  imprisonment  for  debt
as  the  result  of  misfortune,  Van  Buren  took  an  early
opportunity  to  advocate  its  abolition  as  a  feature
of  Federal  jurisprudence.  He  opposed  in  1824  the
ratification  of  the  convention  with  England  for  the
suppression  of  the  slave-trade  (perhaps  because  a
qualified  right  of  search  was  annexed  to  it),  though
the  convention  was  urgently  pressed  on  the  senate
by  President  Monroe.  He  supported  William  H.
Crawford  for  the  presidency  in  1824,  both  in  the
congressional  caucus  and  before  the  people.  He
voted  for  the  protective  tariff  of  1824  and  for  that
of  1828,  though  he  took  no  part  in  the  discussion
of  the  economic  principles  underlying  either.  He
voted  for  the  latter  under  instructions,  maintain-
ing a  politic  silence  as  to  his  personal  opinions,


07^t?aws?3uu^


which  seem  to  have  favored  a  revenue  tariff  with
incidental  protection.  He  vainly  advocated  an
amendment  of  the  constitution  for  the  election  of
president  by  the  intervention  of  an  electoral  col-
lege to  be  specially  chosen  from  as  many  separate
districts  as  would
comprise  the  whole
country  while  rep-
resenting the  elec-
toral power  of  all
the  states.  The
measure  was  de-
signed to  appease
the  jealousy  of  the
small  states  by
practically  wiping
out  state  lines  in
presidential  elec-
tions and  at  the
same  time  pro-
posed to  guard
against  elections
by  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives, as  in
case  of  no  choice  at
a  first  scrutiny  the

electoral  colleges  were  to  be  reconvened.  After
voting  for  a  few  "  internal  improvements,"  he  op-
posed them  as  unconstitutional  in  the  shape  then
given  to  them,  and  proposed  in  1824  and  again  in

1825  to  bring  them  within  the  power  of  congress
by  a  constitutional  amendment  that  should  pro-
tect the  "sovereignty  of  the  states"  while  equally
distributing  these  benefits  of  the  government.  In  a
debate  on  the  Federal  judiciary  in  1826  he  took
high  ground  in  favor  of  "state  rights"  as  against
the  umpirage  of  the  supreme  court  on  political
questions,  and  deplored  the  power  of  that  court  to
arraign  sovereign  states  at  its  bar  for  the  passage
of  laws  alleged  to  impair  "the  obligation  of  con-
tracts." He  confessed  admiration  for  the  Republi-
cans of  1802  who  had  repealed  "the  midnight  judi-
ciary act."  He  opposed  the  Panama  mission,  and
reduced  the  "Monroe  doctrine"  to  its  true  histori-
cal proportions  as  a  caveat  and  not  a  "pledge."
On  all  questions  he  was  strenuous  for  a  "strict
construction  of  the  constitution." He  favored  in

1826  the  passage  of  a  general  bankrupt  law,  but,  in
opposing  the  pending  measure,  sharply  accentuated
the  technical  distinction  of  English  law  between
"bankrupt"  and  "insolvent"  acts — a  distinction
which,  in  the  complexity  of  modern  business  trans-
actions, Chief-Justice  Marshall  had  pronounced  to
be  more  metaphysical  than  real,  but  which  to  Van
Buren  was  vital  because  the  constitution  says
nothing  about  "  insolvent  laws."

He  was  re-elected  to  the  senatain  1827,  but  soon
resigned  his  seat  to  accept  the  office  of  governor  of
New  York,  to  which  he  was  elected  in  1828.  As
governor  he  opposed  free  banking  and  advocated
the  "  safety-fund  system,"  making  all  the  banks  of
the  state  mutual  insurers  of  each  other's  soundness.
He  vainly  recommended  the  policy  of  separating
state  from  Federal  elections.  After  entering  on  the
office  of  governor  he  never  resumed  the  practice  of
law.  Van  Buren  was  a  zealous  supporter  of  An-
drew Jackson  in  the  presidential  election  of  1828,
and  was  called  in  1829  to  be  the  premier  of  the  new
administration.  As  secretary  of  state  he  brought
to  a  favorable  close  the  long-standing  feud  be-
tween the  United  States  and  England  with  regard
to  the  West  India  trade.  Having  an  eye  to  the
presidential  succession  after  Jackson's  second  term,
and  not  wishing  meanwhile  to  compromise  the  ad-
ministration or  himself,  he  resigned  his  secretary-


232


VAN  BUREN


VAN  BUREN


ship  in  June,  1831,  and  was  sent  as  minister  to
England.  The  senate  refused  in  1832  to  confirm
his  nomination,  by  the  casting-vote  of  John  C.
Calhoun,  the  vice-president.  Conscientious  Whigs,
like  Theodore  Frelinghuysen,  confessed  in  after
days  the  reluctance  with  which  they  consented  to
this  doubtful  act.  A  clause  in  one  of  Van  Buren's
despatches  while  secretary,  containing  an  invidi-
ous reference  to  the  preceding  administration,  was
alleged  as  the  ground  of  his  rejection.  The  of-
fence was  venial,  compared  with  the  license  taken
by  Robert  R.  Livingston  when,  in  negotiating
the  Louisiana  purchase,  he  cited  the  spectre  of  a
Federalist  administration  playing  into  the  hands
of  "  the  British  faction."  Moreover,  the  pretext
was  an  afterthought,  as  the  clause  had  excited  no
remark  when  first  published,  and,  when  the  out-
cry was  raised,  Jackson  "  took  the  responsibility  "
for  it.  The  tactical  blunder  of  the  Whigs  soon
avenged  itself  by  bringing  increased  popularity  to
Van  Buren.  He  became,  with  Jackson,  the  sym-
bol of  his  party,  and,  elected  vice-president  in  1832,
he  qame  in  1833  to  preside  over  the  body  which  a
year  before  had  rejected  him  as  foreign  minister.
He  presided  with  unvarying  suavity  and  fairness.
Taking  no  public  part  in  the  envenomed  discus-
sions of  the  time,  he  was  known  to  sympathize  with
Jackson  in  his  warfare  on  the  United  States  bank,
and  soon  came  to  be  generally  regarded  by  his  party
as  the  lineal  successor  of  that  popular  leader.

He  was  formally  nominated  for  the  presidency
on  20  May.  1835,  and  was  elected  in  1836  over  his
three  competitors,  William  H.  Harrison,  Hugh  L.
White,  and  Daniel  Webster,  by  a  majority  of  57
in  the  electoral  college,  but  of  only  25,000  in
the  popular  vote.  The  tide  of  Jacksonism  was
beginning  to  ebb.  South  Carolina,  choosing  her
electors  by  state  legislature  and  transferring  to
Van  Buren  her  hatred  of  Jackson,  voted  for  Willie
P.  Mangum.  During  the  canvass  Van  Buren  had
been  opposed  at  the  north  and  championed  at  the
south  as  "  a  northern  man  with  southern  prin-
ciples." As  vice-president,  he  had  in  1835  given
a  casting-vote  for  the  bill  to  prohibit  the  circula-
tion of  "  incendiary  documents  "  through  the  mails,
and  as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  he  had
pledged  himself  to  resist  the  abolition  of  slavery  in
the  District  of  Columbia  without  the  consent  of
the  slave-states  and  to  oppose  the  "  slightest  inter-
ference "  with  slavery  in  the  states.  He  had  also
pledged  himself  against  the  distribution  of  surplus
revenues  among  the  states,  against  internal  im-
provements at  Federal  expense,  and  against  a  na-
tional bank.

Compelled  by  the  fiscal  embarrassments  of  the
government,  in  the  financial  crash  of  1837,  to  sum-
mon congress  to  meet  in  special  session,  4  Sept.,
1837,  he  struck  in  his  first  message  the  key-note
of  his  whole  administration.  After  a  detailed  an-
alysis of  the  financial  situation,  and  of  the  causes
in  trade  and  speculation  that  had  led  to  it,  he  pro-
ceeded to  develop  his  favorite  idea  of  an  independ-
ent treasury  for  the  safe-keeping  and  disbursement
of  the  public  moneys.  This  idea  was  not  new.  It
was  as  old  as  the  constitution.  The  practice  of
the  government  had  departed  from  it  only  by  in-
sensible degrees,  until  at  length,  in  spite  of  the
protests  of  Jefferson,  it  had  been  consolidated  into
a  formal  order  of  congress  that  the  revenues  of
the  government  should  be  deposited  in  the  United
States  bank.  On  the  removal  of  the  deposits  by
Jackson  in  1833,  they  had  been  placed  in  the  cus-
tody of  "  the  pet  banks,"  and  had  here  been  used
to  stimulate  private  trade  and  speculation,  until
the  crisis  in  1837  necessitated  a  change  of  fiscal


policy.  By  every  consideration  of  public  duty  and
safety,  conspiring  with  what  he  believed  to  be  eco-
nomic advantage  to  the  people,  Van  Buren  enforced
the  policy  of  an  independent  treasury  on  a  reluc-
tant congress.  There  was  here  no  bating  of  breath
or  mincing  of  words;  but  it  was  not  until  near
the  close  of  his  administration  that  he  succeeded
in  procuring  the  assent  of  congress  to  the  radical
measure  that  divorced  the  treasury  from  private
banking  and  trade.  The  measure  was  formally
repealed  by  the  Whig  congress  of  1842,  after  which
the  public  moneys  were  again  deposited  in  se-
lected banks  until  1846,  when  the  independent
treasury  was  reinstalled  and  has  ever  since  held
its  place  under  all  changes  of  administration.  He
signed  the  independent  treasury  bill  on  4  July,
1840,  as  being  a  sort  of  "  second  Declaration  of
Independence,"  in  his  own  idea  and  in  that  of  his
party.  Von  Hoist,  the  sternest  of  Van  Buren's
critics,  awards  to  him  on  "  this  one  question  "  the
credit  of  "  courage,  firmness,  and  statesman-like
insight."  It  was  the  chef  d'eeuvre  of  his  public
career.  He  also  deserves  credit  for  the  fidelity
with  which,  at  the  evident  sacrifice  of  popularity
with  a  certain  class  of  voters,  he  adhered  to  neutral
obligations  on  the  outbreak  of  the  Canada  rebel-
lion late  in  1837.

The  administration  of  Van  Buren,  beginning
and  ending  with  financial  panic,  went  down  under
the  cloud  resting  on  the  country  in  1840.  The
enemies  and  the  friends  of  the  United  States  bank
had  equally  sown  the  wind  during  Jackson's  ad-
ministration. Van  Buren  was  left  to  reap  the
whirlwind,  which  in  the  "  political  hurricane  "  of
1840  lifted  Gen.  Harrison  into  the  presidential
chair.  The  Democratic  defeat  was  overwhelming.
Harrison  received  234  electoral  votes,  and  Van
Buren  only  60.  The  majority  for  Harrison  in  the
popular  vote  was  nearly  140,000.  Retiring  after
this  overthrow  to  the  shades  of  Lindenwald,  a
beautiful  country-seat  which  he  had  purchased  in
his  native  county,  Van  Buren  gave  no  vent  to  repin-
ings.  In  1842  he  made  a  tour  through  the  southern
states,  visiting  Henry  Clay  at  Ashland.  In  1843
he  came  to  the  front  with  clear-cut  views  in  favor
of  a  tariff  for  revenue  only.  But  on  the  newly
emergent  question  of  Texas  annexation  he  took  a
decided  stand  in  the  negative,  and  on  this  rock  of
offence  to  the  southern  wing  of  his  party  his  can-
didature was  wrecked  in  the  Democratic  national
convention  of  1844,  which  met  at  Baltimore  on  27
May.  He  refused  to  palter  with  this  issue,  on  the
ground  of  our  neutral  obligations  to  Mexico,  and
when  the  nomination  went  to  James  K.  Polk,  of
Tennessee,  he  gave  no  sign  of  resentment.  His
friends  brought  to  Polk  a  loyal  support,  and  se-
cured his  election  by  carrying  for  him  the  decisive
vote  of  New  York.

Van  Buren  continued  to  take  an  interest  in  pub-
lic affairs,  and  when  in  1847  the  acquisition  of  new
territory  from  Mexico  raised  anew  the  vexed  ques-
tion of  slavery  in  the  territories,  he  gave  in  his  ad-
hesion to  the  "  Wilmot  proviso."  In  the  new  elec-
tive affinities  produced  by  this  "burning  ques-
tion" a  redistribution  of  political  elements  took
place  in  the  chaos  of  New  York  politics.  The
"Barnburner"  and  the  "Hunker"  factions  came
to  a  sharp  cleavage  on  this  line  of  division.  The
former  declared  their  "  uncompromising  hostility
to  the  extension  of  slavery."  In  the  Herkimer
Democratic  convention  of  26  Oct..  1847,  the  Free-
soil  banner  was  openly  displayed,  and  delegates
were  sent  to  the  Democratic  national  conven-
tion. From  this  convention,  assembled  at  Bal-
timore in  May,  1848,  the  Herkimer  delegates  se-


VAN  BUREN


VAN  BUREN


233


ceded  before  any  presidential  nomination  was  made.
In  June,  1848,'  a  Barnburner  convention  met  at
Utica  to  organize  resistance  to  the  nomination  of
Gen.  Lewis  Cass.  who.  in  his ."  Nicholson  letter,"
had  disavowed  the  "Wilmot  proviso."  To  this
convention  Van  Buren  addressed  a  letter,  declin-
ing in  advance  a  nomination  for  the  presidency,
but  pledging  opposition  to  the  new  party  shib-
boleth. In  spite  of  his  refusal,  lie  was  nominated,
and  this  nomination  was  reaffirmed  by  the  Free-
soil  national  convention  of  Buffalo,  9  Aug.,  1848,
when  Charles  Francis  Adams  was  associated  with
him  as  candidate  for  the  vice-presidency.  In  the
ensuing  presidential  election  this  ticket  received
only  291,263  votes,  but,  as  the  result  of  the  tri-
angular duel,  Gen.  Cass  was  defeated  and  Gen.
Zachary  Taylor,  the  Whig  candidate,  was  elected.
The  precipitate  annexation  of  Texas  and  its  natu-
ral sequel,  the  war  with  Mexico,  had  brought  their
Nemesis  in  the  utter  confusion  of  national  poli-
tics. Van  Buren  received  no  electoral  votes,  but
his  popular  Democratic  vote  in  Massachusetts,
Vermont,  and  New  York  exceeded  that  of  Cass.
Henceforth  he  was  simply  a  spectator  in  the  politi-
cal arena.  On  all  public  questions  save  that  of
slavery  he  remained  an  unfaltering  Democrat,  and
when  it  was  fondly  supposed  that  "the  slavery
issue "  had  been  forever  exorcised  by  the  com-
promise measures  of  1850,  he  returned  in  full  faith
and  communion  to  his  old  party  allegiance.  In
1852  he  began  to  write  his  "  Inquiry  into  the
Origin  and  Course  of  Political  Parties  in  the
United  States"  (New  York,  1867),  but  it  was  never
finished  and  was  published  as  a  fragment.  He
supported  Franklin  Pierce  for  the  presidency  in
1852,  and,  after  spending  two  years  in  Europe,  re-
turned in  time  to  vote  for  James  Buchanan  in
1856.  In  1860  he  voted  for  the  combined  elec-
toral ticket  against  Lincoln,  but  when  the  civil
war  began  he  gave  to  the  administration  his  zeal-
ous support.

Van  Buren  was  the  target  of  political  accusa-
tion during  his  whole  public  career,  but  kept  his
private  character  free  from  reproach.  In  his  do-
mestic life  he  was  as  happy  as  he  was  exemplary.
Always  prudent  in  his  habits  and  economical  in  his
tastes,  he  none  the  less  maintained  in  his  style  of
living  the  easy  state  of  a  gentleman,  whether  in

Eublic  station  at  Albany  and  Washington,  or  at
indenwald  in  his  retirement.  As  a  man  of  the
world  he  was  singularly  affable  and  courteous,
blending  formal  deference  with  natural  dignity
and  genuine  cordiality.  Intensely  partisan  in  his
opinions  and  easily  startled  by  the  red  rag  of
"  Hamiltonian  Federalism,"  he  never  carried  the
contentions  of  the  political  arena  into  the  social
sphere.  The  asperities  of  personal  rivalry  estranged
him  for  a  time  from  Calhoun,  after  the  latter  de-
nounced him  in  the  senate  in  1837  as  "  a  practical
politician,"  with  whom  "  justice,  right,  patriotism,
etc.,  were  mere  vague  phrases,"  but  with  his  great
Whig  rival,  Henry  Clay,  he  maintained  unbroken
relations  of  friendship  through  all  vicissitudes  of
political  fortune.  As  a  lawyer  his  rank  was  emi-
nent. Though  never  rising  in  speech  to  the  heights
of  oratory,  he  was  equally  fluent  and  facile  before
bench  or  jury,  and  equally  felicitous  whether  ex-
pounding the  intricacies  of  fact  or  of  law  in  a  case.
His  manner  was  mild  and  insinuating,  never  de-
clamatory. Without  carrying  his  juridical  studies
into  the  realm  of  jurisprudence,  he  yet  had  a
knowledge  of  law  that  fitted  him  to  cope  with  the
greatest  advocates  of  the  New  York  bar.  The  evi-
dences of  his  legal  learning  and  acute  dialectics  are
still  preserved  in  the  New  York  reports  of  Johnson.


Cowen,  and  Wendell.  As  a  debater  in  the  senate,
he  always  went  to  the  pith  of  questions,  disdaining
the  arts  of  rhetoric.  As  a  writer  of  political  let-
ters or  of  state  papers,  he  carried  diffusiveness  to
a  fault,  which  sometimes  hinted  at  a  weakness  in
positions  requiring  so  much  defence.  As  a  poli-
tician he  was  masterful  in  leadership— so  much  so
that,  alike  by  friends  and  foes,  he  was  credited  with
reducing  its  practices  to  a  fine  art.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  famous  Albany  regency  which  for  so
many  years  controlled  the  politics  of  New  York,
and  was  long  popularly  known  as  its  "  director."
Fertile  in  the  contrivance  of  means  for  the  attain-
ment of  the  public  ends  which  he  deemed  desira-
ble, he  was  called  "  the  little  magician,"  from  the
deftness  of  his  touch  in  politics.  But  combining
the  statesman's  foresight  with  the  politician's  tact,
he  showed  his  sagacity  rather  by  seeking  a  majority
for  his  views  than  by  following  the  views  of  a  ma-
jority. Accused  of  "  non-committalism."  and  with
some  show  of  reason  in  the  early  stages  of  his  ca-
reer, it  was  only  as  to  men  and  minor  measures  of
policy  that  he  practised  a  prudent  reticence.  On
questions  of  deeper  principle  —  an  elective  judi-
ciary, negro  suffrage,  universal  suffrage,  etc. — he
boldly  took  the  unpopular  side.  In  a  day  of  un-
exampled political  giddiness  he  stood  firmly  for
his  sub  -  treasury  system  against  the  doubts  of
friends,  the  assaults  of  enemies,  and  the  combined

Eressure  of  wealth  and  culture  in  the  country,
•ispensing  patronage  according  to  the  received
custom  of  his  times,  he  yet  maintained  a  higli
standard  of  appointment.  That  he  could  rise  above
selfish  considerations  was  shown  when  he  promoted
the  elevation  of  Rufus  King  in  1820,  or  when  he
strove  in  1838  to  bring  Washington  Irving  into
his  cabinet  with  small  promise  of  gain  to  his  doubt-
ful political  fortunes  by  such  an  "unpractical"
appointment.  As  a  statesman  he  had  his  com-
pact fagot  of  opinions,  to  which  he  adhered  in  evil
or  good  report.  It  might  seem  that  the  logic  of
his  principles  in  1848,  combined  with  the  subse-
quent drift  of  events,  should  have  landed  him  in
the  Free-soil  party  that  Abraham  Lincoln  led  to
victory  in  1860:  but  it  is  to  be  remembered  that,
while  Van  Bu  re  n,'s  political  opinions  were  in  a  fluid
state,  they  had  been  cast  in  the  doctrinal  moulds  of
Jefferson,  and  had  there  taken  rigid  form  and
pressure.  In  the  natural  history  of  American
party-formations  he  supposed  that  an  enduring
antithesis  had  always  been  discernible  between  the
"  money  power  "  and  the  "  farming  interest "  of  the
land.  In  his  annual  message  of  December,  1838,
holding  language  very  modern  in  its  emphasis,  he
counted  "the  anti-republican  tendencies  of  asso-
ciated wealth  "  as  among  the  strains  that  had  been
put  upon  our  government.  This  is  indeed  the  main
thesis  of  his  "  Inquiry,"  a  book  which  is  more  an
apologia  than  a  history.  In  that  chronicle  of  his
life-long  antipathy  to  a  splendid  consolidated  gov-
ernment, with  its  imperial  judiciary,  funding  sys-
tems, high  tariffs,  and  internal  improvements—
the  whole  surmounted  by  a  powerful  national  bank
as  the  "regulator"  of  finance  and  politics— he  has
left  an  outlined  sketch  of  the  only  dramatic  unity
that  can  be  found  for  his  eventful  career.  Con-
fessing in  1848  that  he  had  gone  further  in  conces-
sion to  slavery  than  many  of  his  friends  at  the
north  had  approved,  he  satisfied  himself  with  a
formal  protest  against  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri
compromise,  carried  through  congress  while  he
was  travelling  in  Europe,  and  against  the  policy  of
making  the  Dred  Scott  decision  a  rule  of  Demo-
cratic politics,  though  he  thought  the  decision
sound  in  point  of  technical  law. With  these  reser-


234


VAN  BUREN


VAN  BUREN


rations,  avowedly  made  in  the  interest  of  u  strict
construction"  and  of  "old-time  Republicanism"
rather  than  of  Free-soil  or  National  reformation,
he  maintained  his  allegiance  to  the  party  with
which  his  fame  was  identified,  and  which  he
was  perhaps  the  more  unwilling  to  leave  because
of  the  many  sacrifices  he  had  made  in  its  service.
The  biographv  of  Van  Buren  has  been  written
by  William  H.  Holland  (Hartford,  1835);  Fran-
cis J.  Grand  (in  German,  1835) ;  William  Emmons
(Washington,  1835) ;  David  Crockett  (Philadelphia,
1836) ;  William  L.  Mackenzie  (Boston,  1846) ;  Will-
iam Allen  Butler  (New  York,  1862) ;  and  Edward
M.  Shepard  (Boston,  1888).  Mackenzie's  book  is
compiled  in  part  from  surreptitious  letters,  shed-
ding a  lurid  light  on  the  "  practical  politics "  of
the  times.  Butler's  sketch  was  published  immedi-
ately after  the  ex-president's  death.  Shepard's
biography  is  written  with  adequate  learning  and
in  a  philosophical  spirit. — His  wife,  Hannah,  b.  in
Kinderhook,  N.  Y.,  in  1782;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  5
Feb.,  1819,  was  of  Dutch  descent,  and  her  maiden
name  was  Hoes.  She  was  educated  in  the  schools  of
her  native  village,  and  was  the  classmate  of  Mr.  Van
Buren,  whom  she  married  in  1807.  She  was  devoted
to  her  domestic  cares  and  duties,  and  took  little  in-
terest in  social  affairs,  but  was  greatly  beloved  by
the  poor.  When  she  learned  that  she  could  live  but
a  few  days,  she  expressed  a  desire  that  her  funeral
be  conducted  with  the  utmost  simplicity,  and  the
money  that  would  otherwise  have  been  devoted  to
mourning  emblems  be  given  to  the  needy. — His
brother,  Lawrence,  soldier,  b.  in  Kinderhook,
N.  Y,  in  1783 ;  d.  there.  1  July,  1868,  served  in  the
war  of  1812— '15,  in  which  he  attained  the  rank  of
major.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Demo-
cratic ticket  in  1852.— Martin's  son,  Abraham,
soldier,  b.  in  Kinderhook,  N.  Y,  27  Nov.,  1807;  d.
in  New  York  city,  15  March,  1873,  was  graduated
at  the  IT.  S.  military  academy  in  1827,  and  attached
to  the  2d  infantry  as  2d  lieutenant.  He  served  for
two  years  on  the  western  frontier,  and  for  the  next
seven  years  as  aide-de-camp  to  the  general-in-chief,
Alexander  Macomb,  except  during  several  months
in  1836,  when  he  accompanied  Gen.  Winfield  Scott
as  a  volunteer  aide  in  the  expedition  against  the
Seminole  Indians.  He  was  commissioned  as  a
captain  in  the  1st  dragoons  on  4  July,  1836,  resign-
ing on  3  March,  1837,  to  become  his  fathers  pri-
vate secretary.  He  brought  daily  reports  of  the
proceedings  of  congress  to  President  Van  Buren,
who  was  often  influenced  by  his  suggestions.  At
the  beginning  of  the  war  with  Mexico  he  re-entered

the  army  as  major
and  paymaster,  his
commission  dating
from  26  June,  1846.
He  served  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Zacha-
ry  Taylor  at  Monte-
rey, and  subsequent-
ly joined  the  staff
of  Gen.  Scott  as  a
volunteer,  and  par-
ticipated in  every
engagement  from
Vera  Cruz  to  the
capture  of  the  city
of  Mexico,  being  bre-
vetted  lieutenant-
colonel  for  braverv
at  Contreras  and
Churubusco  on  20  Aug.,  1847.  He  served  in  the
paymaster's  department  after  the  war  till  1  June,
1854,  when  he  again  resigned,  after  which  he  resided


)M^h3


for  a  part  of  the  time  in  Columbia,  S.  C.  (where  his
wife  inherited  a  plantation),  till  1859,  and  after-
ward in  New  York  city  except  during  three  years'
absence  in  Europe. — Another  son,  John,  lawyer,  b.
in  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  18  Feb.,  1810;  d.  at  sea,  13  Oct.,
1866,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1828,  studied  law
with  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  at  Albany  in  1830.  In  the  following  year  he
accompanied  his  father  to  London  as  an  attache
of  the  legation.  In  February,  1845,  he  was  elected
attorney-general  of  the  state  of  New  York,  serving
till  31  Dec,  1846.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the
political  canvass  of  1848  as  an  advocate  of  the  ex-
clusion of  slavery  from  the  territories,  but  did  not
remain  with  the  Free-soil  party  in  its  later  develop-
ments. He  held  high  rank  as  a  lawyer,  appearing
in  the  Edwin  Forrest  and  many  other  important
cases,  was  an  eloquent  pleader,  and  an  effective  po-
litical speaker.  He  died  on  the  voyage  from  Liv-
erpool to  New  York.  He  was  popularly  known
as  "  Prince  John,"  was  tall  and  handsome,  and  of
elegant  manners  and  appearance. — Abraham's  wife,
Angelica,  b.  in  Sumter  district,  S.  C,  about  1820;
d.  in  New  York  city,  29  Dec,  1878,  was  a  daughter
of  Richard  Singleton,  a  planter,  and  a  cousin  of
William  C.  Preston  and  of'  Mi's.  James  Madison,
who,  while  her  kinswoman  was  completing  her
education  in  Phil-
adelphia, present-
ed her  to  Presi-
dent Van  Buren.
A  year  later  she
married  Maj.  Van
Buren,  in  Novem-
ber, 1838,  and
on  the  follow-
ing New-Year's-
day  she  made  her
first  appearance
as  mistress  of
the  White  House.
With  her  hus-
band she  visited
England  (where
her  uncle,  An-
drew Stevenson,
was  U.  S.  minis-
ter) and  other
countries  of  Eu-
rope, in  the  spring  of  1839,  returning  in  the  au-
tumn to  resume  her  place  as  hostess  of  the  presi-
dential mansion.  The  accompanying  vignette  is
from  a  portrait  painted  by  Henry  Inman.

VAN  BUREN,  William  Holme,  surgeon,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5  April,  1819;  d.  in  New
York  city,  25  March,  1883.  His  grand  father,  Beek-
man,  and  his  great-grandfather,  Abraham,  who
came  from  Holland  in  1700,  after  studying  under
Boerhaave  at  Leyden,  were  physicians  to  the  New
York  city  almshouse.  He  was  a  student  at  Yale
of  the  class  of  1838  for  two  years,  and  was  sub-
sequently granted  his  degree.  On  leaving  college,
he  studied  medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania and  in  the  Paris  hospitals.  He  received  his
diploma  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1840,  presenting  an  essay  on  "  Immovable  Appara-
tus," which  was  published  by  the  faculty,  and  on
15  June  of  that  year  was  appointed  an  assistant
surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army.  Resigning  on  31  Dec,
1845,  he  went  to  New  York  city  to  assist  his  father-
in-law,  Valentine  Mott,  in  his  surgical  clinic  in
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  the
city  of  New  York.  He  soon  took  high  rank  both
as  an  operative  surgeon  and  family  practitioner,
also  as  a  teacher  and  demonstrator  of  anatomy  and


VANCE


VAN  CLEVE


235


surgery.  When  Bellevue  hospital  was  organized
in  1847  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  surgeons.  In
1849  he  became  surgeon  to  St.  Vincent  hospital,
and  in  1852  he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  anatomy
in  New  York  university  medical  college.  He  was
visiting  surgeon  to  New  York  hospital  from  1852
till  1868,  and  from  the  latter  date  consulting  sur-
geon. He  was  consulting  surgeon  also  to  Bellevue
and  Charity  hospitals.  He  was  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  IT.  S.  sanitary  commission  in  1861,  and
served  as  the  medical  member  of  its  executive  com-
mittee throughout  the  civil  war,  declining  the  ap-
pointment of  surgeon-general  of  the  U.  S.  army.
He  resigned  his  professorship  in  the  University
medical  college  in  1866,  on  being  elected  professor
of  surgery  for  the  newly  established  department
of  diseases  of  the  genito-urinary  system  in  Bellevue
hospital  medical  college.  In  1868  this  chair  was
combined  with  that  of  principles  and  practice  of
surgery,  and  in  1871-'3  he  acted  as  professor  of
clinical  surgery  also.  He  was  vice-president  of
the  New  York  academy  of  medicine,  president  of
the  New  York  pathological  society,  and  a  corre-

?onding  member  of  the  Paris  surgical  society.
rale  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1879.  Dr.  Van  Buren  performed  amputation  at
the  hip-joint,  removed  foreign  bodies  from  the
trachea,  and  tied  the  internal  and  external  iliac
and  the  subclavian  arteries.  In  abscess  of  the
breast,  and  often  in  cases  of  carbuncle,  he  was
averse  to  the  use  of  the  knife,  placing  more  reli-
ance than  surgeons  commonly  do  in  the  repara-
tive processes  of  nature.  He  gave  much  study  to
hereditary  taints  and  constitutional  tendencies,
and  in  later  life,  though  still  famed  for  his  skill
in  amputations  and  other  operations  of  general
surgery,  principally  devoted  his  attention  to  the
specialty  of  diseases  of  the  genito-urinary  organs.
Besides  many  medical  papers,  he  published,  with
Dr.  Charles  E.  Isaacs,  a  translation  of  "  Bernard
and  Huette's  Manual  of  Operative  Surgery  and
Medical  Anatomy "  (New  York,  1855) ;  a  transla-
tion of  Charles  Morel's  "Compendium  of  Human
Histology  "  (New  York  and  London,  1861) ;  "  Con-
tributions to  Practical  Surgery  "  (Philadelphia,
1865) ;  "  Lectures  on  Diseases  of  the  Rectum "
(New  York,  1870) ;  and,  with  his  pupil,  Dr.  Edward
L.  Keyes,  "  Text-book  on  Diseases  of  the  Genito-
urinary Organs,  with  Syphilis"  (1874).

VANCE,  Joseph,  governor  of  Ohio,  b.  in  "Wash-
ington county,  Pa.,  21  March,  1786 ;  d.  near  Ur-
bana,  Ohio,  24  Aug.,  1852.  When  he  was  a  child
his  father  removed  to  Kentucky,  and  thence  went
to  Urbana.  The  son  became  a  successful  merchant
in  that  place,  and  afterward  engaged  extensively
in  farming  and  stock-raising.  He  was  a  member
of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of  1820,
served  in  the  legislature  in  1812-'16,  and  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1822,  and  re-
elected for  five  successive  terms,  serving  till  March,
1835.  He  was  governor  in  1836-'8.  In  1842  he
was  re-elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  and  served
through  two  terms,  during  one  of  them  as  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  claims.  In  1848  he  was
a  delegate  to  the  Whig  national  convention.

VANCE,  Zebulon  Baird,  senator,  b.  in  Bun-
combe county,  N.  C,  13  May,  1830.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Washington  college,  Tenn.,  and  at  the
University  of  North  Carolina,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1852,  established  himself  at
Asheville,  N.  C,  was  chosen  county  solicitor,  and
in  1854  was  elected  to  the  legislature.  When
Thomas  L.  Clingman  entered  the  senate,  Vance
was  elected  to  succeed  him  in  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives, taking  his  seat  on  7  Dec,  1858. He


y-/tf.sZu6C£.


opposed  the  secession  of  North  Carolina,  yet  after
that  step  was  taken  he  raised  a  company  and  was
chosen  captain,  and  soon  afterward  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  26th
North  Carolina  regi-
ment, which  became
one  of  the  most  fa-
mous of  the  organi-
zations of  southern
soldiers.  In  1862  he
was  elected  govern-
or, while  serving  in
the  field.  He  soon
saw  the  impossibili-
ty of  obtaining  suffi-
cient supplies  for  the
troops  of  his  state
without  recourse  to
foreign  aid,  and
therefore  sent  agents
abroad,  and  pur-
chased a  fine  steam-
ship in  the  Clyde,
which  successfully
ran  the  blockade,
not  only  supplying  the  state  troops  with  clothing
and  arms,  but  furnishing  also  large  stores  for  the
use  of  the  Confederate  government  and  for  the
hospitals,  and  general  supplies  for  the  people  of
his  state.  As  early  as  December,  1863,  perceiving
the  desperate  nature  of  the  undertaking  in  which
the  south  was  engaged,  he  urged  President  Davis
to  neglect  no  opportunity  of  negotiation  with  the
U.  S.  government,  but  at  the  same  time  he  was  so
earnest  and  efficient  in  contributing  men  and  mate-
rial for  the  support  of  the  cause  that  he  was  called
the  war  governor  of  the  south.  He  was  also  con-
spicuous in  his  efforts  to  ameliorate  the  condition
of  Federal  prisoners  in  his  state.  He  was  over-
whelmingly re-elected  for  the  next  two  years  in
1864.  When  the  National  troops  occupied  North
Carolina,  Gov.  Vance  was  arrested  and  taken  to
Washington,  D.  C,  where  he  was  confined  in  prison
for  several  weeks.  In  November,  1870,  he  was
elected  U.  S.  senator  by  the  legislature,  but  he  was
not  allowed  to  take  his  seat,  and  resigned  it  in
January,  1872.  In  the  same  year  he  was  again  a
candidate  for  a  senatorship,  but  was  defeated  by
Augustus  S.  Merrimon,  to  whom  the  Republicans
gave  their  votes.  He  received  a  pardon  from  Presi-
dent Johnson  in  1867,  and  his  political  disabilities
were  removed  by  congress  in  1872.  soon  after  he
had  been  refused  a  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate  by  rea-
son of  those  disabilities.  He  continued  to  practise
law  in  Charlotte,  taking  no  part  in  politics,  except
his  conspicuous  efforts  as  a  private  citizen  to  over-
throw the  reconstruction  government  in  North
Carolina.  In  1876,  after  an  animated  canvass,  he
was  elected  governor  by  a  large  majority.  He  re-
signed on  being  again  elected  U.  S.  senator,  took
his  seat  on  4  March,  1879,  and  by  his  wit  and  elo-
quence soon  acquired  a  high  rank  among  the
Democratic  orators  of  the  senate.  In  1884  he  was
re-elected  for  the  term  ending  on  4  March,  1891.

VAN  CLEVE,  Horatio  Phillips,  soldier,  b.  in
Princeton,  N.  J.,  23  Nov.,  1809.  He  studied  for
two  years  at  Princeton,  then  entered  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy,  was  graduated  in  1831,  served  at
frontier  posts  in  Michigan  territory,  was  commis-
sioned as  2d  lieutenant  of  infantry  on  31  Dec.,
1831,  and  on  11  Sept.,  1836,  resigned  and  settled
in  Michigan.  He  taught  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in
1840-'l,  then  engaged  in  farming  near  Ann  Ar-
bor, Mich.,  was  an  engineer  in  the  service  of  the
state  of  Michigan  in  1855,  then  United  States  sur-


236


VAN  CORTLANDT


VAN  CORTLANDT


veyor  of  public  lands  in  Minnesota,  and  in  1856
engaged  in  stock-raising.  On  22  July,  1861,  he
was  commissioned  as  colonel  of  the  2d  Minnesota
infantry.  He  served  under  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas
at  Mill  Springs,  for  his  part  in  which  action  he
was*  promoted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on
21  March,  1862.  He  was  disabled  by  a  wound  at
Stone  river,  but  resumed  command  of  the  division
on  his  recovery,  was  engaged  at  Chickamauga,  and
was  in  command  of  the  post  and  forces  at  Murfrees-
boro,  Tenn.,  from  December,  1863,  till  24  Aug.,  1865.
when  he  was  mustered  out,  having  been  brevetted
major-general  on  13  March,  1865.  He  was  adjutant-
general  of  Minnesota  in  18G6-'70,  and  in  1876-'82.
VAN  CORTLANDT,  Oloff  (or  Oliver)  Ste-
vense,  soldier,  b.  in  Wijk,  near  Utrecht,  Holland,
in  1600;  d.  in  New  York,  4  April,  1684.  He
came  to  New  Netherland  as  an  officer  in  the  ser-
vice of  the  West  India  company,  arriving  there  in
the  ship  "Haring"  (The  Herring),  with  Director
Kieft,  on  28  March,  1638.  Of  the  origin  of  his
family  nothing  is  definitely  known.  He  had  a  good
education,  and  the  offices  he  subsequently  held,  his
seal  with  the  Van  Cortlandt  arms,  still  in  the  pos-
session of  his  descendants,  as  well  as  articles  of
Dutch  plate  bearing  the  same  arms,  show  that  his
position  was  good,  and  that  of  a  gentleman.  He
remained  only  a  short  time  in  the  military  service,
having  been  appointed  by  Kieft  in  1639  "commis-
sary of  cargoes,"  or  "customs  officer,"  and  in  1643
keeper  of  the  public  stores  of  the  West  India  com-
pany, a  responsible  post  under  the  provisions  of
the  charters  of  freedoms  and  exemptions,  being  the
superintendent  of  the  collection  of  the  company's
revenue  in  New  Amsterdam,  most  of  which  was
paid  in  furs.  In  1648  he  resigned  from  this  office,
was  made  a  freeman  of  the  city,  and  entered  upon
the  business  of  a  merchant  and  brewer,  in  which
he  was  eminently  successful,  becoming  one  of  the
richest  men  in  New  Amsterdam.  In  1649  he  was
chosen  colonel  of  the  burgher  guard,  or  city  train
bands,  and  also  appointed  one  of  the  "  Nine  Men,"
a  temporary  representative  board  elected  by  the
citizens.  He  was  previously  one  of  the  "Eight
Men,"  a  similar  body,  in  1645.  In  1654  he  was
elected  schepen,  or  alderman,  and  the  next  year,
1655,  appointed  burgomaster,  or  mayor,  of  New
Amsterdam.  This  office  he  filled  nearly  uninter-
ruptedly till  the  capture  by  the  English  in  1664,
at  which  he  was  one  of  the  commissioners  that
were  appointed  by  Director  Stuyvesant  to  negoti-
ate the  terms  of  surrender,  and  was  active  in  their
settlement,  the  document  bearing  his  signature
with  those  of  the  other  commissioners.  He  was
also  engaged  in  several  temporary  public  matters
as  a  councillor  and  commissioner  during  the  ad-
ministration of  Stuyvesant,  notably  in  the  Connec-
ticut boundary  matter  in  1663,  and  the  settlement
of  Capt.  John  Scott's  claim  to  Long  Island  in  1664.
He  acted  in  similar  capacities  under  the  first  Eng-
lish governors,  Nicolls,  Lovelace,  and  Dongan,  and
was  chosen  the  trustee  of  Lovelace's  estate  to
settle  it  in  1673.  He  married,  on  26  Feb.,  1642,
Annetje,  sister  of  Govert  Loockermans,  who  came
out  with  Director  Van  Twiller  in  1633,  and  was  so
prominent  afterward  in  New  Netherland  affairs.
"Govert  Loockermans,  after  filling  some  of  the
highest  offices  in  the  colony,"  says  O'Callaghan,
"  died,  worth  520,000  guilders,  or  $208,000,  an  im-
mense sum  when  the  period  in  which  he  lived  is
considered."  Oloff  Stevense  Van  Cortlandt  died  on
4  April,  1684,  and  his  wife  followed  him  about  a
month  afterward.  They  had  seven  children — five
daughters  and  two  sons.  The  oldest  of  the  latter
was  Stephanus,  and  the  youngest  Jacobus,  who,


respectively,  were  the  progenitors  of  all  of  the  name
now  living.  The  former  founded  the  oldest  branch,
the  Van  Cortlandts  of  the  manor  of  Cortlandt,  the
latter  the  younger  branch,  the  Van  Cortlandts  of
Cortlandt  House,  Yonkers. — His  son,  Stephanus,
statesman,  b.  in  New  York,  4  May,  1643;  d.  there,
25  Nov.,  1700,  was  the  first  and  only  lord  of  the
manor,  and  one  of  the  most  eminent  men  of  the
province  of  New  York  after  it  became  an  English
colony.  Except  the  governorship,  he  filled  at  one
time  or  another  every  prominent  office  in  that
province.  When  Lieut. -Gov.  Nicholson  went  to
England,  at  the  beginning  of  Jacob  Leisler's  insur-
rection and  actual  usurpation,  to  report  in  person
to  King  William,  he  committed  the  government,
in  his  absence,  to  Stephanus  Van  Cortlandt  and
Frederick  Philipse.  Ihis  fact  caused  Leisler  to
seek  their  lives,  and  forced  them  to  escape  from
the  city  of  New  York  to  save  themselves.  Van
Cortlandt's  career  was,  perhaps,  the  most  brilliant
and  varied,  in  the  fifty-seven  years  it  occupied,  of
any  inhabitant  of  New  York  in  the  17th  century.
He  was  a  youth  of  twenty-one  when,  in  1664,  the
English  capture  took  place  and  New  Amsterdam
became  New  York.  Brought  up  under  the  eye  of
his  father,  and  educated  bythc  Dutch  clergymen
of  New  Amsterdam,  whose  scholarship  was  vastly
higher  than  it  has  pleased  modern  writers  to  state,
and  which  would  compare  favorably  with  that  of
the  clergy  of  the  19th  century,  young  Van  Cort-
landt, long  before  the  death  of  his  father  in  1684,
showed  how  well  he  had  profited  by  the  example
of  the  one  and  the  learning  of  the  others.  He  was
a  merchant  by  occupation.  His  first  appointment
was  as  a  member  of  the  court  of  assizes,  the  body
instituted  under  "the  Duke's  Laws"  over  which
Gov.  Richard  Nicolls  presided,  and  which  exercised
both  judicial  and  legislative  powers.  In  1668  he
was  appointed  an  ensign  in  the  Kings  county  regi-
ment, subsequently  a  captain,  and  later  its  colonel.
From  1677,  when,  at  the  age  of  thirty-four,  he  was
appointed  the  first  native  American  mayor  of  the
city  of  New  York,  he  held  that  office  almost  con-
secutively till  his  death  in  1700.  When,  by  the
Duke  of  York's  commission  and  instructions  to
Gov.  Dongan,  a  governor's  council  was  established
in  New  York,  Stephanus  Van  Cortlandt  and  Fred-
erick Philipse  were  named  by  the  duke  therein  as
councillors,  and  with  them  Dongan  was  to  appoint
such  others  as  he  deemed  fit  for  the  office.  Ste-
phanus Van  Cortlandt's  name  was  continued  in  each
of  the  commissions  of  all  the  succeeding  governors
down  to  and  including  Bellomont's  in  1697,  and  he
continued  in  the  office  till  his  death  in  1700.  Early
in  this  latter  year  he  was  appointed  chief  justice,
but  he  only  filled  the  office  till  his  demise  in  No-
vember of  the  same  year.  He  had  many  years  be-
fore been  appointed  judge  of  the  common  pleas  in
Kings  county,  and  later,  in  1693,  a  justice  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  province.  In  1686  Dongan
made  him  commissioner  of  the  revenue,  and  on  10
Nov.,  1687,  he  was  appointed  by  the  king's  auditor-
general  in  England,  William  Blathwayt,  deputy
auditor  in  New  York,  his  accounts  being  regularly
transmitted  to  England  and  approved.  He  was
appointed  also  deputy  secretary  of  New  York,  and
personally  administered  the  office,  the  secretary  al-
ways residing  in  England,  after  the  British  custom.
He  was  prominent  in  all  the  treaties  and  confer-
ences with  the  Indians  as  a  member  of  the  council,
and  was  noted  for  his  influence  with  them.  His
letters  and  despatches  to  Gov.  Edmund  Andros,
and  to  the  different  boards  and  officers  in  England
that  were  charged  with  the  care  of  the  colonies  and
the  management  of  their  affairs,  remain  to  show  his


VAN  CORTLANDT


VAN  CORTLANDT


237


capacity,  clear-headedness,  and  courage.  Equally
esteemed  and  confided  in  by  the  governments  of
James  as  duke  and  king,  and  by  William  and
Mary,  in  the  troublous  times  in  which  he  lived,  and
sustained  by  all  the  governors,  even  though,  as  in
Bellomont's  case,  they  did  not  like  him  personally,
no  greater  proof  could  be  adduced  of  his  ability,
skill,  and  integrity.  His  estate  was  erected  into
the  lordship  and  manor  of  Cortlandt  by  patent  of
William  III.,  bearing  date  17  June,  1697.  The  Van
Cortlandt  manor-house,  which  is  shown  in  the  ac-

companyingil-
lustration,  is
one  of  the  old-
est edifices  that
now  remain  on
the  borders  of
Hudson  river.
It  stands  on
the  northern
shore  of  Cro-
ton  bay,  and
was  built  both
as  a  country
residence  and
as  a  fort,  the
walls  being  of
reddish  free-
stone, nearly  three  feet  in  thickness,  pierced  with
loop-holes  for  musketry.  It  was  built  originally  as
a  fortified  trading-house  by  Stephanus,  and  added
to  by  the  successive  owners.  In  it  were  entertained
some  of  the  most  notable  persons  in  the  history  of
the  state,  beginning  with  the  early  colonial  govern-
ors. ,  George  Whitefield  preached  to  the  tenants  of
the  manor  from  its  veranda,  while  Benjamin  Frank-
lin rested  there  on  his  return  from  his  Canadian
mission  in  1776.  Washington,  Rochambeau,  Lafay-
ette, and  Lauzun  were  among  its  guests,  and  Col.
Henry  B.  Livingston  had  his  quarters  there  while
watching  the  "  Vulture  "  at  the  time  of  Arnold's
treason.  Here,  too,  were  entertained  eminent  Meth-
odist preachers  in  the  early  days  of  that  church,
including  Bishop  Asbury  and  Freeborn  Garretson.
— Philip,  third  son  of  Stephanus,  merchant,  b.  in
New  York  city,  9  Aug.,  1683;  d.  there,  21  Aug.,
1746,  was  a  man  of  good  abilities,  and  possessed  of
great  decision  of  character.  He  was  a  merchant
in  New  Amsterdam,  and,  like  his  father,  took  an
active  part  in  public  affairs.  In  June,  1729,  he  was
recommended  to  the  king  for  appointment  as  a
councillor  of  the  province  by  Gov.  Montgomerie  in
place  of  Lewis  Morris,  Jr.  The  appointment  was
made,  3  Feb.,  1730,  he  took  his  seat  in  April  of  the
same  year,  and  continued  in  the  council  until  his
death,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Edward  Holland
through  the  recommendation  of  Gov.  George  Clin-
ton. He  was  a  member  of  the  commission  on  the
part  of  New  York  in  the  case  of  the  colony  of
Connecticut  and  the  Mohegan  Indians.  His  wife
was  Catharine,  daughter  of  Abraham  de  Peyster,
to  whom  he  was  married  in  1710.  He  left  six
surviving  children — five  sons  and  one  daughter,
Catharine,  who  was  killed  by  the  bursting  of  a
cannon  on  the  Battery  while  watching  the  firing  of
a  salute  in  honor  of  the  king's  birthday,  4  June,
1738,  in  her  thirteenth  year.  By  the  death  of  his
elder  brothers  (Johannes,  who  left  only  a  daugh-
ter, Gertrude,  the  wife  of  Philip  Verplanck,  and
Oloff,  or  Oliver,  who  died  a  bachelor)  Philip  be-
came the  third  head  of  the  Van  Cortlandt  family.
His  five  sons  were  Stephen,  Abraham,  Philip,
John,  and  Pierre. — Stephex,  the  eldest,  who  suc-
ceeded his  father  as  the  head  of  the  family;  was
born  26  Oct.,  1710,  married,  in  1738,  Mary  Walton


Ricketts,  and  died,  17  Oct.,  1756,  leaving  two  sons,
Philip  and  William  Ricketts  Van  Cortlandt. —
Philip  the  elder,  the  fourth  head  of  the  family,  b.
10  Nov.,  1739,  preferring  a  military  life,  entered
the  British  army,  in  which  he  served  many  ye^irs,
dying  on  1  May,  1814.  He  is  buried  in  Hailsham
church,  where  a  mural  monument  is  erected  to  his
memory.  He  married,  on  2  Aug.,  1762,  Catharine,
daughter  of  Jacob  Ogden,  of  New  Jersey.  They
had  the  large  number  of  twenty-three  children
(several  being  twins),  of  whom  twelve  lived  to  grow
up,  five  being  sons  and  seven  daughters.  The  for-
mer all  became  officers  in  the  British  regular  army.
— Pierre,  first  lieutenant-governor  of  the  state  of
New  York,  youngest  son  of  Philip,  the  third  son
of  Stephanus,  b.  in  Cortlandt  manor,  10  Jan.,  1721 ;
d.  in  New  York,  1  May,  1814.  In  consequence  of
the  deaths  in  early  manhood  of  his  brothers  Abra-
ham, Philip,  and  John,  unmarried,  and  of  the
death,  in  1756,  of  his  eldest  brother,  Stephen,  and
the  absence  in  the  army  of  his  nephew,  Philip,
Stephen's  eldest  son,  Pierre  became  early  and
closely  identified  with  the  affairs  of  the  manor  and
the  interests  of  his  relatives  therein.  Marrying
Joanna,  a  daughter  of  Gilbert  Livingston,  he  natu-
rally leaned  to  the  political  side  of  his  wife's  fam-
ily in  the  party  contests  anterior  to  the  opening  of
the  American  Revolution.  He  was  the  representa-
tive of  the  manor  in  the  colonial  assembly  from
1768  till  1775,  and,  unlike  his  nephew,  Philip,  the
head  of  the  family,  took  the  American  side  in  the
Revolutionary  war.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Pro-
vincial convention,  the  council  of  safety,  and  the
Provincial  congress,  and,  upon  the  organization  of
the  state  government  in  1777,  was  chosen  lieuten-
ant-governor of  New  York  and  served  in  that  office
till  1795,  when  he
declined  a  re-elec-
tion, the  long  pe-
riod of  eighteen
years.  In  1777  he
was  president  of
the  convention  at
Kingston  which
framed  the  first
constitution  of
the  state  of  New
York.  He  left
two  sons,  Gen.
Philip  and  Gen.
Pierre.  He  was
an  admirable  pre-
siding officer,  gen-
tle but  firm,  strict
but  impartial, and
commanded  the
respect  and  esteem  of  senators  of  all  parties. —
Philip,  soldier,  b.  in  Cortlandt  manor,  1  Sept.,
1749;  d.  there,  5  Nov.,  1831,  was  the  eldest  son  of
Lieut.-Gov.  Pierre  Van  Cortlandt,  and  was  edu-
cated at  Coldenham  academy  and  graduated  at
King's  (now  Columbia)  college  in  1758.  He  be-
came a  surveyor.  In  June,  1775,  he  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th  battalion.  New
York  infantry,  and  on  30  Nov..  1776,  by  Wash-
ington, colonel  of  the  2d  New  York  regiment,  in
place  of  Col.  Ritzema.  who  had  joined  the  British,
lie  was  present  at  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne,  and
in  1779  he  was  engaged  with  Gen.  John  Sullivan
in  the  Indian  campaign  in  western  New  York.  In
1781  he  took  part  in  the  Virginia  campaign,  and
witnessed  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis  at  Yorktown.
His  highest  rank  in  actual  service  was  colonel,  but
after  the  disband ment  of  the  army  at  the  peace,
congress  gave  him  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.


238


VAN  CORTLANDT


VANCOUVER


/^^^I^^^T


He  was  subsequently  a  member  of  the  New  York
assembly  and  senate,  and  one  of  the  commissioners
of  forfeitures  for  the  southern  district  of  New

York.  He  sat  in
congress  for  the
Westchester  dis-
trict from  1793  till
1809.  He  was  for
many  years  treas-
urer of  the  state
Society  of  the  Cin-
cinnati, and  ac-
companied Lafay-
ette on  his  travels
through  the  Unit-
ed States  during
his  visit  in  1824.
He  lies  buried  in
the  family  ceme-
tery near  the
Cortlandt  manor-
house  at  Croton.
— Pierre,  soldier,
second  son  of
Lieut.-Gov.  Pierre,
b.  in  Cortlandt
manor,  29  Aug.,  1762 ;  d.  there  in  July,  1848,  was
a  leading  man  in  Westchester  county,  its  repre-
sentative in  congress  in  1811— '12,  and  major-gen-
eral of  the  militia,  one  of  his  aides  being  James
Penimore  Cooper.  He  was  graduated  at  Rutgers
college  in  1783,  and  in  1843  was  given  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  by  that  institution.  He  studied  law
with  Alexander  Hamilton,  but  did  not  practise
long,  giving  his  attention  to  politics  and  to  his
estate.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  for  Jeffer-
son in  1800  and  for  Gen.  William  H.  Harrison  in
1840,  and  a  candidate  on  the  defeated  Henry  Clay
ticket  in  1844.  From  1833  till  his  death  he  was
president  of  the  Westchester  county  bank.  He
married  first,  in  1801.  Catharine,  daughter  of  Gov.
George  Clinton  and  widow  of  Capt.  John  Taylor,
of  the  British  army,  and  secondly,  in  1813,  Ann,
daughter  of  John  Stevenson  and  Magdalen  Douw,
of  Albany,  by  whom  he  had  one  child,  Col.  Pierre
Van  Cortlandt  (1815-84). — Jacobus,  merchant,  b.
in  New  York,  7  July,  1658;  d.  there  in  1739,  was
the  younger  of  the  two  sons  of  Oloff,  first  above
named,  and  ancestor  of  the  Yonkers  branch.  His
estate  at  Yonkers,  continuously  held  by  his  de-
scendants to  this  day,  has  been  purchased  by  the
city  of  New  York  for  its  new  "  Van  Cortlandt
park"  of  about  800  acres.  He  was  one  of  the
most  eminent  men  of  his  time  and  one  of  the

aldermen  of
the  city.  He
sat  in  the  first
assembly  of
William  and
Mary  in  1691,
for  New  York
city,  and  also
in  the  two  suc-
ceeding as-
semblies. He
again  sat  for
the  city  from
1702  till  1709,
and  from  1710
till  1715.  In  1719  he  was  mayor  of  the  city  of
New  York.  He  was  a  large  land-holder  in  W  est-
chester  county,  notably  in  the  town  of  Bedford,
where  a  large  part  of  his  property  came  by  de-
scent and  wills  of  relatives  to  his  grandson  (through
his  daughter  Mary),  Chief-Justice  John  Jay,  who


built  thereon  the  residence  in  which  he  died,  and
which  now  belongs  to  the  latter's  grandson,  John
Jay.  (See  illustration.)  Jacobus  Van  Cortlandt
was  an  officer  and  member  of  the  Hutch  church.
He  married  Eve  Philipse,  the  step-daughter  of  the
first  Col.  Frederick  Philipse,  whose  wife,  by  birth
Mai'garet  Hardenbrook,  was  the  widow  of  Peter
Rudolph  de  Vries,  by  whom  she  had  one  daughter,
who,  after  her  mother's  marriage  to  Frederick
Philipse,  was  adopted  by  him  and  called  by  his
name.  His  only  son  by  this  marriage,  Frederick
(1698-1749),  who  married,  in  1724,  Frances  Jay,  was
the  father  of  James,  and  Augustus,  of  Yonkers.
The  latter  (1728-1824)  was  for  many  years  prior
to  the  Revolution  clerk  of  the  common  council  of
New  York  city,  and  to  his  unflinching  loyalty  to
his  trust,  as  well  as  to  his  king,  is  due  the  preser-
vation of  the  ancient  city  records  of  New  York,  for
of  his  own  motion  and  on  his  own  responsibility,  in
1775,  he  placed  them  in  chests,  in  a  vault  built  at
his  own  expense,  in  his  own  garden,  "  made,"  as  he
informed  the  Provincial  congress,  "  for  that  purpose
of  stone  and  brick,  well  arched,  and  exceedingly
dry,"  and  kept  them  till  after  the  peace  of  1783.

VANCOUVER,  George,  English  navigator,  b.
in  1758 ;  d.  near  London,  England,  10  May,  1798.
He  entered  the  British  navy,  joining  the  "  Resolu-
tion," under  Capt.  Cook,  in  1771,  and  served  as
midshipman  in  Cook's  second  voyage  (1772-'5),
and  on  his  third  voyage  (1776-"80),  when  that  com-
mander lost  his  life.  In  December  of  that  year  he
was  made  lieutenant,  and  appointed  to  the  sloop
"  Martin,"  on  board  which  he  continued  till  he  was
removed  to  the  "  Fame,"  one  of  Lord  Rodney's
fleet,  in  the  West  Indies.  In  1784  he  was  ap-
pointed to  the  station  in  Jamaica,  sailed  in  the
"Europe,"  and  was  there  till  the  vessel  returned
to  England  in  September,  1789.  Vancouver,  in
1791,  was  appointed  to  command  a  squadron  and
sent  to  the  northwest  coast  of  North  America,  with
instructions  first  to  visit  the  Sandwich  islands,
then  go  to  Nootka,  where,  in  1792,  with  mutual
concessions  on  the  part  of  the  Spanish  government
and  the  court  of  St.  James,  a  matter  in  dispute
was  amicably  arranged ;  and,  further,  to  make  an
accurate  survey  of  the  coast  from  the  30th  degree
of  north  latitude  northward,  in  order  to  find  if
there  were  any  waterways,  by  inlets,  rivers,  or
lakes,  between  that  coast  and  Canada,  or  any  pas-
sage from  the  North  Pacific  to  the  Atlantic  ocean.
His  careful  survey  occupied  the  summers  of  1792-'3,
the  intervening  winter  being  spent  in  completing
the  examination  of  the  Sandwich  group.  In  1794
he  returned  to  the  American  coast  and  surveyed
it  as  far  as  Cook's  inlet,  on  the  completion  of  which
he  was  promoted  to  post-captain.  Then  he  sailed
along  the  western  coast  of  South  America,  doubled
Cape  Horn,  and  returned  to  Britain,  reaching  the
Shannon  in  September,  1795.  The  greater  part  of
the  surveys  was  performed  in  boats,  but  his  con-
stitution was  undermined  by  the  service.  His
training,  under  Capt.  Cook  manifested  itself  in
the  same  enforcement  of  discipline  and  in  the
same  care  for  the  health  and  comfort  of  his  crew
that  had  characterized  that  great  commander.
Vancouver's  island  was  named  in  his  honor.  From
that  time  till  his  death  he  was  occupied  in  the
preparation  of  his  journals  for  publication.  All
the  charts  were  completed,  the  narrative  printed
aVid  corrected  almost  to  the  end  of  the  third  vol-
ume, and  what  little  remained  was  prepared  for
the  press  by  his  brother  John.  The  "  Voyage  of
Discovery  to  the  North  Pacific  Ocean  and  Round
the  World  "  was  published  by  the  government  (3
vols.,  London,  1798),  with  an  atlas.


VAN  CURLER


VAN  DEN  BROEK


239


VAN  CURLER,  or  CORLEAR,  Arendt,  pio-
neer, b.  in  Holland  about  1600 ;  d.  in  Lake  Cham  plain
in  1667.  He  was  a  cousin  of  Killian  Van  Rensselaer,
came  to  this  country  in  1630r  and  rose  through
subordinate  offices  to  be  the  superintendent  of  the
manor  and  colony  of  Rensselaerwyck,  having  juris-
diction from  Beeren  island  in  the  Hudson  to  the
mouth  of  Mohawk  river,  controlling  nearly  a  thou-
sand square  miles  of  fur-bearing  territory.  By  his
energy,  talents,  and  character  he  made  the  pa-
troon's  colony  more  prosperous  than  that  at  New
Amsterdam.  He  early  mastered  the  language  and
learned  the  nature  of  the  Iroquois  Indians,  and
often  visited  their  towns,  either  to  ransom  Christian
captives  or  to  make  covenants  of  amity.  He  may
be  considered  as  the  real  founder  of  that  Dutch
policy  of  peace  with  the  Indians  that  was  after-
ward followed  by  the  English,  which,  by  making
an  invincible  obstacle  to  French  ambition,  aided
so  powerfully  to  secure  this  continent  to  Germanic
instead  of  Latin  civilization.  In  1646  (the  same
year  in  which  the  patroon  died)  he  married  An-
tonia,  widow  of  Jonas  Bronck  (who  founded
Bronxville,  N.  Y.),  and  visited  Holland.  On  his
return  he  lived  on  his  farm  near  West  Troy,  N.  Y.,
using  all  his  influence  to  keep  peace  between  the
whites  and  Indians  and  to  check  the  trade  in
"  fire-water."  He  greatly  assisted  Gov.  Peter  Stuy-
vesant  in  treating  with  the  Indians,  especially  at
Esopus,  in  1660.  In  1661,  having  outgrown  the
semi-feudal  ideas  of  the  patroon  system,  he  led  a
company  of  free  settlers  from  Holland  to  Sche-
nectady, which  he  had  first  bought  from  the  Mo-
hawks, and  founded  an  agricultural  settlement,  in
which  all  purchasers  could  hold  land  in  fee  simple.
He  several  times  assisted  French  individuals  or
companies  when  in  straits  of  captivity,  starvation,
or  ambuscade ;  yet,  by  simple  honesty  of  character,
kept  the  friendship  and  unbounded  confidence  of
the  savages.  In  1664,  on  the  English  conquest  of
New  Netherlands,  Col.  Richard  Nicolls  sent  for
him  to  consult  as  to  the  Indian  policy,  and  Van
Curler's  propositions  were  adopted.  In  1667,  while
on  a  visit  to  Canada,  by  invitation  of  the  French
governor,  Tracy,  he  was  drowned  in  the  middle
of  "  Corlear's  lake,"  or,  as  it  is  now  called,  Lake
Champlain.  The  Mohawk  Indians  always  ad-
dressed the  governors  of  New  York  and  of  Can-
ada as  "  Corlear,"  and  the  Indian  title  of  Queen
Victoria  is  Kora  Kowa — "  the  Great  Corlear."  He
left  about  2,000  letters  and  papers,  which  are  pre-
served chiefly  in  Albany,  N.  Y.  A  biography  of
Arendt  Van  Curler  is  in  preparation. — Two  others
of  the  same  name  are  Anthony  Van  Curler,  the
trumpeter,  and  Jacobus  Van  Curler,  who  was  sent
by  Gov.  Van  Twiller,  of  New  Netherlands,  to  oc-
cupy territory  in  what  is  now  Connecticut.  He
purchased  land  from  Sassacus,  sachem  of  the  Pe-
quots,  and  on  8  June,  1633,  landed  with  a  company
of  soldiers  at  what  is  now  Dutch  Point,  Hartford,
and  erected  a  trading-factory,  called  the  House  of
Hope.  Hans  Janse  Eencluys,  being  in  charge  of  the
artillery,  forbore  to  fire  on  the  Englishman,  Will-
iam Holmes,  while  sailing  past  the  fort  to  make
a  settlement  at  Windsor,  and  the  Dutch  finally
evacuated  the  Connecticut  valley.  Van  Curler  was
the  first  school-master  in  New  York  city,  and  his
farm  was  on  the  point  of  land  near  the  foot  of
Grand  street,  on  East  river,  still  called  Corlear's
hook. He  afterward  removed  to  Long  island.

VAN  DAM,  Rip,  colonial  governor,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  about  1662 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  after
1736.  He  became  a  prominent  merchant  in  the
West  India  trade,  resisted  Lord  Bellomont's  re-
strictions on  commerce,  and,  in  consequence  of  the


Vbtfu


Vxort-  C/cLVYls


seizure  of  some  of  his  vessels  for  supposed  infrac-
tion of  the  custom  laws,  engaged  in  politics,  en-
tered the  assembly  in  1699,  and  became  a  leader  of
the  opposition  party.  With  other  merchants  he
signed  a  petition  to
the  king  protesting
against  Bellomont's
acts.  Lord  Corn-
bury,  who  removed
some  of  the  council-
lors for  promoting
political  disorder,
appointed  Van  Dam
to  one  of  the  vacan-
cies. He  continued
in  the  council  for
nearly  thirty  years,
and  as  its  senior
member  and  presi-
dent assumed  the
administration  and
acted  as  governor
from  the  death  of
Gov.  John  Mont-
gomery on  1  July,

1731,  till  the  arrival  of  his  successor  on  1  Aug.,

1732.  He  was  opposed  to  courts  of  chancery,  and
refused  to  take  the  oath  as  chancellor.  When  Gov.
William  Cosby  on  his  arrival  exhibited  an  order  for
an  equal  division  of  the  salary,  emoluments,  and  per-
quisites, Van  Dam  refused  to  pay  over  any  part  of
the  salary  that  he  had  received  unless  Cosby  divided
the  larger  sum  that  he  had  obtained  in  England
for  pretended  expenditures  in  the  colony.  They
each  brought  suits,  which  were  finally  dropped
without  a  settlement,  after  arousing  intense  parti-
san feeling  between  the  aristocratic  friends  of  the
governor  and  the  popular  party,  which  supported
Van  Dam.  Van  Dam  absented  himself  from  the
meetings  of  the  council,  and  Gov.  Cosby,  on  his
death-bed,  secretly  suspended  him  from  office  in
order  to  prevent  his  succeeding  again  to  the  direc-
tion of  the  government.  George  Clarke,  who  was
next  in  length  of  service,  was  sworn  in,  but  Van
Dam  claimed  the  office,  and  the  rival  governors
each  called  a  meeting  of  the  council.  Van  Dam
was  sustained  by  the  chief  justice,  and  his  adher-
ents were  ready  to  support  his  claim  with  arms,
when  the  arrival  from  England  of  despatches  that
were  addressed  to  Clarke  put  an  end  to  the  contro-
versy. He  published  "  Heads  of  Articles  of  Com-
plaint against  Gov.  Cosby"  (Boston,  1734).

VAN  DEN  BROEK,  Theodore,  clergyman,
b.  in  Alkmaar,  Holland,  in  1783;  d.  in  Little
Chute,  Wis.,  5  Nov.,  1851.  He  belonged  to  the
order  of  St.  Dominick,  and  came  to  the  United
States  in  1832.  After  spending  some  time  in
studying  the  language  and  customs  of  the  country
at  the  Dominican  convent  of  St.  Rose,  Ky.,  he  de-
termined to  devote  himself  to  the  Indian  mission.
After  laboring  at  Green  Bay  in  1834-'6  he  went  to
Little  Chute  and  established  a  school  for  the  In-
dians', but  his  mission  embraced  almost  the  entire
state  of  Wisconsin  for  several  years.  He  visited  the
more  distant  stations  generally  in  winter,  often
slept  on  the  snow,  and  was  frequently  called  to
visit  sick  persons  at  a  distance  of  200  miles.  He
taught  the  savages  agriculture  and  trained  them
to  use  carpenter's  tools,  as  well  as  instructing  them
in  the  arts  of  masonry  and  plastering.  With  their
aid  he  built  a  fine  church  in  1839.  Between  1834
and  1842  he  converted  more  than  600  Menominees.
In  1844  he  established  the  mission  of  St.  Francis
on  Wolf  river  or  Lake  Powahegan,  which  in
1846  numbered  400  Indians,  with  a  good  church


240


VANDENHOFF


VANDERBILT


and  school.  Father  Van  den  Broek  was  the  pio-
neer of  Roman  Catholic  colonization  in  Wisconsin.
In  1847  he  left  Little  Chute  and  went  to  Europe.
Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  Amsterdam  he  pub-
lished a  pamphlet  describing  the  advantages  that
Wisconsin  offered  to  industrious  immigrants.  This
publication,  with  his  lectures,  induced  a  large  num-
ber of  Hollanders  to  emigrate,  and  in  1848  three
vessels  arrived  with  them  at  New  York.  These
people  were  settled  at  Little  Chute,  Hollandtown,
Green  Bay,  and  other  localities.  The  work  of  Fa-
ther Van  den  Broek  in  Holland  continued  to  bear
fruit,  and  Dutch  colonies  were  founded  not  only
in  Wisconsin,  but  in  Minnesota,  Nebraska,  and
other  western  states.

VANDENHOFF,  George,  actor,  b.  in  England,
18  Feb.,  1820.  He  first  appeared  on  the  stage  as
Leon  in  "  Rule  a  Wife  and  Have  a  Wife "  at  the
Covent  Garden  theatre,  London,  on  14  Oct.,  1839.
In  the  summer  of  1842  he  came  to  the  United
States,  appearing  at  the  Park  theatre,  New  York,
as  Hamlet,  on  21  Sept.  After  a  successful  career
he  retired  from  the  stage  in  November,  1856,  stud-
ied law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1858,  but
devoted  himself  chiefly  to  public  readings  and  the
teaching  of  elocution  in  the  cities  of  the  United
States  and  also  in  England,  making  New  York
city  his  ordinary  residence.  He  was  the  author  of
"  A  Plain  System  of  Elocution,"  which  was  repub-
lished under  the  title  of  "The  Art  of  Elocution"
(New  York,  1846) ;  "  Dramatic  Reminiscences,  or
Actors  and  Actresses  in  England  and  America"
(London,  1859);  "Leaves  from  an  Actor's  Note-
Book,  with  Reminiscences  and  Chit-Chat  of  the
Greenroom  and  the  Stage  in  England  and  Ameri-
ca "  (1860) ;  "  Clerical  Assistant,  or  Elocutionary
Guide"  (1862);  and  "  A  Lady's  Reader,  with  Rules
for  reading  Aloud"  (1862).  His  wife,  whom  he
married  in  Boston  on  20  Aug.,  1855,  was,  as  Miss
Makeath,  successful  on  the  stage  in  the  role  of
Julia  in  "  The  Hunchback,"  and  in  other  charac-
ters, making  her  first  appearance  in  Philadelphia
on  25  Dec,  1854.  She  finally  retired  from  the
stage,  and  gave  dramatic  instruction  in  New  York
until  her  death  in  1883.

VANDERBILT,  Cornelius,  financier,  b.  near
Stapleton,  Staten  island,  N.  Y.,  27  May,  1794;  d.
in  New  York  city,  4  Jan.,  1877.  He  was  descended
from  Jan  Aertsen  Van  der  Bilt,  a  Dutch  farmer,
who  settled  near  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  about 1650.

Cornelius's  great-
grandfather, a  son
of  the  emigrant
ancestor,  removed
about  1715  to  New
Dorp,  Staten  isl-
and,where  the  fam-
ily was  converted
to  Moravian  doc-
trines by  religious
exiles  from  Bohe-
mia. His  father
was  a  farmer  in
moderate  circum-
stances, who  con-
veyed his  produce
to  market  in  a  sail-
-  boat,  which  the  son
(7)  S  Jw~  eat"ly  learned  to
•J^tS-^-?^^  manage.  The  boy.
who  was  hardy  and
resolute,  early  became  schooled  in  practical  affairs
and  the  direction  of  men,  but  neglected  every  op-
portunity for  education.  When  sixteen  years  of
age  he  purchased  a  boat,  in  which  he  ferried  pas-


sengers and  goods  between  New  York  city  and
Staten  island,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen  he  was
the  owner  of  two  boats  and  captain  of  a  third.  A
year  later  he  married  a  cousin,  Sophia  Johnson,
and  removed  to  New  York  city.  He  extended  his
interests  in  boats,  sloops,  and  schooners,  engaged
in  traffic  as  well  as  transportation  along  the  shores
of  New  York  bay  and  Hudson  river,  and  built  new
craft  on  the  latest  and  most  approved  models.  In
1817  he  engaged  as  captain  of  a  steamboat  that
made  trips  between  New  York  city  and  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  and  for  twelve  years  worked  for
a  salary.  In  1827  he  leased  the  ferry  between
New  York  city  and  Elizabeth,  and,  by  putting  on
new  boats,  made  it  very  profitable.  Returning  to
New  York  city  in  1829,  he  began  to  build  steam-
boats of  improved  construction  and  fittings,  and  to
compete  in  prices  and  service  with  the  wealthy
capitalists  who  owned  the  existing  lines  on  Hudson
river  and  Long  Island  sound.  Ilis  success  as  a
steamboat  builder  and  manager  caused  the  title  of
"Commodore"  to  be  popularly  attached  to  his
name.  Before  he  was  forty  years  old  his  wealth
was  estimated  at  $500,000.  He  withdrew  his
steamboats  from  the  Hudson .  river  by  arrange-
ment with  Robert  L.  Stevens,  but  maintained
lines  connecting  New  York  city  with  Bridgeport,
Norwalk,  Derby,  New  Haven,  Hartford,  and  New
London,  Conn.,  Providence  and  Newport,  R.  I.,
and  Boston,  Mass.  When  the  emigration  of  gold-
seekers  to  California  began,  he  established  a  pas-
senger line,  by  way  of  Lake  Nicaragua,  gaining
large  profits.  Selling  this  in  1853,'  he  visited
Europe  in  the  "North  Star,"  which  was  con-
structed after  his  own  designs,  and  surpassed  all
steam  yachts  that  had  before  been  built.  The
company  to  which  he  had  transferred  the  Nicara-
gua short  line  evaded  payment,  and  on  his  return
Vanderbilt  again  engaged  in  the  California  traffic,
threatening  to  force  his  dishonest  competitors  into
bankruptcy.  This  he  accomplished,  and  in  the
course  of  eleven  years  he  accumulated  $10,000,000
in  this  business.  He  engaged  in  ocean  transpor-
tation while  British  ships  were  withdrawn  during
the  Crimean  war,  building  three  of  the  finest  and
fastest  steamers,  and  establishing  a  line  between
New  York  and  Havre.  His  offer  to  carry  the
mails  for  nothing  impelled  the  government  to
withhold  the  subsidy  that  it  had  paid  to  the  Col-
lins line  and  caused  the  cessation  of  its  operations.
A  few  years  later  Vanderbilt,  who  had  begun  to
invest  largely  in  the  stock  of  the  New  York  and
New  Haven  railroad  as  early  as  1844,  retired  from
the  transatlantic  trade  on  account  of  the  sharp
competition  of  Europeans,  and  gradually  trans-
ferred his  capital  from  shipping  to  railroad  enter-
prises. When  the  "Merrimac"  attacked  the  Na-
tional vessels  in  Hampton  Roads,  he  had  his  fin-
est steamship,  the  "Vanderbilt,"  fitted  up  for
naval  purposes  and  sent  to  James  river,  intend-
ing to  run  down  the  Confederate  ram.  He  gave
the  vessel  to  the  government,  and,  at  the  conclu-
sion of  the  war,  congress  voted  him  a  gold  medal
in  recognition  of  his  gift.  His  first  important  rail-
road venture  was  in  1863,  when  he  purchased  a
large  part  of  the  stock  of  the  New  York  and  Har-
lem railroad,  and  obtained  a  charter  for  a  con-
necting street  railroad  through  New  York  city,
causing  the  stock  to  rise  from  ten  dollars  a  share
to  par.  Daniel  Drew  and  other  heavy  speculators,
with  foreknowledge  of  the  intention  of  the  city
council  to  cancel  the  franchise  for  a  horse-car  line
through  Broadway,  sold  stock  for  future  delivery,
causing  it  to  decline  heavily.  Vanderbilt  bought
what  was  offered,  till  it  was  all  in  his  hands,


VANDERBILT


VANDERBILT


241


and  the  sellers  could  only  make  their  deliveries  by
paying  him  double  the  prices  that  he  had  con-
tracted to  pay  them.  He  began  in  the  same  year
to  purchase  the  shares  of  the  Hudson  River  rail-


i*''{VftriljiL

■W¥\

»■  iltf'Mliiii  it  if*

Lftt  Mrmi^rPS.''  tit ' '  >  H.

ffi»»4'

'Ar~

^BKJPHQ

^BBjMIBm"/ 'TiiMwriiJ^M

r*S"  s&-t  .^38^  ^SPBB^B

\ ll^wW "^

Wt¥3

****s£SSiF&^™r

w^F^^^^^^ 4

road,  a  competing  line,  and,  when  he  had  obtained
the  control,  procured  the  introduction  of  a  bill  for
the  consolidation  of  this  and  the  Harlem  road.
Members  of  the  legislature  entered  into  a  combi-
nation with  stock-jobbers  to  defeat  the  measure,
after  promising  their  support,  and  in  thisvway  to
cause  Harlem  stock,  which  had  risen  from  $75  to
$150  a  share  in  anticipation  of  the  consolidation,  to
fall  below  the  former  price,  enabling  them  to
make  profits  by  selling  while  it  declined.  With
the  aid  of  financial  allies,  Vanderbilt  was  able  to
take  all  bids  of  stock,  effecting  a  "  corner "  of
much  greater  dimensions  than  the  former  one.  The
speculators  for  a  fall  had  agreed  to  deliver  27,000
more  shares  than  the  entire  stock  of  the  road,  and,
when  the  time  for  settlement  came,  the  Vanderbilt
"  pool "  could  make  the  price  what  they  chose,
but  did  not  venture  to  raise  it  above  $285  for  fear
•of  precipitating  a  general  panic.  After  this  stroke,
by  which  he  gained  many  millions,  he  purchased
large  amounts  of  New  York  Central  railroad
stock.  Fearing  that  the  road  would  pass  into  his
hands,  the  managers  in  1864  made  secret  arrange-
ments to  have  freight  and  passengers  forwarded  to
New  York  city  by  river  steamers,  instead  of  by  the
Hudson  river  railroad.  In  retaliation,  in  the  sec-
ond winter  after  the  discriminations  began,  Van-
derbilt changed  the  terminus  of  the  Hudson  river
railroad  at  Albany  to  the  eastern  side  of  the  river,
and  ordered  the  employes  to  receive  no  freight
from  the  Central  railroad.  The  stock  of  the  New
York  Central  railroad  fell  in  the  market,  and  Van-
derbilt and  his  associates  gradually  increased  their
holdings.  In  1867  Vanderbilt  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  company.  The  Harlem  and  Hudson
river  railroads  had  improved  greatly  in  efficiency
and  economy  under  Vanderbilt's  administration.
He  now  applied  the  same  methods  of  reform  to  the
New  York  Central  road,  increasing  the  rolling-
stock,  improving  the  tracks,  systematizing  the  ser-
vice, and  increasing  the  connections.  In  order  to
Eut  an  end  to  unprofitable  competition  in  rates,
e  next  sought  to  obtain  control  of  the  New  York,
Lake  Erie,  and  Western  railroad  (then  called  the
Erie),  and  bought  freely,  while  Daniel  Drew,  Jay
Gould,  and  James  Fisk  sold  "short"  for  a  fall,
winning  the  contest  by  flooding  the  market  with
new  shares,  illegally  issued.  They  obtained  from
Vanderbilt  about  $7,000,000,  but,  after  a  legal  con-
troversy over  the  fraudulent  issue,  were  willing  to
repay  nearly  $5,000,000.  In  1869  he  procured  an
act  for  the  consolidation  of  the  New  York  Central
and  Hudson  River  companies,  and  in  the  same
year  divided  new  shares  among  the  stock-holders,
adding  107  per  cent,  to  the  nominal  capital  of  the
New  York  Central  and  80  per  cent,  to  that  of  the
vol.  vi. — 16


Hudson  River  road.  Notwithstanding  the  doubling
of  the  stock,  the  market  value  of  the  shares,  which
in  1867  had  ranged  from  $75  to  $120,  reached
$200  in  1869.  By  purchasing  a  controlling  inter-
est in  the  Lake  Shore,  the  Canada  Southern,  and
the  Michigan  Central  railroads,  he  extended  his
system  to  Chicago,  making  it  a  trunk-line  for
western  traffic.  He  erected  the  Grand  Central
station  in  New  York  city,  with  viaducts  and  tun-
nelled approaches,  for  building  which  the  city  paid
half  of  the  cost.  Four  tracks  were  laid  on  the
New  York  Central  line.  Of  the  capital  stock  of
the  railroads  that  composed  the  trunk-line,  amount-
ing to  $150,000,000,  Vanderbilt  owned  one  half.
Although  he  had  never  contributed  to  benevolent
enterprises,  toward  the  close  of  his  life  he  gave
$50,000  to  Rev.  Charles  F.  Deems  to  purchase  the
Church  of  the  Strangers,  and  $1,000,000  to  found
Vanderbilt  university  at  Nashville,  Tenn.  He  had
a  fortune  generally  estimated  at  $100,000,000,  all
of  which  he  left  to  his  eldest  son,  William  Henry,
except  $11,000,000  bequeathed  to  the  latter's
four  sons,  and  $4,000,000  to  his  own  daughters.
His  voyage  to  England  and  along  the  coasts  of
Europe  from  Russia  to  Turkey  was  recounted  by
Rev.  Dr.  John  O.  Choules  in  "  The  Cruise  of  the
Steam  Yacht  'North  Star'"  (Boston,  1854).  Mr.
Vanderbilt  was  an  extremely  handsome  man,  with
a  beautiful  complexion.  He  was  tall  and  graceful,
and  to  the  last  retained  an  erect  figure  and  an
elastic  step. — His  son,  William  Henry,  financier,
b.  in  New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.,  8  May,
1821 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  8  Dec,
1885,  was  educat-
ed at  Columbia
gram  mar  -  school.
Leaving  school  at
the  age  of  seven-
teen, he  engaged
in  business  as
a  ship-chandler,
and  a  year  later
became  a  clerk
in  the  banking-
house  of  which
Daniel  Drew  was
the  senior  part-
ner. He  married
in  his  twentieth  year,  and,  his  health  failing,  settled
in  1842  on  a  small  farm  in  New  Dorp,  Staten  isl-
and, that  his  father  gave  him.  This  he  cultivated
profitably,  enlarging  and  improving  it  with  but
slight  aid  from  his  father,  who  at  that  time  had  a
poor  opinion  of  his  financial  ability.  This  esti-
mate was  altered  when  the  son  managed  with  great
success  the  Staten  Island  railroad,  of  which  he  was
made  receiver.  When  "  Commodore  "  Vanderbilt
engaged  in  railroad  financiering  at  the  age  of  sev-
enty, he  intrusted  the  business  management  of  the
railroads  that  came  into  his  control  to  William
H.,  who  was  chosen  vice-president  of  the  Har-
lem and  Hudson  River  corporations  in  1864,  and
afterward  of  the  New  York  Central.  To  these
great  establishments  he  applied  the  same  watchful
attention  and  frugal  economies  which  had  restored
to  prosperitv  the  bankrupt  Staten  Island  road,  and
with  the  same  success.  While  participating  no
more  in  the  speculative  plans  of  his  father  than  he
formerly  had  in  his  steamship  enterprises,  he
aided  materially  toward  their  success  by  his  effi-
cient management.  When  he  succeeded  to  the
control  of  the  railroad  property  he  averted  the  con-
sequences of  a  protracted  war  of  rates  and  of  a


242


VANDERBILT


VANDERBILT


threatened  strike  of  laborers  by  conciliation  and
compromise.  With  equal  prudence  he  avoided  a
contest  over  his  father's  will  with  his  brother,  Cor-
nelius Jeremiah,  and  two  of  his  sisters,  by  agreeing
to  pay  the  brother  the  income  from  $1,000,000,
which  was  five  times  as  much  as  the  will  awarded
him,  and  increasing  by  $500,000  the  legacy  of  each
of  his  sisters.  Under  his  administration  was  com-
pleted the  acquisition  of  the  Canada  Southern  rail-
road, which  was  effected  by  a  guarantee  of  its
bonds,  and  that  of  the  Michigan  Central  by  pur-
chases in  the  open  market.  Between  1877  and
1880  he  gained  control  of  the  Chicago  and  North-
western line,  comprising  with  its  tributaries  4,000
miles  of  road.  He  obtained  connection  with  St.
Louis  by  means  of  the  Cleveland,  Columbus,  Cin-
cinnati, and  Indianapolis  railroad.  In  November,
1879,  in  order  to  obviate  financial  rivalries  by  in-
teresting other  capitalists  in  the  New  York  Central
road  and  to  put  his  own  property  into  a  more  man-
ageable shape,  he  sold  250,000  shares  of  the  stock
to  an  English  and  American  syndicate,  investing  the
$30,000,000  that  he  obtained  in  U.  S.  government
bonds,  of  which  a  year  later  he  held  $53,000,000.
In  1880  he  sold  his  interests  in  the  Western  Union
telegraph  company.  In  1881  he  lowered  rates  in
competition  with  the  New  York,  Western,  Lake
Erie,  and  other  trunk  lines,  primarily  in  order  to
discourage  the  construction  of  the  "  Nickel  Plate  "
railroad.  On  4  May,  1883,  he  formally  resigned
the  office  of  president  of  the  New  York  Central
and  Hudson  River,  Lake  Shore  and  Michigan
Southern,  and  Michigan  Central  companies,  and
sailed  for  Europe.  At  the  same  time  the  compa-
nies were  reorganized  by  the  election  of  his  son
Cornelius  as  chairman  of  the  board  of  directors  of
the  New  York  Central,  and  Michigan  Central  com-
panies, and  of  his  son  William  Kissam  as  chairman
of  the  Lake  Shore  road.  The  Nickel  Plate  road,
when  completed,  was  acquired  and  added  to  the
New  York  Central  system,  while  the  West  Shore
road  was  forced  into  bankruptcy  by  a  reduction  of
rates.  Mr.  Vanderbilt  built  a  fine  mansion,  which,
with  two  other  family  residences,  is  shown  in  the
illustration,  in  New  York  city,  which  he  filled  with
modern  paintings,  chiefly  of  the  French  school,  and
with  other  works  of  art.  Five  houses  were  built
for  his  sons  and  daughters  in  Fifth  avenue  near
his  own.  He  was  fond  of  driving,  as  his  father
had  been,  and  purchased  Maud  S.  and  other  famous
trotting-horses.  He  added  $200,000  to  the  endow-
ment of  Vanderbilt  university,  and  gave  $100,000
for  a  theological  school  and  $10,000  for  a  library
in  connection  with  the  university.  In  1884  he
gave  $500,000  for  new  buildings  to  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  and  a  year  afterward  his
daughter,  Emily,  wife  of  William  D.  Sloane,  built


and  endowed  in  connection  with  it  a  maternity
hospital  at  a  cost  of  $250,000,  and  his  four  sons
have  erected  and  equipped  a  building  for  clinical
instruction  in  connection  with  the  college  as  a  me-


morial of  their  father.  He  distributed  $100,000
among  the  train-men  and  laborers  of  the  New  York
Central  railroad  when  they  refrained  from  striking
in  1877,  gave  $50,000  to  the  Church  of  St.  Bar-
tholomew, and  paid  $103,000  for  the  removal  of  the
obelisk  that  the  Khedive  Ismail  gave  to  the  United
States  and  for  its  erection  in  Central  park,  New
Yrork  city.  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant,  two  days  before
the  failure  of  Grant  and  Ward,  borrowed  from
Mr.  Vanderbilt,  on  an  exchange  check,  $150,000,
which  went  to  protest.  The  general  then  sent  to
Mr.  Vanderbilt,  as  security  for  this  loan,  deeds
to  certain  real  estate,  and  his  swords,  medals,
works  of  art,  and  the  gifts  made  him  by  foreign
governments.  Mr.  Vanderbilt  proposed  to  re-
turn all  this  property  to  Gen.  Grant,  but  found
that  impossible,  as  it  was  liable  to  be  seized  by
creditors  of  the  firm  of  Grant  and  Ward.  He  then
offered  to  give  them  to  Mrs.  Grant ;  but  she  de-
clined to  receive  them.  He  then  proposed  to  trans-
fer all  the  property  to  the  Union  trust  company,
in  trust  for  Mrs.  Grant  and  her  heirs.  Mrs.  Grant
and  the  general  refused  this,  on  the  ground  that
the  original  debt  was  a  debt  of  honor.  Mr.  Van-
derbilt then  proposed  that  the  presents  should  be
transferred  to  Mrs.  Grant  during  her  life,  and  at
her  death  be  placed  in  the  archives  of  the  National
government  at  Washington.  This  proposition  was
accepted,  and  Mrs.  Grant  immediately  transferred
the  articles  to  the  government.  By  his  will  he  left
$10,000,000  to  each  of  his  eight  children,  one  half
of  each  bequest  to  be  held  in  trust ;  to  his  eldest
son  $2,000,000  more;  $1,000,000  to  the  eldest  son
of  the  latter:  and  the  residuary  estate  in  equal
parts  to  his  two  eldest  sons,  subject  to  the  payment
of  an  annuity  of  $200,000  to  the  widow,  to  whom
he  left  his  house  and  the  artistic  objects  that  it
contained.  He  bequeathed  $1,000,000  for  benevo-
lent purposes,  including  gifts  to  Vanderbilt  uni-
versity, the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art,  the  Young
men's  Christian  association,  the  missions  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  St.  Luke's  hos-
pital. He  also  provided  for  building  and  main-
taining a  Moravian  church  and  a  family  mauso-
leum at  New  Dorp,  Staten  island.  The  bulk  of  the
family  fortune,  including  the  railroad  securities,
has,  by  agreement  among  the  heirs,  been  left  to  the
management  of  the  two  principal  heirs,  Cornelius
and  William  Kissam. — The  eldest  son  of  William
H.,  Cornelius,  financier,  b.  on  Staten  island,  N.  Y.,
27  Nov.,  1843,  was  educated  at  private  schools  and
trained  to  business.  He  was  treasurer  of  the  New
York  and  Harlem  railroad  from  1867  till  1877,
then  vice-president  till  1886,  and  since  that  date
has  been  its  president.  In  addition  to  his  con-
nection with  the  roads  previously  mentioned,  in
1883  he  became  president  of  the  Canada  Southern
company.  He  is  a  director  in  thirty-four  different
railroad  companies,  and  is  a  trustee  of  many  of
the  charitable,  religious,  and  educational  institu-
tions of  New  York  city.  Among  Mr.  Vanderbilt's
benefactions  are  the  gift  of  a  building  in  New
York  city  for  the  use  of  railroad  employes,  a  con-
tribution of  $100,000  for  the  Protestant  Episcopal
cathedral,  and  a  collection  of  drawings  by  the  old
masters  and  the  painting  of  the  "  Horse  Fair,"  by
Rosa  Bonheur,  to  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art.
— The  third  son,  Frederick  William,  is  secretary
and  treasurer  of  the  New  York,  Chicago,  and  St.
Louis  railway  company,  and  is  a  director  in  most
of  the  roads  comprising  the  Vanderbilt  system. —
The  youngest  son,  George  Washington,  has  estab-
lished a  free  circulating  library  in  New  York  city,
which  was  opened  in  July.  1888,  and  has  main-
tained a  manual  training-school.


VANDERHEYDEN


VANDERPOEL


243


VANDERHEYDEN,  Dirk,  owner  of  the  site  of
Troy,  N.  Y.,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  about  1680 ;  d.
there  in  October,  1738. The  first  of  the  name  in

Albany  came
to  this  country
from  Holland
about  1590.
Dirk  was  an
innkeeper  in
his  native  town
and  a  specula-
tor in  lands.
In  1720  he  ob-
tained a  grant
of  490  acres  of
land  in  fee.  at
a  yearly  rent
of  fiveschepels
of  wheat  and  four  fat  fowls.  This  grant,  called  the
"  Poesten  Bouwery,"  was  afterward  known  as  Van-
derheyden's  ferry,  and  in  1789  was  named  Troy.
The  Vanderheyden  mansion,  which  was  bought  by
Dirk's  descendant,  Jacob,  in  1778,  was  built  in  1725
by  Johannes  Beeckman,  a  burgher  of  Albany.  The
bricks  were  imported  from  Holland,  and  it  was  one
of  the  best  specimens  of  Dutch  architecture  in  the
state.  Its  dimensions  were  fifty  feet  front  by  twenty
in  depth,  with  a  hall  and  two  rooms  on  a  floor,  the
massive  beams  and  braces  projecting  into  the  rooms.
It  is  described  by  Washington  Irving  in  the  story
of  Dolph  Heyliger,  in  "  Bracebridge  Hall,"  as  the
residence  of  Heer  Anthony  Vanderheyden.  The
weather-vane,  a  horse  going  at  full  speed,  was
placed  by  Mr.  Irving  above  the  turret  of  the  door-
way at  Sunnyside,  when  in  1833  the  Vanderheyden
house  was  demolished  and  a  Baptist  church  was
built  on  its  site.  The  Vanderheyden  mansion  is
shown  in  the  accompanying  illustration.

VANDERLYN,  John,  artist,  b.  in  Kingston,
Ulster  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  Oct.,  1775  ;  d.  there,  24  Sept.,

1852.  After  receiv-
ing an  education
at  Kingston  acad-
emy, he  went  to
New  York,  where
he  engaged  in  busi-
ness, and  devot-
ed his  leisure  to
art,  attending  the
drawing-school  of
Archibald  Robert-
son. Subsequently
he  went  to  Phila-
delphia, where  he
spent  some  time  in
the  studio  of  Gil-
bert Stuart,  and
copied  his  por-
traits of  Aaron
Burr  and  Egbert
Benson.  Through
the  generosity  of  Aaron  Burr,  who  heard  of  the
young  artist's  difficulties.  Vanderlyn  was  enabled  to
continue  his  studies.  In  1796  he  went  to  France,
where  he  remained  for  five  years.  After  his  return
in  1802  he  painted  two  views  of  Niagara  falls,  which
were  engraved  and  published  (London,  1804),  and
portraits  of  Burr  and  his  daughter.  The  following
year  he  went  abroad  again,  and  spent  several  years
in  England  and  Paris,  where  he  painted  for  Joel
Barlow  the  "  Death  of  Miss  McCrea."  In  1805  he
visited  Rome,  and  there  painted,  in  1807,  his  "  Ma-
rius  amid  the  Ruins  of  Carthage."  On  his  return
to  Paris  the  following  year  he  exhibited  it  at  the
salon,  where  it  gained  for  him  the  Napoleon  gold


medal.  This  painting  belongs  now  to  Bishop  Kip,
of  California.  He  also  executed  various  copies  after
the  old  masters,  and  in  1812  painted  his  famous
"  Ariadne."  This  picture  was  subsequently  bought
and  engraved  by  Asher  B.  Durand,  and  is  now  in
the  Pennsylvania  academy  of  fine  arts.  He  re-
turned to  the  United  States  in  1815,  and  painted
portraits  of  various  eminent  men,  including  Wash-
ington (for  the  National  house  of  representatives),
James  Monroe,  John  C.  Calhoun,  Gov.  Joseph  C.
Yates,  Gov.  George  Clinton,  Andrew  Jackson,  and
Zachary  Taylor.  At  this  time  he  projected  also  a
panoramic  exhibition,  and  erected  in  New  York
the  "  Rotunda."  He  exhibited  there  panoramas
of  Paris,  Athens,  Mexico,  Versailles  (by  himself),
and  some  battle-pieces;  but  the  enterprise  was
not  successful,  and  the  building  passed  out  of  his
hands.  This,  and  the  want  of  appreciation  for
the  arts  in  this  country,  seem  to  have  dispirited
and  embittered  him.  His  last  large  composition-
picture,  "  The  Landing  of  Columbus,"  painted  in
Paris  for  one  of  the  panels  in  the  capitol  at  Wash-
ington, is  hardly  more  than  respectable.  It  was
engraved  for  the  United  States  five-dollar  bank-
notes. Vanderlyn  will  always  be  known  as  the
painter  of  "  Marius  "  and  "  Ariadne,"  which  latter,
though  scarcely  showing  great  originality,  is  a
noble  work.  The  New  York  historical  society  owns
his  portraits  of  Aaron  Burr.  Robert  R.  Livingston
(1804),  Roger  Strong,  and  Henry  Benson  (1823).

VANDERPOEL,  Aaron,  congressman,  b.  in
Kinderhook,  N.  Y.,  5  Feb.,  1799;  d.  in  New  York
city,  18  July,  1871.  He  was  carefully  educated,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1820,  and
began  practice  in  his  native  town.  He  was  in  the
assembly  in  1826-'30,  and  in  congress  in  1833-'7
and  1839-'41,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Demo-
crat. He  then  retired  from  political  life,  settled  in
New  York  city,  and  was  a  judge  of  the  superior
court  in  1842-50.  During  his  congressional  ser-
vice he  acquired  the  soubriquet  of  the  "Kinder-
hook  roarer,"  on  account  of  the  power  of  his  voice
and  his  oratorical  flights. — His  nephew,  Aaron  J,
lawver,  b.  in  Kinderhook,  N.  Y.,  18  Aug.,  1825 ;  d.
in  Paris,  France,  23  Aug.,  1887,  was  the  son  of  Dr.
John  Vanderpoel,  a  successful  physician,  and  the
personal  and  political  friend  of  Martin  Van  Buren,
Aaron  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  New
York  in  1842,  studied  law  under  William  Curtis
Noyes,  settling  in  Kinderhook,  and  subsequently
in  New  York  city.  He  formed  a  partnership  with
A.  Oakey  Hall  and  Augustus  L.  Brown  in  1853,
under  the  name  of  Brown,  Hall,  and  Vanderpoel,
The  firm  had  a  large  practice,  especially  as  counsel
for  the  city  in  many  municipal  affairs.  In  1873,
by  the  withdrawal  of  Mr.  Hall,  the  firm  was  re-
organized as  Vanderpoel,  Green,  and  Coming.  Mr.
Vanderpoel  was  in  constant  practice  before  the
courts  for  more  than  thirty  years,  and  perhaps  ap-
peared in  more  cases  than  any  other  lawyer  at  the
New  York  bar.  He  was  an  authority  on  corpora-
tion law,  for  many  years  was  sheriff's  counsel,
counsel  for  the  police  commissioners,  and  engaged
in  many  important  railroad  suits.  He  declined  a
nomination  to  the  bench  of  the  court  of  appeals  in
1885.  In  1880  the  University  of  New  York  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  At  the  time  of  his  death
he  was  president  of  the  Manhattan  club.

VANDERPOEL,  Ann  Priscilla,  philanthro-
pist, b.  in  London,  England,  25  June,  1815 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  4  May,  1870.  Her  father,  Robert
O.  Barnes,  came  to  this  country  with  his  family  in
1833.  She  married  Dr.  Edward  Vanderpoel  in
1837,  and  for  many  years  was  identified  with  phil-
anthropic work  in  New  York  city. She  founded


244


VAX  DER  VEER


VAN  DORN


the  Ladies'  home  U.  S.  hospital  in  1861,  and  gave
her  gratuitous  services,  for  four  years  and  a  half,
as  a  nurse  to  the  Union  soldiers,  her  labors
being  recognized  by  the  government,  especially
by  President  Lincoln,  who  sent  her  an  engraved
certificate  as  a  memorial  of  her  work. In  July,

1863,  during  the  draft  riots  in  New  York  city,  she
saved  Mayor  George  Opdyke's  house  from  fire  and
pillage  by  driving  in  an  open  carriage  from  Fourth
street  to  Mulberry  street,  where  the  police  office
was  situated,  and  sending  a  company  of  soldiers  to
his  aid.  To  reach,  the  office  she  exposed  her  life
by  breaking  through  a  dense  mob.  She  has  been
called  the  Florence  Nightingale  of  New  York.

VAN  DER  VEER,  Albert,  surgeon,  b.  in  Root,
N.  Y.,  10  July,  1841.  He  studied  at  Albany  medi-
cal college,  was  graduated  in  1862  at  the  National
medical  college,  Washington,  D.  C,  and  served
through  the  civil  war  as  a  surgeon.  He  then  set-
tled in  Albany,  where  in  1869  he  became  profes-
sor of  the  principles  and  practice  of  surgery  in  the
Medical  college.  In  1882  he  was  given  the  chair
of  surgery  and  clinical  surgery.  During  this  time
he  was  also  connected  with  Albany  and  St.  Peter's
hospitals.  Dr.  Van  der  Veer  has  achieved  success
in  abdominal  surgery.  He  has  been  president  of
the  New  York  state  medical  society,  and  is  a  mem-
ber of  various  other  medical  societies  at  home  and
abroad.  Albany  medical  college  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  M.  D.  in  1869,  Williams  that  of  A.  M.  in

1882,  and  Union  and  Hamilton  that  of  Ph.  D.  in

1883.  He  has  contributed  to  "  Wood's  Reference
Handbook  of  Medicine  and  Surgery,"  and  to  sev-
eral medical  journals.

VAN  DERVEER,  Ferdinand,  soldier,  b.  in
Butler  county,  Ohio,  27  Feb.,  1823.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Farmer's  college,  Ohio,  enlisted  as  a  pri-
vate in  an  Ohio  regiment  during  the  Mexican  war,
rose  to  the  rank  of  captain,  and  headed  one  of  the
assaulting  columns  at  the  capture  of  Monterey.
He  subsequently  practised  law,  and  became  sheriff
of  Butler  county,  Ohio.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  became  colonel  of  the  35th  Ohio  vol-
unteers, succeeded  to  the  command  of  Gen.  Robert
L.  McCook's  brigade,  and  led  it  till  the  autumn  of

1864,  when  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers, and  assigned  to  the  4th  corps.  Gen.  Van
Derveer  saw  much  active  service,  and,  among  many
other  engagements,  participated  in  the  battles  of
Mill  Springs,  Chickamauga,  and  Mission  Ridge.
Since  1870  he  has  been  judge  of  the  court  of  com-
mon pleas  of  Butler  county,  Ohio.

VAN  DE  VELDE,  James  Oliver,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  near  Termonde,  Belgium,  3  April,  1795;  d.  in
Natchez,  Miss.,  13  Nov.,  1855.  He  received  his
early  training  from  a  refugee  French  priest  who
had  been  sheltered  by  his  family,  was  afterward
placed  in  a  boarding-school  near  Ghent,  and  was
professor  of  French  and  Flemish  in  Puers  when  he
was  eighteen  years  old.  He  afterward  entered  the
Seminary  of  Mechlin,  where  he  taught  Latin,  while
studying  logic  and  theology.  In  1817  he  came  to
the  United  States  and  became  a  student  in  the
Jesuit  novitiate  at  Georgetown.  After  two  years
he  was  appointed  professor  of  belles-lettres  in  St.
Mary's  college,  and  he  was  ordained  a  priest  in
1827.  He  was  chaplain  of  the  Convent  of  the  Visi-
tation till  1829,  when  ke  was  given  charge  of  the
missions  of  Rockville  and  Rock  Creek,  Md.  In  1831
he  was  sent  to  St.  Louis,  and  named  professor  of
rhetoric  in  the  Jesuit  college.  In  1833,  when  this
college  was  made  a  university,  he  was  appointed
vice-president  and  procurator.  He  was  vice-pro-
vincial of  Missouri  in  1837,  and  in  1840  became
president  of  St.  Louis  university. He  set  out  for


Rome  the  same  year,  to  attend  the  congregation  of

[)rocurators,  as  representative  of  his  province.  On
lis  return  he  resumed  the  presidency  of  his  col-
lege, and  he  was  named  vice-provincial  again  in
1843.  Under  his  administration  the  Jesuit  insti-
tutions in  the  west  became  very  prosperous.  He
built  several  churches  and  novitiates,  and  created
new  Indian  missions.  In  1848  he  became  socius  of
the  provincial,  and  in  this  capacity  attended  the
council  of  Baltimore.  He  was  nominated  for  the
see  of  Chicago,  and  was  consecrated  bishop  on  11
Feb.,  1849.  He  at  once  made  a  thorough  visitation
of  his  diocese,  and  founded  two  orphan  asylums ;
but  his  health  soon  gave  way,  and  this,  added  to
the  opposition  he  encountered  from  part  of  his
diocese,  induced  him  to.  implore  the  pope  to  accept
his  resignation.  Not  succeeding,  he  set  out  for
Rome  in  1852,  bearing  the  decrees  of  the  plenary
council  that  was  held  in  that  year  in  Baltimore.
He  was  well  received  by  Pius  IX.,  who  decided  to
transfer  him  to  a  milder  climate.  While  making  a
circuit  of  his  diocese  after  his  return,  he  received
his  brief  of  nomination  to  the  vacant  see  of  Nat-
chez on  29  July,  1853.  During-  his  administration
of  the  diocese  of  Chicago  seventy  churches  had
been  begun  and  the  greater  number  of  them  were
completed,  and  he  erected  several  other  religious
and  charitable  institutions.  On  arriving  in  the
state  of  Mississippi,  he  visited  the  different  congre-
gations, made  efforts  to  procure  additional  priests,
founded  schools,  and  took  measures  for  completing
the  cathedral  and  erecting  a  college.  On  13  Oct.,
1855,  he  sustained  an  injury  from  a  fall  which
eventually  led  to  his  death.

VANDEWATER,  George  Roe,  clergyman,  b.
in  Flushing,  L.  I.,  25  April,  1854.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Cornell  in  1874,  at  the  General  theological
seminary,  New  York  city,  in  1879,  ordained  to  the
priesthood  in  the  latter  year,  and  was  rector  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  at  Oyster  Bay,  Long
Island,  in  1878-'80,  where  he  was  instrumental  in
building  a  church  and  founding  a  library.  He
then  became  rector  of  St.  Luke's  church,  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  organized  the  church  and  congregation  of
St.  Bartholomew,  was  active  in  what  is  known  as
the  advent  mission  revival  in  1885,  and  instrumen-
tal in  organizing  the  Parochial  mission  society,  of
which  he  became  general  secretary.  He  subse-
quently conducted  missions  in  various  parts  of  the
country  with  success,  and  on  1  June,  1887,  was  ap-
pointed general  missioner  of  the  Parochial  mission
society  of  the  Episcopal  church  for  one  year,  still
retaining  his  pastorate.  In  1888  he  became  rector
of  St.  Andrew's  church,  New  York  city.  He  is
identified  with  the  cathedral  and  the  cathedral
schools  in  Garden  City,  Long  Island,  and  is  a  trus-
tee of  Cornell,  and  of  the  General  theological  semi-
nary. Nashotah  seminary  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1886.  He  has  published  "Manual  of
Church  Music"  (Brooklyn,  1886);  "The  Hvmn-
Book  for  Missions  "  (New  York,  1887) ;  and  "  Man-
ual of  Church  Prayer  "  (Brooklyn,  1888).

VAN  DORN,  Earl,  soldier,"  b.  near  Port  Gib-
son, Miss.,  17  Sept.,  1820:  d.  in  Spring  Hill,  Tenn.,
8  May,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1842,  assigned  to  the  7th  infantry,
and  served  in  garrisons.  After  his  promotion  to
2d  lieutenant,  30  Nov.,  1844,  he  took  part  in  the
military  occupation  of  Texas  in  1845-'6,  was  made
1st  lieutenant,  3  March,  1847,  and  brevetted  cap-
tain on  18  April  for  "gallant  and  meritorious  con-
duct in  the  battle  of  Cerro  Gordo."  He  was  at
Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and  was  brevetted  ma-
jor, 20  Aug.,  1847,  for  gallantry  in  those  actions.
He  also  took  part  in  the  assault  and  capture  of  the


VAN  DYKE


VAN  DYKE


245


city  of  Mexico,  and  was  wounded  at  Belen  gate.
He  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Persifer  F.  Smith,
from  April,  1847,  till  May,  1848,  at  Baton  Rouge,
La.  Lieut.  Van  Dorn  engaged  in  the  Seminole
war  in  1849-50,  was  made  captain  in  the  2d  cav-
alry, 3  March,  1855,  took  part  in  the  battle  with
the  Comanches,  1  July,  1856,  and  commanded
the  expedition  against  those  Indians  near  Washita
Village,  Indian  territory,  1  Oct.,  1858,  where  he
was  four,  times  wounded,  twice  dangerously  by  ar-
rows. He  was  again  engaged  with  the  Comanches
in  the  valley  of  Nessentunga,  13  May,  1859.  He
became  major  of  the  2d  cavalry,  28  June,  1860,  but
resigned  on  31  Jan.,  1861,  and  was  appointed  by
the  legislature  of  Mississippi  brigadier-general  of
the  state  forces,  afterward  succeeding  Jefferson
Davis  as  major-general.  He  was  appointed  colonel
of  cavalry  in  the  regular  Confederate  army,  16
March,  1861,  took  command  of  a  body  of  Texan
volunteers,  and  on  20  April  captured  the  steamer
"  Star  of  the  West "  at  Indianola.  On  24  April,
at  the  head  of  800  men,  at  Salaria,  he  received  the
surrender  of  Maj.  Caleb  C.  Sibley  and  seven  com-
panies of  U.  S.  infantry,  and  on  9  May  he  received
that  of  Col.  Isaac  V.  D.  Reeve  with  six  companies
of  the  8th  infantry.  He  became  brigadier-gen-
eral on  5  June,  and  major-general  on  19  Sept.,
1861,  and  on  29  Jan.,  1862,  took  command  of
the  Trans-Mississippi  department.  He  was  de-
feated at  Pea  Ridge  on  6-8  March  (see  Curtis,
Samuel  R.),  and,  being  superseded  by  Gen.  The-
ophilus  H.  Holmes,  joined  the  Army  of  Mississippi.
At  Corinth,  3-4  Oct.,  where  he  was  in  command
with  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  he  was  again  defeated,
and  he  was  superseded  by  Gen.  John  C.  Pember-
ton.  On  20  Dec.  he  made  an  attack  on  Holly
Springs,  Miss.,  which  was  occupied  by  Col.  Murphy
with  a  body  of  U.  S.  troops,  and  captured  a  large
amount  of  valuable  stores.  On  10  April,  1863,  he
made  an  unsuccessful  attack  on  Gen.  Gordon  Gran-
ger at  Franklin.  Tenn.  In  the  following  month
Gen.  Van  Dorn  was  shot  by  a  physician  named
Peters,  on  account  of  a  private  grievance.  Gen.
Van  Dorn  provoked  many  strictures  at  one  time
by  an  order  restricting  the  comments  of  the  press
on  the  movements  of  the  army,  though  the  step
was  taken  in  obedience  to  the  commands  of  Gen.
Braxton  Bragg.  He  possessed  a  cultivated  taste,
and  was  a  fine  draughtsman.  When  stationed  at
Newport,  Ky.,  barracks,  opposite  Cincinnati,  he
devised  and  successfully  tried  in  that  city  an  ele-
vated electric  railway.

VAN  DYKE,  Hendrick,  pioneer,  b.  in  Holland
about  1599 ;  d.  in  New  York  in  1688.  He  came  to
this  country  in  1636  or  in  1640,  in  the  service  of
the  West  India  company,  as  ensign  commander  of
their  troops.  He  was  sent  by  Gpv.  William  Kieft
on  several  expeditions  against  the  Indians,  and  in
1643,  under  his  orders,  destroyed  a  large  Indian  vil-
lage on  Long  Island  sound,  killing  about  500  per-
sons. He  returned  to  Holland  on  25  June,  1645,
was  appointed  fiscal  or  attorney-general  of  the  New
Netherlands,  and  in  1646  sailed  for  New  Amster-
dam with  Peter  Stuyvesant,  the  new  governor  of
the  province.  During  the  voyage  he  offended
Stuyvesant,  and  when  they  reached  New  Amster-
dam the  governor  excluded  him  from  the  council
for  twenty-nine  months,  and  succeeded'  in  depriv-
ing him  of  all  his  influence  and  dignities.  In  1650
he  made  an  earnest  protest  to  the  home  govern-
ment "  against  the  excesses  of  Director  Stuyvesant,"
but  the  latter  influenced  his  dismissal  in  March,
1652.  In  1655,  at  a  time  when  the  citizens  were
entirely  unprepared  for  an  attack,  the  Indian  tribes
that  surrounded  New  Amsterdam  landed  within


the  city  limits  with  500  warriors,  broke  into  houses,
abused  the  people,  and  among  others  wounded
Van  Dyke,  who  was  seated  peacefully  in  his  gar-
den. The  citizens  rushed  to  the  fort,  a  struggle
ensued,  and  three  Indians  were  killed.  The  sav-
ages took  to  their  boats,  but  in  revenge  laid  waste
the  farms  on  the  New  Jersey  coast,  killed  50  of
the  inhabitants  of  Staten  island,  and  took  100  pris-
oners. This  uprising  is  almost  universally  ex-
plained by  historians  on  the  theory  that  Van  "Dyke
had  killed  an  Indian  woman  who  was  stealing  fruit
from  his  garden :  but  the  statement  is  not  substan-
tiated by  the  earliest  and  most  reliable  authorities.
His  closing  years  were  passed  in  retirement.  He
is  described  as  a  "  thrifty  man,  dealing  in  real  es-
tate, and  loaning  money."  In  1675  he  married  the
widow  of  Jacob  Van  Couwenhoven.  See  "  Colonial
New  York,"  by  George  W.  Schuyler  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1885). — His  descendant  in  the  fourth  genera-
tion. Henry  Herbert,  financier,  b.  in  Kinderhook,
N.  Y.,  in  1809 :  d.  in  New  York  city,  22  Jan.,  1888,
was  apprenticed  to  a  printer  early  in  life,  and  at
twenty-one  years  of  age  became  editor  of  the  Go-
shen "Independent  Republican."  He  was  subse-
quently connected  with  the  Albany  "  Argus,"  and
was  active  in  state  polities  as  a  Free-soil  Democrat,
following  the  lead  of  Martin  Van  Buren  in  the
revolt  against  the  "  Hunker  "  Democrats  that  re-
sulted in  the  election  of  Zachary  Taylor  to  the
presidency  as  a  Whig.  He  subsequently  joined
the  Republican  party,  and  was  a  presidential  elec-
tor on  the  Fremont  ticket  in  1856.  He  became
superintendent  of  public  instruction  for  the  state
of  New  York  in  1857,  and  in  1861  superintendent
of  the  state  banking  department,  holding  office  till
1865,  when  he  was  chosen  by  President  Johnson  as-
sistant U.  S.  treasurer.  The  failure  of  his  health
compelled  his  resignation  of  that  post  in  1869.
He  was  president  of  the  American  safe  deposit
company  in  1883-'8,  and,  among  other  business
offices,  held  the  presidency  of  the  Erie  transporta-
tion company. — Henry's  brother,  Cornelius  Van
Allen,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kinderhook,  N.  Y.,  13  Aug.,
1818,  studied  at  Kinderhook  academy,  was  gradu-
ated at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1837,  and  the
same  year  became  a  missionary  to  Syria,  under  the
care  of  the  American  board.  Having  become  pro-
ficient in  Arabic,  he  was  appointed  principal  of  a
seminary  at  Abeih,  on  Mount  Tabor,  Palestine,  and
at  the  same  time  engaged  in  the  preparation  of
mathematical  and  scientific  books  in  the  Ai-abic.
He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  in  1846,  and  after  the  death  of  Dr.  Eli
Smith  was  called  by  the  American  board  to  Bey-
rout  to  complete  the  latter's  work  on  the  Arabic
version  of  the  Scriptures. As  there  were  certain

Erinciples  in  Dr.  Smith's  version  that  Dr.  Van
•yke  found  it  necessary  to  change,  he  rewrote  the
whole,  with  the  exception  of  the  Pentateuch,  in  the
style  of  the  Koran.  He  was  invited  by  the  Amer-
ican Bible  society  to  come  to  New  York  in  1864,
and  to  superintend  its  publication.  After  two
years  he  completed  an  edition  of  the  whole  Bible,
and  one  of  the  New  Testament  alone,  with  vowel
points  (New  York,  1867).  He  was  manager  of  the
mission  press  in  Beyrout  in  1857-80,  subsequently
physician  to  St.  John's  hospital  and  professor  of
pathology  in  the  Syrian  Protestant  college,  and
since  1882  has  been  physician  to  St.  George's  hospi-
tal. Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1865.
He  has  published  tracts,  is  the  author  in  Arabic  of
a  series  of  mathematical,  chemical,  astronomical,
and  hygienic  works,  and  has  translated  into  that
tongue  the  "  Shorter  Catechism  "  (Beyrout,  1843)
and  "  The  Sch5nberg-Cotta  Family  "  (1865).


246


VAN  DYKE


VAN  DYKE


VAN  DYKE,  Henry  Jackson,  clergyman,  b.
in  Abingdon,  Montgomery  co.,  Pa.,  2  March,  1822.
He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylva-
nia in  1843  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary
in  1845,  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Pres-
byterian church  the  same  year,  and  was  pastor  in
Bridgeton,  N.  J.,  in  1845-52,  and  in  Germantown,
Pa.,  in  1852-'3.  At  the  last  date  he  was  called  to
the  1st  Presbyterian  church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
which  charge  he  continues  to  hold.  The  Univer-
sity of  Missouri  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1860.  He  is  an  effective  speaker  and  lecturer,  and
is  popular  as  a  pastor,  occupying  a  high  place  in
the  Presbyterian  church  as  an  authority  on  doc-
trine and  discipline.  He  was  active  in  1870  in  the
movement  for  the  reunion  of  the  northern  and
southern  branches  of  that  body,  and  moderator  of
the  General  assembly  in  1876. — His  son,  Henry
Jackson,  clergyman,  b.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,  10
Nov.,  1852,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1873,
and  at  the  Theological  seminary  there  in  1877.
He  became  corresponding  editor  of  the  Philadel-
phia •'Presbyterian"  in  1876,  edited  the  "Prince-
ton Book,"  and  was  licensed  to  preach  the  same
year.  He  studied  at  the  University  of  Berlin  in
1877,  became  pastor  of  the  United  Congregational
church,  Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1878,  and  since  1882  has
been  in  charge  of  the  Brick  (Presbyterian)  church,
New  York  city.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1884.  He  has  published  "  The  Reality  of
Religion  "  (New  York,  1884),  and  many  contribu-
tions to  periodicals,  including  a  series  of  articles
on  "  Gospel  History  in  Italian  Painting."

VAN  DYKE,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Lamington,
N.  J.,  3  April.  1807;  d.  in  Wabasha,  Minn.,  24
Dec,  1878.  He  was  admitted  to  the  New  Jersey
bar  in  1836,  and  immediately  rose  to  prominence
in  the  Suydam-Robinson  murder  trial.  He  held
many  offices  of  trust  and  was  the  first  president  of
the  Bank  of  New  Jersey  at  New  Brunswick.  He
was  elected  to  congress  in  1847  and  served  two
terms,  during  which  his  course  was  marked  by  bit-
ter opposition  to  slavery.  In  politics  he  was  a
Whig,  and  afterward  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Republican  party  in  New  Jersey.  In  1859  he  be-
came one  of  the  state  supreme  court  judges,  which
post  he  held  until  1866.  Two  years  later  he  went
to  Minnesota,  and  was  there,  by  special  appointment,
judge  of  the  3d  judicial  district.  He  published
some  anti-slavery  pamphlets  and  contributed  to
magazines. — His  son,  Theodore  Strong,  author,
b.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  19  July,  1842,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1863,  and  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1866.  He  practised  law  in  Minnesota
from  1869  till  1876,  when  feeble  health  forced  him
to  remove  to  southern  California.  He  chose  lit-
erature in  nature  for  his  subject,  and  soon  be-
came known  through  his  letters  on  shooting,  fish-
ing, natural  history,  and  gun-rifling  in  sporting
journals.  He  was  the  first  to  make  known  the  in-
ternal beauties  and  advantages  of  southern  Cali-
fornia to  the  sportsman,  'settler,  and  invalid.  In
1884  he  travelled  through  Mexico  as  a  special  cor-
respondent for  several  New  York  papers.  In  ad-
dition to  his  magazine  and  newspaper  contribu-
tions, he  has  published  "  The  Rifle,  Rod,  and  Gun
in  California"  (New  York,  1881);  "The  Still
Hunter"  (1883);  "Southern  California"  (1886);
and  "Southern  California  the  Italy  of  America"
(San  Diego,  Cal.,  1887).  —  Another  son,  John
Charles,  author,  b.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  21
April,  1856,  was  admitted  to  the  New  York  bar  in
1877,  but  immediately  abandoned  the  law  for  lit-
erature. He  studied  art  in  Europe  in  1883,  1887,
and  1888,  was  editor  of  the  "  Studio  "  in  1884,  and,


besides  many  articles  in  magazines  and  newspa-
pers, principally  on  art  topics,  has  published
"  Books,  and  how  to  use  Them  "  (New  York,  1883) ;
"Principles  of  Art"  (1887);  and  "How  to  judge
of  a  Picture  "  (1888).

VAN  DYKE,  Joseph  Smith,  clergyman,  b.  in
Bound  Brook,  N.  J.,  2  Nov.,  1832.  He'was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1857,  and  at  the  theological
seminary  there  in  1861,  was  tutoif  in  Greek  while
studying  theology,  pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian
church  in  Bloomsbury,  N.  J.,  in  1861-'9,  and  since
the  latter  year  has  held  a  charge  in  Cranbury,
N".  J.  In  1859-'60  he  lectured  on  education.
Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1884.
He  has  published  "  Popery  the  Foe  of  the  Church  "
(Philadelphia,  1871) ;  "  Prohibition  of  the  Liquor
Traffic"  (New  York,  1879):  "Through  the  Prison
to  the  Throne,  Illustrations  of  Life  from  the  Biog-
raphy of  Joseph  "  (1881) ;  "  From  Gloom  to  Glad-
ness, Illustrations  of  Life  from  the  Biography  of  Es-
ther" (1883);  "Giving  or  Entertainment:  Which?"
(1883) ;  and  "  Theism  or  Evolution  "  (1886).

VAN  DYKE,  Nicholas,  statesman,  b.  in  New
Castle  county,  Del.,  25  Sept.,  1738 ;  d.  there,  19  Feb.,
1789.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  county,  stud-
ied law,  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in
1765,  and  attained  eminence  in  the  profession.  He
took  an  active  part  in  the  military  and  political
affairs  of  his  county,  attaining  the  rank  of  major
in  the  militia.  In  1774,  when  the  freeholders  of
New  Castle  county  held  a  general  meeting  to  con-
sider the  Boston  port  bill,  he  was  appointed  on
the  committee  of  thirteen  to  correspond  with  the
other  colonies.  On  this  committee  he  was  asso-
ciated with  Thomas  McKean  and  George  Read.
He  was  a  deputy  from  his  county  to  the  State  con-
vention of  July,  1776,  which  framed  the  first  con-
stitution of  the  state.  He  was  elected  with  James
Sykes,  22  Feb.,  1777,  to  the  Continental  congress
in  the  room  of  John  Dickinson  and  John  Evans,
who  declined  to  serve.  He  continued  in  congress
until  1783,  and  was  one  of  the  delegates  that  rati-
fied the  articles  of  confederation.  In  1781  con-
gress appointed  him  one  of  a  committee  of  five  to
confer  with  the  people  of  New  Hampshire  relative
to  the  admission  of  that  colony  into  the  "  federal
union  of  these  states."  In  1777  he  was  a  member
of  the  council  of  the  state  of  Delaware,  and  in
1779  its  speaker.  In  1777  he  was  also  appointed  a
judge  of  admiralty.  He  was  elected  president  of
the  state  of  Delaware  in  1783,  holding  the  office
until  1786.  Gov.  Van  Dyke  was  a  firm  believer  in
the  sovereignty  of  the  state. — His  son,  Nicholas,
senator,  b.  in  New  Castle,  Del.,  20  Dec,  1769 ;  d.
there,  21  May,  1826,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1788.  In  his  class  were  David  Stone,  afterward
governor  and  chief  justice  of  North  Carolina,  Will-
iam Kirkpatrick,  subsequently  Federal  judge  and
a  member  of  congress,  and  Smith  Thompson,  after-
ward secretary  of  the  navy  and  justice  of  the  U.  S.
supreme  court,  yet  President  Witherspoon  said  of
him  in  a  letter  to  George  Read,  2  Oct.,  1787:  "If
you  have  any  opportunity  of  seeing  Mr.  Van  Dyke,

S lease  assure  him  that  his  son  is,  I  think,  without
oubt,  the  first  in  his  class."  After  his  graduation
he  studied  law  with  his  brother-in-law,  Kensey
Johns,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  New  Castle
in  April,  1792.  He  was  elected  in  1799  to  the
legislature  of  Delaware,  and  in  1807  to  congress,
serving  until  1811.  In  1815  he  became  a  member
of  the  senate  of  Delaware,  and  from  1817  till  1826
he  was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  senate.  Lafayette,
who  was  present  at  the  wedding  of  Mr.  Van  Dyke's
daughter  to  Charles  1.  Du  Pont,  and  gave  away  the
bride,  was  his  personal  friend,  and  declared  that  "  in


VANE


VAN  ELTEN


247


his  judgment  Mr.  Van  Dyke  was  one  of  the  first
statesmen  in  rank  whom  he  knew  in  America."
William  T.  Reed  said  of  him :  "  If  surpassed  by
some  of  his  contemporaries  (inferior  to  few,  if  any,
members  of  the  bar  throughout  the  Union)  in  pro-
found knowledge  of  the  law  and  in  dialectical
power,  he  was  a  sound  lawyer,  and  superior  to
them  all  as  a  fluent,  graceful,  and  successful  advo-
cate and  in  the  skilful  management  of  his  cases.
He  never  lost  his  predilection  for  general  litera-
ture, and  was  remarkable  for  the  ease  and  elegance
of  his  manners  and  conversational  powers,  for  his
taste  in  architecture  and  his  fondness  for  indulg-
ing in  it.  In  the  senate  of  the  United  States  he
not  only  maintained  but  increased  the  high  repu-
tation of  the  representatives  of  Delaware  for  states-
manship and  ability  as  a  debater.  He  was  of  the
Federal  party."

VANE,  Sir  Henry,  governor  of  Massachusetts,
b.  in  Hadlow,  Kent,  England,  in  1612 ;  d.  in  Lon-
don, 14  June,  1662.  He  was  the  son  of  Sir  Henry
Vane,  comptroller  of  the  household  of  Charles  I.,
and  was  educated  at
Westminster  school
and  Oxford.  Through
his  father's  influence
he  early  entered  the
diplomatic  service  and
visited  Vienna,  in
1631,  with  the  Eng-
lish ambassador.  It
is  supposed  that  he
spent  a  short  time  in
Geneva,  for  he  return-
ed to  England  a  thor-
ough Puritan,  and,  re-
fusing the  career  that
was  open  to  him  as
the  son  of  a  courtier,
sailed  in  1635  for  New
England.  An  impres-
sive bearing  and  great
abilities,  joined  to  the
fact  of  his  high  birth,  led  to  his  taking  an  ac-
tive part  in  the  affairs  of  the  colony  of  Massachu-
setts. Within  a  month  after  his  arrival  he  was
admitted  to  membership  in  the  church  of  Boston,
and  before  three  months  had  expired,  with  Hugh
Peters,  he  procured  a  meeting  in  Boston  of  the
principal  magistrates  and  ministers  of  the  colony,
with  a  view  to  healing  some  distractions  in  the
•commonwealth  and  "effecting  a  more  firm  and
friendly  uniting  of  minds."  At  this  meeting  Vane
declared  in  favor  of  a  more  rigorous  administra-
tion of  government  than  had  thus  far  been  pur-
sued. In  May,  1636,  notwithstanding  his  youth,
Vane  was  chosen  governor  of  the  colony.  Accord-
ing to  John  Winthrop,  "  the  ships  congratulated
his  election  with  a  volley  of  shot.  It  was  expedi-
ent before  all  things  that  the  colonists  should  be
united,  but  Vane  had  a  horror  of  all  forms  of  big-
otry, and  he  had  no  sympathy  with  the  attacks  of
the  clergy  on  Anne  Hutchinson,  with  many  of
whose  opinions  he  agreed.  A  strong  opposition
was  organized  against  him,  and  he  was  defeated  at
the  annual  election  in  1637.  But  he  had  gained
the  affection  of  the  people  of  Boston,  and  was  at
once  chosen  by  them  one  of  their  representatives
to  the  general  court.  The  majority  of  that  body
declared  the  election  of  Vane  and  his  associates
void,  whereupon  the  inhabitants  returned  them  a
second  time  on  the  next  day.  In  order  to  put
down  the  Hutchinson  heresy,  a  law  was  passed  by
the  general  court  that  no  strangers  should  be  re-
ceived within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  colony  except


such  as  should  be  allowed  by  some  of  the  magis-
trates. This  created  such  public  discontent  that
Gov.  Winthrop  put  forward  a  *'  Defence,"  to  which
Vane  immediately  replied  with  "  A  Brief  Answer
to  a  certain  Declaration  made  of  the  Intent  and
Equity  of  the  Order  of  Court  that  none  should  be
received  to  inhabit  within  this  Jurisdiction  but
such  as  should  be  allowed  by  some  of  the  Magis-
trates." Vane  returned  to  England  in  August,
1637,  and  thereafter  it  is  recorded  by  Winthrop  that
"  he  showed  himself  in  later  years  a  true  friend  to
New  England,  and  a  man  of  a  noble  and  generous
mind."  He  was  elected  to  parliament  in  1640,  was
made  treasurer  of  the  navy  with  Sir  William  Rus-
sell, and  during  the  same  year  he  was  knighted.
In  November,  1640,  he  was  chosen  to  the  long  par-
liament, and  before  the  assembly  met  he  found
among  his  father's  papers  (so  it  has  been  asserted)
notes  that  subsequently  formed  the  chief  evidence
in  causing  the  impeachment  and  execution  of  the
Earl  of  Strafford.  The  use  of  this  information
brought  about  a.  collision  between  father  and  son,
and  it  was  several  years  before  they  were  recon-
ciled. He  became  a  zealous  opponent  of  the  royal-
ist party  and  turned  the  fees  of  his  office — £30,000
a  year — over  to  parliament,  deeming  such  a  reve-
nue too  great  for  a  subject.  In  July,  1643,  he  was
sent  to  Scotland  as  one  of  the  commissioners  to
negotiate  an  alliance,  and  by  his  persuasion  the
"  Solemn  league  and  covenant "  was  adopted.  Dur-
ing the  progress  of  the  war  he  was  placed  on  all
commissions  that  were  empowered  to  treat  with
the  king,  and  was  also  one  of  the  parliament's  com-
mittee that  occasionally  accompanied  the  army.
When  the  house  of  commons  discussed  the  terms  of
settlement  that  were  offered  by  the  king,  he  led
the  minority  that  favored  their  rejection,  but  yield-
ed to  the  majority,  and  retired.  In  1649  he  re-
turned to  public  life  as  a  member  of  the  council
of  state,  and  had  almost  exclusive  direction  of
the  navy  and  the  conduct  of  foreign  wars.  The
forcible  dissolution  of  the  parliament  by  Oliver
Cromwell  in  1653  brought  him  into  open  enmity
with  that  leader.  He  then  went  to  Raby  castle
and  devoted  himself  to  writing  theological  works.
Certain  of  his  publications  being  regarded  as  sedi-
tious, he  was  imprisoned  in  Carisbrooke  castle,  but
was  soon  released.  After  the  death  of  Oliver  Crom-
well he  returned  to  parliament,  when  he  became
the  leader  of  the  Republican  party.  On  the  restora-
tion of  the  monarchy  he  was  imprisoned,  and  after
a  trial  for  treason  was  beheaded.  Sir  Henry  Vane's
labors  in  behalf  of  New  England  were  arduous  and
important.  The  charter  for  the  colony  of  Rhode
Island  was  procured  in  great  measure  through  his
influence,  and  Roger  Williams  declared  that  his
name  ought  ever  to  be  held  in  honored  remem-
brance by  her  people.  See  his  biography  by  George
Sikes,  a  contemporary ;  M  Life  of  Sir  Henry  Vane,"
by  Charles  W.  Upham,  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biog-
raphy "  (Boston,  1835) :  "  Statesmen  of  the  Com-
monwealth," by  John  Forster  (London,  1840) :  and
"  The  Life  of  Young  Sir  Henry  Vane,  Governor  of
Massachusetts  Bay  and  Leader  of  the  Long  Par-
liament," by  James  K.  Hosmer  (Boston,  1888).

VAN  ELTEN,  Hendrick  Dirk  Krusenian,
artist,  b.  in  Alkman,  Holland,  14  Nov.,  1829.  He
began  the  study  of  art  in  his  native  town,  and
in  1844  went  to  Haarlem,  where  he  studied  with
Cornells  Sieste  and  other  masters.  His  profes-
sional life  has  been  spent  in  Holland  and  in  New
York,  in  which  city  he  has  resided  since  1865.  He
is  a  member  of  various  academies  and  art  socie-
ties in  Holland  and  Belgium  and  in  the  United
States,  and  a  chevalier  of  the  Order  of  the  Lion.


248


VAN  HORNE


VAN NESS


In  1871  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy,  and  in  1885  he  became  an  academician.
He  has  received  medals  at  Amsterdam  (1860)  and
Philadelphia  (1876),  and  has  contributed  many
pictures  to  the  exhibitions  at  the  Academy  of  de-
sign. His  "Clearing  off,  Adirondacks,"  "The
Grove  in  the  Heath,"  "Russell's  Falls,  Adiron-
dacks," and  "  Autumn  in  the  White  Mountains  "
were  at  the  Philadelphia  exhibition  of  1876.

VAN  HORNE,  William  C,  railroad  president,
b.  in  Will  county,  111.,  in  February,  1843.  He
began  his  railway  career  as  a  telegraph-operator
on  the  Illinois  Central  in  1856,  was  attached  in
various  capacities  to  the  Michigan  Central  and
Chicago  and  Alton  railroads  from  1858  till  1872,
was  general  superintendent  of  the  St.  Louis,  Kansas
City,  and  Northern  line  in  1872-4, general  manager
of  the  Southern  Minnesota  in  1874-8,  and  president
in  1877-9,  and  in  1879  also  filled  the  office  of  gen-
eral superintendent  of  the  Chicago  and  Alton.  He
was  next  general  superintendent  of  the  Chicago,
Milwaukee,  and  St.  Paul  road,  then  became  general
manager  of  the  Canadian  Pacific  railroad,  of  which
the  section  through  the  wheat-districts  of  Manitoba
had  just  been  completed.  He  was  elected  vice-
president  of  the  company  in  1884,  and  in  1888
became  its  president.

VAN  KOUGHNET,  Philip  (van-ko'-net),  Cana-
dian statesman,  b.  in  Cornwall,  Upper  Canada,  in '
1789 ;  d.  there,  17  May,  1873.  His  father,  Michael,
a  United  empire  loyalist,  removed  to  Canada  at  the
time  of  the  American  Revolution.  The  son  was
present  at  the  battle  of  Chrysler's  Farm,  11  Nov.,
1813,  as  a  subaltern  officer,  and  at  the  battle  of  the
Windmill,  at  Prescott,  13  Nov.,  1837,  as  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  5th  battalion  of  incorporated  mili-
tia, and  remained  in  command  till  the  regiment
was  disbanded.  He  was  a  member  of  one  or  the
other  branch  of  the  legislature  of  Upper  Canada
for  more  than  thirty  years,  being  in  the  legislative
council  in  1840,  when  the  union  of  Upper  and
Lower  Canada  took  place.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  chairman  of  the  board  of  government
arbitrators  for  the  Dominion. — His  son,  Philip
Michael  Scott,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Corn-
wall, Ont.,  26  Jan.,  1823;  d.  in  Toronto  in  the
autumn  of  1869,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1844,
began  practice  in  Toronto,  and  in  1850  was  ap-
pointed queen's  counsel.  In  1856  he  became
president  of  the  executive  council  and  minister  of
agriculture  in  the  Tache-Macdonald  government
in  the  place  of  Sir  Allan  N.  MacNab,  who  had  re-
signed. When  the  Cartier-Macdonald  ministry
was  formed  he  vacated  the  office  of  minister  of
agriculture  for  that  of  commissioner  of  crown
lands.  He  resigned  his  portfolio  in  1862,  and  was
appointed  chancellor  of  Canada,  in  which  post  he
continued  till  his  death.  He  represented  Rideau
division  in  the  legislative  council  of  Canada,  and
became  and  continued  during  his  political  career
leader  of  the  government  in  that  body.  He  was  at
one  time  a  delegate  to  England  to  confer  with  the
imperial  government  regarding  the  international
railway. — Another  son,  Laurence,  b.  in  Cornwall,
Ont.,  7  Oct.,  1836,  was  educated  at  Trinity  college,
Toronto,  and  in  May,  1880,  became  deputy  superin-
tendent-general of  Indian  affairs  in  the  Dominion.

VAN  LENNEP,  Henry  John,  missionary,  b.  in
Smyrna,  Asia  Minor,  8  March,  1815.  He  is  de-
scended from  an  eminent  family  of  Dutch  schol-
ars and  writers.  In  1830  he  was  sent  to  this  coun-
try, and  he  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1837.
After  studying  one  year  at  Andover  theological
seminary,  he  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the
Congregational  church,  returned  to  Asia  Minor  as


a  missionary,  and  established  new  mission-posts  in
European  Turkey,  Asia  Minor,  and  Syria.  H&
subsequently  was  connected  with  collegiate  and
theological  institutions  in  Constantinople,  Smyrna,
and  Tocat,  and  made  many  exploring  expeditions
and  travelled  extensively  in  Egypt  and  the  East.
He  also  became  familiar  with  ten  oriental  dialects,
in  five  of  which  he  was  able  to  preach.  He  lost  his
sight  from  cataract  in  1869,  returned  to  this  coun-
try, was  professor  of  natural  sciences  and  modern
languages  in  Ingham  university,  Le  Roy,  N.  Y.,  in
1876-'8,  and  subsequently  a  teacher  in  Great  Bar-
rington,  Mass.  He  has  published  "  Travels  in  Asia
Minor  "  (2  vols.,  London,  1870),  and  "  Bfble  Lands  "
(1879). — His  wife.  Mary  Elizabeth,  missionary,  b.
in  Hartford,  Conn.,  16  April,  1821 ;  d.  in  Constan-
tinople, Turkey,  27  Sept.,  1844,  was  a  daughter  of
the  Rev.  Joel  Hawes,  and  was  educated  in  Hart-
ford and  New  Haven.  She  married  Mr.  Van  Len-
nep  in  1843,  accompanied  him  to  Asia  Minor,  and
established  a  school  for  native  girls  in  Constanti-
nople. See  an  interesting  "  Memoir  "  by  her  mother
(Hartford.  Conn.,  1847).

VAN  NESS,  John  Peter,  congressman,  b.  in
Ghent,  N.  Y.,  in  1770 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  7
March,  1847.  He  studied  at  Columbia  and  was
prepared  for  the  bar,  but  was  prevented  from
practising  by  delicate  health.  He  was  chosen  to
congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1800.  After  he  became
major  of  the  uniformed  militia  of  the  District  of
Columbia  the  house  of  representatives  declared
that  he  had  forfeited  his  seat  by  accepting  a  com-
mission from  the  general  government,  and  he  was
relieved  from  office,  17  Jan.,  1803.  On  the  death
of  his  wife's  father  he  came  into  possession  of  a
large  fortune,  built  a  fine  mansion,  and  entertained
on  a  luxurious  scale.  He  then  became  a  citizen  of
Washington,  occupied  many  offices  of  trust,  was
president  of  the  Metropolitan  bank,  mayor  of  the
city,  and  a  trustee  of  various  institutions. — His
wife,  Marcia  Burns,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  in  1782 ;  d.  there  in  September,  1832,
was  a  daughter  of  David  Burns,  of  Washington,
and  was  married
in  1802.  She  was
carefully  educat-
ed, and,  as  the
wealthiest  heiress
in  her  section  of
the  country,  held
a  conspicuous
place  in  Wash-
ington society.
While  meeting  all
the  claims  that
her  large  wealth
and  high  standing
could  present,  she
led  a  life  of  much
benevolence  and
religious  beauty.
She  established
the  Protestant  or-
phan asy  lu  m ,  gave
the  ground  on  which  two  churches  were  built,  and
contributed  liberally  to  charities.  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Van  Ness  were  buried  in  a  mausoleum  that  was
erected  after  the  pattern  of  the  Temple  of  Vesta  at
Rome.  It  stood  in  the  grounds  of  the  Protestant
orphan  asylum,  and  for  many  years  was  one  of  the
curious  and  interesting  relics  of  old  Washington.
It  has  since  been  removed  to  a  cemetery.  Mrs.
Van  Ness  was  the  only  woman  in  Washington  that
ever  received  a  public  funeral,  which  was  awarded
her  on  account  of  her  extensive  charities. — His


yy^^t^i^  /^C^cs/z^


VAN  NEST


VAN  NOSTRAND


249


brother,  William  Peter,  jurist,  b.  in  Ghent,  N.
Y.,  in  1778 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  Sept.,  1826,
was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1797,  adopted  the
profession  of  law,  and  settled  in  New  York  city,
where  he  became  the  devoted  friend  and  protege
of  Aaron  Burr.  He  took  Burr's  challenge  to
Hamilton,  and  was  one  of  his  seconds  in  the  duel.
Van  Ness  became  judge  of  the  southern  district  of
New  York  in  1812,  being  appointed  by  President
Madison,  and  held  office  until  his  death.  Judge  Van
Ness  suffered  much  opprobrium  from  his  connec-
tion with  the  Burr-Hamilton  duel,  and  is  described
by  the  partisans  of  the  latter  as  "  a  brilliant  but
unscrupulous  politician."  In  his  own  party,  how-
ever, he  was  popular  and  respected.  Washington
Irving  was  his  intimate  friend.  He  published
"  Examination  of  Charges  against  Aaron  Burr,"
under  the  pen-name  of  "  Aristides  "  (New  York,
1803);  with  John  Woodworth,  "Laws  of  New
York,  with  Notes  "  (2  vols.,  Albany,  1813) ;  "  Re-
ports of  Two  Cases  in  the  Prize  Court  for  New
York  District "  (1814) ;  and  "  Concise  Narrative  of
Gen.  Jackson's  First  Invasion  of  Florida  "  (1826). —
Another  brother,  Cornelius  Peter,  jurist,  b.  in
Kinderhook,  N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  15  Dec,  1852,  was  educated  for  the  bar,
removed  to  Burlington,  Vt.,  and  practised  his
profession  with  success  until  1809,  when  he  be-
came U.  S.  district  attorney.  From  that  year  un-
til his  death  he  occupied  public  office.  He  was
collector  of  the  port  of  Burlington  in  1815-'18,  a
commissioner  to  settle  the  U.  S.  boundary-lines
under  the  treaty  of  Ghent  in  1817-21,  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1818-'21,  having  been  chosen,
as  a  Democrat,  chief  justice  of  Vermont  in  1821-'3,
governor  from  the  latter  date  till  1829,  and  U.  S.
minister  to  Spain  in  1829-37.  In  1844-'5  he  was
collector  of  the  port  of  New  York.  The  Univer-
sity of  Vermont  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1823.  He  published  a  "  Letter  to  the  Public  on  Po-
litical Parties,  Caucuses,  and  Conventions  "  (Wash-
ington, D.  C,  1848). — Their  first  cousin,  William
W,  jurist,  b.  in  Claverack,  N.  Y.,  in  1776 ;  d.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  27  Feb.,  1823,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1797,  practised  in  his  native  town  and
in  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  was  a  member  of  the  assembly
in  1804-'6,  and  the  leader  of  the  Federalist  party.
He  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  in
1807,  and  held  office  till  1822.  In  January,  1820,
he  was  tried  before  a  committee  of  the  legislature
on  the  charge  of  using  his  office  to  obtain  the
charter  of  the  American  bank.  The  trial  was
conducted  with  great  ability,  and  Judge  Van  Ness
was  acquitted,  but  he  never  recovered  from  the
effect  of  the  charge,  and  fell  into  delicate  health,
from  which  he  finally  sank  while  on  a  southern
tour.  He  was  removed  from  the  bench  in  1822,
under  the  act  of  the  Constitutional  convention  of
that  year,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  law.  Dr.
Jabez  D.  Hammond  says  of  him :  "  He  was  one  of
the  shrewdest  and  most  sagacious  men  whom  New
York  ever  produced,  of  fascinating  manners,  and
remarkable  conversational  powers."

VAN  NEST,  Rynier,  clergyman,  b.  near  North
Branch,  N.  J.,  8  Feb.,  1739 ;  d.'in  Schoharie,  N.  Y.,
24  Feb.,  1776.  His  ancestor,  Peter,  came  to  this
country  from  Holland  in  1647.  Rynier  was  licensed
to  preach  in  the  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  1773,
and  was  pastor  on  Long  Island  and  in  New  York
state  from,  that  date  until  his  death.  He  was  presi-
dent of  th'e  General  synod  in  1767-'88.  He  was  de-
voted to  the  Whig  cause,  and  gave  liberally  in  sup-
port of  the  Continental  congress. — His  great-neph-
ew, Abraham  Rynier,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York
city,  1  Feb.,  1823,  was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1841,


at  the  New  Brunswick  theological  seminary  in
1847,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  the  Reformed
Dutch  church.  He  was  pastor  in  New  York  city  in
1848-'62.  in  charge  of  the  American  chapel  in  Paris
in  1863-'4,  of  the  American  chapel  in  Rome  in
1864-'5,  of  the  American  Union  church  in  Florence,
Italy,  in  1866-'75,  and  of  a  church  in  Philadelphia
in  1878-'86.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1860  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and
Rutgers.  He  was  president  of  the  evangelization
committee  of  the  Free  church  of  Italy  in  1875.  of
the  General  synod  in  1879,  and  organized  the  Re-
formed Dutch  church  in  Geneva,  Switzerland.  He
has  published  "  Signs  of  the  Times "  (New  York,
1854) ;  "  Reports  of  Union  Church,  Florence  "  (1868,
1870,  1872) ;  "  Life  of  Rev.  George  W.  Bethune  "
(1869) ;  and  "  Reports  of  the  Florence  Orphan  Asy-
lum "  (1876) ;  and  edited  James  S.  Cannon's  "  Pas-
toral Theology"  (1853)  and  George  W.  Bethune's
"  Lectures  on  the  Heidelberg  Catechism  "  (1864).

VAN  NIEUWENHUYSEN,  Wilhelmus,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Holland  about  1645 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  17  Feb.,  1681.  He  came  to  this  country  in
1671  as  an  assistant  to  Samuel  Drisius,  and  min-
istered with  great  success  till  after  1674.  He
was  subsequently  involved  in  a  struggle  between
the  English  governors  and  the  non-conformist
churches,  and  successfully  resisted  an  attempt  to
install  Nicholas  Van  Rensselaer,  an  Episcopal  cler-
gyman, over  the  Dutch  church  in  Albany.  Four
years  later,  by  permission  of  Gov.  Edmund  An-
dros,  Van  Nieuwenhuysen  convened  the  four  Dutch
clergyman  that  were  then  in  New  York,  and  with
their  elders  organized  a  classis.  This  was  the  first
formal  ecclesiastical  body  among  the  Dutch  in
this  country,  and  the  last  for  about  seventy  years.
Their  ordination  of  a  clergyman  was  subsequently
ratified  by  the  classis  of  Amsterdam.  There  was
a  steady  growth  in  the  membership  of  his  church
during  his  ministry  in  New  York.  He  also  sup-
plied the  churches  on  Long  Island  during  their
vacancy.  Henricus  Selyns,  his  relative  and  suc-
cessor, wrote  a  poem  on  his  life  and  work,  which
concludes  with  the  lines

"  Now  is  New  Netherland,  by  Nieuwenhuysen's  mis-
sion,

And  Nieuwenhuysen,  by  New  Netherland's  con-
trition,

Led  to  the  New  Jerusalem  for  new  delights ;

What  church  more  safety  finds  than  in  renewed
rites  ?  "

VAN  NORMAN,  Daniel  Cummings,  educator,
b.  in  Nelson,  Canada  West,  17  Aug.,  1815 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  24  June,  1886.  He  was  graduated
at  Wesleyan  in  1838,  joined  the  Canada  Wesleyan
conference  the  next  year,  and  was  professor  of
classics  and  physics  in  Victoria  college,  Coburg,  in
1838-'45.  He  founded  the  Burlington  ladies'  acad-
emy, Hamilton,  Ont.,  in  1845,  was  its  principal  till
1851,  and  in  the  latter  year  assumed  the  charge  of
Rutgers  female  institute,  New  York  city,  which
post  he  held  till  1857.  He  then  founded  and  be-
came principal  of  the  Van  Norman  institute,  a
school  for  young  ladies,  successfully  conducting
that  institution  until  his  death.  He  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Wesleyan  in  1860.  Late  in
life  Dr.  Van  Norman  left  the  Methodist  and  united
with  the  Presbyterian  church.  He  was  secretary
of  the  American  foreign  and  Christian  union  for
many  years,  and  a  member  of  scientific  and  literary
bodies,  and,  although  he  held  no  regular  pastorate,
had  preached  more  than  4,000  sermons.

VAN  NOSTRAND,  David,  publisher,  b.  in
New  York  city,  5  Dec,  1811 :  d.  there,  14  June,
1886. He  was  educated  at  Union  hall,  Jamaica,


250


VAN  RENSSELAER


VAN  RENSSELAER


N.  Y.,  and  in  1826  entered  the  publishing-house
of  John  P.  Haven,  who  gave  him  an  interest  in
the  firm  when  he  became  of  age.  In  1834  he
formed  a  partnership  with  William  Dwight,  but
the  financial  crisis  of  1837  led  to  its  dissolution.
Mr.  Van  Nostrand  then  accepted  the  appointment
of  clerk  of  accounts  and  disbursements  under  Cant.
John  G.  Barnard,  at  that  time  in  charge  of  the
defensive  works  of  Louisiana  and  Texas,  with  head-
quarters at  New  Orleans.  While  so  engaged  he
devoted  attention  to  the  study  of  scientific  and
military  affairs,  and  on  his  return  to  New  York
city  began  the  importation  of  military  books  for
officers  of  the  U.  S.  array,  afterward  receiving  or-
ders from  private  individuals  and  from  academic
institutions  for  foreign  books  of  science.  His  place
of  business  was  at  first  at  the  corner  of  John  street
and  Broadway,  and  as  his  trade  increased  he  began
the  publication  of  standard  works  by  American
authors  on  military  and  scientific  subjects.  This
extension,  with  the  growing  demands  for  books
on  scientific  subjects, Ted  to  his  removal  to  23  Mur-
ray street,  where  he  continued  until  his  death.  In
1869  he  began  the  publication  of  "  Van  Nostrand's
Engineering  Magazine,"  a  monthly  journal,  which
was  devoted  to  selections  from  foreign  sources,  but
also  contained  original  papers  on  mathematics.
Mr.  Van  Nostrand  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
St.  Nicholas  and  Holland  societies,  and  was  an
early  member  of  the  Century  and  Union  league
clubs  of  New  York  city.

TAN  RENSSELAER,  Killian,  colonist,  b.  in
Amsterdam,  Holland,  in  1595 ;  d.  there  in  1644.
He  was  descended  from  a  long  line  of  eminent  citi-
zens of  Amsterdam,  was  carefully  educated,  and
became  a  wealthy  pearl  and  diamond  merchant  in
his  native  town.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the
formation  of  the  West  India  company,  placed  sev-
eral of  his  vessels  at  the  disposal  of  the  corporation,
and  twice  advanced  money  to  save  its  credit.  He
sent  an  agent  to  the  New  Netherlands  to  trade
with  the  Indians  for  land  on  the  west  side  of  Hud-
son river,  from  twelve  miles  south  of  Albany  to
Smack's  island,  "  stretching  two  days  into  the  in-
terior," soon  afterward  concluding  the  purchase  of
all  the  land  on  the  east  side  of  that  river,  both
north  and  south  of  Fort  Orange,  and  "  far  into  the
wilderness."  This  great  feudal  estate  included  the
entire  territory  that  is  comprised  in  the  present
counties  of  Albany,  Columbia,  and  Rensselaer,
and  was  named  Rensselaerswick.  He  colonized  it
with  laborers  and  emigrants,  whom  he  sent  out  in
his  own  ships  with  provisions  and  implements  of
warfare  and  industry.  Van  Rensselaer  remained
in  Holland,  but  managed  his  affairs  through  a  di-
rector. In  1640  he  sent  Adrian  Van  der  Donck  to
be  sheriff  of  the  colony,  and  subsequently  Dr.
Johannes  Megapolensis  "  for  the  edifying  improve-
ment of  the  inhabitants  and  Indians  thereabouts."
To  obviate,  as  much  as  possible,  the  dangers  of
life  among  the  latter,  he  required  that  all  his  colo-
nists, except  the  farmers  and  tobacco-planters,
should  live  near  each  other,  so  as  to  form  a  church
neighborhood.  At  his  death  his  estate  descended
to  his  eldest  son,  Johannes  ;  but  the  latter,  being
under  age,  was  placed  under  the  guardianship  of
Johannes  Van  Wely  and  Wouter  Van  Twiller,  who
rendered  homage  to  the  states-general  in  the  name
of  their  ward.  But  the  colony  had  in  reality  be-
come an  independent  power,  and  was  regarded  as
injurious  to  the  rights  of  the  province.  The  West
India  company  became  jealous  for  their  privileges,
and  in  1648  Peter  Stuyvesant,  then  governor  of
New  Amsterdam,  went  with  a  military  escort  up
the  Hudson  river,  ordered  that  no  buildings  should


be  erected  within  a  prescribed  distance  of  Fort
Orange,  and  in  many  ways  attempted  to  cut  off
the  powers  of  the  patroon  of  Rensselaerswick.  A
bitter  controversy  with  Brandt  Arent  Van  Slecht-
enhorst,  the  director,  ensued,  but  in  1674  the  West
India  company  confessed  that  Stuyvesant's  aggres-
sions were  unwarranted  and  in  violation  of  the
colony's  charter.  While  this  controversy  was  in
progress,  Jan  Baptist  Van  Rensselaer,  the  second
son  of  the  first  patroon,  came  to  this  country  as  the
representative  of  his  brother  Johannes,  his  com-
mission as  director  dating  8  May,  1652.  He  retired
in  1658,  worn  out  by  controversies  with  Stuyvesant,
and  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Jeremias.  Jan
Baptist  built  the  Van  Rensselaer  mansion,  and
brought  from  Holland  massive  and  elaborately
carved  furniture,  large  quantities  of  silver  plate,
and  many  portraits  of  his  ancestors.  The  manor
house,  in  internal  improvements  and  finish,  re-
sembled the  Holland  homestead.  The  lord  of  the
manor  resided  there  with  his  tenantry,  maintaining
the  authority  of  a  landed  lord  in  Europe.  The  sec-
ond patroon,  Johannes,  never  came  to  this  country.
— Killian's  third  son,  Jeremias,  b.  in  Amsterdam,
Holland,  about  1632  ;  d.  in  Rensselaerswick,  N.  Y.,
in  October,  1674,  was  in  charge  of  the  colony  for
sixteen  years.  He  was  treated  with  respect  and
courtesy  by  Stuyvesant,  by  whom,  when  the  prov-
ince was  threatened  by  the  English,  he  was  invited
to  New  Amsterdam  to  preside  over  the  convention
that  assembled  there,  to  take  measures  of  defence.
When  the  English  gained  possession  of  New  Neth-
erlands in  1664,  he  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to
the  Duke  of  York.  According  to  the  terms  of  sur-
render, he  was  left  in  peaceable  possession  of  the
colony,  and  conducted  its  affairs  without  interfer-
ence from  the  new  government.  He  was  confirmed
in  most  of  his  rights  and  privileges,  and  the  colony
was  erected  into  a  manor  and  governed  according
to  English  rule.  The  village  of  Beverwyck,  which
had  grown  up  under  the  shadow  of  old  Fort
Orange,  was  detached  from  the  manor,  and  incor-
porated into  the  city  of  Albany.  Van  Rensselaer
soon  acquired  reputation  as  an  executive  officer ;
his  correspondence,  which  is  still  preserved  by  his
descendants,  is  a  valuable  record  of  events,  and  at-
tests his  great  energy  and  business-like  qualities.
He  also  wrote  to  Holland  minute  accounts  of  vari-
ous occurrences  in  this  country  under  the  pen-
name  of  the  "  New  Netherland  Mercury."  He  pre-
served peace  with  the  neighboring  Indians,  and  so
attached  them  to  him  that  they  guarded  his  estates
as  carefully  as  they  did  their  own. He  married


Maria  Van  Cortlandt.  Jeremias  was  succeeded  by
his  nephew,  Killian,  son  of  Johannes.  His  pat-
ent was  issued  in  1685,  under  the  title  of  first  lord
of  the  manor,  and  third  patroon.  By  tljis  patent
the  heirs  in  Albany  relinquished  to  the  heirs  in  Hol-
land all  title  and  right  to  the  land  in  Holland,
and  the  Hollanders  gave  up  all  the  Albany  settle-


VAN  RENSSELAER


VAN  RENSSELAER


251


ment.  Killian  died  without  issue,  and  was  succeeded
by  Jeremias's  son,  Killian,  second  lord  of  the
manor,  b.  in  Rensselaerswick  in  1662 ;  d.  there  in
1719.  He  was  an  officer  of  militia  and  a  magistrate,
represented  the  manor  in  the  assembly  in  1693-1704,
and  was  a  member  of  the  council  from  the  latter
date  until  his  death.  In  1705  he  conveyed  Claver-
ack,  or  the  "  lower  manor,"  to  his  brother,  Hendrick.
He  married  Maria,  daughter  of  Stephen  Van  Cort-
landt. — Jeremias's  brother,  Nicholas,  clergyman,
b.  in  Amsterdam  about  1638;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
in  1678,  was  the  fourth  son  of  the  first  patroon.  He
was  liberally  educated  in  Holland,  and  studied
theology  there,  but  began  a  tour  of  Europe  before
taking  his  degree.  In  Brussels  he  met  Charles  II.
of  England,  who  was  then  in  exile,  and  Van  Rens-
selaer predicted  to  him  that  he  would  be  restored
to  the  throne.  He  subsequently  went  to  England
as  chaplain  to  the  Dutch  embassy,  and  the  king,
recognizing  him  and  recollecting his prediction,

f'ave  him  a  gold  snuff-box  with  his  likeness  in  the
id,  which  is  still  in  possession  of  the  Van  Rens-
selaer family.  After  the  Dutch  ambassador  left
Great  Britain,  Van  Rensselaer  was  licensed  by
Charles  to  preach  to  the  Dutch  congregation  at
Westminster,  was  ordained  a  deacon  in  the  English
church,  and  appointed  lecturer  at  St.  Margaret's,
Lothbury.  When  Sir  Edm6nd  Andros  was  com-
missioned governor  of  the  New  Netherlands,  in
1674,  Van  Rensselaer  accompanied  him  to  this
country,  bearing  a  letter  of  recommendation  from
the  Duke  of  York,  in  which  he  requested  that  Van
Rensselaer  be  placed  in  charge  of  one  of  the  Dutch
churches  in  New  York  or  Albany  when  there  should
be  a  vacancy.  He  became  colleague  pastor  of  the
church  in  Albany  shortly  after  his  arrival,  and  in
September,  1675,  was  invited  by  the  governor  to
preach  in  the  Dutch  church  in  New  York;  but
the  pastor,  William  Van  Nieuwenhuysen,  absented
himself  from  the  service,  and  forbade  Van  Rensse-
laer's baptizing  any  children  that  might  be  pre-
sented for  that  ordinance.  Subsequent  events
proved  that  Van  Nieuwenhuysen  rejected  his  or-
dination as  not  being  in  conformity  with  the  order
of  the  Dutch  churches,  nor  with  the  terms  of  the
treaty.  Van  Rensselaer  referred  the  matter  to  the
governor  and  council,  and  the  trial  was  consid-
ered of  much  importance  by  both  the  church  and
the  civil  authorities,  since  it  involved  their  privi-
leges and  rights,  as  denned  in  the  articles  under
which  the  province  was  surrendered  to  the  Eng-
lish. Nieuwenhuysen  and  his  consistory  presented
a  written  answer,  which  was  rather  in  justifica-
tion of  the  former's  conduct  toward  Van  Rens-
selaer than  a  formal  answer  to  the  question  why
he  should  not  be  allowed  t,o  preach.  The  matter
was  passed  over,  and  Van  Rensselaer  returned  to
his  charge  in  Albany ;  but  in  1676  he  was  thrown
into  prison,  "  for  some  dubious  words  spoken  in  a
sermon,"  Jacob  Leisler  and  Jacob  Milburne  making
the  complaint.  He  appealed  to  the  governor  and
council,  and  gave  a  bond  of  1,500  guilders  to  pros-
ecute the  matter  to  the  end.  Leisler  failed  to
furnish  the  bond  that  was  required  of  him,  a  war-
rant was  issued  for  his  arrest,  and  the  churches
and  people  were  thrown  into  a  ferment.  At  last  a
court  was  held  at  Albany,  before  which  Van  Rens-
selaer and  Nieuwenhuysen  appeared  with  papers
and  witnesses.  After  a  review  of  the  whole  case,
they  were  told  by  order  of  the  governor  "  to  be  recon-
ciled according  to  Christian  love  and  duty."  They
answered,  "  With  all  our  hearts,"  and  the  court
ordered  the  parties  to  "  forgive  and  forget,"  and
that  Leisler  and  Jacob  Milburne  pay  the  whole
costs,  as  giving  the  first  occasion  for  the  differences.


Van  Rensselaer  again  resumed  his  charge,  but  a
year  later  he  was  refused  a  seat  among  the  elders.
It  was  resolved  that  he  have  a  suitable  one  behind
the  magistrates,  but  in  1677  he  was  deposed  by  the
governor,  "  on  account,"  say  the  Reformed  church
authorities,  "  of  his  scandalous  life  " ;  but  this  is  not
substantiated  by  unprejudiced  witnesses.  He  left
no  children. — His  wife,  Alida,  was  the  daughter  of
Philip  Schuyler,  and  subsequently  married  Robert
Livingston. — Killian's  grandson,  Stephen,  inher-
ited the  manor,  removed  the  old  house,  and  in
1765  built  the  present  mansion,  seen  in  the  illus-
tration. He  governed  under  the  title  of  the  seventh
patroon.  He  married  Catherine  Livingston,  daugh-
ter of  Philip  Livingston,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  and  with  his  father-in-law
"  sternly  opposed  the  encroachments  of  the  crown."
— Their  son,  Stephen,  eighth  patroon,  b.  in  New
York,  1  Nov.,  1765 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,
1839,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1782,  and  the
next  year  married  Margaret,  daughter  of  Gen.  Philip
Schuyler.  He  was
always  addressed
by  courtesy  as  the
patroon,  although
with  the  establish-
ment of  the  colo-
nial government  he
lost  his  baronial
rights.  After  leav-
ing college  he  en-
tered at  once  on  the
improvement  of  his
splendid  although
somewhat  dimin-
ished estates,  and,
to  induce  farmers
to  settle  on  his
lands,  placed  ren-
tals so  low  that
they  yielded  only
one  per  cent,  at  a
fair  valuation.  In
consequence  he  soon  had  900  farms  of  150  acres
each  under  cultivation.  Having  secured  his  patri-
mony, he  entered  politics,  and,  as  a  great  land-
holder and  at  the  same  time  an  ardent  patriot,  was
destined  to  bridge  the  chasm  between  the  two  op-
posite political  systems.  He  was  chosen  to  the
assembly  in  1789  as  a  Federalist,  became  a  leader
of  that  party,  was  state  senator  in  1791-6,  lieuten-
ant-governor in  1795,  and  in  1798  and  1808-'10
was  in  the  assembly.  He  became  major  of  militia
in  1786,  colonel  in  1788,  and  major-general  in  1801.
He  was  one  of  the  first  to  propose  the  establish-
ment of  a  canal  between  Hudson  river  and  the
great  lakes,  was  appointed  in  1810  a  commissioner
to  report  to  the  assembly  on  the  route,  and  made  an
investigating  tour  of  it  the  same  year,  the  report  of
which  was  favorably  received  in  1811 ;  but  the  pro-
ject was  delayed  by  the  beginning  of  the  second
war  with  Great  Britain.  In  1812  he  was  appointed
to  command  the  U.  S.  forces  on  the  northern  fron-
tier. Although  he  opposed  the  war  as  premature,
he  at  once  organized  a  militia  force  that  was  suffi-
cient in  numbers  to  overrun  the  province  of  Upper
Canada.  But  he  had  no  regular  soldiers,  and  his
officers  were  deficient  in  both  courage  and  military
skill.  On  13-14  Oct.,  1812,  he  fought  the  battle  of
Queenston  Heights.  The  importance  of  that  place
arose  from  the^fact  that  it  was  the  terminus  of  the
portage  between  Lake  Ontario  and  the  upper  lakes.
Gen.  Van  Rensselaer  had  minute  information  as  to
the  situation  and  strength  of  each  post  of  the  ene-
my on  the  western  bank  of  Niagara  river,  and  his


252


VAN  RENSSELAER


VAN  RENSSELAER


force  numbered  6,000  men.  The  immediate  com-
mand of  the  attacking  party  was  assigned  to
Lieut.-Col.  Solomon  Van  Rensselaer,  who,  on  the
morning  of  13  Oct..  with  300  militia  and  300  regu-
lars, under  Lieut.-Col.  John  Chrystie,  crossed  the
river.  After  a  brilliant  attack  by  Van  Rensselaer,
who  received  wounds  that  compelled  him  to  with-
draw, Capt.  John  E.  Wool  assumed  command
and  stormed  and  captured  the  heights.  The  next
day  British  re-enforcements,  numbering  1,300  sol-
diers and  500  Indians,  arrived  under  command  of
Gen.  Roger  H.  Sheaffe.  The  militia  on  the  Ameri-
can shore  could  overlook  the  battle-field  and  see  the
approach  of  Sheaffe ;  but  when  Gen.  Stephen  Van
Rensselaer  attempted  to  move  them  across  the
river  to  the  support  r>f  the  American  force,  they
refused  to  stir.  The  law  provides  that  militia  shall
not  be  compelled  to  serve  beyond  the  bounds  of
their  state  against  their  will.  They  fell  back  on
this  privilege,  and  Van  Rensselaer  was  powerless
to  induce  them  to  fight.  The  Americans  on  the
heights  were  unable  to  hold  their  position,  and  on
the  afternoon  of  14  Oct.  surrendered  in  a  body.  In
his  official  despatches  Gen.  Van  Rensselaer  ascribes
the  disaster  to  the  refusal  of  the  militia  to  go  to
the  aid  of  the  captors  of  the  heights.  He  was  se-
verely censured  for  his  tardiness  in  making  the  at-
tack, and  the  fact  that  he  was  a  leader  of  the  Fed-
eralist party,  and  opposed  to  the  war,  increased
public  dissatisfaction.  On  24  Oct.  he  resigned  his
command  and  left  the  service.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  again  became  canal  commissioner,  and
chairman  of  the  commission.  When  the  Erie  and
Champlain  canals  were  completed  in  1825  he  had
been  president  of  their  boards  for  fourteen  years.
He  was  chosen  to  the  assembly  in  1818,  served  in
the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1821  and  in
congress  in  1823-9,  having  been  elected  to  fill  the
vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Solomon  Van
Rensselaer.  In  that  body  he  earnestly  supported
John  Quincy  Adams  for  the  presidency.  He  be-
came a  regent  of  the  University  of  New  York  in
1819,  and  was  subsequently  its  chancellor  until  his
death.  He  promoted  the  interests  of  the  State
agricultural  society,  and  was  its  president  in  1820.
Under  his  direction  and  at  his  expense  Prof.
Amos  Eaton  made  a  geological  survey  along  the
line  of  the  canal  from  Albany  to  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in
1821-'3,  and  of  another  line  that  began  in  Massa-
chusetts. Prom  the  data  collected  in  these  sur-
veys he  became  convinced  of  the  need  for  further
technical  education ;  to  supply  which  he  founded
Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  at  Troy,  defray-
ing for  a  long  time  half  of  its  expenses.  Yale
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1825.  Gen.  Van
Rensselaer  was  tall,  of  commanding  presence,  and
had  dark,  expressive  eyes.  He  was  the  patron
of  benevolent  objects.  His  second  wife,  whom  he
married  in  1802,  was  Cornelia,  daughter  of  Chief-
Justice  William  Paterson,  of  New  Jersey.  He  pub-
lished "  An  Agricultural  and  Geological  Survey  of
the  District  adjoining  the  Erie  Canal "  (Albany,
1824). — His  eldest  son,  Stephen,  the  last  patroon,
b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  29  March,  1789;  d.  there,  25
May,  1868,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1808,
and  inheriting  the  manor  by  his  father's  will,  at
his  death  became  the  last  patroon.  During  the
anti-rent  troubles  in  1839  he  sold  his  townships,
and  at  his  death  the  manor  passed  out  of  the
hands  of  his  descendants.  He  was  an  accomplished
gentleman  of  the  old  school,  and  served  as  ma-
jor-general of  militia.  He  married  Harriet  Eliza-
beth, daughter  of  William  Bayard,  of  New  York.
— Another  son  of  Gen.  Stephen,  Curt  land  t.  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y .,  26  May,  1808 ;  d.  in


C  fa^.  tfe^h^


Burlington,  N.  J..  25  July.  1860,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1827,  studied  at  Union  theological  semi-
nary. Prince  Edward  county,  Va.,  and  at  Prince-
ton theological  seminary.  He  was  a  missionary  to
the  slaves  in  Vir-
ginia in  1833-'5,
was  ordained  the
latter  year,  be-
came pastor  of
the  Presbyterian
church  in  Burling-
ton, N.  J.,  in  1837,
of  the  2d  Pres-
byterian church,
Washington,  D.C.,
in  184i,  and  agent
of  Princeton  theo-
logical seminary
in  1844,  raising
$100,000  for  its
endowment.  He
was  secretary  of
the  Presbyterian
board  of  educa-
tion in  1846-'60,
and  founded  and  edited  the  "  Presbyterian  Maga-
zine" and  "The  Home,  the  School,  and  the
Church."  The  University  of  New  York  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1845.  Much  of  his  large
fortune  was  devoted  to  benevolent  objects  and  to
the  religious  enterprises  of  the  Presbyterian  church.
After  his  death,  selections  from  his  published  writ-
ings appeared  under  the  title  of  "Miscellaneous
Sermons,  Essays,  and  Addresses,"  edited  by  his
son,  Cortlandt  Van  Rensselaer  (Philadelphia,  1861).
— Another  son  of  Stephen,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1810;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  23
March,  1864,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1831,  but  resigned  from  the  army  the
next  year  and  engaged  in  farming  near  Ogdens-
burg,  N.  Y.  He  was  a  member  of  congress  in
1841-3,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Whig,  and  in
1855-60  was  president  of  mining  companies.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed
chief-of-staff  to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  with  the  rank
of  brigadier-general,  and  he  became  inspector-gen-
eral with  the  rank  of  colonel  on  the  retirement  of
Gen.  Scott,  served  in  the  Department  of  the  Rap-
pahannock in  April  and  August,  1862,  subsequent-
ly in  the  3d  army  corps,  and  in  the  Department  of
the  Ohio  from  17  Sept.  until  his  death. — The  elder
Stephen's  brother.  Philip  S,  mayor  of  Albany,
b.  in  Albany,  15  April,  1767;  d.  there,  25  Sept.,
1824,  became  mayor  of  Albany  in  1799,  and  held  of-
fice for  nineteen  years,  the  longest  service  of  any
mayor  of  that  city.  He  was  a  public-spirited,  ener-
getic officer,  and  active  in  promoting  educational,
moral,  and  religious  interests.  He  married  Ann  Van
Cortlandt.  He  was  president  of  the  Albany  Bible
society  for  many  years,  a  trustee  of  Union,  and  a
founder  of  Albany  academy. — Gen.  Stephen's  kins-
man, Jeremiah,  congressman,  b.  in  New  York
in  1741 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  22  Feb.,  1810,  was
graduated  at  Princeton,  in  1758,  actively  sup-
ported the  Revolution,  and  was  a  member  of  the
1st  congress,  serving  in  1789-91.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1800,  and  lieutenant-governor  of
New  York  in  1800-'4.  He  was  active  in  the  pro-
motion of  schemes  for  internal  improvement,  and
a  member  of  the  Inland  navigation  company,  of
which  Philip  Schuyler  was  the  first  president. — The
second  son  of  the  first  Jeremias,  II  end  rick,  land-
owner, b.  near  Albany,  N.  Y.,  about  1667 ;  d.  there  in
July,  1740,  was  the  founder  of  the  Claverack  branch
of  the  Van  Rensselaer  family. He  received  as  his


VAN  RENSSELAER


VAN  SANTVOORD


253


portion  of  his  grandfather  Killian's  estate  what
was  known  as  the  Claverack  patent,  containing
about  62,000  acres  of  land  in  Columbia  county,  and
1,500  acres  out  of  the  manor  proper,  opposite  the
city  of  Albany.  He  built  a  substantial  brick  house
•on  "the  latter  estate  and  one  at  Claverack,  which
is  still  standing.  He  was  employed  in  many  pub-
lic capacities,  being  mayor  of  Albany,  commis-
sioner of  Indian  affairs,  and  a  representative  in  the
assembly.  In  1698  he  bought  from  the  Schaghti-
ooke  Indians  a  tract  of  six  square  miles  on  Hoosac
river,  for  which  he  procured  a  patent.  This  pur-
chase interfered  greatly  with  the  city  of  Albany,
and,  Van  Rensselaer  declining  to  sell  his  patent  to
the  council,  the  controversy  became  a  state  affair.
In  1699  the  dispute  was  amicably  settled  and  he
passed  his  patent  over  to  the  city.  His  wife  was  a
granddaughter  of  Anneke  Jans  Bogardus,  through
whom  their  descendants  became  heirs  to  Trinity
church  farm. — His  grandson,  Henry  Killian,
soldier,  b.  near  Albany  in  1744 ;  d.  in  Greenbush,
N.  Y.,  9  Sept.,  1816,  commanded  a  New  York  regi-
ment during  the  Revolution,  was  wounded  at  the
■capture  of  Gen.  Burgoyne,  and  carried  the  ball  in
his  body  for  thirty-five  years.  In  July,  1777,  he
was  attacked  by  a  large  force  near  Fort  Ann,  and
made  a  brave  resistance,  but,  learning  of  the  aban-
donment of  Fort  Ticonderoga,  withdrew  after  re-
ceiving another  severe  wound.  He  was  subse-
quently a  general  of  militia. — His  son,  Solomon,
soldier,  b.  in  Rensselaer  county,  N.  Y.,  6  Aug.,
1774 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y,  23  April,  1852,  entered
the  service,  14  March,  1792,  as  a  cornet  of  cavalry.
He  became  captain,  raised  a  volunteer  company,
and,  pushing  through  the  wilderness,  joined  Gen.
Anthony  Wayne  in  Ohio  in  the  Miami  campaign.
At  the  battle  of  Maumee  Rapids  in  August,  1794,
he  made  a  brilliant  and  effective  charge  against

the  savages,  and
was  shot,  it  was
supposed  fatally,
through  the  lungs.
A  litter  was  sent
to  take  him  from
the  battle-field,  but
he  refused  to  be
laid  upon  it.  "  You
young  dog,  then
how  are  you  go-
ing ¥ "  exclaimed
Gen.  Wayne.  "  I
am  an  officer  of
the  cavalry,  and  I
shall  go  on  horse-
back," was  his  re-
ply. "  You  will
drop  by  the  road,"
said  Wayne.  "If
I  do,  just  cover  me
up  and  let  me  die
there,"  said  Van  Rensselaer.  He  was  mounted  on
his  own  charger,  as  he  desired,  and  one  of  his  own
dragoons,  on  either  side,  supported  him  five  or  six
miles.  When  his  cousin,  Stephen,  became  briga-
dier-general of  the  forces  of  the  north  in  1812,  he
became  adjutant-general  of  New  York  militia,  and
negotiated  the  important  agreement  by  which  Lake
Ontario  was  granted  by  the  British  during  an
armistice  as  a  public  highway  for  purposes  of
transportation  of  American  troops  and  stores.  At
the  assault  of  Queenston  Heights,  13  Oct.,  1812,  he
commanded  the  attacking  party,  was  the  first  to
spring  ashore,  on  a  large  rock  at  the  foot  of  the
rapids,  and  with  225  men,  formed  under  a  fierce
fire,  climbed  the  bank  and  routed  the  enemy  at  the


<^o€^fay^i^&^>clcuz^


point  of  the  bayonet,  but  fell  with  several  wounds.
He  served  in  congress  in  1819-22,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Federalist,  and  was  postmaster  at  Al-
bany in  1822-39.  He  accompanied  Gov.  George
Clinton  to  Ohio  in  1824  in  the  interest  of  the  Erie
canal,  and  was  one  of  the  delegates  from  the  state
of  New  York  at  its  opening  on  4  Nov.,  1825.  In
1797  he  married  Harriet,  daughter  of  Col.  Philip
Van  Rensselaer.  He  published  a  "  Narrative  of
the  Affair  at  Queenston  "  (New  York,  1836).  See
"  A  Legacy  of  Historical  Gleanings,"  by  his  daugh-
ter, Mrs.  Catherine  Van  Rensselaer  Bonney  (Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  1875).— Henry's  brother,  Nicholas,
soldier,  b.  in  Rensselaer  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1754;  d.
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1848,  was  a" colonel  in  the  Revo-
lution, and  served  with  gallantry  on  the  heights  of
Stillwater.  After  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Burgoyne
he  was  despatched  by  Gen.  Horatio  Gates  to  an-
nounce the  news  at  Albany. — Another  brother  of
Henry,  Killian  K,  congressman,  b.  in  Rensselaer
county,  N.  Y.,  in  1763;  d.  in  Albany,  18  June,  1845,
after  receiving  a  thorough  education  entered  the
law,  and  attained  reputation  at  the  bar.  He  was
chosen  tocongress  as  a  Democrat  in  1800,  and  served
by  re-election  till  1811. — Another  great-grandson  of
the  first  Jeremias,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Claverack,
N.  Y.,  in  1741 ;  d.  there,  11  Sept.,  1802,  was  a  gen-
eral of  militia  during  the  Revolution,  and  com-
manded the  force  that  pursued  and  defeated  Sir
John  Johnson  on  his  Mohawk  valley  raid  in  1780.
For  a  full  history  of  the  Van  Rensselaer  family,
see  "  Colonial  New  York,"  by  George  W.  Schuyler
(2  vols.,  New  York.  1885).

VAN  RENSSELAER,  Mariana  Griswold,
author,  b.  in  New  York  city,  23  Feb.,  1851.  She
is  the  daughter  of  George  Griswold,  of  New  York
city.  She  was  educated  at  home,  married  Schuyler
Van  Rensselaer  in  1874,  and  has  devoted  herself
to  the -study  of  art  and  architecture,  contribut-
ing on  these  subjects  to  magazines  and  newspapers.
She  is  the  author  of  "  American  Etchers  (New
York,  1886),  and  "Henry  Hobson  Richardson  and
his  Works  "  (Boston,  1888).

VAN  RENSSELAER,  Maunsell,  clergyman,
b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  15  April,  1819.  He  is  the  son
of  Judge  John  S.  Van  Rensselaer.  After  gradua-
tion at  Union  college  in  1838.  and  at  the  Episco-
pal general  theological  seminary  in  1841,  he  was
made  deacon  in  St.  Paul's  chapel,  New  York
city,  27  June  1841,  by  Bishop  Benjamin  T.  Onder-
donk,  and  priest,  in  St.  Paul's  church,  Whitehall,
N.  Y.,  by  the  same  bishop.  He  was  rector  of  St.
Paul's  church,  Whitehall,  N.  Y,  in  1841-'5 ;  of
Grace  church,  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1846-7 ;  of  St.
John's,  Mount  Morris,  N.  Y.,  in  1847-'53 ;  of  St.
Paul's,  Oxford,  N.  Y.,  in  1853-'4 ;  of  St.  Paul's,
Rochester,  in  1854-'9 ;  and  of  Emmanuel  church,
Geneva,  Switzerland,  in  1877-'8.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Hobart  in  1859,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  in  1874.  Dr.  Van  Rensselaer  was  president
of  De  Veaux  college,  N.  Y.,  in  1859-69,  professor
of  ethics  in  Hobart  in  1870-'2,  and  its  president  in
1872-6.  Since  1886  he  has  been  chaplain  of  the
House  of  the  Holy  Comforter  in  New  York  city.
He  has  published  "  Sister  Louise,  the  Story  of  her
Life  Work  "  (New  York,  1883),  and  has  made  large
contributions  to  religious  literature.

VAN  SANTVOORD,  Cornelius,  clergyman,
b.  in  Holland  in  1637;  d.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  6
Jan.,  1752.  He  studied  in  the  University  of  Ley-
den,  came  to  this  country  about  1718,  and  became
pastor  of  the  Reformed  Dutch  church  of  Staten
island,  organized  in  1690.  He  was  here  from  1718
till  1742,  preaching  both  in  French  and  in  Dutch,
many  of  his  hearers  being  French  Protestant  refu-


854


VAN  SANTVOORD


VAN  SCHAACK


gees,  settled  on  the  island.  In  the  latter  year  he
removed  to  Schenectady,  and  became  pastor  of  the
Reformed  Dutch  church  there,  in  which  place  he
remained  until  his  death.  His  intimate  friend,
Theodorus  J.  Frelinghuysen,  who  came  to  this
country  from  Holland  two  years  after  him,  settling
at  Raritan,  N.  J.,  and  arousing  much  opposition
by  his  bold  and  earnest  evangelism,  found  strong
support  in  Mr.  Van  Santvoord,  who  published  in
his  defence  a  small  volume  entitled  "  A  Dialogue
between  Considerans  and  Candidus."  He  was  a
friend  and  had  been  a  favorite  pupil  of  the  eminent
Prof.  John  Marck,  of  Leyden  university,  two  of
whose  works  he  translated — one  a  "  Commentary
on  the  Apocalypse,"  with  added  notes  and  reflec-
tions, the  preface  being  written  by  Prof.  Wesselius
of  the  same  university  (Leyden,  1736);  the  other
*'  A  Dissertation  on  the  Slaughter  of  the  Innocents
at  Bethlehem,"  designed  to  establish  the  literal
interpretation  of  prophecy. — His  great-grandson,
Staats,  clergyman,  b.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  15
March,  1790;  d.  in  New  Baltimore,  N.*Y.,  29  May,
1882,  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1811  and  at  New
Brunswick  theological  seminary  in  1814,  ordained
to  the  ministry  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  church,
and  was  pastor  of  the  church  of  Belleville,  N.  J.,
in  1814-'28,  of  the  church  in  Schodack,  N.  Y.,  in
1829-34,  and  thence  removed  to  New  Baltimore,
where  he  resided  until  his  death.  He  retired  after
completing  his  fiftieth  year  in  the  active  ministry
of  the  Reformed  Dutch  church.  In  1864  he  was
in  the  service  of  the  Christian  commission  at
Nashville,  Tenn.  His  last  public  appearance  was
in  his  ninety-first  year,  when  he  attended  the
200th  anniversary  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  church
at  Schenectady,  of  which  his  ancestor  was  pastor,
delivering  the  benediction  in  Dutch.  Union  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1876.  He  published
several  sermons,  and  "  A  Spiritual  Gift,"  a  series  of
fifteen  discourses  (New  York,  1851). — Staats's  son,
Cornelius,  clergyman,  b.  in  Belleville,  N.  J.,  8
April,  1816,  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1835,  and
studied  at  New  Brunswick  and  Princeton  theo-
logical seminaries.  He  became  pastor  of  the  Dutch
Reformed  church  in  Canastota,  N.  Y.,  in  1838,  sub-
sequently filled  charges  in  New  York  state,  was
chaplain  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  1861-'5,  associate
editor  of  the  "  Interior,"  Chicago,  111.,  in  1869-'71,
and  commissioner  of  schools  in  Ulster  county,  N.  Y.,
in  1871-'6.  Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1855.  He  was  a  special  correspondent  of  the
"  New  York  Times  "  during  the  civil  war,  has  pub-
lished numerous  magazine  and  newspaper  articles,
"Discourses  and  Miscellanies"  (New  York,  1856),
and  "  Memoirs  of  Eliphalet  Nott,"  with  contribu-
tions by  Prof.  Tayler  Lewis  (1876). — Another  son
of  Staats,  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Belleville,  N.  J.,
8  Dec,  1819 ;  d.  in  East  Albany,  N.  Y.,  6  March,
1863,  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1841,  studied  law
in  Kinderhook,  and  removed  to  Indiana,  but  re-
turned to  the  former  town  and  practised  there  in
1846-52,  In  1852  and  1856  he  was  a  member  of
the  state  assembly,  and  in  1860-'3  district  attorney
of  Rensselaer  county.  He  was  killed  in  a  railroad
accident.  He  wrote  for  the  "  Democratic  Review  "
lives  of  French  revolutionists,  and  is  the  author
of  "  The  Indiana  Justice  "  (Lafayette,  1845) ;  "  Life
of  Algernon  Sidney  "  (New  York,  1851) ;  "  Prin-
ciples of  Pleading  in  Civil  Actions  under  the  New
York  Code"  (1852-'4;  enlarged  edition,  with  addi-
tions, 1855 ;  with  appendix,  notes,  and  references,
1858) ;  "  Lives  of  the  Chief  Justices  of  the  United
States "  (1854) ;  "Precedents  of  Pleading"  (1858);
and  "  Practice  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  New  York
in  Equity  Actions"  (Albany,  N.  Y.,  1860-'l).


VAN SATLEE, Antony  Jansen, pirate,  b.

firobably  in  Holland  about  1600  ;  d.  on  Long
sland,  N.  Y.,  in  March,  1670.  He  was  in  New
Amsterdam  as  early  as  1630,  and  resided  there  till
1639,  when  he  was  banished  for  his  crimes  and  un-
ruly manner  of  life,  having  acquired  the  soubri-
quet of  the  "  Turk  "  from  his  cruel  and  fierce  char-
acter. He  is  found  in  the  records  under  several
aliases,  that  indicate  that  he  engaged  in  the  pira-
cies on  the  coast  of  Morocco  before  coming  to  this
country.  When  he  was  banished  from  New  Am-
sterdam he  settled  on  the  west  end  of  Long  Island,
obtaining  a  patent  for  100  acres  of  land.

VAN  SCHAACK,  Peter,  lawyer,  b.  in  Kinder-
hook,  N.  Y.,  in  March,  1747;  d.  there,  17  Sept.,
1832.  His  ancestors  were  early  settlers  of  New
York  state,  emigrating  from  Holland.  Peter  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1768,  studied  law  under
William  Smith  the  elder,  and  at  twenty-six  years
of  age  was  appointed  sole  reviser  of  the  colonial
statutes.  He  was  conscientiously  opposed  to  the
Revolution,  and,  notwithstanding  his  personal
popularity  and  intimacy  with  the  most  eminent
men  of  the  country,  was  summoned  before  the
committee  on  conspiracies  at  Albany  in  June,  1777,
and  required  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the
Continental  congress.  He  refused,  was  ordered  to
Boston  within  ten  days,  and  from  that  time  was
constantly  restrained,  the  authorities  even  refus-
ing to  permit  him  to  take  his  dying  wife  to  New
York,  as  she  entreated.  In  October,  1778,  he  was
banished,  went  to  England,  and  remained  there
till  the  summer  of  1785.  During  his  residence
abroad  he  associated  with  the  chief  scholars  and
statesmen  of  Great  Britain.  When  he  returned
to  this  country  he  was  welcomed  by  his  old  asso-
ciates and  by  people  of  all  parties,  and,  resuming
his  profession,  was  eminently  popular  and  suc-
cessful. Prom  constant  study  his  eyesight  became
impaired  early  in  life,  and  during  his  later  years
he  was  totally  blind.  He  also  devoted  much  time
to  his  law-school,  which  numbered  nearly  one
hundred  pupils  annually.  Judge  Van  Schaack
was  well  versed  in  polite  literature  as  well  as  legal
lore,  a  fine  classical  scholar,  and  a  brilliant  con-
versationalist, and  his  residence  at  Kinderhook,
which  is  still  standing,  was  the  resort  of  many
eminent  persons  of  both  England  and  this  coun-
try. Columbia  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1778.  He  published  "  Laws  of  the  Colony  of  New
York  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1773),  and  "  Conductor
Generalis,  or  the  Duty  and  Authority  of  Justices,
Sheriffs,  Constables,  etc.,  Revised  and  Adapted  to
the  United  States  "  (1788).  See  his  "  Life,  Journal,
Diary,  and  Letters,"  edited  by  his  son,  Henry  C.
Van  Schaack  (1842). — His  son,  Henry  Cruger,
lawyer,  b.  in  Kinderhook,  N.  Y„  3  April,  1802 ;  d.
in  Manlius,  N.  Y.,  16  Dec,  1887,  received  an  aca-
demic education  at  Hudson  and  legal  instruction
from  his  father,  and  at  twenty-one  years  of  age
was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  began  practice  at
Black  Rock,  near  Buffalo.  In  1827  he  removed  to
Manlius,  N.  Y.  During  his  sixty  years  of  profes-
sional life  Mr.  Van  Schaack  published  the  life  of
his  father,  already  referred  to,  and  several  pam-
phlets, including  "  Henry  Cruger,"  an  address  read
before  the  New  York  historical  society  (New  York,
1859);  "History  of  Manlius  Village"  (Fayette-
ville,  N.  Y.,  1873) ;  "  An  Old  Kinderhook  Mansion  "
(New  York,  1878) ;  and  "  Captain  Thomas  Morris  "
(1882).  He  was  a  noted  collector  of  manuscripts,
and  his  collection  of  autograph  letters — including
those  of  most  of  the  heroes  and  patriots  of  the
Revolution — was  one  of  the  most  extensive  and
valuable  in  the  country.


VAN  SCHAICK


VAN  TWILLER


255


TAN  SCHAICK,  Gfozen,  soldier,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  in  January,  1737 ;  d.  there,  4  July,  1787.  His
father,  Sybrant,  was  mayor  of  Albany  in  1756-'61.
Gozen  was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the  expedition
against  Crown  Point  in  1756,  in  which  the  French
and  Indians  were  defeated  at  Sabbath  Day  Point,
became  captain  in  1758,  took  part  in  the  expedi-
tions against  Fort  Frontenac  and  Fort  Niagara,
and  was  appointed  major  of  a  New  York  regiment
in  1759.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st
New  York  regiment  in  1762,  participated  in  the
battle  of  Ticonderoga,  and  received  a  severe
wound  on  the  cheek  from  a  French  musket  that
led  to  a  cancerous  disease  of  which  he  finally  died.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  became
colonel  of  the  2d  New  York  regiment,  and  on  22
Nov.,  1775,  he  was  appointed  to  command  the  1st
New  York  battalion.  A  few  weeks  later  he  was
sent  on  an  expedition  to  Cherry  Valley  to  protect
the  inhabitants  from  the  incursions  of  the  Indian
chief,  Joseph  Brandt,  and  did  good  service  during
this  campaign  and  the  subsequent  ones.  At  the
battle  of  Monmouth  he  acted  as  brigadier-general
under  Lord  Stirling.  In  1779  he  was  appointed  to
head  a  select  detachment,  with  which  he  destroyed
the  Onondaga  settlements.  For  that  service  con-
gress gave  him  a  vote  of  thanks.  He  was  a  rigid
disciplinarian,  his  regiment  being  one  of  the  best
in  the  service,  and  his  patriotism  was  freely  shown
in  sacrificing  his  fortune  to  the  public  good.

VANSITTART,  Henry,  British  naval  officer,
b.  in  Bisham  Abbey,  Berkshire,  England,  in  1779 ;
d.  in  Woodstock,  Canada,  in  1844.  He  entered
the  navy  in  1791,  was  made  a  lieutenant  in  1794,
and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  sloop
"Hermes"  in  1798.  During  the  ensuing  year  he
was  employed  in  convoying  merchant  vessels  to
and  from  British  America,  and  in  1800  he  captured
several  of  the  enemy's  armed  vessels  on  the  Ja-
maica station,  where,  in  the  following  year,  he
obtained  post  rank  in  the  "  Abergavenny,"  of
fifty-four  guns.  He  was  engaged  in  1803  in  block-
ading the  rivers  Elbe  and  Weser,  and  in  February,
1804,  sailed  for  the  Jamaica  station,  where  he  was
actively  employed  during  the  succeeding  four
years.  While  off  Havana,  in  the  summer  of  1806,
on  board  his  frigate,  the  "  Fortunee,"  he  succeeded,
with  the  aid  of  an  armed  schooner,  in  capturing
two  Spanish  gun-boats  and  twenty  merchant  ves-
sels. Among  others  that  the  "  Fortunee  "  took
during  her  cruises  in  the  West  Indies  were  the
French  privateer  "  Le  vautour  "  and  the  French
armed  schooner  "  Le  grand  Juge  Bertolio."  He
was  afterward  employed  on  channel  service  and
in  the  Mediterranean,  and  in  October,  1811,  cap-
tured the  famous  French  privateer  "  Le  Vice- Ad-
miral Martin."  He  was  made  a  rear-admiral,  22
July,  1830,  and  vice-admiral,  23  Nov.,  1841.  In
1834  he  removed  to  Canada,  bought  an  estate  near
Woodstock,  and  was  instrumental  in  erecting
churches  and  school-houses.

VAN  TWILLER,  Wouter,  or  Walter,  gover-
nor of  New  Netherlands,  b.  in  Nieukirk,  Holland,
about  1580;  d.  in  Amsterdam,  Holland,  after  1646.
He  was  a  clerk  in  the  warehouse  of  the  Dutch
West  India  company,  and,  having  married  a  niece
of  Killian  Van  Rensselaer,  was  employed  by  the
latter  to  ship  cattle  to  his  colony  on  Hudson  river.
Van  T wilier  made  two  voyages  to  this  country  in
that  service,  and  was  somewhat  acquainted  with
the  geography  of  New  York  and  the  condition  of
its  affairs,  so  that  through  Van  Rensselaer's  influ-
ence he  was  chosen  in  1633  by  the  West  India
company  governor  of  New  Netherlands,  sailing
for  Manhattan  in  the  ship  "  Soutberg." He  was


inexperienced  in  the  art  of  government,  slow  in
speech,  incompetent  to  decide  important  affairs,
and  obstinate  in  minor  matters.  His  chief  busi-
ness seems  to  have  been  to  maintain  the  commer-
cial operations  of  the  West  India  company,  but  no
sooner  had  he  arrived  than  he  was  involved  in
quarrels  with  the  English.  In  1632  the  Dutch
purchased  from  the  Indians  lands  near  what  is
now  Saybrook,  Conn.,  erecting  thereon  the  arms
of  the  states-general,  and  on  8  July.  1633,  the
West  India  company  bought  the  ground  on  which
the  city  of  Hartford  now  stands,  erecting  a  fort
which  they  called  the  House  of  Good  Hope,  and
defending  it  with  two  cannon.  In  October,  1633,
the  Massachusetts  colony  laid  claim  to  all  the
river  and  country  of  Connecticut,  under  the  grant
of  the  king  of  England.  Van  Twiller  wrote  a
"courteous  and  respectful  letter"  to  Gov.  John
Winthrop,  requesting  that  the  matter  be  settled  by
the  home  authorities,  meanwhile  urging  that  un-
til these  proper  persons  could  determine  what
should  be  done,  the  Plymouth  colony  refrain
from  settling  there.  But  a  few  days  later  one
William  Holmes,  with  a  resolute  crew  and  a  com-
pany of  Indians  who  had  been  the  original  pro-
prietors of  the  soil,  sailed  up  the  river,  and,  though
threatened  by  fire  from  the  Dutch  cannon,  reached
the  present  site  of  Windsor  and  erected  there  the
first  house  that  was  built  in  Connecticut.  Van
Twiller  served  a  process  on  Holmes  as  soon  as  he
heard  this  news,  and  a  few  weeks  afterward  be-
sieged the  trading-house  with  seventy  soldiers,  but
was  forced  to  withdraw  and  leave  the  English  in
peaceable  possession.  The  next  year  he  concluded
an  advantageous  treaty  of  peace  with  the  Raritan
Indians.  Meanwhile  he  spent  large  sums  of
money  in  internal  improvements,  built  a  handsome
house  for  his  own  use  and  several  for  the  officers
of  the  colony,  laid  out  a  cemetery,  and  changed  the
name  of  the  town  from  Manhattan  to  New  Amster-
dam. He  also  bought  large  tracts  of  land,  includ-
ing Governor's  island  and  Blackwell's  island,
stocked  them  with  cattle,  and  became  one  of  the
richest  land-owners  in  the  colony.  In  1635  a  party
of  colonists  from  Point  Comfort,  Va.,  under  com-
mand of  George  Holmes,  sailed  to  the  Delaware,
with  the  intention  of  settling  there,  but  was
forced  to  surrender  to  the  Dutch  fort,  and  sent  as
prisoners  to  New  Amsterdam.  Van  Twiller  re-
shipped  them  "pack  and  sack  for  Point  Com-
fort. He  was  again  unsuccessful  the  same  year
with  the  Massachusetts  colony.  John  Winthrop
the  younger  tore  down  the  arms  of  the  state-
general  at  Saybrook  and  took  possession  of  the
settlement,  naming  it  for  Lord  Say  and  Lord
Brook,  and,  although  Van  Twiller  sent  a  sloop
to  dislodge  them,  Winthrop  would  not  suffer  them
to  land.  Notwithstanding  his  losses  in  Connecti-
cut, the  fur-trade  increased  during  the  last  years
of  Van  Twiller's  administration,  and  the  Dutch
opened  a  profitable  commerce  with  New  England.
His  private  extravagances,  however,  induced  the
vice-director,  Lubbertus  Van  Dincklager,  to  com-

Elain  of  him  to  the  home  authorities,  and  David
>e  Vries  having  derided  them  for  the  "  folly  of
promoting  a  fool  from  a  clerkship  to  a  governor-
ship simply  to  act  farces,"  Van  Twiller  was  re-
moved, and  in  September,  1637,  was  succeeded  by
William  Kieft.  He  returned  to  Holland,  and  in
1644  became  a  guardian  to  Johannes,  the  eldest
son  of  the  patroon  Van  Rensselaer  and  was  in-
volved in  controversies  with  the  West  India  com-
pany, who  described  him  as  an  "  ungrateful  man,
who  had  sucked  his  wealth  from  the  breasts  of
the  company  which  he  now  abuses."


256


VANUXEM


VAN VLECK


VANUXEM,  Lardner,  geologist,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  23  July,  1792 ;  d.  in  Bristol,  Pa.,  25  Jan.,
1848.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Ecole  des  mines,
Paris,  in  1819,  and  soon  after  his  return  to  the
United  States  was  called  to  fill  the  chair  of  chem-
istry and  mineralogy  in  South  Carolina  college.
In  1826  he  retired  from  the  college  and  devoted
his  attention  exclusively  to  geology  as  a  profession.
During  that  year  he  published  in  the  newspapers
and  in  Robert  Mills's  "  Statistics  of  South  Caro-
lina "  reports  on  the  geology  of  the  state,  and  then
visited  Mexico  to  examine  mining  property.  In
1827-'8  he  studied  the  geological  features  of  the
states  of  New  York,  Ohio,  Kentucky,  Tennessee,
and  Virginia,  under  the  auspices  of  the  state  of
New  York,  and  made  his  report  to  its  legislature.
On  the  establishment  of  the  geological  survey  of
New  York  in  1836,  Prof.  Vanuxem  was  assigned
to  the  charge  of  the  3d  geological  district,  and
continued  in  the  active  work  of  the  survey  until
1841.  The  results  are  given  in  "  Geology  of  New
York,  3d  District "  (Albany,  1842).  At  the  close
of  the  survey  he  spent  some  time  in  Albany  in  ar-
ranging the  state  geological  cabinet,  out  of  which
has  grown  the  New  York  state  museum.  Prof.
Vanuxem's  private  collection  of  mineral  and  geo-
logical specimens  was  considered  at  the  time  of  his
death  as  "  the  largest,  best  arranged,  and  most
valuable  private  collection  in  the  country."  He
was  a  member  of  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  nat-
ural sciences,  and  of  other  scientific  associations.
It  was  the  habit  of  those  connected  with  the  New
York  survey  to  meet  at  Albany  at  the  end  of  each
field  season  for  the  purpose  of  comparing  observa-
tions and  of  becoming  acquainted  with  each  other.
In  the  autumn  of  1838  Prof.  Vanuxem  suggested
that  an  invitation  be  given  to  the  geologists  of
Pennsylvania  and  Virginia  for  the  purpose  of  de-
vising and  adopting  a  geological  nomenclature  that
might  be  acceptable  to  all  those  that  were  then
•engaged  on  the  state  surveys,  and  thus  become  the
nomenclature  of  American  geology.  This  meeting
was  finally  held  in  1840,  and  then  the  Association
of  American  geologists  was  organized,  which  is
now  represented  by  the  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  science,  probably  the  largest
scientific  body  in  the  world.  In  addition  to  the
report  that  has  been  mentioned,  and  numerous  pa-
pers on  scientific  subjects  in  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  Science,"  he  published  "  An  Essay  on  the
Ultimate  Principles  of  Chemistry,  Natural  Philoso-
phy, and  Physiology  "  (Philadelphia,  1827).

VAN  VALKENBURG,  Robert  Bruce,  con-
gressman, b.  in  Steuben  countv,  N.  Y.„  4  Sept.,
1821 ;  d.  at  Suwanee  Springs,  Fla.,  2  Aug.,  1888.
He  received  an  academic  education,  adopted  the
profession  of  law,  and  served  three  terms  in  the
New  York  assembly.  When  the  civil  war  opened
he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  state  recruiting
depot  at  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  and  organized  seventeen
regiments  for  the  field.  He  served  in  congress
in  1861-'5,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Republican,
and  took  the  field  in  1862  as  colonel  of  the  107th
regiment  of  New  York  volunteers,  which  he  com-
manded at  Antietam.  In  the  38th  congress  he
was  chairman  of  the  committees  on  the  militia,  and
expenditures  in  the  state  department.  He  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Johnson  in  1865  acting  com-
missioner of  Indian  affairs,  during  the  absence  of
the  commissioner,  and  in  1866-'9  was  U.  S.  min-
ister to  Japan.  He  became  a  resident  of  Florida
when  he  returned  from  that  mission,  and  was
chosen  associate  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court,
which  place  he  held  at  his  death.  Judge  Van
Valkenburg  was  an  able  politician  and  jurist.


VAN  VECHTEN,  Abraham,  lawver,  b.  in  Cats-
kill,  N.  Y,  5  Dec,  1762  ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  6  Jan.,
1837.  He  was  educated  at  Columbia,  studied  law
under  John  Lansing,  and  began  practice  in  Johns-
town, Montgomery  co.,  N.  Y.,  but  soon  removed  to
Albany.  He  was  known  as  the  "  father  of  the  New
York  bar,"  being  the  first  lawyer  admitted  to  prac-
tice after  the  adoption  of  the  state  constitution.
Mr.  Van  Vechten  was  city  recorder  in  1797-1808,
state  senator  in  1798-1805,  member  of  the  assemblv
in  1805-15,  attorney-general  in  1810  and  1813-'15.
and  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention
in  1821.  In  1797-1823  he  was  a  regent  of  the  Uni-
versity of  the  state  of  New  York.  He  declined  a
seat  on  the  supreme  bench  of  the  state  that  was
tendered  him  by  Gov.  John  Jay.  He  was  a  learned,
eloquent,  and  successful  lawyer,  and  as  a  legislator
was  the  author  of  many  laws  that  have  given  in-
ternal improvements  and  educational  advantages
to  New  York  state. — His  nephew,  Jacob,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Catskill,  N.  Y.,  in  1788 ;  d.  in  Auburn,
N.  Y.,  15  Sept.,  1871,  was  graduated  at  Union  col-
lege in  1809,  at  the  Associate  Reformed  seminary  in

1813,  and  at  New  Brunswick  theological  seminary  in

1814.  In  1815-'49  he  was  pastor  of  the  Reformed
Dutch  church  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.  He  then  re-
tired from  the  ministry,  passing  the  remainder  of
his  life  in  intellectual  and  literary  pursuits.  He
published  "  Memoirs  of  Dr.  John  M.  Mason "  (2
vols.,  New  York,  1856),  and  "An  Effective  Min-
istry," a  sermon  (1868).

VAN  VLECK,  Jacob,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in
New  York  city,  24  March,  1751 ;  d.  in  Bethlehem,
Pa.,  3  July,  1831.  In  1772  he  went  to  Germany  in
order  to  complete  his  education  in  the  Moravian
theological  seminary  of  that  country,  and  he  re-
turned after  an  absence  of  seven  years.  He  labored
among  the  young  men  of  the  church  at  Bethlehem,
and  subsequently  was  appointed  secretary  of  the
provincial  or  governing  board.  In  1789  he  went
back  to  Germany  as  a  delegate  to  the  general  syn-
od. On  returning  in  the  following  year  he  accepted
the  principalship  of  the  girls'  boarding-school  at
Bethlehem,  which  post  he  resigned  when  he  was
appointed  senior  pastor  of  the  church  at  the  same
place.  Subsequently  he  served  as  pastor  at  Naza-
reth, Pa.,  as  principal  of  the  boys'  boarding-school,
and  as  pastor  of  the  church  at  Lititz,  Pa.  On  7
May,  1815,  he  was  consecrated  to  the  episcopacy  at
Bethlehem,  having  been  appointed  president  of  the
executive  board  of  the  southern  province.  In  this
office  he  continued  until  1822,  when  failing  health
constrained  him  to  retire.  He  enjoyed  universal
confidence,  and  his  influence  among  the  young
was  very  great. — His  son,  William  Henry,  Mora-
vian bishop,  b.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  14  Nov.,  1790;
d.  there,  19  Jan.,  1853,  was  one  of  the  three  gradu-
ates of  the  first  Moravian  theological  seminary  in
America.  He  served  with  success  in  the  Moravian
churches  of  Philadelphia  and  New  York  city,  and
also  as  principal  of  the  boys'  boarding-school  at
Nazareth,  Pa.  He  was  consecrated  to  the  episco-
pacy, 20  Nov.,  1836,  at  Bethlehem,  and  appointed
president  of  the  executive  board  of  the  southern
province  and  pastor  of  the  church  at  Salem.  In
1848  he  attended  the  general  synod  that  convened
at  Herrnhut,  Saxony,  and  in  the  following  year  re-
signed the  presidency  of  his  district  and  retired  to
Bethlehem.  Bishop  Van  Vleck  was  a  graceful  and
captivating  preacher,  a  wise  and  gentle  ruler,  and
a  man  of  saintly  character.  He  exercised  a  great
influence. — William  Henry's  son,  Henry  Jacob,
Moravian  bishop,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29  Jan.,
1822,  for  twenty-five  years  labored  as  a  teacher  in
the  schools  of  the  church,  and  in  1864  entered  the


VAN VLECK


VARELA


257


Moravian  ministry.  He  was  consecrated  bishop,
18  Sept.,  1881,  at  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  and  resides  at
Gnadenhuetten,  Ohio.

VAN  VLECK,  John  Monroe,  educator,  b.  in
Stone  Ridge,  N.  Y.,  4  March,  1833.  He  was  grad-
uated in  1850  at  Wesleyan  university,  where  he
entered  in  the  junior  year,  after  studying  at  the
University  of  the  city  of  New  York.  In  1850  he
taught  mathematics  in  the  Providence  conference
seminary,  and  in  the  same  year  he  became  an  assist-
ant in  the  nautical  almanac  office  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  where  he  then  remained  for  three  years.
He  was  elected  adjunct  professor  of  mathematics
in  1853  in  Wesleyan  university,  and  since  1858  has
held  the  chair  of  mathematics  and  astronomy  there.
In  1872-'3  and  1887-9  he  was  acting  president.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Northwestern  university  in  187(5.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  expedition  that  was  sent  out  under
the  auspices  of  the  nautical  almanac  office  to  ob-
serve the  total  solar  eclipse  at  Mount  Pleasant,
Iowa,  in  1809.  Prof.  Van  Vleck  is  a  member  of  the
international  Astronomische  Gesellschaft  and  a  fel-
low of  the  American  association  for  the  advance-
ment of  science.  His  publications  include  "  Tables
giving  the  Positions  of  the  Moon  for  1855-'6,"  and
for  1878-'91,  and  similar  "  Tables  giving  the  Posi-
tions of  Saturn  for  1857  to  1877,"  contributed  to
the  "  American  Nautical  Almanac.''

VAN  VLIET,  Stewart,  soldier,  b.  in  Ferris-
burg,  Vt.,  21  July,  1815.  He  was  educated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy,  being  graduated  ninth  in
a  class  of  forty-two  in  1840,  when  he  was  pro-
moted 2d  lieutenant  in  the  3d  U.  S.  artillery.  He
served  against  the  Seminole  Indians  and  in  garri-
son at  several  military  posts  in  Louisiana,  Georgia,
and  South  Carolina,  until  1846,  when,  having  be-
come 1st  lieutenant  and  captain  and  assistant
quartermaster,  he  was  present  at  the  battle  of
Monterey  and  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  Mexico,  in  com-
mand of  his  company.  Capt.  Van  Vliet  was  in
charge  of  the  construction  of  Fort  Laramie,  Fort
Kearny,  and  other  frontier  posts  in  1847-'51,  was
actively  employed  in  fitting  out  the  Utah  expedi-
tion under  Albert  Sidney  Johnston,  and  with  Gen.
William  S.  Harney  at  the  battle  of  Blue  Water,  3
Sept.,  1855,  against  the  Sioux.  He  was  chief  quar-
termaster of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  with  rank
of  brigadier-general  from  August,  1861,  till  July,
1862,  and  rendered  important  service  in  fitting
out  troops  for  the  field,  and  accompanied  Gen.
George  B.  McClellan,  serving  under  him  in  all  the
battles  from  Gaines's  Mills  to  Malvern  Hill.  He
was  promoted  major,  3  Aug.,  1861,  and  lieutenant-
colonel  and  deputy  quartermaster-general,  29  July,
1866.  He  was  on  duty  at  New  York  city  in  1862-7,
furnishing  transportation  and  supplies,  at  Schuyl-
kill arsenal,  Pa.,  in  1869,  and  was  chief  quarter-
master of  the  Division  of  the  Atlantic  in  1872  and
the  Department  of  the  Missouri  in  1872-5.  He
was  brevetted  major-general,  U.  S.  army,  13  March,
1865,  for  "  faithful  and  distinguished  services  dur-
ing the  war,"  and  promoted  to  the  full  rank  of
colonel  and  assistant  quartermaster-general,  6
June,  1872.  On  22  Jan.,  1881,  Gen.  Van  Vliet  was
retired  from  active  service.

VAN  WART,  Isaac,  patriot,  b.  in  Greenburg,
N.  Y.,  in  1760 ;  d.  in  Mount  Pleasant,  N.  Y.,  23
May,  1828.  He  was  a  farmer  in  Westchester  coun-
ty, N.  Y.,  and  an  ardent  sympathizer  with  the
patriot  cause  during  the  Revolution.  On  23  Sept.,
1780,  with  John  Paulding  and  David  Williams,  he
intercepted  Maj.  John  Andre  on  his  return  from
the  American  lines.  (See  Paulding,  John.)  For
this  service  he  received  the  thanks  of  congress,  a

VOL.  VI. — 17


pension  of  $200  per  annum  for  life,  and  a  silver
medal  bearing  on  one  side  the  word  "Fidelity"
and  on  the  other  the  legend  "  Vincit  Amor  Patrias."
On  11  June,  1829,  the  citizens  of  Westchester  coun-


ty erected  a  monument  to  his  memory.  He  was  an
active  member  of  Greenburg  church,  and  served  it
as  chorister  until  his  death.

VAN  WINKLE,  Peter  G.,  senator,  b.  in  New
York  city,  7  Sept.,  1808;  d.  in  Parkersburg,  W.
Va.,  15  April,  1872.  He  removed  to  Parkersburg,
Va.,  in  1835,  and  practised  the  profession  of  law
there  till  1852,  when  he  became  treasurer  and  sub-
sequently president  of  a'  railroad  company.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  constitutional  con-
vention in  1850,  and  of  the  Wheeling  reorganiz-
ing convention  in  1861,  was  in  the  West  Virginia
legislature  from  the  formation  of  the  new  state
till  1863,  and  in  that  year  became  U.  S.  senator,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Unionist  for  the  term
that  ended  in  1869.  He  was  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  pensions  in  that  body,  was  a  member  of
those  on  finance,  pensions,  post-offices,  and  post-
roads,  and  in  the  impeachment  of  President  John-
son was  one  of  the  members  that  voted  for  ac-
quittal. In  1866  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Phila-
delphia loyalists'  convention.

VAN  WYCK,  Charles  Henry,  senator,  b.  in
Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  10  May.  1824.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Rutgers  in  1843,  adopted  the  profession
of  law,  and  in  1850-'6  was  district  attorney  of
Sullivan  county,  N.  Y.  He  served  in  congress  in
1859-'63.  having  been  chosen  as  a  Republican,  and
while  holding  his  seat  in  that  body  became  colonel
of  the  10th  legion,  or  56th  regiment,  of  New  York
volunteers.  He  served  with  Gen.  George  B.  McClel-
lan in  the  peninsula  campaign,  and  in  1865  was
made  brevet  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He
was  again  in  congress  in  1867-'71,  and  was  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  retrenchments.  He  re-
moved to  Nebraska  in  1874,  engaged  in  farming,
was  a  delegate  to  the  Constitutional  convention  in
1876,  state  senator  in  1876-80,  and  in  1881  became
U.  S.  senator.

VAN  ZANDT,  Marie,  singer,  b.  in  Texas,  8
Oct.,  1861.  Her  mother,  Mrs.  Jennie  Van  Zandt,  a
daughter  of  Antonio  Blitz,  was  herself  a  singer  of
note,  and  appeared  in  opera  under  the  direction  of
Max  Maretzek.  Marie  went  with  her  mother  in
1873  to  London,  where  she  studied  at  a  convent
school.  While  in  that  city  she  met  with  much  en-
couragement from  Adelina  Patti,  whose  style  she  is
said  to  have  copied  to  a  great  extent.  After  study-
ing also  a  short  time  with  Francesco  Lamperti  in
Milan,  she  made  her  debut  in  Turin,  in  1879,  as
Zerlina,  and  appeared  also  in  "  La  Sonnambula."
She  was  engaged  for  Her  Majesty's  opera  company
in  London  in  1880,  and  in  1881  made  her  debut
at  the  Opera  Comique,  Paris,  remaining  there  for
four  seasons.  She  is  a  singer  of  much  promise,
and  the  possessor  of  a  fine  voice  of  great  compass.

VARELA,  Florencio  (vah-ray'-lah),  Argentine
publicist,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  23  Feb.,  1807;  d.  in


258


VARELA


VARELA


Montevideo.  20  March,  1848.  He  studied  in  the
college  of  his  native  city,  and  was  graduated  in
law  in  1827  at  the  university.  He  was  then  em-
ployed under  the  secretary  of  the  interior,  and  took
part  in  the  revolution  of  1828  under  Lavalle.  who
made  him  chief  clerk  of  the  ministry.  In  August,
1829,  at  the  fall  of  Lavalle  and  the  accession  of
Rosas,  whom  Varela  had  opposed,  the  latter  went
to  Montevideo,  where  he  published  some  poems  and
a  drama  in  the  magazines.  In  1835  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  of  the  supreme  court  of  Uru-
fuay.  and  in  April,  1838,  he  was  exiled  by  order  of
resident  Oribe,  who  accused  him  of  complicity
in  the  revolutionary  attempt  of  Rivera;  but  he  re-
turned in  October,  after  the  installation  of  Rivera
as  president.  In  1840-'2  he  sojourned  in  Brazil  on
account  of  his  health,  and  returned  in  December
of  the  latter  year,  when  the  siege  of  Montevideo
had  begun.  In  1843  he  was  sent  as  commissioner
of  the  Montevideo  government  to  England  to  ne-
gotiate the  withdrawal  of  the  English  blockading
forces,  and  on  his  return  he  abandoned  his  literary
studies  and  entered  politics,  founding  the  journal
"  El  Comercio  de  la  Plata,"  which  soon  became  a
powerful  instrument  of  opposition  to  Rosas  and
Oribe,  and  excited  the  patriotism  of  the  besieged
city.  It  was  generally  reported  that  he  was  assas-
sinated by  instigation  of  Rosas  while  returning
one  evening  from  the  press-rooms  of  his  paper  to
his  home.  He  wrote  "Rosas  y  las  Provincias"
(Montevideo.  1844),  which  was  translated  into
French  under  the  title  "  Affaires  de  Buenos  Ayres  "
(Paris,  1844) ;  "  La  Confederation  Argentina "
(1845) ;  "  Proyectos  de  Monarquia  en  America  "
(1846) ;  and  "  Biblioteca  del  Comercio  de  la  Plata,"
a  geographical,  historical,  and  political  magazine,
of  which  four  volumes  had  appeared  at  his  death.
His  portrait  is  engraved  on  the  notes  of  the  pro-
vincial bank  of  Buenos  Ayres. — His  son,  Hector
Florencio,  journalist,  b.  in  Montevideo  in  1832,
after  the  assassination  of  his  father  removed  his
mother  and  brothers  for  security  to  Rio  Janeiro,
where  he  labored  as  a  commercial  clerk  to  sustain
his  family,  employing  his  leisure  in  acquiring  other
European  languages,  and  soon  became  an  accom-
plished linguist.  When  Urquiza  declared  war
against  the  dictator  Rosas  in  1851,  Varela  returned
to  Montevideo  and  founded  the  "  Tribuna,"  which,
under  his  management  and  that  of  his  brother,
Mariano,  soon  became  one  of  the  most  popular
newspapers  of  South  America.  He  became  the
chief  champion  of  the  opposition  to  Urquiza  and
of  the  independence  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  took  an
active  though  indirect  part  in  the  operations  that
forced  Urquiza  to  raise  the  siege  of  Buenos  Ayres
in  July,  1853.  He  visited  Europe  in  1854,  and  was
appointed  consul-general  of  Uruguay  in  Paris,  but
was  refused  the  exequatur  by  the  French  govern-
ment, on  account  of  his  severe  criticism  of  the
coup  d'etat  of  2  Dec,  1851,  in  the  columns  of  "  La
Tribuna."  On  his  return,  and  after  the  accession
of  Venancio  Flores,  he  was  elected  to  the  legisla-
ture of  Montevideo,  and  formed  part  of  that  gen-
eral's cabinet.  After  Flores's  resignation,  Varela
left  the  cabinet,  and  when  the  former  was  assas-
sinated, 19  Feb.,  1868,  the  latter  returned  to  Bue-
nos Ayres.  During  the  cholera  epidemic  that
desolated  that  city  in  1871  he  was  one  of  the
first  to  call  a  meeting,  on  10  March,  for  the  pur-
pose of  establishing  a  health  and  charitable  com-
mittee, of  which  he  was  appointed  vice-presi-
dent, and  when  the  president,  Dr.  Roque  Perez,
succumbed  under  his  arduous  duties,  Varela  as-
sumed the  lead  and  made  heroic  efforts  for  the
relief  of  the  afflicted. .One  afternoon,  when  the


'  grave-diggers  fled  in  the  presence  of  700  bodies
to  be  buried,  he  personally,  with  members  of  his
'  committee,  undertook  the  task,  and  did  not  re-
|  tire  until  every  coffin  was  covered.  Toward  the
I  end  of  1871  he  made  a  tour  through  Chili  and
other  Spanish-American  republics  to  obtain  sub-
scriptions for  the  foundation  in  Europe  of  a  large
journal  destined  to  defend  the  interests  of  the
Latin-American  people,  to  make  their  civilization
and  literature  known  in  Europe,  and  to  acquaint,
his  country  with  the  progress  of  science  in  the  Old
World.  He  was  assisted  by  the  authorities  and  pri-
vate persons,  and.  going  to  Paris,  founded  there  the
journal "  El  Americano,"  which  soon  became  widely
known  and  was  the  means  of  attracting  the  interest
of  European  statesmen  and  merchants  toward  South
America.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  minister  resi-
dent of  Guatemala  at  Paris,  and  in  the  next  year  he
began  the  publication  of  a  series  of  noteworthy
political  essays,  which  were  afterward  collected  in
book-form.  In  1874  he  founded  in  Turin  another
journal,  "  La  Italia  y  El  Plata,"  having  the  same
object  as  "  El  Americano."  He  is  a  fluent  orator
and  writer,  although  his  speeches  as  well  as  his
works  suffer  from  verbosity.  He  is  the  author  of
'•  Revolucion  de  Lima ;  resefia  de  los  acontecimi-
entos  de  Julio,"  with  introduction  by  Emilio  Cas-
telar  (Paris,  1872) ;  "  Perou  devant  les  pays  d'Eu-
rope "  (1873) :  "  La  republique  de  Venezuela  et
son  president  Blanco  "  (1874) ;  "  Elisa  Lynch  " ;
"  A  Alvarez  Calderon  "  ;  and  "  Emilio  Castelar  "
(1874). — Another  son,  Mariano,  b.  in  Montevideo
in  1834,  assisted  his  brother  on  "  La  Tribuna,"  and
after  the  latter's  departure  for  Europe  continued
the  journal.  In  1869  he  was  secretary  of  foreign
relations  under  Sarmiento's  administration,  and  in
1871  was  sent  as  minister  plenipotentiary  of  the
Argentine  Republic  to  London,  where  he  negotiated
a  loan  of  $30.000,000.— Another  son,  Juan  Crnz,
b.  in  Montevideo  in  1843,  although  occupied  in
mercantile  pursuits,  has  given  much  time  to  lit-
erature and  travel.  He  is  a  contributor  to  many
periodicals,  a  notable  antiquarian,  and  author  of
two  dramas  in  verse,  "  La  Pecadora  arrepentida  "
(Buenos  Ayres,  1873),  and  "  Facundo,"  unpub-
lished.— Another  son,  Luis  Vicente,  author,  b.  in
Montevideo,  27  May,  1845,  studied  law,  was  editor
of  "  El  Autonomista  "  and  assistant  on  u  La  Tri-
buna," and  is  the  author  of  "  Estudios  sobre  la
constitucion  de  Buenos  Ayres"  (Buenos  Avres,
1868);  "El  Ciego,"a  drama  (1871);  "  Concordan-
cias  y  Fundamentos  del  Codigo  Civil  Argentino  "
(14  vols..  1873-"6);  and  "Organization  del  Regis-
tro  del  Estado  Civil  "  (1874). — Florencio's  brother,
Juan  Crnz,  journalist,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  in
1794:  d.  in  Montevideo,  15  Jan.,  1839,  studied  in
Cordova  and  Tucuman,  and  was  graduated  in  the
latter  city  in  theology  and  law  in  1816.  When  in
that  year  the  congress  of  the  United  Provinces  of
La  Plata  met  at  Tucuman,  Varela  was  elected  one
of  the  deputies  for  Buenos  Ayres,  and  thenceforth
abandoned  the  church  for  politics.  He  took  an
active  part  in  the  direction  of  the  papers  "El
Mensajero  Argentino,"  "  El  Tiempo,"  "  El  Centi-
nela,"  and  "  El  Porteiio,"  held  several  public  offices,
and  from  1824  till  1827  was  secretary  of  the  Na-
tional congress.  He  suffered  persecutions  for  his
political  opinions  after  the  fall  of  the  government
of  Rivadavia,  and,  taking  part  in  the  revolution  of
December,  1828,  emigrated  to  Uruguay,  whence  he
was  banished  by  Oribe,  together  with  other  politi-
cal enemies  of  Rosas,  and  returned  only  after  the
former's  fall.  He  is  the  author  of  the  dramas
"  Dido  "  (Buenos  Ayres,  1823)  and  "  Arjia"  (Mon-
tevideo, 1834),  and  left  a  collection  of  unpublished


VARELA Y MORALES


VARGAS


259


patriotic  poems,  of  which  the  poem  celebrating  the
victory  of  Ituzaingo,  20  Feb.,  1827,  is  the  most
famous. — Another  brother  of  Florencio,  Rufliio,
b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Quebrachito,  28
Nov.,  1840,  was  banished  from  Buenos  Ayres  to-
gether with  his  brothers,  and  in  1840  followed  Gen.
Juan  Lavalle  in  his  invasion  of  the  Argentine,  and
fell  in  the  battle  of  Quebrachito. — Rufino's  son,
Pedro,  b.  in  Montevideo  in  1834,  took  an  active
part  in  the  politics  of  his  country,  and,  after  the
death  of  Gen.  Venancio  Flores,  was  considered  the
leader  of  his  party.  He  was  deputy  and  senator,
and  as  president  of  the  latter  body  took  charge  of
the  executive,  14  Jan..  1875,  at  Dr.  Ellauri's  fall.
He  was  then  elected  constitutional  president,  but
his  government  was  overthrown,  10  March,  1876,
and  Col.  Lorenzo  Latorre  was  his  successor.

VARELA  Y  MORALES,  Felix  (vah-ray'-lah),
Cuban  author,  b.  in  Havana  in  1788;  d.  in  St.  Au-
gustine, Fla.,  in  1853.  He  studied  in  his  native
city,  was  graduated  in  theology  in  1810,  and  be-
came a  priest  in  1811.  He  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  philosophy  in  San  Carlos  seminary,  Ha-
vana, and  afterward  of  political  economy,  dividing
his  time  between  the  duties  of  the  ministry  and  his
labors  as  a  teacher.  He  discarded  completely  the
old  scholastic  philosophy  and  manner  of  teaching,
and  introduced  the  reforms  that  have  changed  the
science  of  education  in  the  19th  century.  In  1821
he  was  elected  representative  for  the  western  prov-
ince of  Cuba  to  the  Spanish  cortes.  where  he  de-
manded political  autonomy  for  Cuba.  In  1823.  with
the  end  of  the  liberal  regime  and  the  return  of  ab-
solute government,  the  cortes  was  forcibly  dis-
solved ;  sixty-five  of  its  members  were  condemned
to  death,  and  Varela,  to  save  his  life,  took  refuge
with  others  at  Gibraltar.  Thence  he  sailed  for
New  York  in  December,  1823,  where  he  fixed  his
residence  after  visiting  the  principal  cities  of  the
Union.  He  devoted  his  time  to  literary,  scientific,
and  educational  pursuits  and  to  the  duties  of  his
ministry  as  a  Roman  Catholic  priest.  In  1845  he
was  appointed  vicar-general  for  New  York,  and
edited  a  religious  magazine  with  Dr.  Constantine
Pise.  His  health  obliged  him  to  go  to  St.  Augus-
tine, Fla.,  in  1849,  where  he  resided  from  1852  un-
til his  death.  Varela's  works  include  "  Institu-
tions Phiiosophiae  Eclecticae "  (2  vols.,  Havana,
1812-'13);  "£tica"(2vols.,1814);  "  Miscelanea  filo-
sofiea  "  (1818) ;  "  Lecciones  de  Filosofia  "  (1819-'20) ;
"  Observaciones  sobre  la  Constitucion  de  la  Mo-
narquia  Espaiiola  "  (1821) ;  "  Manual  de  Practica
Parlamentaria "  (New  York,  1826) ;  "  Maximas
Morales  y  Sociales"  (1830);  "Cartas  a  Elpidio
sobre  la  Impiedad,  el  Fanatismo  "  (1835) ;  and  nu-
merous philosophical  and  religious  pamphlets.
Most  of  these  works,  especially  "  Lecciones  de  Filo-
sofia," have  gone  through  many  editions  in  Cuba,
Spain,  and  the  United  States.  His  biography  has
been  written  several  times,  and  an  exhaustive
"  Life  of  Varela "  has  appeared  in  Spanish,  by
Jose  Ignacio  Rodriguez  (New  York,  1876).

VARELA  Y  LLLOA,  JosS  (vah-ray'-lah-ee-ool-
yo'-ah),  Spanish  naval  officer,  b.  in  Santiago  de
Galicia,  14  Aug.,  1748 ;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  23
July,  1794.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1759,  and
afterward  became  well  known  in  learned  circles
throughout  Europe  for  his  scientific  acquirements.
In  1776  he  was  employed  in  assisting  to  measure
geometrically  the  peak  of  Teneriffe  and  in  deter-
mining the  true  position  of  islands  and  ports  on
the  American  and  African  coasts,  among  others
the  island  of  Santa  Catharina  in  Brazil  and  the
harbors  on  the  Rio  de  la  Plata.  After  discharging
various  important  commissions,  he  was  selected  by


the  Spanish  government  to  fix  the  boundaries  of
the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  possessions  in  America.
He  gave  proof  of  his  abilities  as  a  statesman  and
philosopher  by  his  exhaustive  reports  on  the  pro-
ductions of  the  Spanish-American  colonies,  their
situation,  relation  to  neighboring  countries,  and
the  advantages  that  the  Spanish  government  could
derive  from  them.  On  his  return  to  Spain  he  was
promoted  to  the  rank  of  rear-admiral.  In  1794  he
sailed  for  South  America  in  command  of  a  squad-
ron, and  having  put  in  at  Havana,  on  16  April,  was
attacked  there  by  the  illness  of  which  he  died.

VARGAS,  Jose  Maria,  Venezuelan  president,
b.  in  La  Guaira,  2  March,  1786 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  13  July,  1854.  He  studied  in  the  University
of  Caracas,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1806  in
philosophy  and  in  1808  in  medicine,  and  in  1809
he  translated  Rousseau's  "  Contrat  social,"  which
he  circulated  privately  among  his  friends  for  fear
of  the  authorities.  Early  in  1810  he  began  the
practice  of  his  profession  in  Cumana,  which  prov-
ince sent  him  as  representative  to  congress,  and
he  arrived  in  La  Guaira  just  before  the  earth-
quake of  26  March,  1812,  which  destroyed  nearly
the  whole  city  and  killed  4,000  persons.  He  was
the  only  surviving  physician,  and  his  self-sacrifice
in  saving  lives  and  attending  the  wounded  was  ac-
knowledged by  the  municipality  and  the  national
executive.  After  the  capitulation  of  Miranda  in
the  same  year,  Vargas  was  thrown  by  order  of
Monte verde  into  the  dungeons  of  La  Guaira  ;  but
in  1813  he  received  permission  to  emigrate.  He
continued  his  studies  in  the  University  of  Edin-
burgh, was  received  as  a  member  of  the  Royal  col-
lege of  surgeons  of  London,  and  travelled  for  some
time  through  England  and  France.  Afterward  he
practised  his  profession  for  several  years  in  Porto
Rico  ;  but  he  returned  in  1825  to  Caracas,  where  in
1826,  by  order  of  Bolivar,  he  reorganized  the  uni-
versity and  in  1827  was  elected  its  rector.  He
founded  the  chairs  of  anatomy,  chemistry,  and  sur-
gery, and,  besides  teaching  these  branches  for  some
time  in  the  university,  gave  private  instruction  to
the  best  students  at  night  in  his  home.  In  1830  he
was  elected  by  Caracas  to  the  constituent  congress
of  Venezuela  and  opposed  strenuously  and  with
eloquence  the  proscription  of  Bolivar  and  the  an-
nexation of  the  province  of  Casanare  to  Venezuela.
He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  government  coun-
cil, and  in  1834  to  the  presidency  of  the  republic,
which  he  was  forced  by  public  clamor  to  accept
after  repeated  declinations.  On  9  Feb.,  1835,  he
took  charge  of  the  executive,  and  during  his  term
he  gave  his  salary  as  president  to  hospitals,  schools,
and  other  beneficent  objects.  When  a  mutiny  of
the  military  party,  which  hated  the  first  civilian
president,  began  in  Caracas,  8  July,  1835.  Vargas
with  the  vice-president  was  exiled  to  St.  Thomas ;
but  before  leaving  he  had  time  to  convoke  the
council  and  issue  a  decree  appointing  Gen.  Paez,
who  was  then  living  in  retirement,  commander-in-
chief  for  the  re-establishment  of  order.  The  latter
subdued  the  revolution  in  a  fortnight  and  recalled
Vargas,  who  administered  the  executive  with  strict
impartiality ;  but.  weary  of  political  strife,  he  re-
peatedly handed  in  his  resignation,  which  was  at
last  reluctantly  accepted  by  congress,  24  April,
1836.  He  returned,  notwithstanding  his  shattered
health,  to  his  functions  in  the  university  and  as
director  of  public  instruction,  from  1838  till  1846
was  a  member  of  the  senate  and  almost  continu-
ously its  president,  and  in  1847  was  appointed  to
the  government  council,  but  resigned  in  1849.  His
anxiety,  caused  by  the  uninterrupted  internal  strife
in  his  country,  injured  his  health,  and  in  1853  he


260


VARGAS-MACHUCA


VARLET


went  to  New  York,  where  he  died.  He  left  his
anatomical  collections  and  physical  cabinet,  part  of
his  library  of  8,000  volumes,  and  two  houses,  to  the
university,  the  rest  of  the  library  to  the  National
library,  and  his  mineral  and  botanical  collections
to  the  National  museum  of  Caracas.

VARGAS-MACHUCA,  Bernardo,  Spanish  sol-
dier, b.  in  Simancas  about  1550  ;  d.  in  Mexico  about
1620.  He  took  part  in  the  wars  of  Flanders,  rose
to  the  rank  of  captain,  and  was  sent  to  Mexico,
where,  according  to  his  own  statement,  he  became
commander-in-chief,  although  his  name  is  not
mentioned  in  the  official  documents  of  the  time.
He  is  noteworthy  as  the  author  of  "  Milicia  Indi-
ana, y  Descripcion  Hidrografica  y  Geografica  de
las  Indias  "  (Mexico,  1599) ;  "  Compendio  y  Doc-
trina  nueva  de  la  Gineta,  secretos  y  advertencias  de
ella,  senales  y  enfrenamientos  de  Caballos,  su  cura-
cion  y  beneficio"  (Madrid,  1619);  and  "  Defensa
de  las  Conquistas  de  las  Indias."  of  which  the  origi-
nal manuscript  is  in  a  private  library.

VARGAS  Y  PONCE,  Juan  J ose\  Spanish  geog-
rapher, b.  in  Cadiz  in  1755 ;  d.  in  Madrid  in  1821.
He  entered  the  navy,  was  ordered  in  1783  to  assist
Vicente  Tofino  in  the  publication  of  the  great  atlas
of  the  coast  of  Spain,  and  wrote  a  remarkable  in-
troduction to  that  work.  Vargas  was  attached  af-
terward to  the  colonial  department,  prepared  the
instructions  for  the  scientific  expeditions  that  were
sent  to  America  between  1789  and  1820,  and  was
elected  in  the  latter  year  a  member  of  the  constit-
uent cortes.  His  works  include  "  Descripcion  de
las  islas  Pytiusas  y  Baleares"  (Madrid,  1787),  and
M  An  Account  of  the  Last  Expedition  to  the  Strait
of  Magellan  made  by  the  Frigate  '  La  Santa  Maria
de  la  Cabeza'"(Spanish  edition,  1788;  English  trans-
lation, London,  1788).  Among  his  manuscripts,  in
the  National  library  at  Madrid,  are  "  Descripcion
estatistica  de  la  provincia  de  Guipuzcoa, "  "  De-
scripcion estatistica  de  la  isla  de  Cuba,"  and  "His-
toria  de  la  isla  de  Santo  Domingo."

VARICK,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  Hackensack,
N.  J.,  25  March,  1753  ;  d.  in  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  30
July,  1831.  The  family  name  was  originally  Van
Vafick. He  studied  law  and  was  practising  in

New  York  city,
when,  at  the  open-
ing of  the  Revo-
lution, he  became
a  captain  in  Alex-
ander McDou-
gall's  regiment.
He  afterward  be-
came military  sec-
retary to  General
Philip  Schuyler,
and  on  the  lat-
ter's  recommenda-
tion was  appoint-
ed by  congress
deputy  muster-
master-general,  25
Sept.,  1776,  to
which  post  the
rank  of  lieuten-
ant-colonel was
attached  on  10  April,  1777.  He  remained  with  the
northern  army  till  the  muster  department  was
abolished  after  the  capture  of  Burgnyne,  and  was

f resent  at  the  battles  of  Stillwater  and  Saratoga.
Ie  was  inspector-general  at  West  Point  after  1780,
and  first  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Benedict  Arnold,
whom  he  greatly  admired  as  a  soldier.  It  is  said
that  when  Arnold's  defection  was  made  known,
Col.  Varick  was  almost  insane  for  several  days.


<06c<SZy/#sZstJcs^)


With  Col.  Franks,  the  second  aide,  he  was  ex-
amined by  a  court  of  inquiry,  which  exonerated
both  from  suspicion  of  the  least  complicity  in  the
treason.  Shortly  afterward  he  became  a  member
of  Washington's  military  family,  acting  as  his  re-
cording secretary  till  near  the  close  of  the  war,  and
taking  charge  of  his  confidential  papers.  From
the  evacuation  of  New  York  by  the  British  in
1783  till  1789  he  was  recorder  of  that  city.  In  the
latter  year  he  became  attorney-general  of  the  state,
and  from  1791  till  1801  he  was  mayor  of  New  York.
In  1786  he  and  Samuel  Jones  were  appointed  re-
visers of  the  state  laws,  and  they  published  the  re-
sult of  their  labors  in  a  volume  (1789).  On  the
organization  of  the  state  militia  he  was  made  colo-
nel of  one  of  the  regiments.  Col.  Varick  was
speaker  of  the  assembly  in  1787,  for  many  years
president  of  the  Merchants'  bank,  and  a  founder
and  liberal  benefactor  of  the  American  Bible  so-
ciety, of  which  he  was  president  from  the  resigna-
tion of  John  Jay  till  his  death.  He  was  more  than
six  feet  high,  and  of  imposing  presence,  and  has  a
fine  monument  in  his  native  place.

VARICK,  Theodore  Romeyn,  physician,  b.  in
Dutchess  county,  N.  Y.,  24  June,  1825  ;  d.  in  Jer-
sey City,  N.  J.,  23  Nov.,  1887.  He  was  graduated
at  the  medical  department  of  New  York  univer-
sity in  1846,  and,  after  practising  for  two  years
in  New  York,  removed  in  1848  to  Jersey  City,
where  he  resided  until  his  death.  He  made  many
valuable  additions  to  professional  knowledge,  and
was  widely  known  as  a  surgeon.  He  was  the  first
to  prove  the  usefulness  of  cocaine  in  capital  ampu-
tations, and  he  introduced  into  the  United  States
Trendelenberg's  method  of  amputating  at  the  hip-
joint.  Being  dissatisfied  with  the  results  of  the
Lister  method  of  dressing  open  wounds,  he  per-
fected a  system  for  the  employment  of  hot  water
in  surgery,  and  thereby  secured  the  largest  per-
centage of  successful  operations  known,  but  three
deaths  resulting  from  fifty-four  capital  amputa-
tions. He  also  was  the  first  to  use  hot  water  to
control  oozing  in  laparotomy.  Dr.  Varick  was  an
incorporator  of  the  District  medical  society  of
Hudson  county,  president  of  the  New  Jersey  state
medical  society,  surgeon-general  of  New  Jersey,
president  of  the  New  York  medical  society,  director
of  Morris  Plains  hospital  for  the  insane,  director
of  St.  Francis's  hospital,  surgeon  of  Jersey  City
hospital,  and  a  member  of  various  medical  societies.
Among  the  published  records  of  his  cases  are
monographs  on  "  Urticaria  produced  by  Hydro-
cyanic Acid,"  "  Complete  Luxation  of  the  Radius
and  Ulna  to  the  Radial  Side,"  "  Subperiosteal  Re-
section of  the  Clavicle,"  "  Distal  Compression  in
Inguinal  Aneurism,"  "  The  Causes  of  Death  after
Operations  and  Grave  Injuries,"  "  The  Use  of  Hot
Water  in  Surgery,"  "  The  Protective  Treatment  of
Open  Wounds,"  and  "  Railroad  Injuries  of  the
Extremities  of  the  Human  Body."

VARLET,  Domingue  Marie,  French  mission-
ary, b.  in  France  in  1678;  d.  in  Utrecht,  Holland,
in  1742.  He  was  ordained  a  priest  in  1706,  and
about  1712  was  appointed  superior  of  the  priests
in  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi  by  the  directors  of
the  Seminary  of  foreign  missions  of  Paris.  After
his  arrival  in  Canada  he  was  named  vicar-gen  c  ml,
especially  for  Fort  La  Mobile  and  Fort  Louis,  by
Bishop  Saint  Vallier,  of  Quebec,  with  jurisdiction
over  all  priests  along  Mississippi  river  except
Jesuits.  He  spent  six  years  on  this  mission,  visit-
ing the  country  from  Cahokia  to  the  Gulf.  He
returned  to  Europe  in  1718,  and  was  appointed
bishop  of  Ascalon  and  coadjutor  to  the  bishop  of
Babylon. When  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  East,


VARNHAGEN


VARNUM


261


intelligence  was  brought  to  the  pope  that  he  was
an  adherent  of  the  doctrines  of  Jansenius.  He
was  at  once  ordered  to  return  to  Rome ;  but,  instead
of  doing  so,  he  went  to  Utrecht  and  was  one  of  the
principal  agents  in  founding  the  Jansenist  church
of  that  city.  He  consecrated  four  archbishops  of
the  Jansenist  church  in  succession,  and  was  sev-
eral times  excommunicated  by  the  pope.

VARNHAGEN,  Francisco  Adolpho  de,  Bra-
zilian historian,  b.  in  San  Joao  de  Ypanema  in
1816.  He  acquired  his  primary  education  in  Rio
Janeiro  and  went  to  Portugal  to  study  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Coimbra.  When  the  ex-emperor  of  Bra-
zil, Pedro  I.,  was  trying  to  re-establish  the  govern-
ment of  his  daughter,  Maria  da  Gloria,  in  1834,
Varnhagen  enlisted  in  the  constitutional  army,  and
afterward  re-entered  college  and  completed  his  ca-
reer as  a  military  engineer  in  1840,  when  he  de-
voted himself  to  poetry  and  literature.  He  was
appointed  secretary  of  legation  in  Madrid,  with  the
commission  to  revise  the  documents  in  the  govern-
ment archives  concerning  the  boundaries  of  the
empire  of  Brazil.  In  1859  he  returned  to  South
America  and  was  appointed  minister- resident  to
the  republic  of  Paraguay ;  but,  on  account  of  the
despotic  government  of  the  dictator  Lopez,  he  re-
signed his  post  and  was  commissioned  to  travel
through  Venezuela,  New  Granada,  Ecuador,  and
the  Antilles,  and  report  on  the  agricultural  prog-
ress of  those  countries.  He  executed  this  com-
mission satisfactorily,  presenting  reports  on  coffee,
sugar,  and  tobacco.  Soon  afterward,  as  minister
of  Brazil  to  Chili  and  Peru,  he  protested  against
the  hostile  attitude  of  the  Spanish  government  to-
ward the  republics  of  the  Pacific.  While  in  Lima
he  began  to  investigate  documents  about  Amerigo
Vespucci,  among  which  there  is  a  letter  from  Peter
Martyr  to  Columbus,  in  which  he  says  that  the  Bay
of  Honduras  had  been  visited  before  by  others,
thereby  confirming  Oviedo's  assertion  in  his  "  His-
toria  de  las  Indias."  He  was  sent  to  Vienna  in
1868  as  minister -resident,  promoted  plenipoten-
tiary in  1871.  and  created  in  1874  Viscount  of  Porto
Seguro  and  member  of  the  imperial  council,  con-
tinuing in  Vienna  till  1878,  when  he  returned  to
Brazil.  He  writes  equally  well  in  French,  German,
and  Italian  as  in  his  own  language,  and  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Noticias  do  Brazil,"  printed  by  the  Royal
academy  of  science  of  Lisbon  (1852) ;  "  Trovas  e
Can  tares"  (Lisbon,  1853) ;  "  Historia  geral  do  Bra-
zil," to  the  revolution  against  Portugal  (2  vols.,
1854-'8) ;  "  Os  Indios  bravos  e  o  Sr.  Lisboa  "  (Lima,
1867) ;  "  Le  premier  voyage  de  Amerigo  Vespucci,
definitivement  explique  dans  ses  details"  (Vienna,
1869)  ;  il  Das  wahre  Guanahani  des  Columbus  "
(1869);  "  Sull'  importanza  d'un  manoscritto  inedi-
to  della  Biblioteca  imperiale  di  Vienna  per  verifi-
care,  quale  f  u  la  prima  isola  scoperta  del  Colombo,
ed  anche  altri  punti  della  Storia  della  America"
(1869) ;  "  Nouvelles  Reeherehes  sur  les  derniers
voyages  du  navigateur  Florentin,  et  le  reste  des
documents  et  eclaircissements  sur  lui,  avec  les
textes  dans  les  langues  originelles,"  with  a  fac-
simile of  Plolemy's  chart  of  1513  (1871) ;  and
"  L'origine  Touranienne  des  Americains  Tupis-
Caribes,  et  des  anciens  Egyptiens,  indiquee  princi-
palement  par  la  philologie  comparee ;  traces  d'une
ancienne  migration  en  Amerique,  invasion  du  Bre-
sil  par  les  Tupis,  etc."  (1876).

VARNUM,  James  Mitchel,  soldier,  b.  in  Dra-
cut,  Mass..  17  Dec,  1748 ;  d.  in  Marietta,  Ohio,  10
Jan.,  1789.  His  great-grandfather  came  to  Massa-
chusetts about  1634.  James  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1769,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1771,  and
settled  in  East  Greenwich,  R.  I.,  where  he  practised


his  profession.  In  1774  he  became  colonel  of  the
Kentish  guards,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revo-
lutionary war  he  was  commissioned  as  colonel  of
the  1st  Rhode  Island  infantry,  8  May,  1775,  and
was  present  with  his  regiment  at  the  shelling  of
Roxbury,  Mass.,
the  siege  of  Bos-
ton, the  action  at
Harlem  Heights,
and  the  battle  of
White  Plains.  He
was  specially  rec-
ommended for  re-
tention in  the  army
on  its  rearrange-
ment for  the  war,
was  appointed
brigadier  -  general
of  Rhode  Island
troops,  12  Dec,
1776,  and  to  the
same  rank  in  the
Continental  armv,
12  Feb.,  1777,  and
took  part  with  his
brigade  in  numer-
ous engagements,
including  that  at
Red  Bank,  where  he  commanded  all  the  American
troops  on  the  Jersey  side  of  the  Delaware.  He
rendered  valuable  services  in  the  defence  of  the
forts  on  the  Delaware,  was  at  Valley  Forge  in  the
winter  of  1778,  and  afterward  took  an  active  part
at  the  battle  of  Rhode  Island.  In  1778  he  advo-
cated the  raising  of  a  battalion  of  negroes  in  Rhode
Island,  and  at  his  instance  the  legislature  passed
an  act  offering  freedom  to  all  slaves  that  should
enlist  in  the  army.  He  resigned  "his  commission
and  was  honorably  discharged,  5  March.  1779,  and
resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession  at  East
Greenwich,  where  he  speedily  attained  the  first
rank  as  a  lawyer,  took  part  in  most  of  the  chief
cases  in  Rhode  Island,  and  was  recognized  as  a
polished  and  eloquent  orator.  He  was  major-gen-
eral of  the  Rhode  Island  militia  from  1779  till
1788,  and  in  that  capacity  was  in  the  service  of  the
United  States  in  July  and  August,  1780,  under  the
Comte  de  Rochambeau.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Continental  congress  from  Rhode  Island  in  1780- '2
and  1786-'7,  and  was  there  recognized  by  his  col-
leagues as  "  a  man  of  uncommon  talents  and  most
brilliant  eloquence." In  October,  1787,  he  was  ap-

Sointed  by  congress  one  of  the  judges  of  the
tort h west  territory,  and  removed  to  Marietta,
Ohio,  in  June,  1788.  He  was  an  original  member
of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati,  and  second  presi-
dent of  the  Rhode  Island  society  of  that  order.
— His  brother,  Joseph  Bradley,  senator,  b.  in
Dracutt.  Mass.,  29  Jan.,  1750;  d.  there,  21  Sept.,
1821,  at  the  age  of  eighteen  was  commissioned  cap-
tain by  the  committee  of  the  colony  of  Massachu-
setts bay,  and  in  1787  colonel  by  the  commonwealth
of  Massachusetts.  He  was  made  brigadier-general
in  1802,  and  in  1805  major-general  of  the  state
militia,  holding  the  latter  office  at  his  death  in
1821.  From  1780  till  1795  he  was  a  member  of
the  house  of  representatives  and  senate  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  in  1787.  and  1795  he  served  as  a
member  of  the  governor's  council.  From  1795  till
1811  he  was  a  member  of  the  National  house  of
representatives,  during  which  time  he  was  chosen
speaker  two  terms,  from  1807  till  1811,  being  the
immediate  predecessor  of  Henry  Clay.  From  1811
till  1817  he  was  U.  S.  senator  from  Massachusetts,
being  elected  in  opposition  to  Timothy  Pickering,


262


VARONA


VASQUEZ


and  he  was  president  pro  tempore  of  the  senate
and  acting  vice-president  of  the  United  States
from  6  Dec,  1813,  till  17  April,  1814.  He  was  a
member  of  the  State  convention  to  ratify  the  con-
stitution of  the  United  States  in  1787,  and  that  of
1820  to  revise  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts,
acting  as  the  presiding  officer  in  the  absence  of
President  John  Adams  and  Chief-Justice  Parker.
In  1813  he  was  a  candidate  for  governor  of  Massa-
chusetts against  Caleb  Strong,  the  incumbent  of
that  office,  but  was  defeated.  Gen.  Varnum  was
among  the  earliest  patriots  of  the  Revolution,  hav-
ing raised  and  commanded  as  captain  a  company
of  minute-men  from  his  native  town,  which  par-
ticipated in  engagements  in  Rhode  Island  and
New  York.  For  his  assistance  in  putting  down
Shays's  rebellion  in  1787  he  received  a  personal  let-
ter of  thanks  from  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln,  com-
manding the  state  forces.  Henry  Wilson,  in  his
"  History  of  Slavery,"  quotes  him  in  the  debate  on
the  bill  for  the  government  of  the  Mississippi  ter-
ritory before  the  house  in  March,  1798,  as  having
been  very  strong  and  outspoken  in  his  opposition
to  negro  servitude.  In  politics,  unlike  his  brother,
Gen.  James  M.  Varnum.  who  was  a  Federalist,  he
was  a  Democrat,  and  a  strong  and  consistent  sup-
porter of  the  administration  of  Thomas  J efferson.
After  his  retirement  in  1817  from  congress  he  was
again  chosen  to  represent  his  district  in  the  legis-
lature, and  when  he  died  he  was  the  senior  mem-
ber of  the  senate  of  Massachusetts.  Among  the
portraits  of  the  speakers  of  the  National  house  of
representatives  at  the  capitol  in  Washington  there
is  a  fine  oil-painting  of  Gen.  Varnum  by  Charles  L.
'  Elliott,  a  gift  from  the  state  of  Massachusetts. — A
grandson  of  Joseph  B.,  Joseph  Bradley,  lawyer,
b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  9  June,  1818 ;  d.  in  Astoria,
N.  Y..  31  Dec,  1874,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1838,
studied  law  at  Yale  and  with  Roger  B.  Taney  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  and  after  admission  to  the  bar
practised  in  that  city  for  several  years.  He  then
removed  to  New  York  city  and  acquired  a  large
practice.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New  York
legislature  from  1849  till  1851,  being  chosen  speaker
of  the  assembly  for  the  latter  year.  In  1852  he
was  the  Whig  candidate  for  congress  in  his  dis-
trict. He  was  a  member  of  the  assembly  again  in
1857.  In  1871  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  agita-
tion against  corruption  in  the  government  of  New
York  city.  He  was  a  contributor  to  magazines  and
newspapers,  and  published  in  book-form  "  The  Seat
of  Government  of  the  United  States"  (New  York,
1848)  and  "The  Washington  Sketch- Book."

VARONA,  Enrique  Jose"  (vah-ro'-nah),  Cuban
author,  b.  in  Puerto  Principe,  Cuba,  in  1849.  He
received  his  education  in  his  native  city  and  began
his  literary  career  in  1864  as  a  contributor  to  re-
views. In  1874  he  fixed  his  residence  in  Havana,
dividing  his  time  between  teaching  and  journal-
ism. In  1885  he  was  elected  representative  for
Puerto  Principe  in  the  Spanish  cortes.  In  1885
he  founded  the  "  Revista  Cubana,"  a  literary,  sci-
entific, and  philosophical  review,  which  is  consid-
ered one  of  the  best  in  the  Spanish  language.  His
works  include  "  Odas  Anaereonticas "  (Puerto
Principe,  1868);  "Poesias"  (Havana,  1878);  "  Pai-
sajes  Cubanos  "  (1819) ;  "  Conferencias  filosoficas  ;
Logica "  (1880) :  "  Conferencias  filosoficas  ;  Psi-
cologia"(1881);  "Estudios  Literarios  y  filosoficos"
(1883) ;  and  "  Seis  Conferencias  "  (Barcelona,  1887).
His  "  Logica"  has  been  translated  into  French.

VARR1CK,  James,  A.  M.  E.  Zion  bishop,  b.
near  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  about  1760;  d.  in  1836.
He  with  eight  other  members  of  the  Methodist
church  obtained  permission  from  Bishop  Francis


Asbury  to  hold  separate  meetings  for  his  race.
They  met  in  a  shop  in  New  York  city  for  three
years,  and  in  1800  the  society  was  incorporated
under  the  name  of  the  African  Methodist  Epis-
copal Zion  church,  their  first  church  being  com-
pleted the  same  year.  This  was  the  origin  of  Zion
church  in  this  country,  of  which  James  Varrick
was  one  of  the  earliest  trustees.  In  1820  he  was
elected  one  of  the  first  two  elders  of  the  church,
in  the  following  year  chairman  of  the  New  York
conference  district,  and  in  1822  he  was  made  the
first  superintendent  or  bishop,  his  term  of  service
expiring  in  1828.

VASCONCELLOS,  Andres  de  (vas-cone-thayl'-
los),  Portuguese  navigator,  b.  in  Yelves  about
the  end  of  the  15th  century;  d.  in  Portugal  in
the  first  half  of  the  16th  century.  He  was  an
expert  mariner,  and  sailed  in  1538  in  the  ex-
pedition of  Hernando  de  Soto  as  captain  of  the
"  Buena  Fortuna."  After  the  landing  of  Soto  at
Tampa,  Vasconcellos  explored  the  coast  as  far  as
the  bay  of  Appalachee,  where  he  landed  the  rest  of
his  stores,  and  when  Soto  went  into  winter-quarters
in  1539,  Vasconcellos  sailed  around  the  coast  of
Florida,  taking  astronomical'  observations,  and
landing  often  to  explore  the  country.  On  his  re-
turn to  Appalachee,  he  found  the  adelantado  gone,
sailed  for  Cuba,  and  thence  for  Europe,  where  he
wrote  an  account  of  his  voyage,  with  accurate  de-
tails about  the  formation  of  the  coast  and  astro-
nomical observations  on  the  position  and  distance
of  many  points,  giving  also  an  interesting  descrip-
tion of  the  fruits,  birds,  and  quadrupeds  of  the
country.  His  work  "  Relacao  da  viagem  do  almi-
rante  Dom  Hernando  de  Soto,  descripcao  da  pro-
vincia  da  Florida"  is  preserved  in  the  original
manuscript  in  the  library  of  the  Duke  de  Sesa.
An  anonymous  translation  was  published  in  French
under  the  title  "  Histoire  de  la  Floride  par  le  sieur
Andre  de  Vasconcellos  "  (Paris,  1685),  and  there  is  a
Spanish  translation  entitled  "  Historia  de  la  Florida
del  Hidalgo  de  Yelves"  (Seville,  1545).

VASCONCELLOS,  Simon,  Portuguese  histo-
rian, b.  in  Coimbra  in  1599;  d.  in  the  province  of
Sao  Paulo,  Brazil,  in  1670.  He  early  became  a
Jesuit,  was  attached  for  about  forty  years  to  the
Brazilian  missions,  founded  several  convents  in
the  country,  and  became  assistant  visitor  of  the
order.  He  wrote  three  valuable  works,  "  Cronica
de  la  Compafiio  de  Jesu  en  el  Brazil "  (Lisbon,
1663);  "VidadeJoaoAlmeydo"(1665);  and"Vida
de  Jose  Anchieta"  (1666);  and  left  several  inter-
esting manuscripts,  which  are  preserved  in  the
Brazilian  state  archives,

VASEY,  George,  botanist,  b.  near  Scarborough,
Yorkshire,  England,  28  Feb.,  1822.  He  came  to
this  country  when  a  child,  and  was  graduated  at
Berkshire  medical  college,  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  in
1848.  Settling  in  the  practice  of  his  profession
in  Illinois,  he  continued  it  for  twenty  years.  In
April,  1872,  he  was  appointed  botanist  to  the  de-
partment of  agriculture  in  Washington.  His  pub-
lished works,  issued  under  government  auspices,
include  "A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Native
Forest  Trees  of  the  United  States "  (Washington,
1876) ;  "  The  Grasses  of  the  United  States,  a  Synop-
sis of  the  Tribes,  with  Descriptions  of  the  Genera"
(1883) ;  "  The  Agricultural  Grasses  of  the  United
States"  (1884);  "A  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the
Grasses  of  the  United  States"  (1885) ;  "  Report  of
an  Investigation  of  the  Grasses  of  the  Arid  Dis-
tricts" (2  parts,  1886-7);  and  "Grasses  of  the
South"  (1887).

VASQUEZ,  Francisco  (vas'-kayth),  Central
American  historian,  b.  in  Guatemala  about  1600;


VASQUEZ


VASSAR


263


d.  there  about  1660.  He  entered  the  Franciscan
order  and  was  attached  to  the  missions  in  Chiapa,
where. he  labored  with  great  success  for  about
twenty -five  years,  founded  several  missions,  be-
came chronicler  of  his  order,  and  established  the
Franciscan  province  of  Nicaragua.  He  left  a  valu-
able manuscript,  "  Cronica  de  la  provincia  del
Santisimo  Nombre  de  Jesus,  del  orden  de  San
Francisco  de  Guatemala,  y  de  las  misiones  en  la
provincia  de  Chiapa"  (2  vols.,  Guatemala,  1714
and  1716),  in  which  he  recounts  the  entrance  of
the  Spaniards  into  Guatemala,  narrates  the  stages
of  the  conquest,  and  gives  valuable  information
about  the  foundation  of  Chiapa,  and  concerning
the  missionaries  that  wrote  in  the  aboriginal  lan-
guages of  Guatemala  and  Chiapa.

VASQUEZ,  Francisco  Pablo,  Mexican  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Atlixco  in  1769  ;  d.  in  Cholula  in  1847.
He  was  educated  in  the  Palafoxiano  seminary  of
Puebla,  where  he  studied  philosophy,  and  in  1788
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Mexico,  where
he  obtained  in  1789  the  chair  of  philosophy.  He
was  given  the  degree  of  doctor  in  theology  in
1795,  appointed  to  the  parish  of  San  Geronimo
Coatepec,  and  made  secretary  of  the  diocese  of
Puebla.  In  1818  he  was  elected  canon  of  the
cathedral,  and  in  1825  the  government  appointed
him  minister  to  the  pope,  to  obtain  the  recognition
of  the  republic  and  arrange  a  convention.  He
sailed  for  London,  and  afterward  went  to  Paris,
and  in  December,  1828,  received  new  instructions
in  Florence.  His  negotiations  with  Pius  VIII.,  and
afterward  with  Gregory  XVI.,  ended  in  a  satis-
factory treaty  between  the  apostolic  see  and  the
government  of  the  republic.  He  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Puebla  in  Rome  by  Cardinal  Odescalchi
in  March,  1831,  and  returned  to  Mexico.  He
founded  the  correctional  asylum  for  women,  im-
proved the  hospital,  and  favored  all  the  charitable
institutions  of  Puebla.  He  translated  Clavigero's
"Storia  Antica  del  Messico  "  a,nd  Voltaire's  "  Let-
tres  de  quelques  juifs  Allemands  et  Polonais  "  into
Spanish  (Mexico,  1842).

VASSAR,  Matthew,  philanthropist,  b.  in  the
parish  of  Tuddenham,  Norfolk,  England,  29  April,
1792 ;  d.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  23  June,  1868.
His  father,  James  Vassar. of French ancestry,

who  was  a  dis-
senter of  the  Bap-
tist communion,
emigrated  with
his  wife  and  chil-
dren and  an  un-
married brother,
Thomas,  to  this
country.  He

reached  New
York  in  1796,
and,  after  spend-
ing a  few  months
in  exploring  the
country,  settled
in  the  spring  of
1797  on  a  farm
in  the  neighbor-
hood of  Pough-
keepsie. Here  the
Vassar  family,
having  brought  the  art  with  them  from  England,
began  the  brewing  of  ale  first  for  their  own  con-
sumption and  then  to  meet  the  demands  of  their
neighbors.  These  demands  grew  so  rapidly  that  in
1801  James  Vassar  removed  to  Poughkeepsie  and
there  conducted  the  brewing  business  on  an  exten-
sive scale. His  son,  Matthew,  finally  succeeded  to


K-v^^/y*'


this  business,  and  in  it  acquired  the  large  fortune
that  he  ultimately  devoted  mainly  to  the  higher
education  of  women.  In  1845,  after  many  years  of
diligent  and  prosperous  labor,  he  visited  Europe  and
spent  nearly  twelve  months  in  travelling  over  Great
Britain,  Ireland,  and  the  continent.  Having  no
children,  he  was  already  meditating  as  to  the  man-
ner in  which  he  should  dispose  of  his  fortune  so  as
best  to  promote  the  welfare  of  society.  Circum-
stances finally  determined  him  to  erect  and  endow
a  college  for  young  women  which  should  be  to
their  sex  what  Harvard  and  Yale  were  to  young
men.  In  the  execution  of  this  purpose  Mr.  Vas-
sar was  a  pioneer  in  a  field  that  now  abounds  in
imitators.  In  January,  1861,  he  obtained  from
the  legislature  an  act  to  incorporate  Vassar  col-
lege, and  in  February  following,  at  a  meeting  of
the  board  of  trustees  which  he  selected,  he  trans-
ferred to  their  custody  the  sum  of  $400,000.  At
his  death  this  was  increased  by  the  bequests  of  his
will  to  more  than  $800,000.  In  the  earlier  years
of  his  career  Mr.  Vassar  gave  much  to  various
charities.  A  handsome  house  of  worship  for  the
Baptist  church  of  Poughkeepsie,  to  which  he  was
warmly  attached,  was  built  mainly  by  his  contri-
butions. His  death  occurred  suddenly  on  com-
mencement-day while  he  was  engaged  in  reading
his  annual  address  to  the  trustees. — His  nephew,
Matthew,  philanthropist,  son  of  John  Guy  Vas-
sar, b.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  11  May,  1809;  d.
there,  10  Aug.,  1881.  At  the  age  of  twenty-two  he
accepted  a  partnership  in  his  uncle's  brewing
business,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  a  large  for-
tune. Though  his  early  education  was  limited,  he
became  a  well-informed  man  of  sound  judgment,
positive  convictions,  and  resolute  energy,  and  ex-
erted a  commanding  influence  in  the  community
in  which  he  lived.  He  was  active  in  various  local
institutions  and  charities,  but  rendered  especially
valuable  service  in  his  care  of  the  college  that  his
uncle  had  founded.  He  was  one  of  its  original
trustees,  and  its  treasurer  until  the  time  of  his
death,  devoting,  without  salary,  to  the  duties  of
this  office  and  the  general  interests  of  the  college
several  hours  of  each  day  for  sixteen  years.  Ho
endowed  two  professorships  that  bear  his  name  in
Vassar  college,  contributing  for  this  purpose  $100,-
000,  and  also  bequeathed  to  the  college  $50,000  as
a  beneficiary  fund.  In  conjunction  with  his
brother,  John  Guy,  he  built  and  equipped  the  Vas-
sar brothers'  laboratory  connected  with  the  college
at  a  cost  of  $20,000.  In  the  city  of  Poughkeepsie
he  and  his  brother  erected  and  endowed  the  Vas-
sar brothers'  home  for  aged  men,  the  Vassar  broth-
ers' scientific  and  literary  institute,  and  the  Vassar
brothers'  hospital,  of  which  the  last  named  was
completed  after  his  death.  His  various  benefac-
tions amounted  to  about  $500,000.  By  his  exer-
tions a  branch  of  the  New  York  society  for  the
prevention  of  cruelty. to  animals  was  established  in
Poughkeepsie,  and  he  became  its  president.  lie
also  gave  much  to  the  Baptist  church  of  Pough-
keepsie, of  which  he  was  a  life -long  member.
—The  second  Matthew's  brother,  John  Guy,  phi-
lanthropist, b.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y..  15  June,
1811;  d.  there,  27  Oct.,  1888,  was  early  associ-
ated with  his  uncle  in  the  brewing  business,  and
shared  its  prosperity.  Infirm  health  prevented
his  steady  application  to  business,  and  he  spent
thirty  years  abroad,  during  which  he  travelled  over
a  large  part  of  the  globe.  He  gave  an  account
of  these  travels  in  a  published  volume  entitled
"Twenty  Years  Around  the  World"  (1861).  He
is  one  of  the  original  trustees  of  Vassar  college,  be-
ing selected  for  that  position  by  its  founder. Be-


264


VATRY


VAUBLANC


sides  his  joint  benefactions  with  his  brother,  which
are  recorded  above,  he  has  made  a  conditional
gift  of  $ 20,000  to  the  college  that  bears  the  family
name.  His  later  years  have  been  earnestly  devoted
to  the  completion  and  equipment  of  the  Vassar
brothers'  hospital.  —  The  first  Matthew's  cousin,
John  Ellison,  lay  preacher,  b.  near  Poughkeepsie,
N.  Y.,  13  Jan.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Poughkeepsie,  6  Dec,
1878,  was  the  son  of  Thomas  Vassar.  In  early  life
he  was  employed  in  the  brewery  of  Matthew  Vas-
sar, but,  having  become  a  religious  man  of  very
earnest  convictions,  he  left  the  service  of  his  cousin
and  devoted  his  entire  life  to  self-sacrificing  labors
for  the  good  of  others.  He  was  employed  in  1850
by  the  American  tract  society  as  a  colporteur,  his
first  missionary  work  being  in  Illinois  and  other
western  states.  Subsequently  New  York  and  New
England  were  his  field  of  service.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  at  the  front,  engaged  in  religious
labors  of  all  kinds  among:  the  soldiers.  Just  be-
fore the  battle  of  Gettysburg  he  was  captured  by
Gen.  James  E.  B.  Stuart's  cavalry,  who  were  glad
to  let  him  go  to  escape  his  importunate  exhorta-
tions and  prayers.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  war
he  visited,  in  the  service  of  the  Tract  society,  Vir-

finia,  North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  and  Florida,
'ew  men  of  his  day  travelled  more  extensively  or
were  more  widely  known  than  "  Uncle  John  Vas-
sar," as  he  was  everywhere  called.  His  extraordi-
nary mental  gifts,  in  connection  with  his  zeal,
made  him  a  lay  preacher  that  was  rarely  equalled.
An  account  of  his  life  has  been  published  by  the
Rev.  Thomas  E.  Vassar  (New  York,  1879).— John
Ellison's  nephew.  Thomas  Edwin,  clergyman,  b.
in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  3  Dec,  1834,  is  son  of
William  Vassar.  His  plans  for  entering  college
were  frustrated  by  family  misfortunes,  and  he  was
ordained  to  the  Baptist  ministry  in  1857,  without
the  advantages  of  a  formal  education.  He  has
been  successively  settled  as  pastor  at  Amenia,
N.  Y.,  Lynn,  Mass.,  Flemington,  N.  J.,  and
Newark,  N.  J.,  and  is  now  in  Kansas  City,  Mo.  He
was  for  .one  year  chaplain  of  the  150th  New  York
regiment,  and  was  at  several  battles,  including
Gettysburg.  He  is  the  author  of  a  memoir  of  his
cousin,  John  Ellison  Vassar,  entitled  "  Uncle  John
Vassar  "  (New  York.  1879),  of  which  about  20,000
copies  have  been  sold  in  America  and  England.
He  has  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.

VATRY,  Marc  Antoine  Bourdon  (vah-tree),
Baron  de,  French  statesman,  b.  in  Saint-Maur,
near  Paris,  21  Nov.,  17G1 ;  d.  in  Paris,  22  April,
1828.  He  was  secretary  to  Count  De  Grasse  in
1780-2,  was  at  Yorktown,  and  wrote  for  the  admi-
ralty an  account  of  the  naval  operations  in  the
Gulf  of  Mexico  and  on  the  coast  of  North  Ameri-
ca. After  the  battle  of  Dominica,  12  April,  1782,
in  which  he  was  wounded  and  where  Count  Do
Grasse  was  made  a  prisoner,  he  became  secretary
of  Marquis  Louis  Philippe  de  Vaudreuil,  who  suc-
ceeded De  Grasse  in  the  command  of  the  French
forces.  He  was  charged  with  the  embarkation  at
Boston  of  Rochambeau's  army  for  Santo  Domingo,
and  when  peace  was  concluded  in  1783  he  was  ap-

Sointed  chief  of  the  colonial  bureau  in  the  navy
epartment.  He  was  employed  later  at  Antwerp,
was  secretary  of  the  navy  in  1798-1800,  and  was
then  named  minister  to  the  United  States.  By  a
subsequent  decree  he  was  appointed  commissary-
general  of  the  Low  Countries,  and  a  few  months
later  transferred  to'  Havre  as  maritime  prefect.
He  opposed  the  expedition  of  Gen.  Leclerc  to  San-
to Domingo,  of  which  he  foresaw  the  consequences,
and  it  is  said  that  Bonaparte  answered  his  objec-
tions and  those  of  the  engineer  Fairfait  with  the


significant  words :  "  I  want  to  get  rid  of  the  60,000
republican  soldiers  of  Moreau's  army."  During  his
administration  as  prefect  of  Avignon  and  afterward
of  Genoa  he  built  several  monuments,  constructed
bridges  and  dams,  and  opened  high-roads.  He  be-
came under-secretary  of  the  navy  and  colonies  in
1814,  and  retired  to  private  life  after  the  second
restoration  of  Louis  XVIII.  in  1815.  His  works  in-
clude "  Expose  des  operations  de  l'armee  navale  du
Comte  de  Grasse  de  1780  a  1782"  (Paris,  1785).

VATTEMARE,  Alexandre,  founder  of  the  sys-
tem of  international  exchanges,  b.  in  Paris,  8  Nov.,
1796;  d.  there,  7  April,  1864.  He  became  a  sur-
geon, and  in  1814  was  sent  to  conduct  Prussian
prisoners  of  war  to  Berlin.  Afterward,  being  with-
out resources,  he  became  a  professional  ventrilo-
quist, and  under  the  name  of  Monsieur  Alexandre
was  well  known  throughout  Europe  and  appeared
as  such  in  this  country.  Subsequently  he  gave
up  this  occupation  to  urge  the  adoption  of  his
system  of  commercial  exchanges.  At  first  this
aimed  simply  at  a  systematic  exchange  of  dupli-
cates between  libraries,  especially  of  government
publications,  but  he  afterward  extended  it  to  in-
clude art-objects,  maps,  specimens  of  natural  his-
tory, and  other  similar  articles.  He  came  to  this
country  in  1839  and  again  in  1847,  and  was  granted
money  by  congress  and  by  the  legislatures  of  sev-
eral states  to  further  his  scheme,  which  met  with
more  success  here  than  in  Europe.  His  manners
were  captivating,  and  in  his  addresses  he  indulged
in  the  most  extravagant  flattery  of  the  United
States,  promising  that  by  his  exertions  "the  veil
of  ignorance  which  shuts  out  your  country  from
view  will  fall  and  she  will  stand  in  the  eyes  of  Eu-
rope in  her  true  dignity  and  glory."  He  also  held
out  the  prospect  that  "a  rattlesnake  or  a  lizard
may  procure  a  copy  of  the  Venus  de  Medicis."  He
was  the  means  of  adding  300,000  volumes  to  the
libraries  of  this  country ;  but  he  lacked  judgment
and  system,  and  his  scheme  was  ultimately  a  fail-
ure. His  plan  of  establishing  a  government  bureau
in  Paris  in  connection  with  it  was  not  regarded
with  favor,  and  he  died  a  disappointed  man. — His
son,  Hippolyte,  who  has  contributed  to  current
literature  in  France,  notably  a  series  of  biographi-
cal sketches  of  American  soldiers  in  the  "  Revue
contemporaine,"  has  unsuccessfully  endeavored  to
revive  his  father's  project.

VAUBLANC,  Vincent  Marie  Vienot  (vo-
blong),  Count  de,  West  Indian  statesman,  b.  in  Fort
Dauphin,  Hayti,  2  March,  1756 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,
21  Aug.,  1845.  He  received  his  education  at  the
military  school  of  La  Fleche  in  France  in  1770-*4,
and  entered  the  army  as  lieutenant  in  the  "La
Sarre  "  regiment.  From  1776  till  1782  he  served
in  Santo  Domingo,  but  he  resigned  in  the  latter
year,  was  returned  to  the  legislative  assembly  in
1791,  elected  its  president  on  14  Nov.,  and  in
1792  defended  at  the  bar  of  the  assembly  Count  de
Rochambeau,  and  secured  his  acquittal  by  recall-
ing the  services  that  he  had  performed  in  the
United  States.  He  strongly  favored  the  motion
for  the  enfranchisement  of  the  slaves  in  the  French
colonies  in  America,  and  defending  at  the  tribune
the  conclusions  of  the  commission,  secured  on  9
April,  1792,  the  passage  of  the  law  to  that  effect.
In  1796,  as  a  member  of  the  council  of  five  hun-
dred, he  assailed  the  colonial  administration,  and
secured  the  recall  of  Fclicite  Sonthonax  from
Santo  Domingo.  Being  outlawed  after  the  coup
d'etat  of  4  Sept.,  1797,  he  went  to  Italy,  and,  after
his  return  to  France  in  1799,  became  a  member  of
the  corps  16gislatif  in  1800,  and  its  president  in  1804.
In  1805  he  was  appointed  prefect  of  the  department


VAUDREUIL


VAUDREUIL


265


of  Moselle,  and  in  1813  he  was  made  a  count  of  the
empire.  Under  Louis  XVIII.  he  was  councillor
of  state,  and  secretary  of  the  interior  in  the  Riche-
lieu cabinet  from  24  Sept.,  1815,  till  8  May,  1816.
In  1820  he  was  returned  as  a  deputy  by  the  de-
partment of  Calvados,  and  from  1820  till  1830  he
was  delegate  of  the  colony  of  Guadeloupe  to  the
king.  He  urged  the  establishment  of  a  maritime
entrepot  in  the  Antilles,  and  also  advocated  several
changes  in  the  judiciary  and  administration  of  the
colonies.  After  the  accession  of  Louis  Philippe
to  the  throne  of  France  in  1830,  he  retired  to  pri-
vate life.  His  works  include  "  Du  commerce  mari-
time considere  sous  le  rapport  des  colonies  "  (1828) ;
"  Memoires  et  souvenirs  (2  vols.,  1839) ;  and  "  De
la  navigation  des  colonies  "  (1843).

VAUDREUIL,  Philippe  de  Rigaud,  Marquis
de,  governor  of  Canada,  b.  in  the  castle  of  Vau-
dreuil,  near  Castelnaudary,  France,  in  1640 ;  d.  in
Quebec,  11  Oct.,  1725.  He  was  a  brigadier-gen-
eral in  the  French  army,  and  distinguished  him-
self at  the  siege  of  Valenciennes.  He  was  sent  to
Canada  as  commander  of  the  forces,  and  was  then
known  as  Chevalier  de  Vaudreuil.  With  300  men
he  went  to  the  relief  of  Montreal  during  the  massa-
cre of  Lachine,  and  served  under  Frontenac  in  his
expedition  against  the  Iroquois.  He  was  engaged  in
1690  in  the  defence  of  Quebec  against  the  attack
of  Admiral  Phipps,  and  in  1693  surprised  and  de-
feated La  Chaudiere  Noire,  the  most  astute  and  ter-
rible of  the  Iroquois  chiefs.  In  1702  he  obtained
a  seigniory,  and  was  appointed  governor  of  Mon-
treal, and  in  1703  he  became  governor  of  Canada
as  successor  to  M.  de  Callieres.  In  1710  he  en-
gaged in  the  defence  of  Quebec,  and  at  the  same
time  made  preparations  for  the  relief  of  Montreal.
After  Louis  XV.  became*  king,  Vaudreuil  effected
many  reforms  in  the  colony,  and  his  measures,
civil  or  military,  were  usually  successful. — His
eldest  son,  Louis  Philippe  de  Rigaud,  Marquis
de,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  in
1691 ;  d.  in  Rochefort,  France,  27  Nov.,  1763,  en-
tering the  Canadian  militia  at  the  age  of  sixteen,
rose  rapidly  in  the  service,  and  held  the  rank
of  major  at  the  death  of  his  father.  He  then
returned  to  France,  joined  the  navy  as  lieutenant,
and  was  again  employed  in  Canada  for  several
years.  In  1738  he  was  post-captain  and  com-
manded the  navy  in  Canada.  During  the  war  for
the  succession  of  Austria  he  fought  at  Cape  Bre-
ton, and  for  his  valor  at  the  battle  off  Cape  Finis-
terre,  25  Oct.,  1747.  was  promoted  chef  d  escadre.
Louis  XV.  caused  Carl  Van  Loo  to  paint  a  picture
that  represented  Vaudreuil  disengaging  the  flag-
ship when  it  was  surrounded  by  superior  forces,
and  a  copy  was  presented  to  the  officer,  while  the
original  is  still  preserved  in  the  museum  at  Ver-
sailles. He  was  promoted  lieutenant-general  in
1753,  fought  with  credit  in  the  seven  years'  war,
defended  Marie-Galante  in  the  West  Indies  against
the  English,  and  was  governor  of  Santo  Domingo
in  1761-2.— Another  son,  Pierre  Francois,  Mar-
quis de  Vaudreuil-Cavagnal,  governor  of  Canada,
b.  in  Quebec  in  1698 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France  20  Oct.,
1765,  founded  the  branch  of  Vaudreuil-Cavagnal.
and  was  first  known  as  Chevalier  de  Cavagnal.  He
entered  the  military  service,  and  attained  the  rank
of  major  in  the  marine  corps.  In  1733  he  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  Three  Rivers,  and  in  1742  of
Louisiana,  in  which  capacities  he  gained  great  popu-
larity. In  1755  he  was  appointed  governor  of  Can-
ada. His  relations  with  Montcalm,  commander  of
the  troops  in  Canada,  were  unfriendly,  and  this  lack
of  harmony  between  the  highest  civil  and  military
authorities  in  the  colony  doubtless  tended  to  hasten


the  end  of  French  power  in  North  America.  In
September,  1759,  the  British  defeated  Montcalm
and  captured  Quebec,  and  in  the  spring  of  1760
Vaudreuil  capitulated  to  Gen.  Amherst  at  Mon-
treal. Gen.  Levis,  who  was  in  command  of  the
troops  at  Montreal  at  the  time  of  the  surrender,
opposed  the  capitulation ;  but  opposition  was  use-
less. Such,  however,  was  not  the  view  that  was
taken  of  the  capitulation  and  of  some  other  of
Vaudreuil's  official  actions  by  the  home  authorities,
and  on  his  return  to  France  he  was  imprisoned  in
the  Bastile  on  charges  preferred  by  friends  of  Mont-
calm. He  was  afterward  tried  before  the  Chatelet
de  Paris,  the  result  being  that  the  allegations  were
shown  to  be  baseless,  and  he  was  absolved  from  all
blame  in  his  administration  of  the  affairs  of  Cana-
da. He  was  consequently  released  from  imprison-
ment, but  with  the  loss  of  nearly  all  his  money  and
property. — Another  son,  Pierre  Francois  de  Ri-
gaud, Chevalier  de  Vaudreuil,  b.  in  Quebec  in
1704;  d.  in  Versailles,  France,  in  1772,  was  a
brave  and  capable  officer.  He  took  Fort  Massa-
chusetts from  the  British,  gained  a  victory  over
Col.  Parker  on  Lake  St.  Sacrement,  sunk  twenty
bateaux,  and  took  five  officers  and  160  men  prison-
ers. He  visited  France,  prevailed  on  the  gov-
ernment to  despatch  Montcalm,  Levis,  Bourla-
maque,  and  Bougainville  to  Canada,  and  assembled
at  St.  John  the  army  that  subsequently  besieged
the  forts  at  Oswego  and  Ontario,  and  made  the
last  attempt  to  detach  the  Iroquois  from  the  Brit-
ish in  1757.  He  was  successively  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  Quebec,  and  governor  of  Three  Rivers
and  Montreal. — Louis  Philippe's  son,  Louis  Phil-
ippe de  Rigaud,  Marquis  de  Vaudreuil,  naval
officer,  b.  in  Quebec,  28  Oct.,  1724;  d.  in  Paris,
France,  14  Dec,
1802,  entered  the
navy  as  midship-
man in  1740,  and
rose  rapidly  in  the
service,  being  pro-
moted ensign  in
1747  and  captain
in  1754.  On  19
May,  1759,  he
fought  a  brilliant
engagement  with
the  English,  and
was  made  Knight
of  St.  Louis.  He
was  promoted  post
captain,  adminis-
tered the  govern-
ment of  the  island
La  Desirade,  in
the  West  Indies,
in  1765-'8,  was  made  brigadier  of  the  naval  forces
in  1773,  and  chef  d'escadre  early  in  1777.  He  com-
manded a  division  under  Count  d'Orvilliers  at  the
battle  of  Ouessant,  27  July,  1778,  and  in  December,
1778,  took  charge  at  Brest  of  a  squadron  of  two
ships  of  the  line,  two  frigates,  and  three  corvettes.
After  storming  Fort  St.  Louis,  in  Senegal,  and  se-
curing rich  prizes  on  the  African  coast,  he  conveyed
troops  to  Martinique  and  Santo  Domingo,  and,  join-
ing Count  d'Estaing's  army,  participated  in  the
capture  of  Grenada  and  in  the  attack  on  St.  Lucia.
He  assisted  also  in  the  siege  of  Savannah  in  1779,
and  assumed  command  of  the  fleet  when  the  ad-
miral led  the  French  columns'to  the  assault.  Re-
turning to  Brest  toward  the  close  of  the  year,  he
escorted  a  convoy  of  troops  to  Santo  Domingo  in
February,  1780,  escaping  by  skilful  manoeuvring
the  superior fleet of  Admiral Kempenfelt,  and


6U<  cJ~L~&ct<cf


266


VAUGHAN


VAUGHAN


brought  safely  several  prizes  to  Fort  RoAral,  Mar-
tinique. Joining  Count  de  Guichen's  fleet,  he
commanded  the  first  division  at  the  engagements
with  the  English  in  the  channel  of  Dominica  on
17  April  and  15  and  19  May,  1780,  which  resulted
in  a  victory  for  the  French.  In  July  following
he  was  given  the  grand  cross  of  St.  Louis  and
made  governor  of  Santo  Domingo,  but  he  soon
resigned,  as  he  preferred  active  service  at  sea,
and  took  command  of  a  division  in  Count  de
G  rasse's  fleet,  assisting  in  the  engagement  with  Ad-
miral Graves  in  Chesapeake  bay  and  in  the  siege
of  Yorktown.  At  the  battle  in  the  channel*  of  the
Saintes  islands,  12  April,  1782,  he  escorted  the
convoy  that  was  destined  to  attack  Jamaica,  but
was  unable  to  take  part  in  the  action.  Count  de
Grasse  attributing  his  capture  to  Vaudreuil,  the
latter  was  court-martialed  at  Lorient  in  March,
1784:  but  the  finding  of  the  court,  21  May,  1784,
was  that  "  Vaudreuil's  conduct  during  all  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  battle  deserved  nothing  but
praise."  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-general,  14
Aug.,  1782,  and  in  December  following  carried
Rochambeau's  army  from  Boston  and  Providence
to  Santo  Domingo.  He  was  elected  to  the  states-
general  in  1789  by  the  nobility  of  Castelnaudary.
served  as  a  member  on  the  naval  committee  of  the
assembly,  and  during  the  night  of  5  to  6  Oct.,
1789,  forcing  an  entrance  in  the  palace  of  Ver-
sailles with  a  few  officers,  protected  the  royal
family  from  outrage  and  kept  the  mob  at  bay  till
the  arrival  of  succor.  In  1791  he  emigrated  to
London,  but  he  returned  to  Paris  in  1800.  and  was
granted  by  Napoleon  Bonaparte  a  pension  on  the
retired  list  of  the  navy. — Philippe's  grandson,
Jean  Francois  de  Rigaud  de  Paule,  Count  de,
better  known  as  Count  de  Paule- Vaudreuil,
French  soldier,  b.  in  Port  au  Prince,  Santo  Do-
mingo, 2  March,  1740;  d.  in  Paris,  10  Jan.,  1817,
was  the  son  of  Jean  Paul  Francois,  governor  of
Santo  Domingo  and  other  French  possessions  in
the  West  Indies  for  several  years.  The  son  en-
tered the  navy  and  served  during  the  seven  years'
war,  in  1756-'63,  as  aide-de-camp  to  Marshal
Prince  de  Soubise,  attaining  the  rank  of  lieuten-
ant-general. He  was  a  great  favorite  at  court,
and  was  made  grand  falconer  by  Louis  XVI.  He
emigrated  in  1789  to  Turin  with  the  Count  d'Ar-
tois,  accompanying  the  latter  everywhere  till  the
restoration  of  1814,  when  he  was  created  a  peer  of
France  and  appointed  governor  of  the  royal  palace
of  the  Louvre. — Another  grandson,  Jean  Louis
de  Rigaud,  Count  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Cape
Francais  in  1762;  d.  in  Paris,  20  April,  1816,
entered  the  army  in  1777  as  lieutenant,  went  to
America  with  Rochambeau,  served  as  aide-de-
camp to  Chevalier  de  Chastellux,  and  was  at  York-
town  in  October,  1781.  He  was  promoted  colonel
in  1785,  emigrated  to  Germany  in  1789,  served  in  the
army  of  Conde,  and  after  the  restoration  of  Louis
XVIII.  became  master  of  the  king's  wardrobe.

VAUGHAN,  Benjamin,  political  economist,  b.
in  Jamaica,  West  Indies,  during  a  temporary  resi-
dence of  his  parents  on  the  island,  19  April,  1751 ;
d.  in  Hallowell,  Me.,  8  Dec,  1835.  He  was  the
eldest  son  of  Samuel  Vaughan,  of  London,  a  West
India  merchant  and  planter.  His  mother  was
Sarah  Hallowell,  daughter  of  Benjamin  Hallowell.
a  merchant  of  Boston,  Mass.  He  was  educated  by
Dr.  Priestley,  and  at  the  University  of  Cambridge.
As  early  as  1778  he  wrote  on  political  subjects.  He
studied  medicine  at  Edinburgh,  taking  his  degree
in  May,  1781.  and  on  30  June  married  Sarah,
daughter  of  William  Manning,  of  London,  a  West
India  merchant  and  planter,  grandfather  of  Cardi-


i- CPdOru . Veulfr£evn-s


nal  Manning.  He  became  the  partner  of  Mr.  Man-
ning, and  remained  with  the  house  in  active  busi-
ness until  1794.  Through  his  American  connections
and  his  scientific  pursuits  he  early  became  intimate
with  Benjamin  Franklin.  His  relations  with
Franklin,  his  con-
nection with  Hen-
ry Laurens  (whose
son  married  Miss
Manning),  and  his
friendship  with
Lord  Shelburne
brought  him  into
active  participa-
tion in  the  conduct
of  the  negotiations
for  peace  between
England  and  the
United  States  in
1782.  But  he  never
assumed  any  offi-
cial part  in  these  ne-
gotiations. There
is  some  evidence
that  communica-
tions from  Paris,
concerning  the  possibilities  of  peace,  passed  from
Franklin  to  Shelburne,  through  Laurens  and
Vaughan,  as  early  as  March,  1782,  before  Lord
North's  resignation.  Late  in  March,  after  the  for-
mation of  the  Rockingham  ministry,  Lord  Shel-
burne (then  secretary  for  the  colonies)  requested
Vaughan  to  persuade  Laurens  to  go  to  Holland  with
his  brother,  William  Vaughan,  to  ascertain  from
John  Adams  what  means  were  necessary  for  peace.
By  sending  messengers  in  three  directions  at  once,
Vaughan  succeeded  in  finding  Laurens,  who  was
persuaded  to  undertake  the  mission.  Fox,  secretary
for  foreign  affairs,  desired  to  get  these  negotiations
into  his  own  hands,  being  jealous  of  Shelburne,  and
attempted  to  obtain  the  same  service  from  Laurens,
but  had  been  forestalled  by  Vaughan.  At  the  same
time,  being  consulted  by  Lord  Shelburne  as  to  the
best  person  to  send  to  Paris  to  open  formal  negoti-
ations with  Franklin,  Vaughan  suggested  Richard
Oswald,  who  was  at  once  sent  to  Paris,  crossing  the
channel  in  the  same  packet  with  Laurens.  Oswald
was  afterward  formally  commissioned  negotiator
for  England,  and  returned  to  France ;  but  owing  to
jealousies  between  him  and  Grenville,  sent  by  Fox,
Franklin  became  very  guarded  in  his  intercourse,
and,  before  Lord  Shelburne  became  prime  minister,
Vaughan  seems  to  have  gone  to  Paris  at  his  request
to  attempt  to  allay  Franklin's  suspicions.  After
Lord  Rockingham's  death,  during  the  formation
of  the  Shelburne  cabinet.  Lord  Shelburne  offered
Vaughan  an  official  appointment,  which  he  de-
clined; but  he  consented  to  go  again  to  Paris  in
July  to  see  Franklin,  to  assure  him  of  Lord  Shel-
burne's  genuine  desire  to  conclude  a  peace,  and  to
remove  any  obstacles  arising  from  Fox's  attack  in
the  commons  on  Shelburne's  sincerity.  Being  suc-
cessful in  this,  he  remained  in  Paris,  at  Franklin's
request,  and  by  Lord  Shelburne's  express  desire,  in
order  to  receive  certain  communications  which
Franklin  desired  to  make  to  Shelburne  concerning
reconciliation.  This,  however,  the  course  of  the
negotiation  rendered  unnecessary,  and  they  were
never  formally  written  out.  Oswald  was  ignorant
that  Vaughan  was  in  Paris  at  Shelburne's  request,
and.  becoming  jealous,  he  wrote  Shelburne,  accus-
ing Vaughan  of  meddling.  Diplomatic  require-
ments prevented  Shelburne  from  permitting  Os-
wald to  know  of  his  independent  communications
through  Vaughan,  and  from  clearly  explaining  to


VAUGHAN


VAUGHAN


267


him  Vanghan's  true  position.  Oswald  therefore
remained  in  ignorance  (apparently  through  life)
that  during  the  whole  transaction  Vaughan  was
actively  engaged  in  his  work  of  removing  obstacles
to  the  peace  on  both  sides,  at  the  express  desire  of
both  parties  to  the  negotiation.  Hence  the  corre-
spondence of  Oswald  and  Shelburne  gives,  on  both
sides,  an  erroneous  impression  as  to  Vaughan.
Vaughan  became  well  acquainted  with  Jay,  on  the
latter's  arrival  in  Paris,  23  June,  and  much  com-
munication between  Franklin  and  Jay  in  Paris,  and
Shelburne  in  England,  passed  through  Vaughan.
On  Vaughan's  return  to  London  in  August,  he  was
again  requested  by  Shelburne  to  return  to  Paris  and
continue  his  efforts.  While  there,  Vaughan  learned
of  Rayneval's  secret  mission  to  England,  and  wrote
to  Shelburne  concerning  it,  9  Sept.  Two  days
later  he  wrote  Shelburne  a  long  letter,  urging  delay
with  Rayneval,  and  immediate  and  independent
action  with  the  colonies,  and  showing  the  impor-
tance of  separating  America  from  France,  and  the
danger  to  peace  of  refusing  to  grant  Jay's  demand
for  a  new  commission  to  Oswald  which  should
recognize  the  independence  of  the  United  States  at
once,  instead  of  reserving  independence  to  be  one
of  the  terms  of  the  treaty  itself.  Following  his
letter  to  England  a  few  hours  later,  at  the  urgent
request  of  Jay,  he  had  an  interview  with  Shelburne,
and,  being  asked  "  whether  a  new  commission  was
absolutely  necessary,"  renewed  his  assurance  that
it  was.  The  new  commission  was  made  out,  and
Vaughan  was  desired  by  Shelburne  to  return  to
France  immediately.  He  set  out  at  once,  taking
with  him  in  his  chaise  from  London  the  royal
messenger  with  the  new  commission,  which  recog-
nized in  its  wording  the  independence  of  the  United
States  of  America.  Vaughan  remained  in  Paris
during  October  and  part  of  November,  becoming
acquainted  with  Adams,  the  fourth  commissioner,
who  arrived  in  Paris  on  25  Oct.,  and  being  the
medium  of  much  informal  communication  between
the  negotiators  on  both  sides,  especially  concerning
the  refugees.  In  November  he  again  returned  to
London,  but  was  desired  by  Shelburne  to  go  back
to  Paris.  At  this  time  Shelburne  appears  to  have
been  dissatisfied  with  his  course;  and  the  king,
to  whom  Vaughan's  letters  were  submitted  along
with  the  official  despatches,  also  expressed  dissatis-
faction at  his  stay.  But  the  result  of  his  work
seems  to  have  justified  his  course,  for  Franklin  ex-
pressly declared  that,  had  it  not  been  for  Vaughan's
letters  and  conversations,  he  would  not  have  signed
the  clause  in  the  treaty  concerning  the  refugees — a
subject  which,  more  than  any  other,  threatened  to
wreck  the  whole  negotiation.  Shelburne  must
have  become  satisfied  of  this,  for  he  again  requested
nim  to  remain  in  Paris.  Vaughan  spent  over  seven
months  in  these  visits  at  Paris  and  in  his  journeys,
but  refused  to  receive  any  pay  or  even  the  reim-
bursement of  his  expenses.

From  1783  to  1794  Vaughan  lived  in  London
and  in  the  country,  with  long  visits  to  Paris,  di-
viding his  time  between  active  business  and  po-
litical and  scientific  studies.  His  letters  show
Jeremy  Bentham,  Sheridan,  Sir  Samuel  Romilly,
Grey,  Wilberforee,  M.  de  Narbonne,  the  bishop  of
Autun,  and  many  others  to  have  been  among  his
guests,  while  his  general  correspondence  em-
braced an  even  wider  circle.  His  intimate  relations
with  Franklin  continued  unbroken  during  life.  He
had  long  before  edited  the  first  publication  of
Franklin's  writings  in  London,  and  through  his
influence  in  these  later  years  Franklin  was  induced
to  publish  his  memoirs.  "During  this  time  Vaughan
published  papers  under  the  signature  of  the  "  Calm


Observer."  reprinted  in  book-form  (London,  1793),
and  translated  into  French  and  German.  He  was
returned  to  parliament  in  1792.  and  remained  in
the  house  nearly  two  years.  He  was  opposed  to
any  attempt  to  disturb  the  existing  form  of  govern-
ment in  his  own  country ;  but  as  the  French  revo-
lution developed,  the  popular  tide  in  England  set
strongly  against  those  men  who  had  shown  sym-
pathy with  its  earlier  stages,  and  more  rigorous
laws  were  demanded  against  those  suspected  of
sympathizing  with  what  were  called  revolutionary
ideas.  Vaughan,  from  his  place  in  parliament,  was
well  known  to  Pitt  as  one  of  the  active  opponents
of  the  administration.  Under  these  circumstances
he  decided  to  leave  England  for  the  continent  until
times  had  again  become  settled,  and  accordingly
in  1794  he  went  to  France,  and  afterward  to
Switzerland.  While  in  France  he  was  several
times  suspected  of  being  an  English  spy.  In
Switzerland  he  devoted  himself  to  political  corre-
spondence and  literary  pursuits.  He  was  assured
by  Pitt  that  he  could  at  any  time  return  to  Eng-
land with  safety,  but  he  had  become  so  much  inter-
ested in  republican  principles  that  he  determined
to  live  in  the  United  States.  He  accordingly  went
direct  to  Boston,  and  lived  for  a  short  time  at
Little  Cambridge  (now  Brighton),  whence  he  re-
moved to  Maine,  and  settled  on  lands  descended  to
him  from  his  mother,  Sarah  Hallowell,  on  Kenne-
bec river,  in  what  is  now  the  town  of  Hallowell.
Here  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life,  improving
his  estate,  advocating  conservative  political  views,
working  in  his  library,  writing  literary  and  polit-
ical articles,  and  carrying  on  an  extensive  corre-
spondence. Here,  for  the  first  time,  he  practised
his  profession,  visiting  only  among  the  poor,  and
usually  supplying  medicines  as  well  as  advice
without  charge.  Besides  the  articles  written  in
England  on  political  and  scientific  subjects,  he  also
published,  under  the  title  of  "  Klyogg,  or  the  Rural
Socrates,"  the  result  of  his  researches  in  Switzer-
land, concerning  the  life  of  James  Gouyer,  the
agricultural  philosopher  (Hallowell,  Me.,  1806).  At
Hallowell  he  published  anonymously  various  polit-
ical articles,  and  also  prepared  two  historical  pa-
pers at  President  Adams's  request — one  concern-
ing the  northeast  boundary,  the  other  giving  the
writer's  surmises  of  the  manner  in  which  Turgot's
memoirs  came  into  the  possession  of  Lord  Shel-
burne several  years  before  their  publication.  All
that  he  wrote  was  either  published  anonymously,
or  over  a  fictitious  signature,  or  was  not  written
for  publication,  and  his  literary  labors  have  re-
mained generally  unknown.  He  was  an  indefati-
gable worker,  and  spent  much  of  his  time  during
his  later  life  among  his  books,  which,  when  he
came  to  Hallowell,  were  fewer  by  only  two  thousand
than  the  library  of  Harvard  college  at  that  time.
He  received  the  honorary  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Harvard  in  1807,  and  from  Bowdoin  in  1812— His
brother,  Charles,  merchant,  b.  in  England,  30
June,  1759;  d.  in  Hallowell,  Me.,  15  May,  1839,
after  spending  some  years  in  Jamaica,  came  to
the  United  States  in  1786,  and  settled  in  Hallo-
well. He  had  charge  of  large  tracts  of  land
owned  by  his  father  and  by  his  maternal  grand-
father, Benjamin  Hallowell",  and  devoted  himself
to  encouraging  the  settlement  of  the  Kennebec
region.  In  furtherance  of  this  object  he  visited
England  in  the  autumn  of  1790,  and  spent  several
months  in  establishing  business  relations  with
merchants  in  London  and  other  ports.  Returning
in  June,  1791,  he  married,  in  Boston.  Frances
Western  Apthorp,  established  himself  there  as  a
merchant,  and  had  for  several  years  an  extensive


268


VAUGHAN


VAUGHAN


trade  with  ports  of  England  and  of  the  East  and
West  Indies,  exporting  chiefly  the  products  of  the
Kennebec  region.  He  was  one  of  the  trustees  of
Hallowed  academy,  incorporated  in  1791,  and  one
of  the  founders  of  the  Boston  library  society,  in-
corporated in  1794.  He  built,  in  Hallowed,  houses,
mills,  stores,  a  distillery,  a  brewery,  and  a  printing-
office,  and  established  a  seaport  at  Jones's  Eddy,
near  the  mouth  of  the  Kennebec,  where  he  con-
structed a  costly  wet  dock  for  ship-timber.  In
Boston  he  was  associated  with  Charles  Bulfinch
(his  brother-in-law)  and  William  Scollay,  in  the
important  Franklin  street  improvement  in  1793,
where  they  drained  and  graded  a  boggy  pasture,
and  built  a  block  of  sixteen  houses,  known  as  the
"  Crescent,"  which  was  the  first  brick  block  erected
in  Boston.  A  semi-oval  space  was  inclosed  in  the
middle  of  the  street,  which  Mr.  Vaughan,  convey-
ing in  1791  a  part  of  his  interest  in  the  block,  pro-
vided should  forever  remain  unoccupied  by  build-
ings. Meeting  with  serious  reverses  in  1798,  he
surrendered  his  property  to  his  creditors,  and  in
1799  returned  to  Hallowed,  engaged  actively  in
agricultural  pursuits,  being  also  employed  as  agent
for  large  non-resident  owners  of  land  in  various
parts  of  Maine,  and  devoted  his  energies  to  pro-
moting the  prosperity  of  the  region.  His  impor-
tations of  horned  cattle,  sheep,  and  swine,  of  the
most  approved  breeds,  as  well  as  of  choice  varie-
ties of  wheat  and  other  seeds,  had  a  marked  influ-
ence in  the  development  of  the  agricultural  and
stock-breeding  interests  of  Maine.

VAUGHAN,  Daniel,  scientist,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1821 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  Aprd,  1879.
He  received  an  excellent  education,  and  possessed
great  mathematical  ability.  When  about  sixteen
years  of  age  he  came  to  this  country  and  taught  in
Bourbon  county,  Ky.,  meanwhile  studying  the
higher  branches  of  science  by  himself,  but  he  sub-
sequently settled  in  Cincinnati,  where  he  devoted
himself  mainly  to  astronomy  and  the  larger  aspects
of  natural  phenomena.  He  mastered  the  German,
French,  Italian,  and  Spanish  languages,  and  also
ancient  and  modern  Greek.  He  contributed  nearly
fifty  papers  to  the  proceedings  of  learned  societies
and  to  scientific  periodicals  at  home  and  abroad.
The  last  work  of  his  life  was  a  series  of  astronomi-
cal articles  that  were  published  in  the  "Popular
Science  Monthly."  He  issued  in  book-form  "  Popu-
lar Physical  Astronomy,  or  an  Exposition  of  Re-
markable Celestial  Phenomena"  (Cincinnati,  1858).

VAUGHAN,  Sir  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in
1738 ;  d.  in  Martinique,  W.  I.,  30  June,  1795.  He
was  the  second  son  of  Wilmot,  3d  Viscount  Lis-
burne,  and  entered  the  army  in  1746  as  cornet  in
the  10th  dragoons.  He  was  captain  in  the  17th
foot  in  1750,  and  afterward,  as  lieutenant-colonel,
led  a  division  of  grenadiers  with  great  credit  at
the  capture  of  Martinique.  On  11  May,  1775,  he
was  made  colonel  of  the  40th  regiment,  which  had
been  ordered  to  this  country,  and  he  served  here
on  the  staff  with  the  ranks  of  brigadier-  and  major-
general,  and  from  1777,  with  the  latter  commission
in  full,  in  the  British  regular  army.  He  led  the
grenadiers  in  the  battle  of  Long  Island,  and  at  the
landing  at  New  York  he  was  wounded  in  the  thigh
and  for  a  time  disabled  from  active  service.  He
commanded  the  right  column  of  attack  at  Fort
Clinton  and  Fort  Montgomery,  where  his  horse
was  killed  under  him,  and  was  particularly  men-
tioned in  orders  by  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  who  gave
the  latter  work  the  name  of  Fort  Vaughan  in  his
honor.  With  Sir  James  Wallace  he  sailed  up
Hudson  river  in  October,  1777,  on  a  marauding
expedition  on  which  he  destroyed  the  town  of


Kingston.  In  May,  1779.  he  captured  Stony  Point
and  Verplancks ;  but  after  the  campaign  of  that
year  he  returned  to  England,  where,  in  December,
he  was  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  Lee-
ward islands.  On  3  Feb.,  1781,  with  Admiral
Rodney,  he  took  St.  Eustatius,  and  in  1782  he  was
made  lieutenant-general.  Gen.  Vaughan  had  been
made  governor  of  Fort  William  in  Scotland,  but
shortly  afterward  obtained  the  more  lucrative  post
of  Berwick,  which  he  represented  in  four  successive
parliaments.  In  1793  he  received  the  order  of  the
Bath.  His  death  was  sudden,  and  not  without
suspicion  of  poison.

VAUGHAN,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Uchland,
Chester  co.,  Pa.,  25  Julie,  1775;  d.  in  Wilmington,
Del.,  25  March,  1807.  His  father,  John,  was  a
Baptist  minister.  The  son  was  educated  at  Old
Chester,  studied  medicine  in  Philadelphia  under
Dr.  WilMam  Currie,  and  at  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1793-'4,  and  in  1795-'9  practised  in
Christiana  Bridge,  Del.,  after  which  time  he  re-
sided in  Wilmington.  He  attained  note  in  his
profession,  and  numbered  among  his  intimate
friends  and  familiar  correspondents  Thomas  Jeffer-
son, Aaron  Burr,  John  Dickerson,  Caesar  A.  Rod-
ney, and  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush.  He  was  a  member
of  many  scientific  bodies,  and  in  1799-1800  deliv-
ered a  course  of  lectures  on  chemistry  and  natural
philosophy  at  Wilmington.  After  1800  he  officiated
occasionally  as  a  Baptist  preacher.  Besides  numer-
ous articles  in  periodicals,  Dr.  Vaughan  published
an  edition  of  Dr.  Smith's  "  Letters,"  a  "  Chemical
Syllabus,"  and  "  Observations  on  Animal  Electricity
in  Explanation  of  the  Metallic  Operation  of  Dr.
Perkins,"  a  defence  of  Dr.  Elisha  Perkins's  "metal-
lic tractors,"  of  which  he  was  a  zealous  advocate.

VAUGHAN,  John  Apthorp,  clergyman,  b.  in
Little  Cambridge  (now  Brighton),  Mass.,  13  Oct.,
1795;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5  June,  1865.  His
father,  Charles,  came  from  England  to  this  coun-
try, and  removed  to  Hallowed,  Me.,  where  the  son
received  his  first  education.  After  graduation  at
Bovvdoin  in  1815,  he  went  to  London,  and  was  for
a  time  employed  in  the  banking-house  of  his  uncle,
William  Vaughan.  Subsequently  he  took  charge
of  a  plantation  that  belonged  to  the  Vaughan
family  in  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  but  returned  to  Hallo-
well  and  opened  there  a  school  for  girls,  also  study-
ing divinity.  In  1833  he  was  ordained  deacon,  and
held  charge  of  Trinity  church  in  Saco,  Me.,  and,
after  receiving  priest's  orders  in  1834,  he  became
rector  of  St.  Peter's  church,  Salem,  Mass.  From
1836  till  1842  he  was  secretary  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  board  of  foreign  missions.  Owing  to
impaired  health  he  resigned  this  post,  went  to
Georgia,  and  in  1844  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where
he  was  superintendent  of  the  Institution  for  the
blind  in  1845-8.  In  1848  he  established  in  that
city  a  school  for  girls,  which  he  abandoned  in
1854.  From  1861  until  1865  he  was  professor  of
pastoral  theology  in  the  Philadelphia  divinity-
school,  to  which  he  presented  a  library  of  1,200
volumes.  Kenyon  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1839.  He  published  pamphlets,  including  one
"  On  the  General  Missions  of  the  Church  "  (1842).

VAUGHAN,  Sir  William,  poet,  b.  in  Wales  in
1577:  d.  in  Newfoundland  about  1640.  He  was  a
physician,  and  in  1605  received  the  degree  of  LL.  1).
from  Oxford.  After  purchasing  land  in  New-
foundland, he  removed  there  about  1625,  and  es-
tablished a  plantation  which  he  called  Cambriol.
To  invite  settlers  from  England  he  wrote  his
"Golden  Fleece"  (London,  1626).  This  is  dedi-
cated to  King  Charles  I.  and  is  written  under  the
pen-name  of  Orpheus,  Jr. It  is  a  curious  produc-


VAUGHAN


VAUX


269


tion  in  prose  and  verse,  and  has  been  described  as
a  "composition  of  the  Puritan  way  of  thinking
ingrafted  on  the  old  classic  machinery  of  Apollo
and  his  court."  He  also  published  "The  New-
lander's  Cure,"  in  which  he  gives  some  account  of
his  Newfoundland  settlement  (1630),  and  "The
Church  Militant,"  a  labored  historical  poem  (1040).

VAUGHAN,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, N.  H.,  12  Sept.,  1703 ;  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 11  Dec,  1746.  His  father,  George  (1676-1724),
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1696  and  was  lieu-
tenant-governor of  New  Hampshire  in  1715-17.
The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1722,  be-
came concerned  in  the  fisheries,  and  settled  in
Damariscotta.  He  is  one  of  the  claimants  for  the
honor  of  first  suggesting  the  successful  expedition
against  Louisburg.  It  is  said  that  he  made  the
suggestion  to  Gov.  Benning  Wentworth,  of  New
Hampshire,  who  referred  him  to  Gov.  William
Shirley,  of  Massachusetts.  He  took  part  as  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  the  expedition  under  Sir  William
Pepperell,  and  at  the  head  of  a  detachment,  chief-
ly of  New  Hampshire  troops,  he  marched  by  night
to  the  northeastern  part  of  the  harbor,  where  he
burned  the  warehouses  and  destroyed  a  large  quan-
tity of  wine  and  brandy.  The  French  were  forced
bythe  smoke  to  desert  the  grand  battery,  of  which
Vaughan  took  possession  next  morning,  and  which
he  held  till  the  fall  of  the  city.  He  considered
himself  slighted  in  the  distribution  of  awards,  and
at  the  time  of  his  death  was  asserting  his  rights  in
England.  His  claim  of  priority  in  .the  suggestion
of  the  expedition  is  upheld  in  the  anonymous  tract,
"  The  Importance  and  Advantage  of  Cape  Breton  "
(London,  1746),  the  authorship  of  which  is  often
assigned  to  William  Bollan,  but  which  some  be-
lieve to  have  been  inspired  by  Vaughan.  Other
authors  also  say  that  common  report  gave  him  pri-
ority. See  also  "  Col.  William  Vaughan  of  Mar-
tinicus  and  Damariscotta  "  in  the  "  Collections  of
the  Maine  Historical  Society,"  bv  William  Goold.

VAUGIRAUD,  Pierre  Ren6  Marie  (vo-zhe-
ro).  Comte  de,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Sables-
d'Olonne  in  1741 ;  d.  in  France,  14  March,  1819.
Fie  entered  the  navy  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  and
in  1781  was  major-general  in  the  fleet  of  the  Count
de  Grasse,  and  contributed  to  the  early  successes
of  that  commander  in  the  West  Indies.  While  the
fleet  was  off  Cape  Haytien,  a  fire  was  discovered
on  board  the  "  Intrepide,"  which  was  stationed  in
the  centre,  close  to  the  town.  The  sailors,  panic-
stricken,  mutinied  and  abandoned  the  vessel,  and
Vaugiraud  asked  leave  of  the  Count  de  Grasse  to
aid  the  commander  of  the  "Intrepide"  in  saving
the  fleet  or  to  perish  with  him.  He  then  made-his
way  to  the  vessel,  which  was  already  in  flames,
forced  the  mutineers  to  return,  and  ordered  the
necessary  measures.  The  Are  was  approaching  the
powder-magazine,  when  the  "  Intrepide  "  was  moved
some  distance  from  the  fleet  and  town.  Vaugiraud
and  its  commander  then  ordered  the  crew  to  take
to  the  boats,  and  were  the  last  to  leave  the  ship,
which  blew  up  five  minutes  after  their  departure.
Vaugiraud  afterward  sailed  to  Chesapeake  bay,
and.  returning  with  De  Grasse  to  the  Antilles,  took
part  in  the  battle  of  12  April,  1782,  against  Lord
Rodney,  receiving  from  the  king  an  autograph  let-
ter of  "thanks  and  a  pension  of  12,000  livres.  He
was  in  command  of  a  vessel  at  Martinique  in  1789,
when  an  insurrection  began  in  the  island.  He  sec-
onded the  efforts  of  the  governor,  and  both  for  a
time  arrested  the  progress  of  the  revolution.  He
left  France  in  1791,  and  returned  with  trie  Bour-
bons in  1814.  He  was  made  vice-admiral  and  gov-
ernor of  Martinique,  and soon  afterward  gover-


nor-general of  the  Antilles.  When  he  arrived  he
found  that  the  people  had  learned  of  the  return  of
Napoleon,  and  were  everywhere  hoisting  the  tri-
color flag.  He  took  energetic  measures  to  preserve
Martinique  and  Guadeloupe  to  Louis  XVIII.,  and.
when  he  saw  that  this  was  impossible  without  as-
sistance, he  formed  a  convention  with  the  English.
in  virtue  of  which  he  gave  them  control  of  the
colonies  for  the  time.  He  governed  the  colony
afterward  with  firmness,  and  restored  its  finances
to  a  sound  condition,  but  he  was  charged  with
being  harsh  and  tyrannical,  and  was  recalled  in
1818.  The  king  forbade  him  his  presence,  and  he
died  broken-hearted.  Vaugiraud  published  "  Rap-
port au  roi  sur  le  gouvernement  de  la  Martinique
et  de  la  Guadeloupe"  (Paris,  1822),  which  was  de-
clared unauthentic  by  his  family.

VAUQUELIN,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Caen,
France,  in  1726;  d.  in  France  in  1763.  At  the  age
of  ten  he  entered  the  naval  service  under  his  father.
In  1745  he  gained  a  victory  over  an  English  frig-
ate off  Martinique,  and  in  1754  he  was  employed
in  reconnoitring  the  English  ports,  and  performed
this  mission  with  such  sagacity  that  he  was  given
the  command  of  the  "  Arethuse,"  and  sent  with
re-enforcements  and  military  stores  to  Louisburg,
Cape  Breton.  He  was  entirely  successful,  but  he
determined  to  do  more  for  the  French  colony,
and,  seeing  that  advantage  could  be  derived  from
the  possession  of  a  bay  in  front  of  which  English
vessels  had  to  pass,  he  took  up  a  position  in  it.  He
was  attacked  by  a  superior  force,  but  fought  his
ship  until  most  of  his  crew  were  wounded.  Then
he  retired  under  the  cannon  of  the  fort,  repaired
his  vessel,  and,  having  with  difficulty  obtained  the
governor's  consent,  he  escaped  through  the  English
fleet  and  sailed  for  France  to  obtain  aid  for  the
colony.  This  feat  excited  the  admiration  of  the
English  officers,  and  especially  of  Admiral  Bos-
cawen,  but  met  with  no  adequate  reward  in  France,
where  the  highest  commands  in  the  army  and
navy  were  considered  to  belong  to  the  nobility
solely.  However,  he  was  given  command  of  three
frigates,  and,  in  spite  of  the  vigilance  of  the  Eng-
lish fleet,  sailed  up  St.  Lawrence  river,  placed  his
vessels  in  a  position  of  security,  and,  with  part
of  the  crew,  re-enforced  the  garrison  in  Quebec.
This  succor  delayed  the  capitulation  for  several
days,  but  after  the  French  reverses  of  13  Sept.  he
foresaw  that  the  city  must  soon  surrender,  and  he
resolved  to  make  an  effort  to  save  his  frigates.
Escaping  from  Quebec  with  a  few  followers,'  he
reached  his  vessels  safely,  and  at  once  set  sail.  He
had  scarcely  reached  the  mouth  of  the  St.  Law-
rence when  he  was  attacked  by  a  superior  force.
After  a  heroic  defence,  his  ship  became  unmanage-
able. Determined  to  sink  with  his  vessel  rather
than  surrender,  he  allowed  his  crew  to  escape,  and
remained  alone  on  board  his  ship,  which  he  set  on
fire,  but  the  English  commander,  moved  by  his
heroism,  saved  him.  When  he  returned  to  France
he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant.  But
he  had  enemies  who  were  jealous  of  his  elevation,
and  after  an  important  mission  on  which  he  was
sent  to  India,  he  was  arrested  and  confined  to  his
house.  He  was  released  after  four  months'  deten-
tion, and  was  about  to  appear  before  the  king  in
order  to  defend  himself,  when  he  was  assassinated.

VAUX,  Calvert  (vawks),  landscape  architect,
b.  in  London,  England,  20  Dec,  1824.  He  was
educated  at  the  Merchant  tailors'  school,  and  was
a  pupil  to  Lewis  N.  Cottingham,  architect  in  Lon-
don. In  1848  he  came  to  this  country  at  the  sug-
gestion of  Andrew  J.  Downing,  whose  architec-
tural partner  he  became,  and  with  whom  he  was


270


VAUX


VAWTER


associated  in  laying  out  the  grounds  that  surround
the  capitol  and  Smithsonian  institution,  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  and  other  work  of  landscape  gardening.
On  his  suggestion,  public  competition  was  invited
for  the  plans  of  Central  park,  and,  in  connection
with  Frederick  L.  Olmsted,  he  presented  a  design
which  was  accepted,  and  possessed  among  its  origi-
nal features  that  of  transverse  traffic  roads.  Dur-
ing the  completion  of  the  work  Mr.  Vaux  held  the
office  of  consulting  architect  to  the  department  of
parks. In  1865  he  presented  a  design  for  Prospect

park,  Brooklyn,  which  was  ac-

cepted.  Subsequently  he  was
associated  with  Mr.  Olmsted
in  designing  the  parks  in  Chi-


cago and  Buffalo,  and  the  state  reservation  at
Niagara  Falls.  They  also  designed  the  plans  for
Riverside  and  Morningside  parks  in  New  York
city,  and  Mr.  Vaux  is  now  landscape  architect  of
the  department  of  public  parks,  with  charge  of  the
improvements  of  city  parks.  Meanwhile  he  has
been  exceedingly  fertile  as  an  architect,  designing
country  residences  in  Newport  and  elsewhere,  also
dwellings  and  public  buildings  in  New  York  city.
The  Belvedere  in  Central  park,  which  is  shown  in
the  accompanying  illustration,  was  designed  by
him.  He  has  published  "  Villas  and  Cottages "
(New  York,  1860).

VAUX,  Roberts,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
25  Jan.,  1786;  d.  there,  7  Jan.,  1838.  He  received
his  education  at  private  schools  of  Philadelphia,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1808,  and  rose  rapidly
to  prominence  in  his  profession.  In  1835  he  be-
came judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  of  Phila-
delphia. He  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the
public-school  system  of  Pennsylvania,  and  for
fourteen  years  held  the  first  presidency  of  the
board  of  public  schools  of  Philadelphia.  He  was
also  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Deaf  and  dumb
asylum,  the  Blind  school  and  asylum,  the  Phila-
delphia savings  fund,  the  Historical  society,  and
other  benevolent  societies  of  Pennsylvania.  Early
in  life  he  became  interested  in  prison  matters,  and
as  a  penologist  he  acquired  his  greatest  distinction.
He  was  one  of  the  commissioners  to  adapt  the  law
of  Pennsylvania  to  the  separate  system  of  impris-
onment, and  also  to  build  the  eastern  state  peni-
tentiary, and  labored  zealously  in  the  cause  of
prison-reform.  He  was  a  member  of  scientific  so-
cieties in  Europe,  and  of  the  Philosophical  society
of  Pennsylvania,  lie  refused  several  public  posts
that  were  offered  him  by  President  Jackson,  among
which  was  the  mission  to  St.  Petersburg.  He  pub-
lished "  Eulogium  on  Benjamin  Ridgway  Smith "'
(Philadelphia,  1809);  '-Memoirs  of  "the" Lives  of
Benjamin  Lay  and  Ralph  Sandiford "  (1815) ;
"Memoirs  of  the  Life  of  Anthony  Benezet"  (1817;
with  alterations,  York,  1817;  French  translation,
Paris,  1821) ;  and  "  Notices  of  the  Original  and  Suc-
cessive Efforts  to  improve  the  Discipline  of  the


Prison  at  Philadelphia"  (1826).— His  son.  Rich-
ard, lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  19  Dec,  1816.  was
educated  by  private  tutors,  studied  law  with  Will-
iam M.  Meredith,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Phila-
delphia bar  in  1836.  Shortly  thereafter  he  became
the  bearer  of  despatches  to  the  U.  S.  minister  to  the
court  of  St.  James,  by  whom  he  was  appointed
secretary  of  legation  on  his  arrival.  He  held  this
post  for  one  year  until  he  was  relieved  by  Benja-
min Rush.  Declining  a  similar  post  at  St.  Peters-
burg, he  went  to  Brussels  to  aid  in  reorganizing
the  American  embassy  there,  made  a  tour  of  the
continent,  returned  to  London,  and  accepted  the
post  of  private  secretary  to  the  IT.  S.  minister,
Andrew  Stevenson. Returning  to  Philadelphia  in

1839,  he  was  nominated  as  candidate  for  the  lower
house  of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature. In  March,

1840.  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that
nominated  Martin  Van  Buren  for  president  of  the
United  States.  In  1842  he  was  appointed  recorder
of  deeds  of  Philadelphia,  holding  this  post,  though
it  was  bare  of  emolument,  for  seven  years.  His
"  Recorder's  Decisions  "  (Philadelphia,  1845)  made
him  known,  and  is  now  an  authority.  It  is  note-
worthy that  no  decision  by  him'  during  this  incum-
bency was  ever  reversed  by  a  higher  court.  In
1842  he  was  the  Democratic  candidate  for  mayor,
and,  though  failing  of  election,  greatly  reduced
the  Whig  majority.  In  1843  the  supreme  court
appointed  him  inspector  of  the  state  prison,  and
shortly  thereafter  he  was  elected  comptroller  of
public  schools,  to  succeed  his  father,  and  thus
filled  three  important  posts  at  the  same  time.  He
resumed  the  practice  of  law  after  resigning  the
office  of  recorder.  In  1854  he  was  again  defeated
in  the  mayoralty  contest,  but  was  successful  at  the
next  election,  and  as  mayor  effected  a  complete
reorganization  of  the  city  government.  He  is  one
of  the  chief  penologists  in  the  United  States,  and,
like  his  father,  has  achieved  his  highest  renown
in  this  branch.  He  has  been  a  most  voluminous
writer  on  the  subject.  Besides  about  fifteen  pub-
lications on  general  penal  matters,  he  has  written
forty-five  volumes  of  "  Reports  of  the  Penitent  iary  "
(1842  et  seq.).  He  was  largely  instrumental  in  the
framing  and  passage  of  the  act  of  1885,  which  is
now  the  charter  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  having
laid  the  first  plan  for  this  reform  charter  in  1857,
in  his  message  to  the  city  councils.

VAUX,  William  Sansoni.  mineralogist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19  May,  1811 ;  d.  there,  5  May.
1882.  He  was  a  great-nephew  of  George  Vaux.  of
London,  a  noted  medical  practitioner,  who  died  in
the  early  part  of  the  century.  When  a  boy  he
acquired  a  strong  taste  for  mineralogy,  and  he
pursued  the  study  of  that  science  and  later  that  of
archaeology  with  enthusiasm  throughout  his  life.
He  acquired  extensive  mineralogical  and  archaeo-
logical collections,  which  he  bequeathed  to  the
Philadelphia  academy  of  natural  sciences,  with
a  handsome  endowment  for  their  preservation.
These  collections  are  arranged  in  the  academy  in
a  separate  department,  and  are  known  as  "  the
William  S.  Vaux  collection."  Mr.  Vaux  was  presi-
dent of  the  Zoological  society  of  Philadelphia,  and
from  1864  until  his  death,  with  the  exception  of
1874-'5,  was  vice-president  of  the  Philadelphia
academy  of  natural  sciences.  He  was  one  of
eight  founders  of  the  Numismatic  and  antiquarian
society,  its  senior  vice-president,  and  from  1871
till  his  death  treasurer  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science,  of  which  society
he  had 'been  a  member  since  its  foundation.

VAWTER,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  Orange  (now
Madison)  county,  Va.,  8  Jan.,  1782;  d.  in  Morgan-


VEATCH


VEINTIMILLA


271


town,  Ind.,  17  Aug.,  1862.  lie  was  licensed  as  a
Baptist  minister  in  1804,  and  in  1807,  with  his
father,  removed  to  the  sparsely  inhabited  territory
of  Indiana,  and  settled  in  Madison,  of  which  he
was  the  first  magistrate.  He  was  soon  afterward
elected  sheriff  of  Jefferson  and  Clarke  counties,
and  in  1810  was  appointed  U.  S.  marshal  for  the
state.  He  served  as  a  frontier  ranger  during  the
Indian  campaign  of  1811— '13,  was  elected  colonel
of  militia  of  Jennings  county  in  1817,  and  founded
Vernon,  the  county-seat.  He  was  pastor  of  the
Baptist  church  in  Vernon  in  1821-'48,  a  member  of
the  legislature  in  1831-'5,  and  in  1836  of  the  senate,
where  he  was  instrumental  in  securing  the  adop-
tion of  a  policy  of  internal  improvement  by  the
state.  He  removed  to  Morgan  county  in  1848,
founded  Morgantown,  and  presented  a  brick  church
to  the  Baptist  congregation  of  that  place.

VEATCH,  James  Clifford  (veech),  soldier,  b.
near  Elizabethtown,  Harrison  co.,  Ind.,  19  Dec,
1819.  He  was  educated  in  common  schools  and
under  private  tutors,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
practised  for  many  years,  and  was  auditor  of  Spen-
cer county,  Ind.,  from  1841  till  1855.  He  was  in
the  legislature  in  1861-'2,  became  colonel  of  the
25th  regiment  of  Indiana  volunteers,  9  Aug.,  1861,
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  28  April,  1862,  and
brevet  major-general  in  August,  1865,  at  which
time  he  retired  from  the  army.  He  was  engaged
at  Fort  Donelson,  Shiloh,  the  sieges  of  Corinth  and
Vicksburg,  the  Atlanta  campaign,  the  siege  and
capture  of  Mobile,  and  many  other  actions  during
the  civil  war.  He  became  adjutant-general  of  In-
diana in  1869,  and  was  collector  of  internal  revenue
from  April,  1870.  till  August.  1883.

VEDDER,  Elihu,  artist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
26  Feb.,  1836.  He  had  his  first  instruction  in  art
in  his  native  city,  and  later  studied  with  Tompkins
H.  Matteson  in  Sherbourne,  N.  Y.,  and  Francois
Edouard  Picot  in  Paris.  In  1856  he  went  to  Italy,
and  subsequently  he  opened  a  studio  in  New  York.
He  was  there  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy  in  1863,  and  an  associate  two  years  later.
Subsequently  he  removed  to  Rome,  Italy,  where  he
still  resides.  His  works,  while  naturalistic  and
vigorous  in  treatment,  are  ideal  in  motive,  and
bear  witness  to  the  fertility  of  imagination  and
versatility  of  the  artist.  In  many  of  his  pictures
he  aims,  as  one  critic  has  said,  "  to  give  to  the  un-
real and  impossible  an  air  of  plausibility  and  real
existence."  One  of  the  best  known  of  his  paint-
ings is  the  "  Lair  of  the  Sea-Serpent,"  now  in  the
Boston  museum  of  fine  arts,  where  are  also  "  The
Roc's  Egg"  (two  paintings),  "Fisherman  and
Djin,"  "  Dominican  Friars,"  and  "  An  Italian  Wom-
an." His  other  works  include  "  The  Monk  upon
the  Gloomy  Path  " ;  "  The  Crucifixion  " :  "  The
Lost  Mind  " ;  "  Death  of  Abel "  (1869) ;  "  A  Scene
on  the  Mediterranean "  (1874) ;  "  Greek  Actor's
Daughter,"  exhibited  at  Philadelphia  in  1876;
"  Old  Madonna,"  "  Cumean  Sibyl,"  now  belonging
to  Wellesley  college,  Mass.,  and  "  Young  Marsyas,"
the  three  exhibited  at  the  Paris  exposition  of  1878 ;
"  A  Questioner  of  the  Sphinx  " ;  "  Sleeping  Girl "  ;
"  A  Venetian  Model "  ;  "A  Pastoral,"  exhibited  in
Boston  in  1878 ;  "  Nausicaa  and  her  Companions  " ;
"Waves  off  Pier  Head"  (1882);  and  "Le  Mistral  "
(1884).  His  ideal  works  have  given  rise  to  much
criticism  and  discussion  as  to  their  conception  and
intent.  He  has  also  executed  an  "  accompaniment
of  drawings"  for  Edward  Fitzgerald's  translation  of
the  "  Rubaiyat  of  Omar  Khayyam  "  (Boston,  1884).

VEGA,  Feliciano  de  (vay'-gah),  Peruvian  R.
C.  bishop,  b.  in  Lima  in  1580;  d.  in  Mazatlan,
Mexico,  in  1640. He  was  noted  for  his  knowledge


of  canon  and  civil  law,  held  the  office  of  judge  in
Peru,  and  is  said  to  have  rendered  more  than  4,000
decisions,  not  one  of  which  was  rescinded  on  ap-
peal to  the  higher  courts.  He  was  appointed  bishop
of  Popayan  in  1628,  of  La  Paz  in  1638,  and  arch-
bishop of  Mexico  in  1639,  but  fell  sick  on  his  ar-
rival at  Acapulco  in  1640,  and  was  transported  to
Mazatlan.  where  he  died  of  yellow  fever  He  pub-
lished several  works  on  canon  and  civil  law,  among
them  "  De  adquirenda  haereditate  "  (Lima,  1605)
and  "Relectiones  Canonical  in  Secundum  Decre-
talium  librum  "  (1633).

VEGA,  Ventura  de  la,  Argentine  poet,  b.  in
Buenos  Ayres,  14  July,  1807 ;  d.  in  Madrid,  Spain,
in  1865.  His  father,  president  of  the  royal  treas-
ury court,  remained  after  the  declaration  of  inde-
pendence in  Buenos  Ayres,  where  his  wife  pos-
sessed large  property,  but  he  died  in  1812,  and
young  Vega  went  to  Spain  in  1818  for  his  edu-
cation. His  paternal  uncle  sent  him  to  study
Latin  in  the  Jesuit  college  of  San  Isidro,  and  he
afterward  entered  the  College  of  San  Mateo.  He
founded  the  political  society  of  Numantinos,  which
the  government  dissolved,  notwithstanding  the
youth  of  its  members,  and  imprisoned  seven  of  the
leaders  from  January  till  June,  1825,  when  they
were  sentenced  to  three  months'  seclusion  in  dif-
ferent convents.  After  his  release  Vega  finished
his  studies  with  Alberto  Lista,  and  in  1826  pub-
lished some  of  his  poetry.  For  his  support  he  be-
gan in  1827  to  translate  French  plays,  which  led
him  afterward  to  become  a  playwright.  In  Janu-
ary, 1836,  he  was  appointed  chief  clerk  of  the  min-
istry of  the  interior,  and  he  soon  afterward  became
secretary  of  Queen  Maria  Christina.  In  1838  he
was  the  teacher  of  the  young  queen  and  her  sister,
and  in  1856  he  was  appointed  director  of  the  Royal
conservatory.  He  is  considered  one  of  the  best
modern  Spanish  poets.  Although  he  spent  the
greater  part  of  his  life  in  Spain,  he  is  claimed  by
the  Argentine  Republic  as  a  citizen,  and  it  is  pro-
posed to  erect  a  statue  of  him  in  Buenos  Ayres.
He  wrote  "  El  Cantar  de  los  Cantares "  (Madrid,
1826);  "Cantata  epitalamica"  (1827);  "Al  Rio
Pusa"(1830);  "La  Agitation," an  ode (1834);  "El
18  de  Junio  "  (1837) ;  "  La  Defensa  de  Sevilla,"  an
ode  (1838);  "El  Hombre  de  Mundo,"  a  comedy
(1840) ;  and  the  tragedies  "  La  muerte  de  Cesar  "
(1842)  and  "  Don  Fernando  de  Antequera  "  (1845).

VEIGL,  Franz  Xavier,  missionary,  b.  in  Gratz,
Austria,  1  Dec,  1723 ;  d.  in  Klagenfurt,  in  the  same
country,  19  April,  1798.  He  entered  the  Society
of  Jesus  at  Vienna  in  1738,  and  for  several  years
was  professor  in  the  Jesuit  college  there.  He  was
sent  to  the  American  missions  in  1753,  and  labored
among  the  South  American  Indians  until  1777,
when  he  returned  to  Europe,  and  was  appointed
professor  at  Judenburg.  He  wrote  "  Reisen  einiger
Missionarien  der  Gesellschaft  Jesu  in  Amerika"
(Nuremberg,  1785)  and  "Franz  Xav.  Veigl's  vor-
maligen  Missionars  der  Gesellschaft  Jesu,  grund-
liche  Nachrichten  fiber  die  Verfassung  der  Land-
schaft  Maynas  in  Siid-Amerika  bis  zum  Jahr  1768"
(1798;  in  Latin,  1792).  No.  773  and  No.  774  of
Stocklein's  "  Welt-Bote"  (Gratz,  1727  et  seq.)  con-
tain his  "Summa  epistolarum  duarum  ad  cognatos
suos  in  itinere  scriptarum  1753  et  1755  quibus
id  ipsum  et  qua?  in  eo  observavit  describit "  and
"Epistola  ad  eosdem  ex  Quito  1  Septembris  1755
qua  horribilem  terra?  in  civitate  hac,  et  statum
missionum  ad  flumen  Maragnon  describit."

VEINTIMILLA,  Ignacio  de (vay-een-te-meel-
yah),  South  American  dictator,  b.  in  Cuenca,  Ecua-
dor, about  1830.  He  entered  the  military  service,
rose  to  the  rank  of  general,  and  as  commander  ol


272


VELASCO


VELASCO


Guayaquil  led  in  September,  1876,  a  revolution
against  President  Borrero.  He  defeated  the  govern-
ment troops  at  Galte  on  14  Dec,  and  on  the  25th  of
that  month  entered  the  capital,  and  was  proclaimed
president  by  the  Liberal  party.  In  1877  he  defeated
a  rising  of  the  Clerical  party,  but,  as  he  retained
many  Conservative  members  in  his  cabinet,  he  was
soon  suspected  by  the  Liberals  of  a  leaning  toward
the  clergy.  The  convention  of  Ambato,  "packed  "
in  Veintimilla's  interest,  declared  him  in  1878  dic-
tator for  an  unlimited,  period,  and  he  issued  a  de-
cree abolishing  religious  liberty  and  suppressing
four  opposition  newspapers,  one  of  whose  editors
he  cast  into  a  dungeon.  His  rule  was  arbitrary,  his
chief  aim  seeming  to  be  to  aggrandize  and  enrich
himself  and  his  personal  followers.  When  the  end
of  his  constitutional  term  approached  in  1882  he
instigated  several  mock  pronunciamentos,  and  for
their  suppression  proclaimed  himself  supreme  chief.
But  soon  his  terrorism  became  so  unbearable  that
there  were  genuine  revolutions  under  Gen.  Alfaro
and  Gen.  Salazar.  The  government  stronghold  of
Esmeraldas  was  captured  in  January,  1883,  by  the
latter,  and  the  garrison  of  Quito  by  Col.  Reynaldo
Flores,  forcing  the  dictator  to  take  refuge  in  his
last  stronghold,  Guayaquil.  He  was  there  hemmed
in  by  the  combined  forces  of  the  different  revolu-
tionary leaders,  re-enforced  in  May  by  the  arrival  of
Antonio  Flores,  and,  after  a  protracted  struggle,
the  city  was  occupied  on  9  July  by  the  insurgents,
and  Veintimilla  fled  to  the  steamer  "  Santa  Lucia,"
which  conveyed  him  to  Peru.  On  21  July  he
reached  Lima,  where  he  has  since  resided.

VELASCO,  Jose  Miguel  de  (vay-las'-co),  Bo-
livian soldier,  b.  in  Santa  Cruz  de  la  Sierra  about
1790;  d.  there  in  1859.  In  early  life  he  entered
the  military  service  and  espoused  the  cause  of  in-
dependence, and  after  the  battle  of  Ayacucho  he
was  promoted  colonel  by  Bolivar.  After  the  mu-
tiny of  Chuquisaca  in  April,  1828,  and  by  the
treaty  of  Piquiza,  Santa  Cruz  was  elected  pro-
visional president  and  Velasco  vice-president,  the
latter  taking  charge  of  the  executive  on  account
of  the  former's  absence.  In  December,  Gen.  Blanco
was  elected  constitutional  president,  but  he  was
deposed  and  murdered  by  a  revolt  on  31  Dec,  and
Velasco  took  charge  again,  delivering  the  executive
in  1829  to  Santa  Cruz  on  his  arrival.  He  took
part  in  the  campaigns  against  Peru,  and  the  bat-
tles of  Yanacocna  and  Socabaya,  but  when  Santa
Cruz  marched  against  the  Chilians  in  1838,  Velasco
led  a  revolution  against  him  in  the  south,  and  after
the  former's  fall  the  latter  was  proclaimed  presi-
dent in  1839.  His  administration  was  a  continuous
struggle  against  the  revolutions  of  Santa  Cruz's
followers,  and  in  1841  he  was  captured  by  the  lat-
ter and  banished,  but  soon  afterward  he  returned
and  pronounced  for  Jose  Ballivian,  who  was  elected
president.  On  the  resignation  of  Ballivian  in  De-
cember, 1847,  Velasco  was  proclaimed  president,
but,  instead  of  re-establishing  the  constitution  of
1839,  according  to  his  promise,  he  governed  at  his
own  discretion,  discontent  and  revolutions  follow-
ing. Manuel  Isidoro  Belzu  defeated  him  on  5  Dec,
1848,  at  Jamporaez.  and  was  proclaimed  president.
Velasco  then  retired  to  his  native  city,  where  he  died
when  he  was  preparing  a  new  revolution  against
the  government  of  Dr.  Linares.  He  was  a  well-
meaning  man  of  undoubted  bravery,  but  of  little
talent  and  feeble  character,  permitting  his  follow-
ers to  commit  many  arbitrary  acts  in  his  name.

VELASCO,  Juan  de,  South  American  his-
torian, b.  in  Riobamba,  Ecuador,  in  1727;  d.  in
Verona,  Italy,  in  1819.  He  was  educated  at  Quito
and  Lima,  entered  the  Jesuit  order,  and  occupied


for  many  years  the  chair  of  theology  in  the  Uni-
versity of  San  Marcos  in  Lima.  After  the  expul-
sion of  the  Jesuits  from  the  Spanish  dominions,
Velasco  went  to  Italy,  where  he  settled  in  Faenza,
and  devoted  his  time  to  poetry.  He  afterward
went  to  Verona  for  the  publication  of  his  works,
but  died  before  concluding  arrangements.  His
history,  although  defective  on  account  of  the  au-
thor's excessive  credulity,  is  valuable  for  the  facts
that  it  gives  about  the  reign  of  the  Shyris,  before
the  first  invasion  by  the  incas  of  Peru.  The  work
was  often  consulted  by  writers  on  American  his-
tory, but  was  not  generally  known  in  Europe  until
its  translation  into  French  by  Henri  Ternaux-
Compans,  and  shortly  afterward  it  was  published
in  the  original  language  in  Quito,  with  notes  by
Agustin  Yerovi,  who  had  obtained  a  copy  of  the
manuscript.  Velasco's  works  are  "Colleccion  de
Poesias,  hecha  por  un  ocioso  en  la  ciudad  de  Fa-
enza," in  five  manuscript  volumes;  a  large  map  of
the  kingdom  of  Quito,  remarkably  correct  for  that
epoch,  the  publication  of  which  is  shortly  to  be
undertaken  by  the  government  of  Ecuador;  and
"Historia  del  Reyno  de  Quito"  (3  vols.,  Quito,
1841-4 ;  French  translation,  Paris,  1840).

VELASCO,  Luis  de,  Count  of  Santiago,  viceroy
of  Mexico,  b.  in  Toledo,  Spain,  about  1500 ;  d.  in
the  city  of  Mexico,  31  July,  1564.  He  was  descend-
ed from  the  no-
ble family  of
the  constables
of  Castile,  and
had  acquired
such  fame  as  a
just  and  impar-
tial magistrate,
that  Charles  V.,
when  he  or-
dered Antonio
de  Mendoza  to
Peru,  resolved
to  send  Velasco
to  Mexico  as
his  successor.
On  5  Dec,  1550,
he  arrived  in
Vera  Cruz,  and,
after  confer-
ring with  Men-
doza at  Cholu-
la,  began  his  ad-
ministration by
emancipating  150.000  Indians,  who  until  then  had
been  no  better  than  slaves.  When  he  was  remon-
strated with  about  this  measure,  which  his  counsel-
lors said  would  ruin  the  mines,  he  answered  that  the
liberty  of  the  Indians  was  more  valuable  'than  the
mines  of  the  whole  world.  In  1553  the  University
of  Mexico  was  founded,  and  he  also  instituted  a  hos-
pital for  the  natives.  When  the  Chichimec  Indians
revolted  in  1555,  Velasco  founded  the  towns  of  San
Miguel  el  Grande  and  San  Felipe  de  Ixtlahuaca,  and
sent  Capt.  Francisco  Ibarra  to  the  north,  who  found-
ed the  towns  of  Durango  and  Nombre  de  Dios.  He
sent  in  1558-9  expeditions  under  Guido  de  Labe-
zares  and  Tristan  de  Luna  y  Arellano  to  explore  and
conquer  Florida,  but  without  favorable  results,  and
in  1564  he  was  preparing  an  expedition  under  Miguel
L.  de  Legazpi  for  the  conquest  of  the  Philippine  isl-
ands, when  he  was  overtaken  by  death.  He  was
greatly  mourned  bv  the  people  of  Mexico,  who  called
him  "  father  of  New  Spain." — His  son,  Luis,  Mar-
quis de  Salinas,  b.  in  Madrid,  Spain,  in  1535;  d.  in
Seville  in  1614.  came  to  Mexico  with  his  father  in
1550,  occupied  several  posts  in  the  municipality  of


VELASCO


VELAZQUEZ


273


the  capital,  and  was  mayor  of  Zempoala.  About
1586  he  returned  to  Spain  and  was  appointed  am-
bassador in  Florence,  but  continued  to  consider
Mexico  his  country,  and  when  the  differences  be-
tween the  viceroy  (the  Marquis  de  Villa-Manrique)
and  the  audiencia  of  Guadalajara  occurred,  Philip
II.  thought  Velasco  the  most  appropriate  person
to  re-establish  order.  He  sailed  for  Mexico  in
1589,  with  orders  to  land  in  Panuco,  where  he
.arrived  in  December,  as  it  was  feared  that  the  de-
posed viceroy's  partisans  in  Vera  Cruz  might
oppose  him.  He  took  charge  of  the  government,
5  Feb.,  1590,  and  one  of  his  first  measures  was  to
open  factories  of  woollen  cloth.  In  1591  he  re-
ceived a  deputation  of  the  bellicose  Chichimecs,
with  whom  he  adjusted  a  treaty,  and,  to  secure
their  subjugation,  he  established  around  Zacatecas
four  colonies  of  Tlaxcaltec  Indians,  the  constant
allies  of  the  Spaniards.  In  1593  he  laid  out  the
public  walk  or  alameda,  and  in  1595  he  was  pre-
paring an  expedition  under  Juan  Onate  for  the
fabulous  kingdom  of  Quivira,  or  New  Mexico,  when
he  was  promoted  to  the  viceroyalty  of  Peru,  and,  on
the  arrival  of  his  successor,  Count  de  Monterey,  left
Mexico  in  November,  1595.  He  arrived  in  Lima  on
24  July,  1596,  and  took  charge  of  the  government,
which  he  administered  for  eight  years  with  abil-
ity. At  last,  weary  of  the  cares  of  office,  he  re-
peatedly solicited  his  relief,  and  delivering  up  the
government  on  8  Nov.,  1604,  he  retired  to  his  com-
manderies  of  Teutitlan  and  Azcapotzalco  in  Mexico,
to  live  with  his  family.  But  in  June,  1607,  he  re-
ceived the  royal  order  to  assume  again  the  govern-
ment of  Mexico,  to  succeed  the  Marquis  de  Montes-
claros,  who  had  been  promoted  to  Peru.  Notwith-
standing his  age  and  desire  for  retirement,  he
obeyed,  and  on  20  July  took  charge  of  the  execu-
tive. In  the  same  year  continued  rains  threatened
to  inundate  the  capital  again,  by  the  rising  of  the
Jakes,  and  the  viceroy  determined  to  execute  the
plan  of  Enrique  Martinez  (q.  v.),  of  draining  the
Aralley  by  a  cut  through  the  hills  of  Nochistongo.
The  work  was  begun  28  Nov.  of  the  same  year,  and
•on  7  May,  1608,  the  first  section  of  the  canal  was
■completed.  He  sent  an  embassy  to  Japan  in  1611,
.and,  being  promoted  president  of  the  council  of
the  Indies  in  the  same  year,  left  Mexico  on  17  June
ior  Spain,  where  he  died.  He  is  esteemed  one  of
the  principal  benefactors  of  Mexico. — The  younger
Luis's  nephew,  Pedro  de,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mexico
in  1581 ;  d.  there,  26  Aug.,  1649,  became  a  Jesuit  in
1596,  and  labored  among  the  Indians  for  fourteen
years.  He  was  then  professor  of  sacred  scripture,
iheld  several  high  offices  in  the  order,  was  procura-
tor for  Mexico  at  Rome  and  Madrid,  and  was  made
provincial  of  Mexico  in  1646.  During  his  term  oc-
curred the  troubles  between  Bishop  Palafox  and
the  Jesuits  of  Puebla,  1647.  He  wrote  "  Varias  car-
tas y  representaciones  sobre  los  ruidosos  asuntos
■de  los  Jesuitas  con  el  Sr.  Palafox  " ;  "  Apologia  por
las  Doctrinas  y  Curatos  de  los  Religiosos " ;  and
"Arte  de  una  de  las  lenguas  de  Cinaloa."

VELASCO,  Luis  Vicente,  Spanish  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Villa  de  Noja,  Santander,  about  1710;  d.
in  Havana,  Cuba,  31  July,  1762.  He  had  obtained
the  rank  of  post-captain  and  commanded  the  ship-
of-the-line  "  La  Reina "  at  Havana  when  the
British  expedition  under  the  Duke  of  Albemarle
was  threatening  the  island  of  Cuba  in  1762.  Ve-
lasco was  appointed  by  the  council  of  war  com-
mander of  Morro  Castle,  and  when  the  British  army
landed,  on  7  June,  on  the  beach  of  Cojimar,  he
prepared  to  defend  the  outposts,  but,  by  the  aban-
donment of  the  works  of  Cabanas  by  order  of  the
.council  of  war,  he  was  soon  reduced  to  the  walls
vol.  vi. — 18


of  the  castle,  and  could  not  prevent  the  establish-
ment of  siege  batteries  at  Cabanas.  The  bom-
bardment began  on  1  July,  but  Velasco  defended
the  castle  obstinately,  and  his  batteries  caused
great  loss  to  the  besiegers.  On  16  July  he  was
dangerously  wounded  and  carried  to  Havana,  but
on  the  24th,  hearing  that  the  besieging  works
were  advancing,  he  insisted  on  returning  to  his
post.  On  the  30th  a  mine  opened  a  breach  in  the
walls,  and  the  enemy  captured  the  outer  battery  of
San  Nicolas,  but  in  the  attempt  to  storm  the  cas-
tle they  met  with  a  heroic  resistance,  the  defend-
ers being  led  by  Velasco,  although  he  had  not
fully  recovered.  Not  until  the  latter  fell  and
more  than  1,000  Spaniards  had  perished  did  the
British  capture  the  castle.  Velasco  died  the  next
day,  and  Lord  Albemarle  suspended  hostilities  and
sent  his  remains  with  a  guard  of  honor  to  Havana.
VELAZQUEZ,  Diego  de,  Spanish  officer,  b.  in
Cuellar  about  1460;  d.  in  Santiago,  Cuba,  in  1532.
He  was  of  noble  birth,  had  served  in  the  wars
against  the  Moors,  and  came  to  this  country  in
Columbus's  second  voyage  in  1493,  where  he  took
part  in  the  conquest  of  Hispaniola,  and  was  left  by
the  adelantado  Bartolome  Columbus  in  charge  of
the  government  during  his  expedition  to  the  inte-
rior in  1497.  Nicolas  de  Ovando,  who  became
governor  in  1502,  also  favored  Velazquez,  and  the
latter  took  an  active  part  in  the  subjugation  of
the  provinces  of  Jaragua  and  Higuey.  He  found-
ed the  towns  of  Jaquimo  (Jacmel),  Maguana,  and
Azua,  was  appointed  substitute  by  Ovando,  and
soon  was  one  of  the  principal  settlers  of  the  col-
ony. When  Diego  Columbus,  the  new  governor
of  Hispaniola,  resolved  in  1511  to  conquer  the  isl-
and of  Cuba,  he  selected  Velazquez  as  commander
of  the  expedition,  which  consisted  of  four  vessels
with  300  men,  and  the  latter  landed  toward  the
end  of  the  year  in  the  port  of  Palmas,  bringing  in
his  retinue  Bartolome  de  las  Casas  and  Hernan
Cortes.  He  found  but  little  resistance  except
from  the  cacique  Hatuey  (q.  v.),  a  fugitive  from
Hispaniola,  who  was  soon  captured  and  burned  at
the  stake.  In  February,  1513,  he  founded  the  first
town  at  Baracoa,  and  with  the  re-enforcement
that  was  brought  by  Panfilo  de  Narvaez  he  con-
quered Camaguey  and  soon  subjugated  the  whole
island,  founding,  in  November,  1513,  the  town  of
Bayamo,  and  in  the  following  year  Trinidad,
Santo  Espiritu,  Puerto  Principe,  and  Santiago  de
Cuba,  where  he  established  his  government  on  ac-
count of  its  proximity  to  Hispaniola.  Soon  the
fame  of  the  riches  of  the  island  attracted  numer-
ous adventurers,  and  Velazquez  began  to  distribute,
land  and  Indians  among  his  followers.  On  25
July,  1515,  he  founded  on  the  banks  of  Maya-
beque  river  the  town  of  San  Cristobal,  which  in
1519  was  removed  to  the  present  site  of  Havana.
In  the  same  year  he  sent  the  treasurer,  Miguel
Pasamonte,  to  Spain  with  a  map  of  the  island
(which  still  exists  in  the  archives  of  the  Indies),  and
to  solicit  further  privileges.  To  occupy  the  sur-
plus of  adventurers,  he  approved  an  expedition
under  Francisco  Hernandez  de  Cordova  to  capture
slaves  in  the  Bahamas  in  1517,  who,  impelled  by
contrary  winds,  accidentally  discovered  Yucatan.
The  favorable  reports  about  that  country  encour-
aged Velazquez  to  send  an  expedition  for  its  con-
quest, and  on  1  May,  1518,  a  fleet  under  Juan  de
Grijalva  left  Santiago  de  Cuba  and  visited  the
Mexican  coast  from  Cape  Catoche  to  Panuco  river.
The  news  of  the  rich  country,  which  Grijalva  de-
spatched to  Cuba  by  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  incited
Velazquez  to  form  a  new  expedition  for  its  con-
quest, the  command  of  which  he  gave,  after  much


274 VELAZQUEZ  CARDENAS  DE  LEON


VELLOSO


hesitation,  to  Hernan  Cortes.  Afterward,  mis-
trusting his  lieutenant's  intentions,  he  sought  to
f>revent  his  sailing,  but  his  emissaries  arrived  too
ate  in  Havana.  When  he  heard  that  Cortes  had
sent  commissioners  to  Spain  to  obtain  the  title  to
the  newly  discovered  country,  he  sent  a  powerful
expedition  under  Panfilo  de  Narvaez  in  March,
1520,  to  capture  Cortes  and  take  charge  of  the
government  in  the  name  of  Velazquez.  After  the
unfortunate  result  of  Narvaez's  expedition,  Velaz-
quez intended  to  march  himself,  but  his  age  and
uie  small-pox,  then  desolating  the  island,  prevent-
ed him  from  executing  his  design,  and  disappoint-
ment at  Cortes's  success  contributed  to  the  sick-
ness of  which  he  died.

VELAZO.UEZ  CARDENAS  DE  LEON,  Joa-
quin (vay-lath'-keth),  Mexican  astronomer,  b.  in
Santiago  Aubedocla,  near  Tizicapan,  21  July,  1732 ;
d.  in  Mexico,  6  March,  1786.  He  lost  his  father  in
childhood  and  was  taken  charge  of  by  his  uncle,
the  parish  priest  of  Jaltocan,  who  educated  him,
and  caused  him  to  be  instructed  in  Mexican  his-
tory and  mythology.  He  thus  became  familiar
with  several  Indian  languages,  and  with  the  hiero-
glyph^ writing  of  the  Aztecs.  He  was  afterward
S laced  in  the  Tridentine  college,  of  the  city  of
[exico ;  but  this  institution  was  so  poorly  equipped
with  teachers,  books,  and  instruments  that  he
was  almost  self-educated  in  mathematics  and  the
classics.  Having  met  by  chance  with  the  works  of
Sir  Isaac  Newton  and  Francis  -Bacon,  he  became
attracted  by  the  discoveries  of  the  one  and  the
philosophic  methods  of  the  other.  He  had  been
graduated  in  law,  and  what  he  gained  by  his  la-
bors in  this  profession  he  spent  in  the  purchase  of
instruments  in  England.  After  being  appointed
a  professor  in  the  university,  he  was  sent  on  a  mis-
sion to  California,  where  he  made  a  great  number
of  astronomical  observations.  He  was  the  first  to
notice  that  all  the  maps  of  that  country  had  been
for  several  centuries  strangely  in  error  with  regard
to  its  longitude,  and  made  it  extend  several  de-
grees too  far  to  the  west.  He  built  an  observatory
of  mimosa  logs  at.  Santa  Ana,  with  the  assistance
of  the  Abbe  Chappe,  a  French  astronomer,  and
predicted  that  the  eclipse  of  the  moon  of  18  June,
1769,  would  be  visible  in  California.  Unaided,  he
made  a  very  correct  observation  of  the  transit  of
Venus  on  5  June,  1769.  In  1774  he  was  charged
with  the  execution  of  the  topographical  and  geo-
detic survey  of  the  valley  of  Mexico,  and  his  la-
bors, with  this  aim,  have  formed  the  basis  of  all
those  that  have  been  undertaken  since.  After  his
return  from  California  he  placed  before  the  gov-
ernment a  project  for  the  foundation  of  the  School
of  mines.  The  greatest  service  that  he  rendered
to  his  country  was  the  establishment  of  this  insti-
tution, of  which  he  was  director-general  till  his
death.  He  wrote  "  Sobre  el  beneficio  de  las  Minas
del  sur  de  California  y  demas  de  la  N.  Espaha"
and  "  Conocimientos  interesantes  sobre  la  Historia
Natural  de  las  cercanias  de  Mexico,"  manuscripts
which  were  formerly  in  the  library  of  the  cathe-
dral, and  are  now  in  the  National  library.

VELAZQUEZ  DE  LA  CADENA,  Mariano,
Mexican  grammarian,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  28
June,  1778 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  19  Feb.,  1860.
He  was  sent  at  the  age  of  seven  years  to  Madrid,
and  there  admitted  into  the  Royal  seminary  of
nobles,  where  he  was  graduated  in  philosophy  and
law  in  1799.  Although  lacking  the  legal  age,  he
was  admitted  in  1800,  by  special  royal  order,  as
notary  of  the  council  of  the  Indies,  and  appointed
curator  of  the  estates  of  minors  and  intestate  es-
tates for  the  viceroyalty  of  Mexico. During  his


administration  he  became  intimately  connected
with  Baron  von  Humboldt,  and  in  1802  he  was  re-
called to  fill  the  post  of  private  secretary  to  King
Charles  IV.  As  such  he  was  sent  in  1804  to  rep-
resent the  king  at  the  coronation  of  Napoleon,  and
during  the  follow-
ing year  made  a
tour  through  west-
ern and  central
Europe.  After  the
imprisonment  of
the  king  by  Napo-
leon in  1809,  Ve-
lazquez resigned
his  office,  and  was
making  arrange-
ments for  return-
ing to  Mexico,
when  news  of
the  revolutionary
movement  of  Hi-
dalgo arrived.  Un-
willing to  identify
himself  witheither
of  the  contend-
ing parties,  Velaz-
quez resolved  to
retire  to  the  United  States,  and  settled  in  New
York,  where  he  became  a  teacher  of  Spanish,  and
founded  a  collegiate  institute,  in  which  a  great-
number  of  young  men  from  the  Latin-American
countries  were  educated.  From  1830  till  his  death
he  was  professor  of  the  Castilian  language  and  lit-
erature in  Columbia  college.  He  was  a  member  of
learned  societies  in  Europe  and  the  United  States.
He  was  the  author  of  Spanish  school-books  and  a
large  "  Pronouncing  Dictionary  of  the  Spanish  and
English  Languages"  (New  York,  1852).

VELEZ-HERRERA,  Ramon  (vay'-leth),  Cuban
author,  b.  in  Havana  in  1808 ;  d.  there  in  1887.
He  was  left  an  orphan  when  in  childhood,  but  was
educated  by  his  uncle,  Desiderio  Herrera,  a  learned
man,  author  of  various  scientific  works,  and  fin-
ished his  studies  in  San  Carlos  seminary,  Havana.
In  1829  he  was  graduated  in  law,  but  he  left  this
study  to  devote  himself  to  literature.  The  first
collection  of  his  poems  was  published  in  one  vol-
ume (Havana,  1833),  a  second  in  1837,  and  a  third
in  1838.  He  also  published  "  Elvira  de  Oquendo,"
a  pastoral  in  verse  (1840) ;  "  Los  dos  novios,"  a
comedy  (1843) ;  "  Flores  de  Otofio,"  a  collection  of
poems  (1849) :  "  Romances  Cubanos  "  (1856) ;  "  Na-
poleon en  Berlin,"  a  tragedy  (1860) ;  and  "  Flores
de  invierno,"  poems  (1882).

VELLOSINO,  Jaynie  Andrada  (vail-lo-se'-no),
Brazilian  physician,  b.  in  Pernambuco  in  1639 ;  d.
in  Leyden,  Holland,  in  1712.  His  father,  an  officer
in  the  service  of  Maurice  of  Nassau,  sent  him  to
Holland  after  the  surrender  of  Brazil  to  the  Portu-
guese in  1654.  Young  Vellosino,  after  his  gradu-
ation in  medicine  at  Leyden,  entered  the  service-
of  the  Indian  company,  and  held  high  offices  in
Guiana.  He  was  an  expert  in  Indian  dialects,  and
formed  a  valuable  herbarium  of  the  South  Ameri-
can flora.  His  works  include,  besides  several  me-
moirs on  Indian  languages,  "  Flora  Brasiliana,  etc."*
(2  vols.,  Leyden,  1706).

VELLOSO,  Jos6  Mariano  da  Concei<Jao  (vail-
lo'-so),  Brazilian  scientist,  b.  in  Rio  das  Mortes  in
1742;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1811.  After  studying
in  his  native  province,  he  was  sent  to  Rio  Janeiro,
where  he  finished  his  education  in  the  convent  of
Sao  Boaventura  in  1761,  and  entered  the  order  the
next  year.  He  then  began  the  study  of  philosophy
in  the  convent  of  Santo  Antonio,  and  in  1766  was


VENABLE


VENANT


275


graduated  as  Ph.  D.,  and  received  sacred  orders.
In  1768  he  was  sent  as  preacher  to  Sao  Paulo,  in
which  city  he  was  appointed  in  1771  professor  of
geometry,"  and  obtained  the  chairs  of  rhetoric  in
1779  and  natural  history  in  1786.  Soon  the  vice-
roy, Luiz  de  Vasconcellos,  called  him  to  Rio  Janei-
ro and  commissioned  him,  with  Francisco  Solano,
to  make  a  botanical  exploration  of  the  province.
After  many  years  of  work  he  finished  in  1790  his
celebrated  work  on  the  flora  of  the  province  of
Rio  Janeiro,  which  contained  alone  1,640  plants  of
new  and  formerly  unclassified  species.  The  vice-
roy ordered  him  to  present  his  work  personally  at
court  in  Lisbon,  where  the  manuscript  was  lost  in
the  archives,  but  it  was  discovered  in  1824  in  the
royal  library  by  Antonio  de  Arrabida,  and  the  Em-
peror Pedro  I.  obtained  a  copy,  which  was  published
by  his  orders.  Velloso  was  honored  in  Lisbon  with
the  friendship  of  the  prince  regent,  and  by  him
appointed  director  of  the  topography  of  the  "  Arco
do  Cego,"  which  in  1798  was  incorporated  in  the
royal  printing-office.  Velloso  continued  as  one  of
the  directors,  was  a  corresponding  member  of  the
Royal  academy  of  science  and  many  other  scien-
tific societies,  and  provincial  of  his  order,  but,  de-
siring to  return  to  his  country,  he  was  in  1809
nominated  superior  of  the  convent  of  Santo  An-
tonio in  Rio  Janeiro,  where  he  died  two  years  after.
A  plant  of  the  Euphorbia?  family  has  been  named
in  his  honor  Vellosia  jabanesia  princeps.  •  He
wrote  "  0  Fazendeiro  do  Brazil,"  a  work  on  agri-
culture (11  vols.,  Lisbon,  1794) ;  "  Ornothologia
Brazileira,  ou  enumeracao  de  muitas  aves  uteis"
(1804) ;  "Estudo  sobre  a  cochonilha"  (1807) :  "  So-
bre  6  Lavrador  pratico,  eontendo  a  historia  da
canna  de  assucar  "  (Rio  Janeiro,  1810);  and  a  great
natural  history,  "  Flora  Fluminense,  ou  descripcao
das  plantas  que  nascem  espontaneas  no  Rio  de
Janeiro"  (11  vols.,  1825).

VENABLE,  Abraham  B,  senator,  b.  in  Prince
Edward  county,  Va.,  in  1760 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,
26  Dec,  1811.  His  ancestors  were  among  the  earli-
est settlers  of  Virginia,  receiving  from  Charles  II.
a  grant  of  lands  at  the  Manikin  town  on  James
river.  His  grandfather  was  a  surgeon  in  the  first
regiment  of  troops  that  was  sent  to  Jamestown,
under  the  command  of  Sir  John  Harvie.  Abra-
ham was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1780,  settled
as  a  planter  in  his  native  county,  and  in  1791-'9
was  a  member  of  congress.  In  1803-'4  he  was
U.  S.  senator,  but  he  resigned  at  the  latter  date,
returned  to  private  life,  and  exerted  a  controlling
influence  in  public  affairs.  He  was  the  intimate
friend  and  party  adviser  of  Thomas  Jefferson,  by
whom  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  Bank  of
Virginia,  which  enterprise  was  under  that  states-
man's control.  Mr.  Venable  perished  at  the  burn-
ing of  the  Richmond  theatre. — His  nephew,  Abra-
ham Woodson,  congressman,  b.  in  Prince  Edward
county,  Va.,  17  Oct.,  1799 ;  d.  in  Oxford,  N.  C,  24
Feb.,  1876,  was  graduated  at  Hampden  Sidney  in
1816,  and  at  Princeton  in  1819,  in  the  mean  time
studying  medicine.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1821,  removed  to  North  Carolina  in  1828,  and
established  a  large  practice.  He  was  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Jackson  ticket  in  1832,  and  on  the
Van  Buren-Johnson  ticket  in  1836,  was  chosen  to
congress  in  1846,  and  served  by  re-election  till
1853,  but  was  defeated  in  the  next  canvass.  Dur-
ing his  service  in  that  body  he  gained  reputa-
tion as  an  able  debater  and  an  opponent  of  the
free-soil  or  anti-slavery  policy  and  that  of  nullifica-
tion. He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Breck-
inridge and  Lane  ticket  in  1860,  and  in  1861— '4  a
member  of  the  Confederate  congress. — Abraham's


nephew,  Charles  Scott,  educator,  b.  in  Prince
Edward  county,  Va.,  19  April,  1827,  was  graduated
at  Hampden  Sidney  in  1842  and  at  the  University
of  Virginia  in  1848,  and  studied  at  Berlin  in  1852
and  at  Bonn  in  1854.  He  was  professor  of  mathe-
matics at  Hampden  Sidney  in  1848-'56,  of  physics
and  chemistry  in  the  University  of  Georgia  in
1856,  and  of  mathematics  and  astronomy  in  the
University  of  South  Carolina  in  1858-'61.  He  be-
came captain  of  engineers  in  the  Confederate  army
in  the  last-named  year,  and  in  1862-'5  was  lieu-
tenant-colonel and  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Robert
E.  Lee,  participating  in  all  the  important  battles
in  which  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  took  part.
He  became  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia  in  1865,  and  still  holds  that
chair.  In  1870-'3  he  was  chairman  of  the  faculty,
.and  in  1887  was  again  chosen  to  that  office.  In
1860  he  was  one  of  the  five  commissioners  appoint-
ed to  visit  Labrador  to  observe  the  solar  eclipse.
The  University  of  Virginia  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1868.  He  has  published  a  series  of
mathematical  text-books  (New  York,  1869-75). —
His  son,  Frank  Preston,  chemist,  b.  at  Long-
wood,  Prince  Edward  co.,  Va.,  17  Nov.,  1856,  was
educated  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  and  then
studied  chemistry  at  the  universities  of  Bonn  and
Gottingen,  receiving  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the
latter  in  1881.  He  has  held  the  chair  of  chemistry
at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  since  1880,
and,  in  addition  to  various  scientific  papers,  has
published  "  A  Short  Course  in  Qualitative  Chemical
Analysis"  (Raleigh,  N.  C,  1883).

TENABLE,  William  Henry,  author,  b.  in
Warren  county,  Ohio,  29  April,  1836.  He  began
to  teach  at  seventeen  years  of  age,  and  during  his
vacations  attended  teachers'  institutes  in  Oxford,
Ohio,  being  one  of  the  first  teachers  in  the  state
upon  whom  the  Ohio  board  of  examiners  conferred
a  life  certificate.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Normal
school  at  Lebanon,  Ohio,  in  1862,  became  professor
of  natural  science  in  Chickering  classical  and  sci-
entific institute,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  the  same  year,
was  its  principal  and  proprietor  in  1881,  organized
and  was  first  president  of  the  Cincinnati  society
of  political  education,  and  in  1882  founded  and
conducted  in  that  city  the  African  school  of  popu-
lar science  and  history.  He  retired  from  teaching
in  1886,  has  since  devoted  himself  to  literary  work
and  to  lecturing,  and  is  an  editor  of  the  "  Ohio
Archaeological  and  Historical  Quarterly."  He  is
actively  connected  with  many  educational  associa-
tions, and  is  a  member  of  several  learned  bodies.
The  University  of  Ohio  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1886.  He  has  published  "  June  on  the
Miami,  and  other  Poems"  (Cincinnati,  1871);  "A
School  History  of  the  United  States  "  (1872) ;  "  The
School  Stage,"  a  collection  of  juvenile  acting  plays,
original  and  adapted  (1873) ;  "  The  Teacher's
Dream,"  a  poem  (New  York,  1880) ;  "  Melodies  of
the  Heart,  and  other  Poems"  (Cincinnati,  1884);
"  Footprints  of  the  Pioneers  in  the  Ohio  Valley  "
(1888);  "Biography  of  William  D.  Gallagher"
(1888);  and  "Historical  Sketch  of  Western  Peri-
odical Literature "  (1888).  He  has  also  published
several  pamphlets,  addresses,  etc.,  and  edited  "  The
Dramatic  Actor,"  a  collection  of  plays  (1874) ;  and
"  Dramatic  Scenes  from  the  Best  Authors  "  (1874).

VENANT,  Jean  Barr6  de  (vay-nong)  (some-
times written  Saint- Venant),  French  agricultur-
ist, b.  in  Niort  in  1737 ;  d.  there  in  February,
1810.  He  came  in  his  youth  to  Santo  Domin-
go, founded  there  a  model  farm,  and  was  ap-
pointed president  of  the  colonial  board  of  agri-
culture and  trade,  which  post  he  retained  for  about


276


VENEGAS


VENNOR


twenty  years,  contributing  in  many  ways  toward
developing  the  resources  of  the  colony.  He  found-
ed at  Cape  Francais  the  Academy  of  the  Phila-
delphes,  which  under  his  auspices  published  many
valuable  manuscripts  concerning  the  early  history,
discovery,  and  natural  history  of  the  island,  sent
out  several  scientific  expeditions,  and  greatly  fos-
tered national  education.  After  his  return  to  Eu-
rope in  1788,  Venant  wrote,  at  the  solicitation  of  the
Paris  societe  d'agriculture,  memoirs  on  the  culture
of  cotton,  coffee,  indigo,  tobacco,  and  sugar-cane,
and  urged  the  introduction  of  such  occupations  in
southern  Prance.  His  works  include  "  Des  colo-
nies modernes  sous  la  zone  torride,  et  particuliere-
ment  de  celle  de  Saint-Domingue  "  (Paris,  1802).

VENEGAS,  Francisco  Javier  de,  viceroy  of
Mexico,  b.  in  Ecija,  Spain,  about  1760 ;  d.  in  Madrid
about  1820.  He  entered  military  life,  and  in  1805
retired  on  half-pay  as  lieutenant-colonel.  When
Spain  was  invaded  by  the  French  troops  in  1808,

he  returned  to
active  service,
participated  in
the  victory  of
Baylen  in  July
of  that  year,  and
under  the  pro-
tection of  the
minister  Saave-
draobtained  rap-
id promotions.
He  held  the  rank
of  major-gener-
al, and  had  been
sent  as  viceroy
to  New  Granada,
when  the  Span-
ish council  of
regency  in  1810
resolved  to  ap-
point him  vice-
r^^e^OUd  £,y of MeXiCo,

Ls  as  his  energetic

character  seemed  adapted  to  quell  the  popular  com-
motion that  had  begun  in  that  country.  He  received
news  of  his  promotion  in  Carthagena  shortly  before
his  departure  for  Bogota  and  arrived  in  Vera  Cruz,
25  Aug.,  1810.  On  the  road  to  the  capital  he  heard
of  a  threatened  outbreak  in  Queretaro,  and  two  days
after  his  arrival  in  Mexico  the  revolution  of  Miguel
Hidalgo  took  place  in  Dolores,  16  Sept.,  1810.  With
great  activity  Venegas  gathered  forces  to  oppose
the  advancing  host  of  the  insurgents,  and  after  the
defeat  of  Gen.  Trujillo  at  Monte  de  las  Cruces,  29
Oct.,  he  sent  two  brigades  against  the  retiring
Hidalgo,  who  was  defeated  at  Aculco  on  7  Nov.
He  was  greatly  assisted  by  the  energy  of  Gen.
Felix  Maria  Calleja,  who  on  17  Jan.,  1811,  totally
defeated  the  insurgents  at  Calderon,  and  in  the
same  year  took  Zitacuaro  from  Ignaeio  Lopez
Rayon.  Continued  success  made-  Calleja  believe
himself  superior  to  Venegas ;  from  that  time  he
began  a  secret  opposition  to  the  viceroy,  and  the
latter,  to  keep  him  from  the  capital,  sent  him
against  Morelos's  forces  in  Cuautla.  But  when  the
latter  town  was  abandoned  by  Morelos  after  a
seventy  days'  defence,  on  2  May,  1812,  and  Calleja
with  his  tired  forces  did  not  pursue  the  enemy,
Venegas  censured  him  severely,  and  the  former
resigned.  In  the  same  year  Venegas  took  the  oath
on  the  new  constitution,  and  repressed  a  seditious
movement  in  the  capital  with  the  utmost  cruelty,
ordering  the  execution  of  several  accused  persons
for  whom  the  prosecutor  had  only  demanded  im-
prisonment. In  other  instances he  had acted


against  the  decrees  of  the  Spanish  cortes,  and  this,
together  with  the  intrigues  of  Calleja's  friends,
caused  the  regency  to  order  his  recall  in  February,
1813.  He  delivered  the  executive  to  Calleja  on  4
March,  and  left  Mexico  on  the  13th  of  that  month,
with  the  reputation  of  an  honest  and  energetic  but
haughty  and  cruel  ruler.  In  Spain  he  submitted
to  the  French  government,  and  was  rewarded  with
the  titles  of  Marquis  de  la  Reunion  and  member  of
the  supreme  council  of  war.  After  the  restoration
of  Ferdinand  VII.  he  retired  to  private  life.

VENEGAS,  Miguel  (vay-nay'-gas),  Mexican
author,  b.  in  Puebla,  4  Oct.,  1680 ;  d.  near  the  city
of  Mexico  in  1764.  He  entered  the  Society  of
Jesus  at  Tepozotlan  on  30  Aug.,  1700,  was  a  pro-
fessor of  Latin  and  rhetoric  in  1708,  and  of  moral
theology  in  1714.  and  was  subsequently  a  mission-
ary among  the  Indians  of  Mexico  and  California.
He  rendered  important  services  to  his  order  in  the
administration  of  the  latter  country,  and  collected
a  large  number  of  documents  on  its  history,  geog-
raphy, and  on  the  lives  of  its  missionaries.  At
length  he  was  forced  by  feeble  health  to  live  in  re-
tirement, and  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  on
the  estate  of  Chicomocelo  in  literary  occupations
and  the  practice  of  religious  exercises.  He  wrote
many  works,  among  them  :  "  Hymnus  in  laudem
B.  Mariae  Virginis  de  Guadalupe,"  in  Latin  and  in
Spanish  (Mexico,  1765) ;  "  Manual  de  Parrocos
para  administrar  los  Sacramentos  a  Indios  y  Espa-
iioles"  (1768);  *•  Templo  mistico  de  la  Gracia,  de-
lineado  en  la  admirable  vida  y  virtudes  heroicas
del  Ven.  P.  Juan  Bautista  Zappa,  misionero  de  la
Nueva  Espafia  "  (Barcelona,  1754) ;  and  "  Vida  ad-
mirable del  P.  Juan  Maria  Salvatierra,  Conquista-
dor de  Californias  "  (Mexico.  1755).  The  work  on
which  his  reputation  rests  is  "  Noticia  de  la  Cali-
fornia y  su  Conquista  temporal  y  esniritual  hasta
el  tiempo  presente"  (3  vols.,  Madrid,  1757).  It  is
full  of  details  on  the  manners  of  the  Indian  tribes
and  the  lives  of  the  missionaries.  He  availed  him-
self of  the  manuscripts  of  his  predecessors  and  con-
temporaries, and  the  interest  the  work  excited  is
shown  by  the  fact  that  it  was  translated  into  the
principal  modern  languages.  The  English  transla-
tion bears  the  title  "  Natural  and  Civil  History  of
California  "  (2  vols.,  London,  1759).  The  French
and  Dutch  translations  were  made  from  the  Eng-
lish, and  do  not  give  the  author's  name.  His  life
was  written  by  Salvador  Granada  (Mexico,  1765).

VENNOR,  Henry  George,  Canadian  mete-
orologist, b.  in  Montreal,  30  Dec,  1840  ;  d.  there,  8
July,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  McGill  uni-
versity in  1860,  taking  the  zoological  and  geo-
logical courses  under  Sir  William  Dawson,  studied
civil  engineering,  and  took  a  course  of  chemistry
in  Montreal  medical  college.  For  five  years  after
leaving  the  university  he  was  in  business,  but
found  time  to  make  a  large  collection  of  the  birds
and  fossils  of  Montreal  island,  and  also  made  a
study  of  the  weather.  In  1865  he  became  assistant
to  Sir  William  Logan,  of  the  geological  survey  of
Canada,  with  whom  he  spent  a  season  in  examining
Manatoulin  island  in  Lake  Huron.  There  he  con-
tributed letters  to  the  Montreal  "  Witness,"  made
a  collection  of  the  birds  of  Lake  Huron,  and  pre-
pared a  list  of  all  that  bred  on  the  island.  He
was  placed  on  the  permanent  staff  of  the  geological
survey  in  1866,  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal
geological  society  of  England  in  1870,  and  con-
tinued his  geological  surveys  till  1881,  when  he
left  the  service  of  the  government  and  opened  a
mining  agency  in  Montreal.  While  employed  on
the  survey  he  traced  the  rivers  Lievre,  Reuge,  and
Gatineau  to  their  sources,  and  succeeded  in  direct-


VENTADOUR


VERBECK


277


ing  public  attention  to  valuable  phosphate-mines.
He  first  attracted  notice  as  a  meteorologist  in  the
autumn  of  1876,  when  he  predicted  a  "green"
Christmas  and  a  rainy  New- Year's  day,  which  pre-
diction was  verified.  At  the  same  time  he  began
the  publication  of  "  Vennor's  Almanac,"  which  he
continued  till  his  death,  and  which,  it  was  claimed,
attained  a  larger  circulation  than  that  of  any  simi-
lar publication  in  the  world.  He  made  a  study  of
the  course  of  storms  for  many  years,  and  attained
his  results  chiefly  by  comparing  atmospheric  con-
ditions at  the  time  with  similar  ones  in  the  past.
He  published  "  Our  Birds  of  Prey "  (Montreal,
1875).  The  remainder  of  his  writings  appear  in
the  "  Reports  "  of  the  geological  survey,  the  "  Ca-
nadian Naturalist,"  and  the  "British  American
Magazine."  In  1882-'3  he  supplemented  his  al-
manac with  "  Vennor's  Weather  Bulletin."

VENTADOUR,  Henry  de  LSvis-La  Voute,
Duke  de,  third  viceroy  of  Canada,  b.  in  the  castle
of  Moustier  Ventadour,  near  Tulle,  Correze,  about
1595 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  1651.  He  was  the  second
Duke  of  Ventadour,  and,  after  serving  for  several
years  in  the  army,  retired  and  took  holy  orders.
In  1625  he  bought  for  20,000  livres  from  his  uncle,
Henry,  Duke  de  Montmorency,  the  viceroyalty  of
Canada.  According  to  the  historian,  "  it  was  no
worldly  motive  that  prompted  this  young  noble-
man to  assume  the  burden  of  fostering  the  infancy
of  New  Prance.  For  trade  and  colonization  he
cared  nothing ;  the  conversion  of  infidels  was  his
sole  care.  The  Jesuits  had  the  keeping  of  his  con-
science, and  in  his  eye  they  were  the  most  fitting
instrument  for  his  purpose."  The  Recollet  friars
that  had  arrived  in  Canada  a  few  years  before  had
already  established  five  missions.  To  please  De
Ventadour  they  applied  for  the  assistance  of  the
Jesuits,  and  the  duke  sent  to  Canada,  in  1625,
Charles  Lalemant,  Enemond  Masse,  and  Jean  de
Brebeuf.  They  were  followed  in  1626  by  Noirot  de
la  Noue  and  twenty  other  laborers.  Emery  de
Caen  had  then  the  monopoly  of  trade  and  com-
merce in  Canada,  but,  as  he  was  a  Huguenot,  Ven-
tadour endeavored  to  limit  his  privilege,  and  went
so  far  as  to  prohibit  Emery's  followers  from  prayer
and  singing.  Ventadour  sent  one  ship  to  Canada
in  1626  to  explore  his  new  dominion,  but  denied
the  colonists  any  support,  under  the  pretence  that
they  were  Protestants,  and  when  Richelieu  in
1627  compelled  Ventadour  to  sell  his  viceroyalty  to
the  newly  organized  company  of  the  Hundred  asso-
ciates, the  fifty  inhabitants  of  Quebec  were  nearly
starving.  Pointe  Levis  had  been  named  after  the
third  viceroy  of  Canada.  Ventadour  continued  to
the  end  of  his  life  to  interest  himself  in  the  conver-
sion of  infidels,  and  he  sent  succor  several  times  to
the  missions  that  had  been  established  by  the
Jesuits  in  New  Prance.

V ERA-CRUZ,  Alonso  de  la,  Spanish  monk,
b.  in  Caspueilas,  Guadalajara,  in  1504  ;  d.  in  Mexi-
co, 6  July,  1584.  He  studied  at  the  universities  of
Alcala  and  Salamanca,  and  was  from  1533  till
1537  tutor  of  the  children  of  the  Duke  del  Infan-
tado.  In  1537  he  accompanied  Father  Francisco
de  la  Cruz  to  New  Spain,  and  in  1538  entered  the
Augustinian  order  at  Vera  Cruz.  He  was  provin-
cial of  the  order  in  1550,  and  founded  in  1551  the
University  of  Mexico,  being  its  first  professor  of
Holy  Scripture.  When  Vasco  de  Quiroga,  bishop
of  Michoacan,  went  to  the  council  of  Trent,  he
left  Vera-Cruz  in  charge  of  his  diocese  and  asked
him  for  a  full  report  of  the  missions  in  New  Spain
to  lay  before  the  council.  This  report  was  long
discussed  in  that  body,  as  it  severely  criticised  the
Spanish  administration  and begged  the  king  to


prevent  cruelty  toward  the  Indians.  Vera-Cruz
was  in  consequence  ordered  to  appear  at  court  in
1561,  but  he  justified  himself  and  became  visitor
of  the  order  in  New  Castile.  He  refused  in  1565
the  bishoprics  of  Tlaxcala  and  Michoacan,  and,
being  permitted  to  return  to  New  Spain  in  1573,
brought  with  him  seventeen  friars,  and  established
successful  missions  among  the  Tarascos.  He  was
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  native  languages,
and  left,  besides  many  published  works,  several
valuable  manuscripts,  which  are  mentioned  by
Jose  Mariano  Beristain  in  his  "  Biblioteca  Hispano-
Americana  Septentrional."

VERANDRYE,  Pierre  Gautier  de  Varen-
lies  de  la,  Canadian  explorer,  b.  in  Three  Rivers,
Lower  Canada,  17  Nov.,  1685;  d.  in  Quebec,  6
Dec,  1749.  His  father,  Rene  Gautier  de  Varennes,
a  native  of  France  and  lieutenant  in  the  regiment
of  Carignan,  was  governor  of  Three  Rivers.  The
son  entered  the  French  army,  fought  in  the  war
with  Great  Britain,  received  several  wounds  in  the
battle  of  Malplaquet,  and  was  left  for  dead  on  the
field.  After  his  recovery  he  returned  to  Canada,
and  in  1712  married  the  "daughter  of  the  seignieur
of  He  Dupas.  Like  many  others,  Verandrye  cher-
ished the  hope  of  discovering  a  northwest  passage
to  Cathay,  and  on  his  imparting  his  belief  to  Father
Gonor,  the  latter  persuaded  De  Beauharnois,  then
governor  of  Canada,  to  give  Verandrye  fifty  men
and  a  missionary  to  carry  out  his  intended  explo-
rations. In  1731  he  crossed  Lac  de  la  Pluie  160
miles  west  of  Lake  Superior,  built  Fort  St.  Peter
near  the  present  Fort  Francis,  and  in  1732  erected
Fort  St.  Charles  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Lake
of  the  Woods.  In  1733  he  passed  down  Winnipeg
river  into  the  lake  of  that  name,  and  is  supposed  to
have  erected  a  fort  south  of  Assiniboine  river  near
its  junction  with  Red  river,  from  which  the  pres-
ent Fort  Rouge  is  named.  He  and  his  sons  shortly
afterward  built  Fort  de  la  Reine  upon  the  site  that
is  now  occupied  by  Portage  la  Prairie,  and  subse-
quently continued  their  explorations  westward  un-
til they  had  discovered  the  Rocky  mountains.  In
1736  one  of  his  sons,  the  Jesuit  Pere  Anneau,  and
twenty  others  were  massacred  by  Sioux  on  an  isl-
and of  the  Lake  des  Bois.  In  1749  Verandrye  as-
cended Saskatchewan  river  to  the  forks,  where  he
erected  Fort  Dauphin,  and  afterward  returned  to
Quebec,  hoping  to  obtain  a  further  pecuniary  grant,
but  died  as  he  was  about  to  resume  his  journey.
While  on  his  tour  of  exploration  he  found  among
massive  pillars  a  small  stone  that  bore  on  two  sides
graven  characters  of  an  unknown  language.  The
stone  was  afterward  sent  to  Paris,  and  there  the
resemblance  the  characters  were  thought  to  bear  to
Tartaric  was  regarded  as  supporting  the  hypothesis
of  an  Asiatic  emigration  into  America.  The  king
of  France  conferred  the  cross  of  St.  Louis  upon
Verandrye,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
about  to  resume,  by  the  king's  desire,  his  attempt
to  reach  the  Pacific  ocean.  Alexander  Tache,  the
first  Roman  Catholic  archbishop  of  St.  Boniface,
Manitoba,  who  was  a  relative  of  Verandrye,  laid
in  1885  the  foundation  of  a  monument  to  com-
memorate him  at  St.  Boniface.

VERBECK,  Gliiido  Fridolin,  missionary,  b.  in
Zeist,  near  Utrecht,  Holland,  23  Jan.,  1830.  He
was  graduated  at  the  Moravian  academy  in  Zeist
in  1848,  at  Auburn  theological  seminary  in  1859,
and  was  licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  Cayuga  the
same  year.  .He  went  to  Japan  in  May,  1859,  as
a  missionary  of  the  Reformed  church,  was  con-
nected with  the  government  of  that  country  in  its
education  and  translation  departments  in  1869-78,
and  earlv  in  1869  was  invited  to  Tokio  to  help  in


278


VER  BRYCK


VERE


forming  a  national  university.  He  was  one  of  a
staff  of  writers  employed  in  the  production  of  '"An
Outline  History  of  Japanese  Education  "  for  the
United  States  centennial  exhibition  in  1876,  and
was  engaged  in  the  production  of  other  important
publications  in  Japan.  Dr.  Verbeck  was  one  of  a
select  committee  that  brought  out  the  translation
of  the  Bible  into  the  Japanese  language  in  1887,
after  many  missionaries  had  labored  upon  difficult
parts  of  the  work  for  fifteen  years.  He  is  presi-
dent of  the  University  of  Tokio,  and  received  the
Japanese  order  of  the  "  Rising  Sun  "  in  1877,  and
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Rutgers  in  1875.

VER  BRYCK,  Cornelius,  artist,  b.  in  Yaugh
Paugh,  N.  J.,  1  Jan.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y..
31  May,  1844.  He  studied  in  1835  under  Samuel
P.  B.  Morse,  and  in  1837  went  to  Mobile.  In  1839
he  visited  London,  England,  whence  he  soon  re-
turned. He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  Nation-
al academy  in  1838,  and  an  academician  in  1841.
He  exhibited  at  the  academy  during  1837-'42  va-
rious landscapes,  figure-pieces,  and  portraits,  and
in  1839  "  Charles  I.  in  the  Studio  of  Vandyck."
His  health  gave  way  soon  after  his  art  studies  be-
gan, and  in  1843  he  went  again  to  Europe,  with
the  hope  that  a  voyage  might  restore  him,  but
soon  returned,  and  his  early  death  terminated  a
promising  career.  The  New  York  historical  so-
ciety owns  his  "  The  Old  Dutch  Bible."  Among  his
portraits  isvone  of  William  Cullen  Bryant  (1842).

VERCHERES,  Mary  Madeleine  de,  b.  in
Canada  in  1678;  d.  after  1700.  She  was  born  in
the  fort  on  her  father's  seigniory  on  the  St.  Law-
rence, about  twenty  miles  below  Montreal.  In  the
autumn  of  1692  she  was  on  the  river-bank,  some
distance  from  the  fort,  when  suddenly  she  heard
several  shots  fired,  and  discovered  that  the  Indians
were  killing  and  carrying  off  the  settlers  who  were
working  in  the  fields.  She  describes  the  scene  in
the  narrative  afterward  written  at  the  request  of
the  governor  of  Canada.  A  servant  shouted  to  her
to  run,  and,  on  turning  round,  she  saw  about  fifty
Iroquois  rushing  at  her.  Pursued  by  the  savages,
and  crying  "  To  arms ! "  she  entered  the  fort  just  in
time  to  shut  the  gate  in  their  faces.  Besides  women
and  children,  there  were  only  two  soldiers,  an  old
man,  and  her  two  little  brothers  in  the  fort.  Seeing
that  the  soldiers  were  demoralized,  she  seized  a
rifle,  put  on  a  military  cap.  and  ordered  all  to  take
their  places  and  by  heavy  firing  alarm  the  country.
She  placed  her  two  brothers — the  one  twelve  years
old,  the  other  fourteen — on  the  bastions,  saying :
"  Let  us  fight  till  death  ;  we  fight  for  our  country
and  religion."  The  third  bastion  was  defended  by
the  old  man,  while  she  took  charge  of  the  fourth,
after  placing  the  women  and  children  in  charge  of
the  two  soldiers  in  a  redoubt.  The  Iroquois  made
several  attacks,  but  were  repelled,  and  eventually
retreated  with  loss.  The  siege  lasted  two  days,
during  which  she  neither  ate  nor  slept.  After
another  eight  days  the  fort  was  relieved  by  an
officer  and  forty  men  from  Montreal.  She  after-
ward married  De  Lanaudiere,  Sieur  de  la  Perade.

YERDEN,  Karl  von  (vair'-den),  German  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Schweidnitz,  Silesia,  about  1620 ;  d.
in  Buenos  Ayres  in  1697.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  was
attached  to  the  South  American  missions,  and
labored  for  about  twenty  years  among  the  Indians
of  Tueuraan.  Afterward  he  was  librarian  of  the
convent  of  Buenos  Ayres.  His  works  include
"  Geografia  y  Misiones  del  Rio  de  la  Plata "
(Madrid,  1710);  "Informe  de  las  Misiones  del  Tu-
cuman  "  (1711);  and  "  Informacion  sobre  las  Misi-
ones y  Establecimientos  de  la  Compailia  de  Jesus
en  la  America  meridional  "  (2  vols.,  1715).


VERDI,  Tullio  Suzzara,  physician,  b.  in  Man-
tua, Italy,  10  Feb.,  1829.  He  is  of  a  noble  family,
was  educated  in  the  College  of  art,  literature,  and
sciences  of  Mantua,  and  in  1847  entered  the  Sar-
dinian army.  After  its  defeat  at  Novara  in  1849
he  was  exiled  from  Italy  by  the  Austrians,  came
to  the  United  States,  and  in  1852  became  profes-
sor of  modern  languages  in  Brown  university.
He  was  graduated  at  Hahnemann  medical  col-
lege at  Philadelphia  in  1856,  and  in  1857  re-
moved to  Washington,  D.  C.  In  1871  he  was  ap-
Eointed  a  member  of  the  board  of  health  of  the
•istrict  of  Columbia,  of  which  in  1876  he  was
elected  president,  and  he  was  appointed  in  1879  a
member  of  the  national  board  of  health.  Dr.  Verdi
became  president  of  the  medical  staff  of  the  Na-
tional homoeopathic  hospital  in  June,  1887.  He  was
appointed  in  1873  special  sanitary  commissioner  to
the  principal  cities  of  Europe  from  the  District  of
Columbia.  He  was  physician  to  William  H.  Sew-
ard while  the  latter  was  secretary  of  state,  and  the
assassin  that  nearly  killed  Seward  gained  admission
to  the  secretary  by  the  pretence  that  he  was  the
bearer  of  a  professional  message  from  Dr.  Verdi.
He  has  published  "  Maternity,  a  Popular  Treatise
for  Young  Wives  and  Mothers  "  (New  York,  1869) ;
"  Mothers  and  Daughters :  Practical  Studies  for
the  Conservation  of  the  Health  of  Girls  "  (1877) ;
and  "  The  Infant  Philosopher  "  (1886).

VERDUGO,  Vicente  (vair-doo'-go),  Peruvian
historian,  b.  in  Cuzco  about  1690;  d.  in  Rome,
Italy,  in  1775.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  and  was  su-
perior of  their  houses  at  Cuzco  and  Lima,  canon
of  Cuzco,  and  professor  of  history  at  Quito.  After
mastering  the  Quichua  language  and  several  other
Indian  dialects,  he  collected  an  important  library
of  ancient  documents  concerning  the  early  history
of  South  America  and  its  conquest.  Toward  1750
he  was  sent  to  Rome  and  became  librarian  of  the
Roman  college.  His  works  include  "  Historia  de
las  guerras  civiles  en  Peru  en  el  tiempo  del  Inca
Atahualpa  "  (Rome,  1754) ;  "  Cronica  veridica  de
la  conquista  de  la  provincia  de  Cuzco"  (2  vols.,
1756) ;  and  "  Informacion  de  lo  obrado  en  la  pro-
vincia del  Cuzco,"  a  manuscript  which  is  preserved
in  the  Roman  college.

YERE,  Maximilian,  Freiherr  von  Schele  de,
scholar,  b.  near  Wexio,  Sweden,  1  Nov.,  1820.  He
was  educated  in  Germany,  and  entered  the  military
and  afterward  the  diplomatic  service  of  Prussia.
He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1842,  and  in  1844
accepted  the  chair  of  modern  languages  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  entered  the  Confederate  service  as  a  captain,
and  was  afterward  appointed  commissioner  to
Germany,  to  explain  and  further  there  the  cause  of
the  Confederacy.  He  lived  for  some  time  in
Europe,  mainly  in  Italy,  devoting  himself  to  liter-
ary and  social  studies,  but  returned  to  this  country
after  the  war  and  resumed  his  professorship.  Prof.
De  Vere  is  a  member  of  various  histoneal  and
scientific  societies,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  American  philological  society.  Besides  contri-
butions on  historical,  literary,  and  scientific  subjects,
to  English,  American,  and  German  periodicals,  he
has  published  "  Outlines  of  Comparative  Philology  "
(New  York,  1853);  "  Grammar  of  the  Spanish
Language  "  (1854) ;  "  Strav  Leaves  from  the  Book
of  Nature  "  (1856) ;  "  Studies  in  English,"  "  First
French  Reader,"  and  "  Grammar  in  French  "  (1867) ;
"  The  Great  Empress,"  a  novel  (Philadelphia,  1869) ;
"  Wonders  of  the  Deep  "  (New  York,  1869) ;  "  Intro-
duction to  the  Study  of  French  "  (1870) ;  "  Romance
of  American  History  "  (1872) ;  "  Americanisms,  or
the  English  of  the  New  World  "  (1873) ;  and  "  Mod-


VERGARA  Y  ZAMORAL


VERMILYE


279


ern  Magic  "  (1874).  He  has  translated  into  English
Spielhagen's  "  Problematic  Characters  "  (New  York,
1869) ;  "  Through  Night  to  Light "  (1869) ;  and
"  The  Hohcnsteins  "  (1870) ;  and  has  edited  an  edi-
tion de  luxe  of  Saintine's  "  Myths  of  the  Rhine,"
illustrated  by  Dore,  and  several  volumes  of  the
"  Illustrated  Library  of  Wonders."  He  has  re-
cently begun  a  revised  and  annotated  edition  of
some  of  the  masterpieces  of  French  literature.

VERGARA  Y  ZAMORAL,  Diego  Hernandez
de,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  Jaen,  Andalusia,
Spain,  in  1526 ;  d.  in  Mexico  in  1593.  He  was  of
noble  birth,  early  entered  the  military  service  and
fought  in  Italy  till  1549,  when  he  became  a  Jesuit
to  escape  punishment  for  having  killed  a  fellow-
officer  in  a  duel.  In  the  following  year  he  was
sent  to  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  studied  theology
and  was  ordained  priest.  He  labored  afterward
in  Cuba,  in  the  Tierra  Firme,  and  in  Mexico,  where
he  became  prior  of  a  convent,  librarian  and  pro-
curator of  his  order,  and  was  twice  sent  to  Rome
to  report  to  the  holy  see  on  the  American  mis-
sions. He  left  two  valuable  manuscripts,  which
are  preserved  in  the  Vatican  library  at  Rome.
They  are  entitled  "Litterae  annua?,  ad  praepositum
generalem  Societatis  Jesu,  quae  statu  m  in  provincia
Antillensi  exponunt,"  and  "  Epistoke  tres  de  qua-
draginta  Jesuitis  interfectis  in  Nova  Hispana,"
which  recounts  the  adventures  of  the  first  Jesuits
that  were  sent  to  Mexico.

VERGENNES,  Charles  Gravier,  Count  de,
French  statesman,  b.  in  Dijon,  28  Dec,  1717 ;  d.  in
Versailles,  13  Feb.,  1787.  He  was  the  second  son
of  a  president  of  the  parliament  of  Dijon,  and,  after
receiving  his  educa-
tion at  the  Jesuit  col-
lege, entered  the  dip-
lomatic service,  and
accompanied  a  rela-
tive to  Lisbon  in  1740.
In  the  following  year
he  participated  at
Frankfort  in  the  nego-
tiations that  brought
about  the  election  to
the  empire  of  the  elec-
tor of  Bavaria,  Charles
VII.,  but  he  returned
to  Lisbon  in  1745,  and
in  1750  was  appoint-
ed minister  at  the
court  of  the  elector  of
Treves.  He  assisted
in  the  congress  at
Hanover  in  1752,  and
in  1753  prevented  at
Mannheim  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty  between
Maria  Theresa  and  the  Emperor  Charles  VII.  He
was  ambassador  to  Constantinople  in  1754-'68,  and
in  1771-'74  at  the  court  of  Sweden,  assisting  at
Stockholm  in  the  revolution  in  favor  of  Gustavus
III.  Louis  XVI.  appointed  him  secretary  of  for-
eign relations,  8  June,  1774.  Out  of  friendship  for
Benjamin  Franklin,  he  gave  secret  aid  to  the  colo-
nists through  the  agency  of  Caron  de  Beaumarchais,
and  exerted  his  influence  to  induce  the  king  to  sign
a  treaty  of  commerce  and  alliance  with  the  United
States.  His  task  was  the  less  easy  as  he  had  to
overcome  the  scruples  of  the  king,  the  opposition
of  the  queen  and  of  the  prime  minister,  Count  de
Maurepas.  and  especially  the  objections  of  the  sec-
retary of  the  treasury,  Necker,  who  predicted  bank-
ruptcy and  a  revolution  for  its  consequence.  Ver-
gennes,  supported  by  the  young  nobility  and  the
philosophers, furnished Caron de Beaumarchais


r-e^7^orVl4


with  funds,  arms  and  ammunition,  and  supplies
for  the  colonists,  sent  to  Philadelphia  Gerard  de
Rayneval  as  ambassador,  and  wrote  the  articles  of
the  treaty  of  alliance  that  was  signed,  6  Feb.,  1778.
He  composed  also  the  famous  manifesto  to  the  for-
eign powers  in  which  Louis  XVI.  justified  his  ac-
tion in  recognizing  the  so-called  rebels  of  America,
and  negotiated  also  the  articles  of  the  treaties  of
peace  that  were  signed  at  Paris,  3  Sept.,  1783,  be-
tween Great  Britain  on  the  one  hand  and  France
and  Spain  on  the  other.  Besides  these  treaties,  Ver-
gennes  negotiated  those  of  Soleure  with  the  confed-
eration of  Switzerland,  28  May,  1777;  of  Teschen
with  Emperor  Joseph  II.,  13  May,  1779,  which  settled
the  question  of  succession  to  Bavaria;  of  10  Nov.,
1785,  with  Germany,  which  saved  Holland  from  an
invasion;  and  the  treaty  of  commerce  with  England,
25  Sept.,  1786.  He  addressed  to  Louis  XVI.  a
"  Memoire  historique  et  politique  sur  la  Louisiane,"
which  was  published  after  his  death  (Paris,  1802).

VERHUEN,  Jacobus  (vair-oo-en),  Dutch  his-
torian, b.  in  Leyden  in  1709;  d.  there  in  1777.  He
was  educated  in  the  university  of  his  native  city,
entered  the  Jesuit  order  when  he  was  twenty-five
years  old,  and  was  sent  to  Mexico,  where,  after
learning  the  Indian  dialects,  he  labored  for  about
twenty-five  years  in  the  northern  missions.  When
the  Jesuits  were  expelled  from  the  Spanish  do-
minions he  returned  to  his  native  city,  where  he
died.  He  wrote  in  Dutch  a  valuable  narrative,
which  is  preserved  in  manuscript  in  the  library  of
Leyden.  A  French  translation  was  published
under  the  title  "  Notice  sur  les  missions  etablies
par  la  Compagnie  de  Jesus  dans  la  province  du
Mexique,  suivie  d'un  essai  historique  et  geogra-
phique  sur  la  Californie,  et  de  plusieurs  documents
originaux"  (2  vols.,  Amsterdam,  1782).

VERMILYE,  Thomas  Edward,  clergyman,  b.
in  New  York  city,  27  Feb.,  1803.  He  studied  at
Yale  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary,  but
was  not  graduated.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  by
the  presbytery  of  New  York  in  1826,  was  pastor  of
a  Presbyterian  church  in  New  York  city,  then  of
the  Congregational  church  at  West  Springfield,
Mass.,  in  1829-'34,  and  of  the  Reformed  Dutch
church  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1834-'9.  Since  1839
he  has  had  charge  of  one  of  the  Collegiate  Re-
formed churches  in  New  York  city. — His  son,
Ashbel  Green,  clergyman,  b.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,
in  1822,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  New
York  in  1840  and  at  New  Brunswick  theological
seminary  in  1841.  He  was  ordained  by  the  presby-
tery of  Albany  in  1845,  and  was  pastor  at  Little
Fails,  N.  Y.,  in  1845-50,  at  Newburyport,  Mass.,  in
1850-'63,  at  Utica.  N.  Y,  in  1863-71,  and  at  Sche-
nectady in  1871-'6.  Having  been  appointed  chap-
lain of  the  Marine  chapel,  Antwerp,  Belgium,  he
went  to  that  country  in  March,  1879.  Among
other  sermons  he  published  "  Historical  Sermon  at
Centennial  of  First  Presbyterian  Church,  New-
buryport" (1856).  —  Thomas  Edward's  brother.
Robert  George,  educator,  b.  in  New  York  city,  3
March,  1813 ;  d.  in  Lyme,  Conn.,  5  July,  1875.  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1831.  Hb  was  a  teacher
of  classics  in  the  College  grammar-school  for  sev-
eral years,  and,  with  Dr.  Charles  Anthon,  was  ap-
pointed adjunct  professor  of  Greek  and  Latin  in
Columbia  college  in  1837.  In  the  mean  time,  hav-
ing studied  theology,  he  was  licensed  by  the  pres-
bytery of  New  York  in  April,  1838,  preached  in  the
Duane  street  church,  New  York,  in  1838-'9,  was

Sastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  at  German  Valley,
f.  J.,  in  1843-'6,  and  of  the  Congregational  church
at  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  in  1846-57.  He  was  a  member
of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Hamilton  college  in


280


VERMONT


VEROT


1850-'7,  and  in  the  latter  year  became  professor  of
theology  in  East  Windsor  theological  institute,
which  chair  he  retained  till  his  death.  He  pub-
lished a  few  sermons  and  addresses,  and  left  in
manuscript  his  courses  of  theological  lectures.

VERMONT,  Eloi  Lemercier  Beausoleil
(vair-mong),  Marquis  de,  West  Indian  soldier,  b.  in
Basse-Terre,  Guadeloupe,  in  1762;  d.  in  Paris,
France,  21  Sept.,  1832.  He  became  ensign  in  the
Santo  Domingo  regiment  in  1778,  and  served  in
the  war  of  1778-'83,  being  at  the  capture  of  Tobago
and  in  the  division  of  the  Duke  de  Saint  Simon  at
Yorktown  in  1781.  He  was  promoted  colonel,
commanded  the  French  forces  in  Guadeloupe  from
1788  till  1793,  and  repressed  with  the  utmost  sever-
ity the  revolutionary  troubles  in  the  island.  Being
besieged  in  Pointe  a  Pitre  by  the  insurgents,  he
sustained  their  attacks  for  several  months,  but
when  he  fell  short  of  ammunition  the  city  was
taken.  Vermont  and  his  principal  officers  were  to
be  shot  on  the  next  day,  when  a  British  squadron
appeared  off  the  coast  and  the  admiral  demanded
their  surrender.  After  much  discussion  this  was
agreed  to  by  the  chief  of  the  rebels,  Gen.  Pelagaud ;
but,  as  the  feeling  of  the  negroes  ran  extremely
high  against  Vermont,  extraordinary  precautions
were  taken  to  prevent  his  murden  lie  was  dis-
guised and  placed  on  board  a  boat  entirely  covered
with  black  cloth,  which  was  towed  through  the
French  fleet.  Armed  boats  lined  the  way,  and  the
sentries  repeated  the  cry,  "  By  order  of  the  republic,
let  the  covered  boat  pass."  This  dramatic  episode
has  been  selected  as  a  subject  by  both  English  and
French  painters  and  poets.  Vermont  was  trans-
ported to  England,  where  he  rejoined  the  royal
family.  He  returned  to  Guadeloupe  in  1812,  was
promoted  major-general  and  commander-in-chief
of  the  island  in  1815,  lieutenant-general  in  1826,
and  appointed  governor  of  Guadeloupe  in  1827,
but  declined.  He  died  unmarried,  and  his  enor-
mous fortune  was  divided  among  his  numerous
heirs,  thus  scattering  one  of  the  largest  estates  in
South  and  Central  America.

VERNON,  Edward,  British  naval  officer,  b.  in
Westminster,  England,  12  Nov.,  1684;  d.  at  his
seat  of  Nacton,  Suffolk,  29  Oct.,  1757.  His  father,
James  Vernon,  had  been  secretary  of  state  under
William  and  Mary  from  1697  till  1700.  Edward  was
educated  at  Westminster  school  and  at  Oxford,  and
obtained  a  commission  in  the  navy  in  1702.  He  was
engaged  in  the  expedition  under  Admiral  Hopson

which  destroyed  the
French  and  Spanish
fleets  off  Vigo,  12
Oct.,  1702;  in  the
capture  of  Gibral-
tar, 23  July,  1704;
and  in  the  sea-fight
off  Malaga  on  13
Aug.  of  the  same
year.  He  became
a  rear-admiral  in
1708,  and  was  in  ac-
tive service  till  1727,
when  he  was  elected
to  parliament  for
Penryn.  In  the  suc-
ceeding parliament,
lasting  from  1734
till  1741,  he  repre-
sented Portsmouth.
He  distinguished
himself  in  the  ranks  of  the  opposition,  and.  declar-
ing in  parliament,  in  1739,  that  Puerto  Bello,  on
the  Spanish  main,  could  be  taken  with  six  ships,


t.n


&r?urri.


the  ministry  took  him  at  his  word  and  gave  him
the  command  of  six  men-of-war,  with  the  rank  of
vice-admiral  of  the  blue.  He  appeared  before
Puerto  Bello  with  his  small  fleet,  22  Nov.,  1739,
which  he  captured  after  an  assault  of  one  day,  with
a  loss  of  only  seven  men.  This  success  secured
him  unbounded  popularity.  He  next  took  and
destroyed  Fort  Chagres,  on  the  Isthmus  of  Darien,
and  in  January,  1741,  sailed  from  Jamaica  with
twenty-nine  ships  of  the  line  and  eighty  smaller
vessels,  having  on  board  15,000  sailors  and  12,000
soldiers,  four  battalions  of  which  were  from  the
British  colonies  north  of  Carolina.  After  cruising
in  search  of  the  French  and  Spanish  fleets,  Vernon
determined  to  attack  Cartagena,  the  most  strongly
fortified  port  in  South  America,  and,  appearing
before  it  on  4  March,  was  repelled  with  great  loss,
which  was  augmented  by  a  pestilence.  He  attrib-
uted the  failure  of  the  expedition  to  the  fact  of
his  not  being  in  sole  command,  which  opinion  the
public  evidently  shared,  as  the  disaster  did  not
seem  to  diminish  his  popularity  in  England.  He
planned  an  expedition  against  Panama  in  1742,
was  made  an  admiral  in  1745,  and  was  charged
with  guarding  the  coasts  of  Kent  and  Sussex
against  an  expected  attack  by  Prince  Charles  Ed-
ward Stuart.  His  name  was  stricken  from  the  list
of  admirals,  11  April,  1746,  in  consequence  of  a
quarrel  with  the  admiralty.  In  1741  he  was  elected
to  parliament  from  Penryn,  Rochester,  and  Ips-
wich, but  chose  to  stand  for  the  last-named  place,
for  which  he  was  again  returned  in  1747  and  1754.
Tobias  George  Smollett  served  in  the  Cartagena
expedition  as  a  surgeon's  mate,  and  gave  a  graphic
description  of  it  in  M  Roderick  Random  "  and  in
his  "  History  of  England."  Lawrence  Washington,
elder  brother  of  Gen.  Washington,  who  also  par-
ticipated in  the  expedition,  regarded  Admiral  Ver-
non with  great  friendship,  and  named  his  estate  in
Virginia,  Mount  Vernon  in  his  honor.  The  word
"  grog "  is  said  to  have  been  first  applied  by  the
sailors  of  his  fleet  to  the  diluted  rum  with  which
they  were  served,  in  allusion  to  his  grogram  trou-
sers. During  the  closing  years  of  his  life  he  lived
in  retirement.  He  published  "  New  History  of  Ja-
maica, from  the  Earliest  Account  to  the  Taking
of  Porto  Bello  "  (London,  1740) ;  "  Original  Papers
relating  to  the  Expedition  to  Panama"  (1744);
and  pamphlets  on  naval  subjects  (1746).  See  "  The
Life  of  Admiral  Vernon  by  an  Impartial  Hand"
(London,  1758),  and  "  Memorial  of  Admiral  Ver-
non, from  Contemporary  Authorities,"  by  William
F.  Vernon  (1861).

VERNON,  Jane  Marchant  Fisher,  actress,  b.
in  Brighton,  England,  in  1796;  d.  in  New  York*
city,  4  June,  1869.  Her  maiden  name  was  Fisher.
She  made  her  debut  at  Drury  Lane  theatre,  Lon-
don, in  1817,  in  "  Lilliput,"  and,  coming  to  the
United  States  in  1827,  made  her  first  appearance
on  11  Sept.  at  the  Old  Bowery  theatre,  New
York,  as  Cicely  Homespun  in  "  The  Heir  at  Law."
She  afterward  became  attached  to  the  Old  Chat-
ham theatre,  and  in  1830  to  the  Park,  where  she
remained  till  1847,  and  gained  great  popularity.
She  was  long  connected  with  Wallack's  company,
making  her  last  appearance  as  Mrs.  Sutcliffe  in
"School,"  5  April,  1869.  She  was  a  favorite,  an
excellent  personator  of  old  women,  and  possessed
a  cultivated  mind.  On  6  Oct.,  1827,  she  married
George  Vernon,  who  died,  13  June,  1830.

VEROT,  Augustine-,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Le
Puys,  France,  in  May,  1804;  d.  in  St.  Augustine,
Fla.,  10  June,  1876.  He  received  his  preparatory
education  at  a  classical  school  in  Le  Puys  and  in
1820  entered  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  Paris.


VERPLANCK


VERPLANCK


281


He  was  ordained  a  priest  on  20  Sept.,  1828,  and
shortly  afterward  became  a  member  of  the  Sulpi-
tian  order.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1830
and  was  appointed  professor  in  St.  Mary's  college,
Baltimore.  In  1853  he  was  made  pastor  of  Elli-
cott's  Mills,  where  he  became  noted  for  his  devo-
tion to  the  interests  of  the  slaves.  He  was  nomi-
nated vicar  apostolic  of  East  Florida  and  conse-
crated bishop  of  Danabe  in  partibus  on  25  April,
1858.  He  arrived  in  St.  Augustine  on  1  June,  and
at  once  proceeded  to  organize  congregations.
Bishop  Verot  was  among  the  first  to  make  known
the  advantages  of  Florida  as  afield  for  emigration,
and,  by  letters,  public  addresses,  and  answers  to  in-
quiries, he  did  much  to  attract  settlers  from  other
states  and  from  Europe.  As  there  were  only  three
priests  under  his  jurisdiction,  he  sought  clerical
aid  from  other  quarters  and  soon  had  priests  enough
for  his  new  congregations.  He  built  the  Church
of  St.  Louis  at  Tampa  and  restored  the  cathedral
of  St.  Augustine,  the  chapel  of  Nuestra  Seiiora  de
la  Leche,  and  the  old  Spanish  cemetery,  also  en-
larging the  Church  of  St.  Mary  at  Key  West,  be-
sides founding  churches  at  Mandarin  and  Orange
Spring.  He  was  translated  to  the  see  of  Savan-
nah in  July,  1861,  retaining  at  the  same  time  the
vicariate  of  East  Florida.  He  replaced  the  Roman
Catholic  church  at  Jacksonville,  which  had  been
destroyed  by  fire  during  the  occupation  of  the  city
by  the  U.  S.  soldiers  in  the  civil  war.  He  founded
many  missions,  and  at  St.  Augustine  organized
several  societies  among  the  colored  people.  He
opened  academies  for  young  girls  at  St.  Augustine,
Jacksonville,  Fernandina,  Mandarin,  and  Palatka,
under  the  care  of  the  Sisters  of  St.  Joseph,  and  in-
troduced the  Sisters  of  the  Holy  Names,  who  es-
tablished an  academy  at  Key  West.  In  Georgia
he  made  successful  efforts  to  repair  the  ravages  of
the  civil  war.  He  built  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Trinity  in  Savannah,  and  also  a  church  at  Albany.
He  opened  an  Ursuline  convent  and  school  in  Ma-
con, a  house  of  the  Sisters  of  Mercy  in  Columbus,
and  established  an  orphan  asylum  at  Savannah.
Bishop  Verot  had  a  high  reputation  as  a  theolo-
gian and  scholar,  and  his  influence  in  moulding  the
decrees  of  the  councils  of  Baltimore  and  in  the
council  of  the  Vatican  was  far-reaching.  A  series
of  letters  that  he  published  during  and  after  the
civil  war  in  the  "  Pacificator "  were  effective  in
promoting  peace  and  reconciliation.  He  was
transferred  to  the  bishopric  of  St.  Augustine  on
his  return  from  Rome  in  1870.  His  new  diocese
had  not  recovered  from  the  disasters  of  the  war,
and  he  made  several  lecture-tours  through  the
north  in  order  to  obtain  money  for  the  relief  of
his  people.  Bishop  Verot  published  a  catechism
which  is  accepted  as  an  authority  by  the  Roman
Catholics  of  the  United  States.  His  manuscripts
on  philosophy,  theology,  and  sacred  scripture
would,  if  published,  form  several  large  volumes.

VERPLANCK,  Daniel  Crommelin,  member
of  congress,  b.  in  Dutchess  countv,  N.  Y.,  in  1761 ;
d.  near  Fishkill,  N.  Y.,  29  March,  1834.  He  re-
ceived a  good  education,  served  in  congress  from
17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3  March,  1809,  and  was  first
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  for  Dutchess
county,  from  11  March,  1828,  till  16  Jan.,  1830.
He  took  great  interest  in  agriculture.  His  estate
at  Fishkill  had  been  in  the  possession  of  the  family
since  1682,  and  the  house,  which  was  erected  sev-
eral years  later,  is  still  standing.  It  is  a  one-story
building  of  stone  and  wood,  in  the  Dutch  style.
This  place  was  the  headquarters  of  Baron  Steuben
at  one  time,  and  in  it  Col.  Lewis  Nicola  proposed
to  make  Washington  a  king. (See  illustration.) —


His  son,  (Julian  Crommelin,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  6  Aug.,  1786;  d.  there,  18  March,  1870,
was  graduated
at  Columbia  in
1801,  being  the
youngest  bache-
lor of  arts  that
everreceivedhis
diploma  from
that  college.  He
afterward  stud-
ied law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the
bar  and  began
practice  in  New
York  city.  Soon
afterward  he
went  to  Europe,
where  he  passed
several  years  in
travel.  On  his
return  he  took
an  active  part
in  state  politics,
and  became  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1820.  In  1821  he
was  appointed  professor  of  the  evidences  of  re-
vealed religion  and  moral  science  in  the  Protest-
ant Episcopal  general  theological  seminary,  New
York  city,  and  retained  this  chair  four  years.  He
was  a  member  of  congress  from  1825  till  1833,  was
a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1838-'41,  and  was
for  many  years  president  of  the  board  of  commis-
sioners of  emigration. ,  He  was  one  of  the  vestry-
men of  Trinity  church,  New  York  city,  a  governor
of  the  City  hospital  in  1823-'65,  and  vice-chancellor
of  the  State  university  from  1855  till  his  death.
For  many  years  Mr.  Verplanck  was  president  of  the
Century  club,  and  prominent  in  the  annual  con-
ventions of  the  diocese.  He  published  an  anni-
versary discourse  on  the  earlv  European  friends
of  America  (New  York,  1818);  "The  Bucktail
Bards :  containing  the  State  Triumvirate,  a  Po-
litical Tale ;  and  the  Epistles  of  Brevet  Major
Pindar  Puff,"  being  political  pamphlets  chiefly
aimed  at  De  Witt  Clinton,  mayor  of  New  York
city  (1819);  "Proces  Verbal  of  the  Ceremony  of
Installation  "  (1820) ;  "Address  before  the  Ameri-
can Academy  of  Fine  Arts "  (1824) ;  "  Essays  on
the  Nature  and  Uses  of  the  Various  Evidences  of
Revealed  Religion  "  (1824) ;  "  Essay  on  the  Doc-
trine of  Contracts  "  (1825) ;  "  Discourses  and  Ad-


dresses on  Subjects  of  American  History.  Arts,  and
Literature"  (1833);  "Shakespeare's  Plays,  with
his  Life,  with  Critical  Introduction  and  Notes"
(3  vols.,  1847);  and  several  college  orations,  the
best  known  of  which  is  "  The  American  Scholar,"
delivered  at  Union  college  in  1836.  He  prepared
also  for  fifteen  years  nearly  all  the  annual  reports
of  the  commissioners  of  emigration,  and.  with  Will-


282


VERRAZANO


VERREN


iam  C.  Bryant  and  Robert  C.  Sands,  edited  the
"  Talisman,"  an  annual,  which  continued  three
years,  beginning  with  1827.  These  volumes,  con-
taining some  of  the  choicest  productions  of  their
authors,  were  republished  in  1833  with  the  title  of
"  Miscellanies  first  published  under  the  Name  of
the  '  Talisman.' " — His  cousin,  Isaac  A.,  jurist,  b.
in  Coeymans,  Albany  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  Oct.,  1812 ;  d.
in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  16  April,  1873,  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1831,  studied  law,  and  began  practice  in
Batavia,  N.  Y.,  in  1834.  He  went  to  Buffalo  in
1847,  was  elected  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  of
that  city  in  1854,  and  twice  re-elected,  and  by  the
choice  of  his  associates  was  made  chief.  As  a
member  of  the  convention  of  1867-'8  he  assisted
materially  in  the  revision  of  the  state  constitution.
VERRAZANO,  VERAZZANI,  or  VERRAZ-
ZANO,  Giovanni  de  (vay-rah-tsah'-ne),  Floren-
tine navigator,  b.  in  Yal  di  Greve,  near  Florence,
in  1470  ;  d.  either  in  Newfoundland  or  Puerto  del
Pico  in  1527. At  the  age  of  twenty-five  he  entered

the  French  mari-
time service  and
was  employed  in
voyages  of  dis-
covery. It  is  as-
serted in  the
French  annals
that  he  visited
the  northern
coast  of  Ameri-
ca as  early  as
1508,  but  no  ac-
count of  his  dis-
coveriesisknown
to  exist.  Later
he  was  employed
in  ravaging  the
Spanish  and  Por-
tuguese posses-
sions in  the  East
and  West  Indies,
and  soon  became  famous  as  a  corsair.  In  1521  he
secured  valuable  prizes  in  the  West  Indies,  and  he
captured  in  1522  the  treasure-ship  in  which  Hernan
Cortes  was  sending  home  the  rich  spoils  of  Mexico.
Toward  the  end  of  1523  he  left  Dieppe  on  the  frigate
"  La  Dauphine "  with  a  mission  from  Francis  I.,
king  of  France,  to  explore  the  coast  of  North  Ameri-
ca. He  sailed  from  Madeira,  17  Jan.,  1524,  and  ar-
rived in  February  off  the  coast  of  North  America.
For  three  months  he  explored  the  coast  from  30°  to
50°  north  latitude,  landed  at  a  point  near  Cape  Fear,
and,  coasting  northward,  discovered  New  York
and  Narragansett  bays.  He  landed  on  Newfound-
land, of  which  he  took  possession  in  the  name  of
the  king,  and  endeavored  to  find  a  passage  to  the
East  Indies  by  the  northwest.  On  his  return  to
Dieppe  he  wrote,  on  8  July,  a  memoir  to  Francis
I.,  relating  his  discoveries,  of  which  he  gave  a
somewhat  confused  description.  Very  little  is
known  of  the  remainder  of  Verrazano's  life.
References  to  the  French  annals  make  it  possible
that  he  was  killed  by  Indians  in  Newfoundland
during  a  subsequent  voyage  of  exploration.  It  is
known  that  he  communicated  to  persons  in  Eng-
land a  map  of  his  discoveries,  and  a  document
found  at  Rouen  in  1876  proves  that  he  executed  a
power  of  attorney  to  his  brother,  Geronimo  (Jeras-
me  de  Verasenne),  11  May,  1527,  before  sailing  to
the  East  Indies,  by  virtue  of  an  agreement  with
Admiral  Philippe  Chabot  and  the  famous  mer-
chant of  Dieppe,  Jean  Ango.  It  is  claimed  that
during  the  voyage  he  was  captured  on  the  southern
coast  of  Spain,  and  executed  at  Pico  as  a  privateer.


^Ja/VAJ \errcCjajUAsS


His  exploits,  capture,  and  execution  are  narrated
by  Pietro  Martire  d'Anghiera,  Bernal  Diaz  del
Castillo,  and  others,  who  call  him  Juan  Florin.  In
the  18th  century,  on  the  authority  of  Andres  Gon-
zalez Barcia,  in  his  "  Ensayo  Cronologico,  etc. "
(Madrid,  1723),  Juan  Florin  was  identified  with
Verrazano,  but  more  modern  authors  contest  the
identification.  Ramusio  published  in  his  collec-
tion in  1556  an  Italian  version  of  Verrazano's  let-
ter to  King  Francis  I. ;  and  Antonio  de  Herrera,  in
his  "  Decades,"  gives  extracts  from  the  letter,  say-
ing that  he  had  seen  the  original.  The  authentici-
ty of  the  letter  was  attacked  in  1864  by  Bucking-
ham Smith,  who  claimed  that  Esteban  Gomez,
pilot  of  Magellan,  was  the  first  to  visit  the  coast  of
Carolina  in  1525.  But  James  Carson  Brevoort,  in
"Verrazzano,  the  Navigator"  (New  York,  1874),
maintains  the  authenticity  of  the  letter,  which
Henry  C.  Murphy  rejects  as  spurious  in  his  "  Voy-
age of  Verrazzano,  a  Chapter  of  the  Early  Maritime
Discoveries  in  America  (New  York,  1875).  The
conclusion  is  not  yet  definitive,  as  George  W.  Greene
discovered  in  the  Strozzi  library  at  Florence  a
manuscript  copy  of  Verrazano's  letter,  varying
somewhat  in  text  from  the*  Ramusio  version,  and
containing  some  additional  paragraphs.  It  was
published  in  the  transactions  of  the  New  York
historical  society  for  1841.  Brevoort  gave  also  an
account  of  a  planisphere  that  is  preserved  in  the
Strozzi  library,  dated  1529,  signed  by  Geronimo
Verazzano,  in  which  he  calls  the  land  "Nuova
Gallia,  quale  discopri,  5  annos  fa,  Giovanni  de
Verazzano,  Fiorentino."  The  French  archives,
recently  searched  by  Ramee  for  his  "  Documents
inedits  sur  Jacques  Cartier  et  le  Canada,"  afford
proof  that  Verrazano  discovered  the  northern  coast
of  North  America.

VERREAU,  Hospice-Anthelme  Jean  Bap-
tiste,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in  LTslet,  Quebec,  6
Sept.,  1828.  He  was  educated  at  the  Seminary  of
Quebec,  taught  there  in  1847-'8,  was  principal  of
Sainte  Therese  college  in  1848-'56,  and  has  been
principal  of  Jacques  Cartier  normal  school,  Mon-
treal, since  1856.  He  was  ordained  a  priest  in
1851,  in  1873  was  commissioned  by  the  provincial
government  to  make  investigations  in  Europe  re-
garding Canadian  history,  and  made  extensive
notes  of  his  travels  and  researches,  which  were
published  in  1875. He  was  appointed  an  officer  of

Eublic  instruction  by  the  French  government.  He
as  published  "  Invasion  du  Canada "  (Montreal,
1873),  and  prefaces  and  notices  of  memoirs  of  the
historical  society.

VERREN,  Antoine,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mar-
seilles, France,  14  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
17  March,  1874.  He  studied  philosophy  and  the-
ology, was  graduated  in  Geneva,  Switzerland,  or-
dained a  minister  in  the  French  Protestant  church
in  August,  1825,  and  was  in  parochial  charge  at
Ferney,  Switzerland,  in  1825-'7.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  September,  1827,  and  was  called
to  the  rectorship  of  L'Eglise  du  St.  Esprit,  New
York  city,  which  post  he  held  during  his  life.  He
was  ordained  deacon  and  priest  in  September,  1828,
by  Bishop  Hobart,  and  was  professor  of  French
literature  in  Columbia  in  1832-'44.  A  new  church
edifice  was  built  on  the  corner  of  Franklin  and
Church  streets  in  1834;  the  interior  was  destroyed
by  fire  in  1839,  but  was  restored  in  1840.  Services
were  discontinued  in  this  building  in  1862,  and  a
new  building  was  erected  in  West  Twenty-second
street,  between  Fifth  and  Sixth  avenues.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Hobart  college  in
1860.  Dr.  Vetren  in  1831,  by  appointment,  revised
and  corrected  the  "  Book  of  Common  Prayer  "  in


VERRILL


VESEY


283


French,  for  the  use  of  congregations  in  the  United
States  that  have  services  in  that  language.  This
book  was  republished  in  Paris.

VERRILL,  Addison  Emory,  naturalist,  b.  in
Greenwood,  Me.,  9  Feb.,  1839.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard  in
1862,  where  he  specially  studied  natural  history
under  Louis  Agassiz.  In  1864  he  was  called  to
the  chair  of  zoology  in  Yale,  which  he  still  retains,
And  he  was  also  professor  of  entomology  and  com-
parative anatomy  in  the  University  of  Wisconsin
in  1867-70.  The  instruction  on  geology  in  the
Sheffield  scientific  school  of  Yale  is  under  his
■care,  and  since  1867  he  has  been  curator  of  zo-
ology in  the  Peabody  museum.  The  zoological
■collection  has  been  created  by  him,  and  it  now
ranks  as  one  of  the  host  in  this  country.  Since
1860  he  has  devoted  part  of  every  summer  to  col-
lecting and  studying  the  marine  animals  of  the
Atlantic  coast,  and  since  1871  he  has  had  charge
■of  the  dredging  of  marine  invertebrates  of  the
United  States  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  fish
■commission,  to  whose  reports  he  has  annually  con-
tributed an  account  of  his  work.  Prof.  Verrill  is
a  member  of  various  scientific  societies,  and  in  1872
was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.
The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Yale
in  1867.  He  has  made  original  investigations  on
corals,  mollusca,  annelids,  echinoderms,  tunicata,
and  bryozoa,  and  of  the  gigantic  cephalopods  of
Newfoundland.  His  bibliography  is  quite  large
and  includes  papers  in  the  "  American  Journal  of
Science  "  and  the  proceedings  of  various  societies
of  which  he  is  a  member.

VERSCHOOR,  Julius  Wilhelm  Van  (fair-
shore),  Dutch  navigator,  b.  in  Dordrecht  about
1575 ;  d.  there  in  1640.  He  sailed  as  rear-admiral
of  a  fleet  that  was  equipped  by  order  of  the  states-
general  of  Holland  and  Prince  Maurice  of  Nassau
for  an  expedition  against  Peru,  under  command  of
Admiral  Jacob  L'Hermite  Clerk,  which  left  Am-
sterdam, 29  April,  1623.  They  stopped  at  the  Cape
Verde  islands,  where  rich  prizes  were  secured,  and,
•on  1  Feb.,  1624,  made  Cape  Penas  on  Tierra  del
Fuego.  The  admiral  was  already  very  sick,  and
.after  July,  1623,  the  fleet  was  virtually  commanded
by  Vice- Admiral  Gheen  Huygen  Schapenham  and
Yerschoor.  On  2  Feb.  they  entered  the  Strait  of
Le  Maire,  and,  the  fleet  being  dispersed  by  winds,
Verschoor  discovered  Nassau  bay,  between  Navarin,
Hoste,  and  Wollaston  islands.  His  mathematician,
Johan  von  Walbeck,  made  a  chart  of  the  south-
eastern coast  of  Tierra  del  Fuego  and  the  Strait  of
Le  Maire,  which  was  at  that  time  the  most  authen-
tic map  of  the  extremity  of  South  America.  In
March,  1824,  Verschoor  was  detached  with  a  divis-
ion for  the  American  coast,  while  the  admiral
mailed  for  Juan  Fernandez.  Verschoor  joined  him
there,  and  the  fleet  attacked  Callao  on  12  May,
burning  thirty  merchant  vessels  in  the  harbor.  On
23  May,  Verschoor  was  sent  to  attack  Guayaquil,
which  he  partly  burned,  but  he  was  repelled  there
and  again  at  Pisco.  After  Hermite's  death,  2  June,
1624,  Schapenham  took  the  command-in-chief,  and,
in  opposition  to  Verschoor's  advice,  refused  to
attack  Callao  again,  which  could  have  been  easily
carried,  and  a  new  expedition  against  Pisco  was
decided  upon ;  but  the  Dutch  were  driven  back  on
26  Aug.,  owing  to  Schapenham's  ill-concerted
measures.  When  the  fleet  reached  the  coast  of
New  Spain,  Verschoor  secured  several  rich  prizes
and  was  ordered  to  sail  for  the  East  Indies,  Schap-
enham returning  by  way  of  Cape  Horn  to  the
Atlantic.  Verschoor  arrived  on  2  March  at  Ter-
nate,  in  the  Moluccas, and,  the  vessels  being  assigned


to  other  services,  he  returned  to  Holland  to  report
to  the  states-general.  His  secretary,  Hessel  Ger-
ritz,  published  "  Journal  van  de  Nassauche  Vloot "
(Amsterdam,  1626).  A  German  version,  with  ad-
ditional remarks,  was  made  by  Adolf  Decker,  who
had  served  as  captain  of  marines  in  the  expedition.
It  is  entitled  "Journal  oder  Tag- Register  der  Nas-
sauischen  Flotte"  (Strasburg,  1629).  De  Bry  pub-
lished a  later  version  of  it  in  his  "  Historic  Amer-
icana? "  (1634),  but  the  best-known  version  was
published  in  French  in  the  "  Recueil  des  voyages
de  la  Compagnie  des  Jndes."  Des  Brosses  gave
also  an  account  of  the  expedition  in  his  "  Voyages
aux  terres  australes,"  and  Capt.  James  Burney
published  an  English  translation  in  his  "  Voyages
to  the  South  Sea"  (London,  1811).

VERTIN,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Rudolf s-
werth,  Carniola,  17  July.  1844.  He  emigrated  to
the  United  States  in  1863  with  his  father,  and,
having  resolved  to  study  for  the  priesthood,  en-
tered the  theological  seminary  of  St.  Francis  at
Milwaukee,  Wis.  He  was  ordained  a  priest  on  31
Aug.,  1866,  by  Bishop  Baraga,  in  Marquette.  He
was  then  appointed  pastor  at  Houghton,  and  in
1871  transferred  to  Negaunee.  He  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Marquette  on  14  Sept.,  1879.  The  dio-
cese has  made  considerable  progress  under  his  ad-
ministration. It  contains  40  priests,  36  churches,  4
chapels,  and  68  stations.  There  are  11  convents,
an  academy.  10  parochial  schools,  and  2  orphan
asylums. The  Catholic  population  is  about  40,000.

VERY,  Jones,  poet,  b.  in  Salem.  Mass.,  28  Aug.,
1813;  d.  there,  8  May,  1880.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1836.  In  his  youth  he  made  several
voyages  to  Europe  with  his  father,  a  sea-captain.
He  was  a  teacher  of  Greek  at  Harvard  from  1836
till  1838,  was  licensed  as  a  preacher  by  the  Cam-
bridge (Unitarian)  association,  and,  though  never
ordained  over  a  congregation,  preached  occasion-
ally. He  published  "Essays  and  Poems"  (Boston,
1839).  A  complete  edition  of  Mr.  Very's  essays
and  poems,  with  a  biographical  notice  of  the  au-
thor by  James  Freeman  Clarke,  was  published
(Boston,  1886).  His  poetry  is  characterized  by  re-
markable purity  and  delicacy  of  thought  and  great
ease  and  simplicity  of  style. — His  brother,  Washing-
ton, clergyman,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  in  1815  ;  d.  there
in  1853,  wrote  hymns  and  poems  for  the  press. —
His  sister,  Lydia  Louisa  Anna,  poet,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  2  Nov.,  1823,  from  1845  till  1875  taught  in
the  schools  of  her  native  city.  She  shares  the  po-
etical gift  of  her  family,  and  contributed  poems  to
various  Boston  and  Salem  newspapers  while  en-
gaged in  teaching.  As  an  artist  Miss  Very  has
produced  excellent  pictorial  illustrations  for  chil-
dren's stories.  She  has  published  "  Poems  "  (An-
dover,  1856)  and  children's  books.

VESEY,  Denmark,  conspirator,  b.  about  1767;
d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  2  July,  1822.  He  was  an
African  of  great  physical  strength  and  energy,  who
had  been  purchased  in  St.  Thomas,  when  fourteen
years  old,  by  a  sea-captain  of  Charleston,  S.  C,
whom  he  accompanied  in  his  voyages  for  twenty
vears,  learning  various  languages.  He  purchased
his  freedom  in  1800,  and  from  that  time  worked  as
a  carpenter  in  Charleston,  exercising  a  strong  in-
fluence over  the  negroes.  For  four  years  he  taught
the  slaves  that  it  would  be  right  to  strike  a  blow  for
their  liberty,  comparing  their  situation  to  that  of  the
Israelites  in  bondage,  and  repeating  the  arguments
against  slavery  that  were  made  in  congress  by
speakers  on  the  Missouri  compromise  bill.  In  con-
junction with  a  negro  named  Peter  Poyas,  he  or-
ganized a  plot  for  a  general  insurrection  of  slaves
in  and  about  Charleston,  which  was  disclosed  by  a


284


VESEY


VETCH


negro  whom  one  of  the  conspirators  approached  on
25  May,  1822.  Several  thousand  slaves  from  neigh-
boring islands,  organized  in  military  formations
and  provided  with  pikes  and  daggers,  were  to  ar-
rive in  canoes,  as  many  were  accustomed  to  do  on
Sunday,  and  with  one  stroke  take  possession  of
the  city,  the  forts,  and  the  shipping  in  the  harbor.
Nearly  all  the  slaves  of  Charleston  and  its  vicin-
ity, many  from  remoter  plantations,  and  a  large
number  of  whites,  were  in  the  plot.  The  leaders
that  were  first  arrested  maintained  such  secrecy
and  composure  that  they* were  discharged  from
custody,  and  proceeded  to  develop  their  plans.  An
attempt  was  made  to  carry  them  out  on  16  June,
but  the  insurrection  was  promptly  suppressed.
At  length,  on  the  evidence  of  informers,  the  chief
conspirators  were  arrested  and  arraigned  for  trial
on  19  June.  The  two  courts  were  organized  under
a  colonial  law,  and  consisted  each  of  two  lawyers
and  five  freeholders,  among  whom  were  William
Drayton,  Robert  Y.  Hayne,  Joel  R.  Poinsett,  and
Nathaniel  Hay  ward.  Denmark  Vesey  showed  much
dialectic  skill  in  cross-examining  witnesses  by  coun-
sel and  in  his  final  plea.  He  and  five  of  the  ring-
leaders were  hanged  first,  and  twenty-nine  others
on  later  dates,  all  save  one  keeping  up  to  the  end
their  calm  demeanor  and  absolute  reticence,  even
under  torture.  On  the  day  of  Vesey's  execution  a
second  effort  was  made  to  rouse  the  blacks,  but
two  brigades  of  troops,  on  guard  day  and  night,
were  sufficient  to  deter  them  from  action.  The
slaves  were  ready,  however,  to  embrace  the  first
opportunity,  and  re-enforcements  of  United  States
troops  were  sent  in  August  to  guard  against  a  re-
newal of  the  insurrection.

YESEY,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Braintree,
Mass.,  in  1674;  d.  in  New  York  city,  18  July,  1746.
He  entered  Harvard,  and  was  graduated  in  1693,
after  which  he  began  the  study  of  theology  in  Bos-
ton. He  officiated  as  lay  reader  in  Hempstead,
Queens  co.,  N.  Y.,  during  1695-'6,  and  was  invited
by  Gov.  Fletcher  and  the  magistrates,  vestrymen,
and  wardens  vto  become  rector  of  the  new  congre-
gation in  New  York,  known  as  Trinity  church,
and  "  to  have  the  care  of  souls  in  the  city  of  New
York  "  so  soon  as  he  took  orders.  The  vestry  en-
gaged to  pay  his  expenses,  and  he  embarked  for
England  early  in  1697.  He  was  ordained  in  Au-
gust- of  the  same  year,  and  returned  immediately
to  this  country.  He  was  inducted  into  the  new
church  as  soon  as  it  was  finished,  13  March,  1698.
Gov.  Fletcher  made  a  grant  to  the  church  of  a  tract
of  land  for  a  term  of  years,  known  as  "  The  King's
Farm,"  subject  to  rent,  which,  however,  was  not
exacted.  Fletcher's  successor,  the  Earl  of  Bello-
mont,  by  requiringthe  rent,  stirred  up  a  violent
controversy  with  Rector  Vesey ;  but  Lord  Corn-
bury,  who  succeeded  as  governor  in  1701,  restored
the  farm  to  the  church.  About  1712  the  bishop
of  London,  Dr.  Compton,  appointed  Mr.  Vesey  his
commissary,  which  proved  to  be  a  laborious  and
troublesome  office,  and  led  to  several  protracted
and  unpleasant  controversies.  He  discharged  his
various  duties  with  zeal  and  earnestness,  and  as
the  Venerable  society  for  the  propagation  of  the
gospel  furnished  him  with  assistant  ministers,
school-masters,  and  teachers,  he  was  able  to  give  an
impetus  to  the  Church  of  England  in  New  York
city,  which  placed  it  in  the  foremost  rank,  and
secured  to  its  successor,  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  the  strong  position  that  it  holds  to  the
present  day.  His  last  report  as  commissary  to  the
Venerable  society  in  1746  showed  the  result  of  long
and  faithful  labors,  and  spoke  of  "twenty-two
churches  flourishing  and  increasing  in  his  juris-


diction." Mr.  Vesey  was  an  able  preacher,  but  he
left  nothing  in  print.  His  portrait  is  among  the
collections  of  parish  rectors  in  the  vestry-room  of
Trinity  chapel,  New  York  city.  Vesey  street,  in
the  same  city,  was  named  in  his  honor.

VEST.  George  Graham,  senator,  b.  in  Frank-
fort, Ky.,  6  Dec.  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Cen-
tre college  in  1848,  and  in  the  law  department  of
Transylvania  university  in  March,  1853.  Begin-
ning practice  in  central  Missouri,  he  was  chosen  a-
presidential  elector  on  the  Democratic  ticket  in
1860,  and  in  the  same  year  was  elected  to  the  Mis-
souri house  of  representatives.  In  the  -legislative
debates  of  the  session  of  1861  he  was  an  ardent
supporter  of  southern  views.  He  relinquished  his
seat  in  order  to  take  his  place  in  1863  as  a  repre-
sentative from  Missouri  in  the  Confederate  senate,
of  which  he  was  a  member  for  two  years.  After
the  downfall  of  the  Confederacy  he  resumed  the
practice  of  law  in  Sedalia,  Mo.,  whence  he  re-
moved in  1877  to  Kansas  City,  Mo.  He  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  taking  his  seat  on  18
March,  1879,  became  prominent  by  his  powers  as
a  debater  and  orator,  and  was  re-elected  for  the
term  ending  3  March,  1891.

VETCH,  James,  British  engineer,  b.  in  Had-
dington, Scotland,  13  May,  1789 ;  d.  in  London,
England,  7  Dec,  1869.  He  was  educated  at  Wool-
wich military  academy,  served  as  an  officer  of  en-
gineers in  the  peninsular  war,  and  after  conduct-
ing the  ordnance  survey  in  the  Shetland,  Orkney,
and  Hebrides  islands  for  three  years,  went  to-
Mexico  in  1824,  and  for  the  next  eleven  years
managed  the  silver-mines  of  Real  del  Monte  and
Bolanos.  While  a  resident  of  Mexico  he  con-
structed roads  and  other  public  works,  and  began
to  survey  and  map  the  country.  After  his  return
to  Great  Britain  he  was  employed  in  important
drainage  works  and  harbor  improvements,  and
held  high  offices  under  the  government  connected
with  his  profession.

VETCH,  Samuel,  colonial  governor,  b.  in  Edin-
burgh, Scotland,  9  Dec,  1668 ;  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 30  April,  1732.  He  was  the  son  of  William
Vetch,  a  minister
in  Edinburgh,  was
educated  there  and
at  the  College  of
Utrecht,  Holland,
and  accompanied
William,  Prince  of
Orange,to  England,
5  Nov.,  1688.  He
afterward  served
with  credit  in  Flan-
ders in  the  war
against  France,  re-
turned to  England
at  the  peace  of  Rys-
wick  in  1697,  and  in
1698  was  appointed
one  of  the  seven
councillors  of  the
"  colony  of  Caledo-
nia" at  Darien  and
proceeded  thither.
(See  Paterson,  William.)  He  accompanied  Pater-
son  as  far  as  New  York  when  the  latter  was  on  his-
way  to  England  to  report  to  the  directors  of  the
Darien  scheme,  and  afterward  went  to  Albany,
engaged  in  trade  with  the  Indians,  and  on  20  Dec,
1700,  married  Margaret,  daughter  of  Robert  Liv-
ingston. In  1705  he  was  sent  as  a  commissioner
from  Gov.  Joseph  Dudley,  of  Massachusetts,  to
Quebec  with  proposals  for  a  treaty  between  Cana-


o/am.  fahrf


VETHAKE


VEUILLOT


285


■da  and  New  England ;  but,  having  failed,  he  went
to  England  in  1708,  and  with  the  full  authoriza-
tion of  the  colony  of  New  York  proposed  to  Queen
Anne  the  seizure  of  Canada.  The  queen  regarded
the  proposal  with  ,  favor  and  forwarded  by  Col.
Vetch  her  instructions  to  the  colonial  governors  to
aid  in  rendering  the  project  effective.  On  landing
at  Boston  he  laid  his  instructions  before  the  gov-
ernor and  council  of  Massachusetts,  and  also  for-
warded similar  documents  to  the  governors  of
Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  New  York,  New  Jer-
sey, and  Pennsylvania.  In  consequence  of  the
non-arrival  of  the  fleet  that  was  promised  by  the
queen,  the  expedition  against  Canada -was  aban-
doned. Returning  to  Boston,  he  called  a  meeting
of  prominent  citizens,  at  which  it  was  decided  to
fit  out  an  expedition  for  the  capture  of  Port  Royal
(now  Annapolis),  Nova  Scotia,  and  at  the  same
time  a  requisition  was  made  for  men-of-war  to  as-
sist in  the  enterprise.  The  expedition  was  com-
manded by  Sir  Francis  Nicholson,  Col.  Vetch  be-
ing adjutant-general,  and  after  the  capitulation
of  Port  Royal,  2  Oct.,  1710,  the  latter  remained
as  governor  of  the  conquered  colony.  Gov.  Vetch
next  sent  a  delegation  to  the  French  governor-
general  at  Quebec,  the  Marquis  de  Vaudreuil,  to
announce  that  Acadia  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of
the  British  and  to  offer  an  exchange  of  prisoners
that  had  been  captured  at  Annapolis  for  British  sub-
jects that  were  then  in  Montreal  and  Quebec.  Noth-
ing came  of  this ;  but  Vetch  and  his  small  garrison,
who  had  held  precarious  possession  of  the  conquered
province,  were  finally  relieved  from  the  fear  of  re-
prisals on  the  part  of  the  French  and  Iroquois  by  the
treaty  of  Utrecht,  11  April,  1713.  Shortly  afterward
he  was  removed  from  the  governorship  of  Nova
Scotia  in  consequence  of  his  great  zeal  for  George  I.,
soon  after  whose  accession  he  was  restored  to  his
post ;  but  he  was  soon  removed  again.  The  cause
of  his  second  removal  is  unknown,  though  it  is
surmised  that  his  harsh  treatment  of  the  plotting
priests  and  the  people  of  the  province  was  the
chief  reason.  After  his  departure  from  Annapolis
he  went  to  Boston,  annoyed  the  war  and  state  de-
partments with  his  claims  for  back-pay,  and  peti-
tioned the  king  to  be  allowed  £3,000  a  year  till  he
had  been  provided  with  a  post  in  America  as  had
been  promised.  Receiving  neither  the  post  nor
the  money,  he  returned  finally  to  England,  where
he  was  residing  in  1719.  He  was  a  man  of  great
natural  ability  and  formed  for  command,  but  preju-
diced in  politics  and  religion.  A  manuscript  jour-
nal covering  the  Port  Royal  period  is  in  the  pos-
session of  Mrs.  James  Speyers,  of  New  York,  as  is
also  the  portrait  by  Sir  Peter  Lely,  which  has  been
engraved  for  the  first  time  for  this  work.  See
"  An  Historical  and  Statistical  Account  of  Nova
Scotia,"  by  Thomas  C.  Haliburton  (Halifax,  1829) ;
"  Journal  of  the  Voyage  of  the  Sloop  Mary  "  (1701 ;
new  ed.,  with  introduction  and  notes  by  Edmund
B.  O'Callaghan,  New  York,  1866) ;  "  History  and
General  Description  of  New  France,"  by  Pierre
Francois  Xavier  de  Charlevoix,  translated  with
notes  by  John  G.  Shea  (New  York,  1866-'72) ;  and
"  An  Acadian  Governor,"  by  James  Grant  Wilson,
in  "  International  Review  "  (November,  1881).

VETHAKE,  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Essequibo
county  (now  united  with  Demerara),  British  Guiana,
in  1792 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  16  Dec,  1866.  He
was  brought  to  the  United  States  by  his  parents  at
the  age  of  four  years,  was  graduated  at  Columbia
in  1808,  and  afterward  studied  law.  In  1813  he  be-
came instructor  in  mathematics  and  geography  at
Columbia,  and  later  in  the  same  year  professor  of
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Queen's


college  (now  Rutgers).  He  went  to  Princeton  in
1817  as  professor  of  the  same  sciences,  and  for  the
first  year  of  chemistry  also,  resigning  in  1821  in
order  to  take  the  chair  of  mathematics  and  natural
philosophy  in  Dickinson  college,  where  he  remained
till  1829.  He  taught  the  same  subjects  in  the  Uni-
versity of  the  city  of  New  York  from  1832  till
1835,  and  then  filled  for  a  year  the  office  of  presi-
dent of  Washington  college,  Lexington,  Va.,  taking
the  chair  of  intellectual  and  moral  philosophy.  He
was  professor  of  mathematics  from  1836  till  1855,
and  subsequently  till  1859  of  intellectual  and
moral  philosophy  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, being  chosen  vice-provost  in  1846,  and  pro-
vost in  1854.  From  1859  till  his  death  he  occupied
the  chair  of  the  higher  mathematics  in  the  Phila-
delphia polytechnic  college.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1836.  He  pub-
lished "  Principles  of  Political  Economy "  (Phila-
delphia, 1838;  2d  ed.,  1844),  besides  contribu-
tions to  periodicals.  He  edited,  with  additions,
John  R.  McCulloch's  '"Dictionary  of  Commerce"
(Philadelphia,  1843),  and  a  supplemental  volume  of
the  "Encyclopaedia  Americana,"  which  was  in
great  part  written  by  himself  (1847).

VETROMILE,  Eugene,  Italian  missionary,  b.
in  Gallipoli,  Italy,  22  Feb.,  1819;  d.  there,  21  Aug.,
1880.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1840  and
entered  Georgetown  college,  Georgetown,  D.  G,
where  he  finished  his  studies  and  obtained  his  first
knowledge  of  the  Abnaki  language.  He  was  then
ordained  a  priest,  and  assigned  to  missionary  duty
at  Port  Tobacco,  Md.  He  was  afterward  professor
in  a  college  at  Washington,  and  in  1858  was  given
charge  of  the  mission  of  Old  Town,  Me.  His  labors
among  the  Penobscot  Indians  for  more  than  a
quarter  of  a  century  affected  his  health,  and  he  re-
turned to  Italy  shortly  before  his  death.  He  pub-
lished "  Travels  in  Europe,  Egypt,  Palestine,  and
Syria,"  and  "  The  Abnaki  and  their  History."  His
knowledge  of  the  Indian  dialects  made  him  widely
known.  Rev.  Edward  Ballard,  of  Brunswick,  Me.,
says,  in  the  "  Collections  of  the  Maine  Historical
Society,"  that  Vetromile  was  the  only  person  who
could  "read  a  verse  of  John  Eliot's  Indian  Bible  with
a  true  understanding  of  the  words  of  that  transla-
tion." His  chief  Indian  works  are  "  Aln'amby  Uli
Awikhigan,"  a  volume  that  comprises  devotions  and
instructions  in  various  Abnaki  dialects ;  "  Ahiami-
hewintuhangun,"  a  collection  of  hymns  set  to
music ;  "  Vetromile  Wewessi  Ubibian,"  an  Indian
Bible  ;  and  an  "  Abnaki  Dictionary  "  in  three  folio
volumes,  which  occupied  him  twenty-one  years.

YEUILLOT,  I)6sir§  (vuh-yo),  French  ex-
plorer, b.  in  Cahors  in  1653 ;  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, in  1732.  He  was  employed  till  1684  as  in-
spector-general of  the  establishment  of  the  West
Indian  company  in  the  Antilles,  Louisiana,  and
Alabama,  and  made  an  exploration  of  Mississippi
river  in  1683,  penetrating  as  far  as  the  Missouri,  and
returning  by  way  of  Arkansas.  As  he  was  a  Prot-
estant, he  was  forced,  after  the  revocation  of  the
edict  of  Nantes  in  1685,  to  renounce  the  land-grant
that  he  had  obtained  in  upper  Mississippi  and  for
the  settlement  of  which  he  was  preparing  an  ex-
pedition, and  eventually  he  left  France  and  took
refuge  in  London,  where  he  obtained  employment
in  the  office  of  the  secretary  of  foreign  relations.
He  wrote  "  Description  des  cotes  de  la  Louisiane,
avec  un  voyage  fait  le  long  du  cours  du  fleuve
Mississipi"  (2  vols.,  London,  1708),  and  "Notice
historique  sur  la  Compagnie  du  Mississipi  et  sur
les  etablissements  fondes  par  les  Francais  en
Louisiane"  (2  vols.,  1714),  which  was  translated
into  English  (171o).


286


VEYTIA


VICK


VEYTIA,  Mariano  (vay-ee'-te-ah),  Mexican  his-
torian, b.  in  Puebla  in  1718;  d.  there  in  1779.  He
was  a  precocious  child,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen
years  took  his  first  degree  in  philosophy.  Three
years  afterward  he  was  graduated  in  civil  law,  and
in  1737,  notwithstanding  his  youth,  he  was  admitted
as  lawyer  of  the  audiencia  by  a  special  permission
of  the  viceroy.  In  May,  1737,  he  sailed  for  Spain,
and  at  that  time  he  began  to  write  a  detailed  nar-
rative of  his  travels.  In  two  years  he  visited
Spain,  France,  and  Holland,  and  afterward  he
went  to  Italy,  Portugal,  England,  and  Palestine.
In  1742  he  became  a  member  of  the  military  order
of  Santiago  in  Madrid,  and  he  entered  the  convent
of  San  Agustin  in  Puebla  in  1768.  About  that
time  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  the  ancient
history  of  Mexico,  but  at  the  time  of  his  death  he
had  finished  only  three  volumes  of  his  work,  em-
bracing the  period  from  the  earliest  occupation  of
Anahuac  till  the  middle  of  the  15th  century,  which
are  noteworthy  for  the  fidelity  of  his  researches.
Clavigero,  who  by  this  time  had  finished  his  "  Storia
Antica  del  Messico,"  wrote  to  Veytia  to  obtain  notes
on  the  period  anterior  to  the  beginning  of  his  his-
tory. Veytia's  work  was  published  under  the  title
of  "  Historia  Antigua  de  Mexico  "  (Mexico,  1836),
by  Jose  Ortega.  Veytia  left  also  a  manuscript  en-
titled "Historia  ecclesiastiea,"  which  has  not  yet
been  published,  and  translated  the  "  Cartas  provin-
ciates de  Pascal."

VEZIN,  Hermann,  actor,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  29  March,  1829.  He  was  intended  for  the  bar
by  his  father,  a  German  -  American  merchant  of
Philadelphia,  and  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1847.  Desiring  to  follow  the
stage,  he  went  to  England,  and,  after  some  prepa-
ration, obtained,  through  the  recommendation  of
Charles  Kean,  an  engagement  at  a  theatre  in  York.
He  appeared  in  London  under  Kean's  management
in  1852,  and  two  years  later  played  principal  parts
in  a  tour  through  Great  Britain.  He  visited  the
United  States  in  1857-'8 ;  but  his  style  of  acting
was  not  popular.  Returning  to  England  in  1859,
he  played  Hamlet,  Macbeth,  Othello,  King  John,
Louis  XL,  and  Shylock  in  1859.  After  his  mar-
riage to  Mrs.  Charles  Young  in  1863,  he  travelled
with  his  wife,  and  in  the  following  year  they  pro-
duced Westland  Marston's  comedy  of  "  Donna
Diana  "  at  the  Princess's  theatre,  London.  He  was
successful  in  "The  Man  o'  Airlie,"  "  The  Rightful
Heir,"  '•  Life  for  Life,"  and  various  comedies,  new
and  old,  and  in  1875  added  greatly  to  his  reputation
by  his  rendering  of  Jacques  in  "  As  You  Like  It."
On  4  Feb.,  1876,  he  played  Macbeth  at  Drury  Lane
theatre  for  the  benefit  of  the  Philadelphia  centen-
nial exhibition,  and  subsequently  he  played  Dan'l
Druce  in  William  S.  Gilbert's  drama  of  that  name,
crdated  the  part  De  Talde  in  "  The  Danicheffs "
and  Schelm  in  "  Russia  "  in  1877,  and  was  success-
ful in  the  characters  of  Sir  Giles  Overreach,  the
Duke  of  Alva  in  "  Fatherland,"  and  Iago  in  a  re-
vival of  "  Othello  "  in  March,  1878.  In  1885  he
played  the  Shepherd  in  an  open-air  representation
of  John  Fletcher's  "  Faithful  Shepherdess."

VIALE,  Agostinho  (ve-ah'-lay),  Brazilian  ex-
plorer, b.  in  Sao  Paulo  about  1620 ;  d.  in  the
Ay  mores  country  in  1667.  In  1664  he  was  named
by  Afonso  VI.  administrator-general  of  the  mines
in  Brazil,  with  power  to  pardon  all  offenders  that
had  sought  a  refuge  in  the  forests.  The  general
belief,  since  justified,  was  that  rich  mines  existed
in  the  interior  of  Brazil,  and  the  government,  in-
tending to  make  use  of  the  geographical  knowledge
that  had  been  obtained  by  the  outlaws  during  their
wandering  through  the  forests,  had  decided  to  win


their  services  by  the  offer  of  a  complete  pardon.
Viale  left  Sao  Paulo  at  the  head  of  50  soldiers  and
150  Indians,  and  entered  the  vast  forests  of  the
province  of  Matto  Grosso,  but,  after  journeying  with
great  difficulties  for  thirteen  months  through  the
territory  of  the  warlike  Aymores,  he  wrote  to  Sao
Paulo  in  1666  for  re-enforcements,  announcing
that  he  soon  hoped  to  reach  the  much-talked-of
emerald  mines.  He  was  joined  by  a  few  more
soldiers,  and,  resuming  the  march,  entered  marshes
where  the  greater  part  of  his  host  died  from  ma-
larial fever,  and  Viale  fell  a  victim  to  the  dis-
ease just  in  sight  of  the  Serra  das  Esmeraldas.
His  lieutenant,  Barbalho  Bezena,  brought  back  the
remnants  of  the  expedition  to  Sao  Paulo.  Viale's
journey  afforded  some  knowledge  of  the  vast  coun-
tries of  the  interior.

VI ANA,  Francisco  de  (ve-ah'-nah),  Spanish  mis-
sionary, b.  in  the  province  of  Alava  about  1530 ;  d.  in
Coban,  Guatemala,  in  1609.  He  entered  the  Domini-
can order  at  Salamanca,  and  about  1560  went  to
New  Spain,  where  he  was  attached  to  the  missions
of  the  province  of  Chiapa.  For  more  than  forty
years  he  labored  among  the  natives  of  the  sur-
rounding district,  whose  language  he  acquired,  and
became  superior  of  the  convent  of  Coban,  rebuild-
ing that  and  the  one  at  Zacapula.  He  left  some
valuable  manuscripts,  which  were  preserved  in  the
library  of  the  order  at  Chiapa.  The  principal  are
"  Arte  de  la  Lengua  de  Vera  Paz,"  "  Vocabulario
de  la  Lengua  de  Vera  Paz,"  numerous  religious
works,  sermons,  and  a  catechism  in  that  language,
and  a  "Tratado  de  los  deberes  de  la  Justicia,
para  gobierno  de  Alcaldes  mayores  de  Indias,"  all
of  which  were  translated  into  Quiche  by  Friar
Dionisio  Zuniga,  of  the  province  of  Guatemala.

VIANA,  Miguel  Pereira  (ve-ah'-nah).  Viscount
da,  Brazilian  author,  b.  in  Evora,  Portugal,  in
1779 ;  d.  in  Bahia  in  1838.  He  received  his  edu-
cation in  the  college  for  nobles  at  Lisbon,  and
afterward  obtained  a  place  in  the  office  of  the  sec-
retary of  state,  whom  he  accompanied  to  Brazil
with  the  royal  family  in  1806.  There  he  was  ap-
pointed secretary  of  the  commission  to  mark  the
frontier  between  the  Portuguese  and  the  Spanish
possessions,  became  councillor  of  state,  sided  in
1822  with  the  party  of  Dom  Pedro,  who  made  him
a  viscount,  and  was  appointed  in  1828  civil  judge
at  Bahia.  He  wrote  "  Romanceiro  historico  do  rio
Amazonas  "  (Bahia,  1825) ;  "  Ensaio  historico  e  de-
scriptivo  do  rio  Amazonas  "  (1829) ;  and  "  Descripcao
geral  da  provincia  da  Bahia  "  (1832).

VICENTE  Y  BENNAZAR,  Andres  (ve-then'-
tay),  Spanish  geographer,  lived  in  the  second  half
of  the  15th  century.  He  published  at  Antwerp
in  1476  four  charts,  representing  the  four  conti-
nents of  the  world.  Unlike  Columbus,  he  did  not
imagine  America  to  be  part  of  Asia,  but  repre-
sented it  as  a  distinct  continent  and,  what  is  more
remarkable,  as  a  continent  divided  into  two  parts
by  an  isthmus.  This  publication,  at  so  early  a
date,  and  before  Columbus's  discovery,  has  caused
much  discussion.  Some  authorities  think  that
Vicente  y  Bennazar  had  arrived  at  the  conclusion
that  America  existed  as  a  distinct  continent;
others,  that  such  an  opinion  was  general  among
scientific  circles  in  the  15th  century ;  and  still
others,  that  he  only  intended  to  reproduce  the  lost
Atlantis  spoken  of  by  Plato  and  the  ancients.

VICK,  James,  horticulturist,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
England,  23  Nov.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
16  May,  1882.  He  received  a  common-school  edu-
cation, came  early  to  the  United  States,  gained  a
practical  knowledge  of  gardening  and  floriculture,
i  wrote  on  these  subjects,  and  in  1850  became  pub-


VICKERS


VICTOR


287


lisher  of  the  "  Genesee  Farmer  "  in  Rochester,  and
in  1853  also  of  the  "  Horticulturist,"  issued  in  Al-
bany. He  severed  his  connection  with  these  pe-
riodicals in  1855  in  order  to  embark  in  the  novel
enterprise  of  retailing  seeds  through  the  medium
of  the  U.  S.  mails.  This  business  grew  to  large
proportions  and  found  many  imitators.  In  con-
nection with  it  he  published  "Vick's  Monthly
Magazine  "  in  1878-'82,  the  "  Flower  and  Vegetable
Garden,"  and  an  annual  "  Floral  Guide."  He  de-
veloped new  varieties  of  plants  by  cultivation  or
cross-fertilization,  notably  double  phlox,  white
gladiolus,  and  fringed  petunia.  Mr.  Vick  was  a
corresponding  member  of  the  English  royal  horti-
cultural society,  and  for  several  years  secretary  of
the  American  pomological  convention.

VICKERS,  George,  senator,  b.  in  Chestertown,
Kent  co.,  Md.,  19  Nov.,  1801 :  d.  there,  8  Oct..  1879.
He  acquired  a  classical  education,  was  employed
in  the  county  clerk's  office  for  several  years,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1832,  and  practised
in  Chestertown.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Whig
national  convention  of  1852.  When  the  civil  war
began  he  was  appointed  major-general  of  the  state
militia.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the
McClellan  ticket  in  1864,  and  one  of  the  vice-presi-
dents of  the  Union  convention  of  1866.  In  1866-'7
he  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate.  In  1868  he
was  elected  U.  S.  senator  for  the  term  that  ended
on  3  March,  1873,  in  the  place  of  Philip  F.  Thomas,
who  had  been  denied  the  seat.  He  took  a  con-
spicuous part  in  the  debate  on  the  15th  amendment
to  the  Federal  constitution.

VICO,  Domingo  de  (ve'-co),  Spanish  mission-
ary, b.  in  Ubeda,  Andalusia,  in  1485 ;  d.  in  1555.
He  became  a  Dominican  in  his  native  city,  studied
in  Salamanca,  and  in  1516  came  to  this  country
with  Bartolome  de  las  Casas.  He  first  labored
among  the  Indians  in  Cuba,  but  later  passed  to
New  Spain,  and  accompanied  Las  Casas  in  his
journeys  through  Nicaragua,  Guatemala,  and  Peru.
When  the  latter  was  appointed  bishop  of  Chiapa
in  1544,  Vico  became  his  vicar-general  and  sec-
onded him  in  his  zeal  for  the  welfare  of  the  In-
dians. Later  he  was  prior  of  the  convents  of
Guatemala,  Chiapa,  and  Coban,  founded  the  city
of  San  Andres,  and  became  in  1552  the  first  bishop
of  Vera  Paz.  He  was  killed,  during  a  journey
through  his  diocese,  by  Lacandon  Indians.  His
works  include  several  treatises  on  theology  in  the
Vera  Paz,  Cakchiquel,  Quiche,  and  Lacandon  dia-
lects, and  "  Historia  de  los  Indios,  sus  fabulas,  su-
persticiones,  costumbres,  etc.,"  which  the  historian
Antonio  Remesal  says  is  remarkable  for  its  pictures
of  Indian  life,  but  the  manuscript  of  which  was
not  found  when  the  libraries  of  the  convents  came
into  the  possession  of  the  state.

VICTOR,  Orville  James,  author,  b.  in  San-
dusky, Ohio,  23  Oct.,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at
the  seminary  and  theological  institute  in  Norwalk,
Ohio,  in  1847.  After  contributing  to  "  Graham's
Magazine "  and  other  publications  for  several
years,  he  adopted  journalism  as  a  profession  in
1851,  becoming  associate  editor  of  the  Sandusky
"  Daily  Register,"  which  he  left  in  1856  to  edit
the  "  Cosmopolitan  Art  Journal."  Removing  to
New  York  in  1858,  he  assumed  charge  also  of  the
"  United  States  Journal,"  conducting  both  periodi-
cals till  1860.  He  next  edited  the  "  Dime  Bio-
graphical Library,"  to  which  he  contributed  lives
of  John  Paul  Jones,  Anthony  Wayne,  Ethan
Allen,  Israel  Putnam,  Winfield  Scott,  Abraham
Lincoln,  and  Giuseppe  Garibaldi,  and  wrote  for
newspapers  and  periodicals  in  New  York  city.  In
1863-4  he  visited  England,  and  there  published  a


pamphlet  entitled  "  The  American  Rebellion  ;  its
Causes  and  Objects :  Facts  for  the  English  Peo-
ple." He  edited  in  1866-7  "Beadle's  Magazine
of  To  -  Day,"  in  1870-'l  the  weekly  "  Western
World,"  and  in  1872-'80  the  "New  York  Satur-
day Journal."  He  published  during  the  civil  war,
in  annual  volumes,  a  "  History  of  the  Southern
Rebellion  "  (4  vols.,  New  York,  1862-'5),  which  for
several  years  he  has  been  engaged  in  revising  for
republication  in  two  volumes.  His  other  works
are  "  Incidents  and  Anecdotes  of  the  War  "  (1863),
and  a  "  History  of  American  Conspiracies  "  (1864).
— His  wife,  Metta  Victoria,  author,  b.  near  Erie,
Pa.,  2  March,  1831 ;  d.  in  Hohokus,  IS.  J..  26  June,
1886,  was  educated  in  the  female  seminary  at
Wooster,  Ohio.  When  thirteen  years  old  she
published  a  story  called  "The  Silver  Lute,"  and
from  that  time  till  her  eighteenth  year  was  a  con-
tributor to  the  "  Home  Journal "  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Singing  Sibyl "  or  in  connection  with  her
elder  sister,  Frances  A.  Fuller,  the  two  being
known  as  "  The  Sisters  of  the  West."  In  1856
she  married  Mr.  Victor,  and  in  1859-'61  she  edited
the  "  Home  Monthly  Magazine."  A  volume  of
poetry  by  the  two  sisters  was  published  under  the
title  of  "  Poems  of  Sentiment  and  Imagination,
with  Dramatic  and  Descriptive  Pieces"  (New
York,  1851).  She  published  individually  "  Fresh
Leaves  from  Western  Woods"  (Buffalo,  1853);
"  The  Senator's  Son  :  a  Plea  for  the  Maine  Law  "
(Cleveland,  1853),  which  had  a  large  circulation  in
England  as  well  as  in  the  United  States;  and
"  Two  Mormon  Wives :  a  Life-Story  "  (New  York.
1856  ;  London,  1858).  She  was  the  author  of  "  The
Gold-Hunters,"  "  Maum  Guinea,"  and  others  of
Beadle  and  Co.'s  "  Dime  Novels."  Among  her
numerous  contributions  to  the  periodical  press
were  series  of  humorous  sketches  under  the  signa-
ture of  "  Mrs.  Mark  Peabody,"  entitled, "  Miss  Slim-
mens' Window"  and  "Miss  Slimmens' Boarding-
House,"  which  were  issued  in  book-form  (New
York,  1859).  The  story  of  "  Too  True "  was  re-
printed from  "Putnam's  Magazine " (1868).  Her
novels  "  Dead-Letter  "  and  "  Figure  Eight  "  were
issued  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Seeley  Register  "
(1868).  Her  last  novel  was  "  Passing  the  Portal  "
(1877).  She  subsequently  wrote  humorous  books  en-
titled "  The  Bad  Boy's  Diary  "  (1880),  "  The  Rasher
Family  "  (1884), "  The  Naughty  Girl's  Diary  "  (1884),
and  "Blunders  of  a  Bashful  Man "  (1885),  which
were  issued  anonymously.  —  Her  sister,  Frances
A  nretta,  author,  b.  in  Rome,  N.  Y.,  23  May,  1826,
was  educated  at  the  seminary  in  Wooster,  Ohio,
and  spent  some  time  in  the  eastern  states  in  prepa-
ration for  a  literary  life,  but  after  her  return  to  the
west  and  her  marriage  in  1853  to  Jackson  Barrett,
of  Michigan,  she  rarely  wrote  for  publication.  In
1862  she  married  for  her  second  husband  Henry  C.
Victor,  a  1st  assistant  engineer  in  the  U.  S.  navy
and  a  brother  of  Orville  J.  Victor,  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  emigrated  to  the  Pacific  coast,  where  novel
scenes  impelled  her  to  resume  literary  work.  She
contributed  to  the  newspapers  of  San  Francisco
and  Sacramento,  and  to  the  "  Overland  Monthly  "
from  its  first  publication.  After  removing  to  Ore-
gon in  1865,  she  published  "The  River  of  the
West:  Life  and  Adventures  in  the  Rocky  Moun-
tains and  Oregon "  (Hartford,  1870),  which  was
followed  by  "  All  Over  Oregon  and  Washington  "
(San  Francisco,  1870).  She  has  also  published
"  The  New  Penelope,  and  other  Stories "  (1877),
and  furnished  to  Hubert  H.  Bancroft's  "  Pacific
Coast  Histories "  chapters  on  Oregon  and  other
states  and  territories  of  the  northwest,  besides
parts  of  the  "  History  of  California."


288


VICTORIA


VICUNA


ZC*fr?^C&


VICTORIA,  Guadalupe,  Mexican  president,  b.
in  Tamazula,  Durango,  in  1789 ;  d.  in  Perote,  21
March,  1843.  His  real  name  was  Manuel  Felix
Fernandez,  but  after  the  death  of  Father  Hidalgo

in  1811  the  young
man  abandoned  the
College  of  San  II-
defonso.  where  he
was  studying,  and
joined  the  patriotic
ranks,  adopting  as
a  symbol  of  victory
and  in  honor  of  the
Virgin  of  Guada-
lupe the  name  by
which  he  is  known
in  history.  He  first
took  part  under
Morelos  in  the  siege
of  Oaxaca  in  1812,
and  in  1814  was  ap-
pointed by  the  con-
gress of  Chilpanzin-
go  to  organize  the
revolution  in  the
province  of  Vera  Cruz,  where  he  soon  became
feared  by  the  Spaniards,  as  his  guerillas  captured
nearly  every  supply-train  that  left  the  port  for
Jalapa  and  the  interior.  In  1817,  when  the  insur-
rection was  nearly  everywhere  subdued,  and  only
Gen.  Guerrero  held  out  in  the  southwest,  Victoria,
unable  to  reach  the  latter  chief,  hid  for  nearly  four
years  in  the  mountains  of  Vera  Cruz,  till  the
proclamation  of  the  plan  de  Iguala  in  1821.  Then
he  joined  Iturbide,  but,  as  an  ardent  lover  of  lib-
erty, was  coldly  received  by  the  latter,  who  was
already  maturing  his  plan  of  monarchy,  and  after
its  establishment  Victoria  was  imprisoned.  In
December,  1822,  when  Santa-Anna  proclaimed  the
republic  in  Vera-Cruz,  Victoria,  who  had  escaped,
joined  him  and  was  appointed  commander  of  the
city.  After  Iturbide's  fall,  Victoria  was  elected,
on  1  April,  1823,  to  the  executive  council,  but,
being  occupied  in  the  siege  of  San  Juan  de  Ulua,
he  did  not  take  his  seat  till  July,  1824.  Shortly
afterward  he  was  elected  the  first  constitutional

g resident  of  Mexico,  taking  possession  on  10  Oct.
[is  government  was  specially  notable  for  the  rec-
ognition of  the  republic  by  England,  the  aboli-
tion of  slavery,  which  took  place  on  16  Sept.,
1825,  the  surrender  of  the  Spanish  garrison  of  the
castle  of  San  Juan  de  Ulua,  18  Nov.,  1825,  and  the
first  arrival  of  American  settlers,  under  Stephen
Austin,  in  Texas  in  the  beginning  of  1828.  The
last  year  of  his  administration  was  disturbed  by
several  revolutions  that  were  caused  by  the  rivalry
between  the  Scotch  and  York  lodges,  and  the  weak-
ness of  Victoria  gave  them  free  play.  On  1  April,
1829,  he  delivered  the  executive  to  his  successor,
and  retired  from  public  life  without  appearing
again  in  politics.  He  was  a  well-meaning  and
honest  man,  but  of  feeble  character  and  easily  con-
trolled by  his  political  followers.

VICTORIA,  Pedro  de,  b.  in  Seville,  Spain,  in
the  latter  part  of  the  16th  century.  He  entered
the  Jesuit  order,  and  was  sent  when  young  to
America  The  perils  to  which  he  was  exposed  in
a  shipwreck  on  the  coast  of  Peru,  and  his  subse-
quent adventures  among  the  natives,  form  the
subject  of  his  work  "  Naufragio  y  peregrination  en
la  costa  del  Peru "  (1610).  A  Latin  translation
was  published  in  1647  under  the  title  of  "Argo-
nauticorum  Americanorum  Historia."

VICTORIA,  Tomas,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Victoria,  Alava,  early  in  the  16th  century ;  d.  in


Guatemala  in  1600.  He  entered  the  Dominican
order  and  came  to  New  Spain,  where  he  learned
the  Tarasco  language,  and  was  employed  in  the
missions  of  the  Pacific  coast.  Soon,  he  acquired
the  Zapotec  language  and  went  to  the  province  of
Oaxaca,  and  later  to  that  of  Guatemala,  where  he
obtained  such  success  that  he  was  called  the  Elias
of  Guatemala.  He  left  "Arte  y  Sermones  doc-
trinales  en  lengua  de  Zacatula,"  and  several  relig-
ious tracts  in  manuscript  in  that  dialect  and  the
Quiche  language.

VICU$ A,  Manuel  (ve-coon'-yah),  Chilian  arch-
bishop, b.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  1778 ;  d.  in  Val-
paraiso in  1843.  After  acquiring  his  primary  edu-
cation, he  entered  the  College  of  San  Carlos,  and  in
a  short  time  was  graduated  in  theology.  Soon
afterward  he  entered  the  church,  and,  being  or-
dained priest,  travelled  through  the  country  as  a
missionary  with  other  young  ecclesiastics.  After
the  battle  of  Maypu  he  visited .  the  hospitals  and
personally  assisted  the  wounded  and  dying.  Hav-
ing inherited  a  fortune,  he  employed  a  part  of  it  in
the  construction  of  a  house  of  retirement.  In  1825
the  bishop  of  Santiago,  Jose  Santiago  Rodriguez,
was  exiled,  and  in  1830  Pope  Leo  XII.  promoted
Vicuna  to  the  bishopric,  in  which  office  he  labored
for  the  re-establishment  of  the  theological  semi-
nary. When  Santiago  was  declared  a  metropolitan
see.  the  government  presented  Vicufia  as  tlie  first
archbishop,  and  in  June,  1840,  Pope  Gregory  XVI.
confirmed  him.  Afterward  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress and  was  a  member  of  the  council  of  state.

VICUNA,  Pedro  Felix,  Chilian  journalist,  b.
in  Santiago  in  1806 ;  d.  there  in  1874.  He  received
an  excellent  education,  in  early  life  began  to  write
for  the  newspapers,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty-one
years  was  one  of  the  founders  and  the  first  editor-
in-chief  of  "  El  Mercurio,"  of  Valparaiso.  After-
ward he  successively  belonged  to  the  editorial  staff
of  "  El  Telegrafo  "'(1827) ;  "  El  Censor  "  and  "  La
Ley  y  la  Justicia"  (1828);  "La  Paz  Perpetua"
(1834) ;  "  El  Elector  "  and  "  El  Verdadero  Liberal  "
(1841) ;  *  El  Republicano  "  (1845) ;  and  "  La  Refor-
ma  "  (1847).  He  was  elected  to  the  senate  of  the
nation  in  1865,  and  in  that  body  was  the  author  of
the  law  that  abolished , imprisonment  for  debt  in
1870.  He  published  "  Unico  asilo  de  las  Republi-
cas  Hispano-Amerieanas  "  (Santiago,  1837) ;  "  El
Porvenir  del  Hombre  "  (1858) ;  and  "  La  Hacienda
Publica"  (1864). — His  son,  Benjamin  Vicufia-
Mackenna,  Chilian  historian,  b.  in  Santiago  in
1831 ;  d.  in  Santa  Rosa  del  Colmo,  25  Jan.,  1886,
attended  the  Lyceum  of  Santiago  and  the  National
institute,  and  studied  law  in  the  University  of
Chili,  but  in  1849  he  was  expelled  for  his  refusal
to  sign  a  congratulatory  address  to  the  secretary  of
justice.  There  was  such  indignation  at  this  arbi-
trary act  that  the  rector  reinstated  him  against  the
desire  of  the  government.  When  a  revolution  be-
gan in  Santiago,  20  April,  1851,  he  took  an  active
part  in  it,  and,  in  an  attempt  on  the  armory  of  the
Chacabuco  regiment  on  28  April,  he  was  made  a
prisoner  and  condemned  to  death,  but  escaped  and
fled  to  the  north  in  July.  He  participated  in  the
outbreak  in  Serena  on  7  Sept.,  and  was  appointed
revolutionary  governor  of  Illapel.  The  revolution
was  subdued  in  November,  and,  after  hiding  for  a
year  and  being  again  condemned  to  death,  he  sailed
in  1852  for  California.  He  travelled  through  the
United  States  and  Mexico,  visited  Canada,  and
in  July,  1853,  went  to  Europe,  where  he  remained
a  year  at  the  Agricultural  college  of  Cirencester,
studying  natural  science.  In  1855  he  travelled
through  Europe,  and  in  the  next  year  returned  to
Chili,  where  in  1856  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar


VIDAL


VIDAURRI


289


and  began  practice.  In  1858  he  founded  "  La
Asamblea  Constituyente,"  in  which  he  attacked  the
arbitrary  measures  of  the  government,  and  in  De-
cember he  was  arrested  in  a  public  meeting  and
imprisoned  for  about  six  months  in  the  penitentiary,
where  he  wrote  his  unpublished  work  "  Diego  de
Almagro."  In  June,  1859,  he  was  exiled  by  the
government  with  three  others,  who  had  taken  an
active  part  in  the  opposition.  He  visited  France
and  Spain,  searching  the  libraries  for  historical
manuscripts,  and  in  1861  went  to  Lima,  but  re-
turned soon  afterward  to  Chili.  In  1803  he  was
appointed  chief  editor  of  the  "  Mercurio,"  of  Val-

Saraiso,  and  in  1864  he  was  elected  deputy  to  the
rational  congress  for  Valdivia.  In  1865,  after  the
declaration  of  war  by  Spain  against  the  republic,
Vicufia-Mackenna  was  sent  to  Peru  and  the  United
States  on  a  confidential  mission,  founding  in  New
York  the  paper  "La  Voz  de  America,"  in  defence
of  the  South  American  republics.  Returning  to
his  own  country  in  1867,  he  was  again  elected  to
congress  for  Talca,  and  became  secretary  to  the
chamber  of  deputies.  In  1870  he  again  went  to
Europe,  where  he  acted  during  the  Franco-German
war  as  correspondent  of  the  " Mercurio"  in  Berlin
and  Paris.  Afterward,  in  the  archives  of  the  In-
dies in  Seville,  he  copied  documents  on  colonial
history,  acquiring  in  Valencia  the  manuscript  of
Father  Rosales's  "  Historia  de  Chile."  On  his  re-
turn in  1872  he  was  appointed  intendant  of  the
province  of  Santiago.  At  the  opening  of  the  war
with  Peru  he  became  editor  of  "  El  Nuevo  Ferro-
carril,"  and,  as  president  of  "  La  Sociedad  Protec-
tora,"  became  the  friend  of  the  soldiers  and  their
widows  and  orphans.  After  the  conclusion  of  the
strife  his  descriptions  of  it  became  well  known
for  their  impartiality.  He  wrote  "  El  Sitio  de  Chil-
ian en  1813 "  (Santiago,  1849) ;  "  La  Agricultura
Europea  aplicada  a  Chile  "  (London,  1854) ;  "  Le
Chili-'  (Paris,  1855) ;  " Tres  afios de  Viajes "  (Santi-
ago, 1856) ;  "  Ostracismo  de  los  Carreras  "  (1857) ;
"Revolucion  del  Peru  "(Lima,  1861);  "Ostracismo
de  O'Higgins"  (Santiago,  1862);  "Historia  de  la
Administration  de  Montt "  (5 vols.,  1862-3) ;  "  Vida
de  Diego  Portales  "  (2  vols.,  1862-3) ;  "  Historia  de
Santiago  "  (2  vols.,  1868) ;  "  Historia  de  Valparaiso  "
(2  vols.,  1868);  "  Francisco  Moyen,  6  lo  que  fue  la
Inquisition  en  America"  (1868;  English  transla-
tion, London,  1869) ;  "  La  Guerra  a  Muerte  "  (1869) ;
"  Historia  de  la  Jornada  del  20  de  Abril  1851  "
(1878) ;  "  Historia  de  las  Campafias  de  Arica  y
Tacna"  (1881);  "Historia  de  Tarapaca"  (1881);
"Mr.  Blaine"  (1881);  "La  Guerra  con  Espana"
(1883) ;  several  books  on  the  mineral  riches  of  Chili
(1883) ;  "  Album  de  la  Gloria  de  Chile "  (1883) ;
"  Dolores "  (1883) ;  "  Seis  afios  en  el  Senado  de
Chile"  (1884);  "Las  Islas  de  Juan  Fernandez"
(1884) ;  "  Viaje  a  traves  de  la  Immortalidad "
(1885) ;  and  "  Al  Galope  "  (1885).

VIDAL,  Alexander,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
Berkshire,  England,  4  Aug.,  1819.  He  accom-
panied his  father,  a  captain  in  the  royal  navy,  to
Canada  in  1834,  and  settled  in  Sarnia.  He  was  man-
ager of  the  Sarnia  branch  of  the  Bank  of  Upper
Canada  in  1852-66,  and  held  a  similar  post  in  the
service  of  the  Bank  of  Montreal  from  1866  till
1875,  when  he  resigned.  He  is  also  county  treas-
urer of  Lambton,  lieutenant-colonel  of  militia,  was
elected  chairman  of  the  Dominion  prohibitionary
convention  at  Montreal  in  September,  1875,  and
is  president  of  the  Dominion  alliance  for  the  total
suppression  of  the  liquor  traffic.  He  represented
the  St.  Clair  division  in  the  legislative  council  of
Canada  from  September,  1863,  till  1867,  and  became
a  member  of  the  Canadian  senate,  15  Jan.,  1873.
vol.  vi. — 19


VIDAURRE,  Manuel  Lorenzo  de  (ve-dah-
oor'-ray),  Peruvian  statesman,  b.  in  Lima  in  1773 ;
d.  there,  9  March,  1841.  He  was  graduated  in  law
at  the  University  of  San  Marcos,  and  became  audi-
tor of  the  Royal  audiencia  of  Cuzco  in  1810,  but
was  transferred  in  1820  to  the  audiencia  of  Puerto
Principe  in  Cuba,  and  soon  afterward  sent  to  Spain,
as  he  began  to  write  in  favor  of  South  American
independence.  Being  persecuted  for  his  liberal
ideas,  he  escaped  to  the  United  States  in  1822,  and
on  his  return  to  Peru  was  appointed  by  Simon
Bolivar,  in  April,  1824,  first  president  of  the  supe-
rior court  of  Trujillo,  and  in  1825  promoted  presi-
dent of  the  supreme  court  of  justice  of  the  repub-
lic. He  was  appointed  minister  plenipotentiary  of
Peru  for  the  general  American  assembly  of  Pana-
ma in  1825,  and  several  times  was  minister  of  for-
eign relations.  In  1838  he  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Orbegozo  minister  to  Ecuador  to  negotiate  her
neutrality  in  the  struggle  of  the  Peru-Bolivian  fed-
eration against  Chili  and  the  plots  of  Agustin  Ga-
marra,  and  on  the  accession  of  the  latter,  in  1839,
was  deprived  of  his  post  in  the  supreme  court.  He
was  the  author  of  the  Peruvian  civil  and  penal  codes
and  of  "  Plan  de  Peru,  dedicado  al  Libertador
Simon  Bolivar  "  (Paris,  1822) ;  "  Cartas  Americanas,
politicas  y  morales,  que  contienen  muchas  reflex-
iones  sobre  la  guerra  civil  de  las  Americas  "  (2  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1823) ;  and  "  Efectos  de  las  facciones
en  los  Gobiernos  "  (Lima,  1828).

VIDAURRI,  Santiago  (ve-dah-oor'-ree),  Mexi-
can soldier,  b.  in  the  province  of  Nuevo  Leon  in
1803 ;  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  8  July,  1867.  He
was  descended  from  a  wealthy  family  of  Indian
extraction,  received  a  good  education,  and  in  1826
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  he  soon  entered  poli-
tics, and,  after  filling  some  minor  offices,  took  part
in  the  civil  wars  in  Mexico.  He  had  obtained  the
rank  of  colonel  when,  toward  the  close  of  1852,  he
was  elected  governor  of  the  state  of  Nuevo  Leon,
and  when,  in  April,  1853,  Santa- Anna  returned  to
Mexico  and  declared  himself  dictator,  Vidaurri
protested.  As  he
was  gathering  the
militia,  Santa-An-
na appointed  Gen.
Pedro  Ampudia
military  chief  of
thenorthern  states;
but  Vidaurri  re-
fused to  recognize
his  authority,  and
when  the  revolu-
tion of  Ayutla  be-
gan, in  March,
1854,  he  joined  in
the  campaign  for
the  overthrow  of
Santa-Anna.  While
Juan  Alvarez  was
contending  against
the  latter  in  the
south,  he  took  the
field  in  the  north,  acting  independently  as  com-
manding general.  After  the  downfall  of  Santa-
Anna  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  in  the
junta  of  Cuernavaca,  4  Oct.,  1855;  but  Alvarez
having  been  preferred  to  him,  he  assumed  a  semi-
independent  position  and  decreed  the  confiscation
of  church  property  in  the  northern  central  states.
He  also  refused  to  submit  to  Alvarez's  successor,
Ignacio  Comonfort,  and  decreed,  in  February,  1856,
the  union  of  Coahuila  and  Nuevo  Leon,  proclaim-
ing himself  their  governor.  This  union  was  dis-
approved by  Comonfort,  who  ordered  an  army  of


fo?zi%a&o  <y&y<?u6xxi/


290


VIEIRA


VIEL


observation  under  Gen.  Parrocli  to  the  north,  when
Vidaurri,  under  pretence  of  protesting  against  the
tariff  and  the  tobacco-privilege,  recalled  the  depu-
ties of  Nuevo  Leon  from  congress,  and  was  ac-
cused of  an  intention  to  form  the  independent
republic  of  Sierra-Madre,  consisting  of  the  north-
western states.  Being  defeated  by  the  government
troops  at  Mier,  he  retired  to  Saltillo ;  but  after  re-
signing the  executive  of  Coahuila,  in  September,
1856,  he  was  re-elected  by  a  packed  legislature.
Afterward  he  was  more  successful,  and  Comonfort
signed  a  treaty,  on  18  Nov.,  1856,  which  left  Vi-
daurri in  undisputed  possession  of  the  two  states,
which  position  was  sanctioned  by  the  constituent
congress  of  1857.  Vidaurri  held  the  northern
states  against  Zuloaga  and  Miramon  during  the
war  of  reform.  In  the  summer  of  1861  he  entered
into  friendly  relations  with  the  secessionists  of
Texas,  and  on  the  invasion  of  Mexico  by  the  allied
powers  in  December,  1861,  he  declared  his  adhesion
to  the  national  cause,  and  served  for  some  time
against  the  French.  But  when  the  Republican
government  abandoned  the  capital,  on  31  May,
1863,  and  established  itself  in  San  Luis  de  Potosi.
differences  arose  between  Juarez  and  Vidaurri,  and
when  Juarez,  in  December  of  that  year,  retreated
before  the  advancing  French  toward  Monterey,
Vidaurri  opposed  his  entry  by  force.  Soon  after
the  French  forces  occupied  Monterey  in  1864,  Vi-
daurri was  induced  to  give  his  adhesion  to  the
empire,  and  he  was  rewarded  with  honors  and  ap-
pointed a  member  of  the  imperial  council.  In
the  latter  capacity  he  assisted  in  the  assembly  of
Orizaba,  26  Nov.,  1866,  where  he  was  the  leader  of
the  party  that  opposed  Maximilian's  abdication,
and  by  his  flattering  representations  induced  the
emperor  to  return  to  Mexico.  He  accompanied
Maximilian  to  Queretaro,  but  in  March,  1867,  was
sent  to  Mexico  with  Leonardo  Marquez  as  presi-
dent of  the  ministry  and  lieutenant  of  the  empire.
Disapproving  of  Marquez's  harsh  measures,  he  re-
signed, and,  unable' to  escape  at  the  occupation  of
the  capital  by  the  Liberal  forces,  21  June,  1867,  he
remained  in  hiding,  but  was  discovered  and  ar-
rested. He  was  tried  by  a  court-martial,  quickly
sentenced  to  death  as  a  traitor,  and  shot  in  the
square  of  Santo  Domingo.

VIEIRA,  Antonio  (ve-ay'-e-rah),  Portuguese
author,  b.  in  Lisbon,  6  Feb.,  1608;  d.  in  Bahia,  Bra-
zil, 18  July,  1697.  He  went  early  to  Brazil,  stud-
ied with  the  Jesuits  at  Bahia,  and  entered  their
order  in  1635.  He  learned  the  Indian  dialects,  but
was  refused  by  his  superiors  permission  to  engage
in  missionary  work,  and  in  1641  accompanied  to
Lisbon  Fernando  de  Mascarenhas,  son  of  the  vice-
roy of  Brazil.  He  preached  with  remarkable  suc-
cess before  the  king,  was  appointed  member  of  the
privy  council,  and  employed  in  several  diplomatic
missions.  In  1652  he  obtained  the  king's  consent
to  return  to  Brazil,  and  on  his  arrival  engaged  im-
mediately in  missionary  work  among  the  Indians
of  the  province  of  Para  and  of  the  basin  of  the
Tocantins.  He  endeavored  to  free  the  Indians,  and
denounced  the  labor  that  they  were  compelled  to

Eerforra  for  the  Portuguese.  The  latter  opposed
im  bitterly,  and,  being  threatened  with  imprison-
ment by  the  local  authorities,  he  sailed  for  Lisbon.
There  he  justified  himself  before  the  king,  who  is-
sued peremptory  orders  to  the  viceroy,  and  Vieira,
on  his  return  to  Brazil  in  1655,  was  henceforth
supported  by  the  governor  of  Maranhao.  During
the  following  six  years  the  Indians  enjoyed  rela-
tive freedom,  but  at  the  death  of  Joao  IV.  the  set-
tlers obtained  Vieira's  arrest,  and  he  was  taken  to
Lisbon  in  1661. The  regent,  Luisa  do  Gusman,


approved  his  conduct,  but  for  the  sake  of  policy  he
was  exiled  to  Coimbra  by  order  of  the  state  secre-
tary, Castelmenor.  Vieira  in  his  exile  constructed
an  ideal  Portuguese  empire  in  a  remarkable  work,
"  O  Quinto  Imperio  do  Mundo,"  of  which  he  cir-
culated a  few  copies.  They  were  seized  by  the  tri-
bunal of  the  Inquisition,  and  the  author  was  im-
prisoned from  1665  till  1667,  when  he  was  released
by  order  of  Pope  Alexander  VII.  and  greatly  hon-
ored in  Rome.  But  he  longed  to  return  to  Brazil,
and  in  1681  obtained  permission  to  labor  again
among  the  Indians.  He  was  appointed  visitor  and
provincial  of  the  Brazilian  missions,  which  posts
he  retained  till  his  death.  Vieira  was  the  most
celebrated  preacher  of  his  age,  and  is  considered  as
the  purest  and  most  eloquent  of  the  Portuguese
classic  authors.  His  works  include  "  Sermoes  *'  (16
vols.,  Lisbon,  1683);  "Historia  do  futuro"  (1718);
"  Cartas  "  (3  vols.,  1736) ;  and  "  Ecco  dos  voces
Saudosos"  (1757).  The  original  and  only  known
copy  of  "  0  Quinto  Imperio  do  Mundo,  is  pre-
served among  the  manuscripts  in  the  National
library  of  Paris.  "  Arte  de  furtar  "  (Amsterdam,
1652).  one  of  the  most  curious  and  popular  works
of  the  seventeenth  century,  is  also  attributed  to
him.  Biographies  of  Vieira  were  written  by  Fran-
cisco de  Fonseca  (Lisbon,  1734)  and  Antonio  de
Barros  (1746).

VIEIRA,  Joao  Fernandes,  Brazilian  patriot,
b.  in  Olinda  about  1600 ;  d.  in  Pernambuco  about
1660.  He  was  one  of  the  richest  proprietors  of  the
province  of  Olinda  when  that  port  was  captured
in  February,  1630,  but  when  the  East  India  com-
pany sent  out  Prince  Maurice,  of  Nassau,  as  gov-
ernor-general, Vieira.  with  other  proprietors,  qui-
etly submitted  to  the  new  government,  as  it  was
only  a  change  in  foreign  masters,  Portugal  being
then  under  Spanish  rule.  But  Portugal  recovered
her  independence  in  1640,  and  after  the  recall  of
the  Prince  of  Nassau  in  1643,  when  the  Dutch  be-
gan to  pursue  the  native  owners  with  vexatious
measures,  discontent  became  general.  Taking  ad-
vantage of  this  sentiment,  Vieira  put  himself  at
the  head  of  a  revolutionary  movement,  and  in
June,  1645,  with  a  small  army  of  badly  equipped
country  people,  attacked  the  outposts  of  Recife,
but  after  a  short  struggle  was  defeated.  The  in-
surrection, however,  spread  over  the  whole  coun-
try, Vieira  employed  his  resources  in  procuring
arms  and  ammunitions  for  the  revolutionary  forces,
and  with  untiring  energy  and  great  natural  tal-
ent harassed  the  Dutch  forces  in  numerous  en-
counters. He  was  not  well  supported  by  the  home
government  and  the  governors  of  the  other  Bra-
zilian colonies,  and  but  for  his  unwavering  reso-
lution the  province  would  have  been  conquered
again.  Amid  great  hardships  he  held  out  until
he  received  succor  from  Andre  Vidal  de  Negrei-
ros.  Soon  he  took  the  offensive,  and  after  the
two  battles  of  Os  Guarapes,  in  1648-'9,  the  Dutch
no  longer  dared  show  themselves  outside  the  forti-
fications of  Recife,  which  place,  after  the  capture
of  Fort  Milhon,  capitulated,  26  Jan.,  1654.  thus
ending  the  Dutch  dominion  in  Brazil.  Vieira,
as  the  first  instigator  of  the  insurrection  in  the
province  of  Pernambuco,  was  greatly  honored  by
the  people  and  court,  but  refused  all  recompense,
retiring  to  private  life.  Lately  a  monument  in
honor  of  his  memcry  and  that  of  Negreiros's  has
been  erected  in  Pernambuco.

VIEL,  fjtienne  Bernard  Alexandre,  clergy-
man, b.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  31  Oct.,  1736;  d.  in
the  College  of  Juilly,  France,  16  Dec,  1821.  He  be-
came a  member  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  labored
for  many  years  at  Attapakas,  La. He  translated


VIBLE

Fenelon's  "  Telemaqiie  "  into  Latin  verse,  and  pub-,
lished "  Miscellanea Latino-Gallica " (1816) and
French  translations  of  the  "A-rs  Poetica"  of  Hor-
ace and  of  some  of  his  epistles.

VIELE,  Arnaud  Cornelius,  colonist,  b.  in
Brabant,  Netherlands,  about  1620 ;  d.  in  New  York
city  about  1700.  He  came  to  this  country  with
his"  father  about  1630,  and  the  latter  erected  an
Indian  trading-house  at  Fort  Orange  (now  Albany,
N.  Y.).  Arnaud  grew  up  with  the  young  Indians
that  accompanied  their  chiefs  on  the  trading  expe-
ditions, and  the  friendships  that  he  formed  with
them  continued  for  half  a  century,  and  proved  a
lasting  benefit  to  the  colonists.  His  familiarity
with  the  dialect  and  character  of  the  Indians  led  to
his  becoming  an  interpreter  between  the  govern-
ment and  the  natives,  and  nearly  all  the  treaties
with  the  Indians  for  many  years  bear  his  signature.
Gov.  Thomas  Dongan  sent  'Viele  as  a  special  envoy
to  the  Iroquois,  and  Gov.  Jacob  Leisler  made  him
governor  of  the  Six  Nations.  He  was  at  the  coun-
cil of  Onondaga  when,  at  the  instigation  of  the
Canadian  authorities,  the  Iroquois  tribes  were  as-
sembled to  decide  whether  the  English  or  French
should  have  their  allegiance.  Upon  the  decision
depended  the  fate  of  the  colony,  and  had  it  not
been  for  the  long  friendship  of  the  Indians  with
Viele,  they  would  have  transferred  their  support
to  the  French. — His  kinsman,  John  Lndovickus,
lawyer,  b.  in  Washington  county,  N.  Y.,  6  June.
1788 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  19  Oct.,  1832.  entered
Union,  but  left  to  serve  in  the  war  of  1812,  then
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1812,  and
practised  in  Washington,  Rensselaer,  Saratoga,  and
Albany  counties.  He  was  elected  to  the  state  sen-
ate, and  was  associated  with  De  Witt  Clinton  in
the  legislation  concerning  the  Erie  canal.  In  1821
he  was  made  judge  of  the  court  of  errors,  and  in
the  case  of  the  Dutch  church  of  Albany  against
John  M.  Bradford,  Ihen  its  minister,  Samuel  Jones,
president  of  the  court,  whose  decisions  had  never
before  been  questioned,  delivered  an  elaborate
opinion  with  the  confident  expectation  that,  as
usual,  it  would  be  concurred  in.  Several  other
judges  gave  long  opinions  to  the  same  effect.
Judge  Viele,  the  youngest  member  of  the  court,
differed  from  them  and  the  chancellor,  and,  much
to  the  surprise  of  the  latter,  who  often  referred  to
the  case  as  his  only  legal  defeat,  the  court  decided
with  Judge  Viele.  He  was  appointed  inspector  of
the  New  York  state  militia  in  1819,  and  regent  of
the  University  of  the  state  of  New  York  in  1832.
On  the  visit  of  Lafayette  to  America,  Judge  Viele
was  chosen  as  the  orator  to  receive  him  on  his  visit
to  the  battle-field  of  Saratoga.  His  judicial  opin-
ions are  published  in  Cowan's  reports. — John  L.'s
son,  Egbert  Lndovickus,  engineer,  b.  in  Water-
ford,  N.  Y.,  17  June,  1825,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1847,  assigned  to  the  2d
infantry,  and,  joining  his  regiment  in  Mexico,  served
under  Gen.  Winfield  Scott.  He  was  then  given
duty  on  lower  Rio  Grande  river,  and  was  stationed
at  Ringgold  barracks  and  afterward  at  Fort  Mcin-
tosh. In  1853  he  resigned,  after  attaining  the  rank
of  1st  lieutenant  on  26  Oct.,  1850.  Pie  then  settled
in  New  York  city,  where  he  entered  on  the  practice
of  civil  engineering,  and  in  1854'-6  was  state  engi-
neer of  New  Jersey.  In  1856  he  was  appointed
chief  engineer  of  Central  park,  New  York,  and  pre-
pared the  original  plan  that  was  adopted.  Jour
years  later  he  became  chief  engineer  of  Prospect
park.  Brooklyn,  for  which  he  prepared  the  original
plan,  but  resigned  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war.  He  responded  to  the  first  call  for  volunteers,
and  conducted  an  expedition  from  New  Yoik  to


VIGER


291


Washington,  forcing  a  passage  up  Potomac  river.
After  serving  in  the  defences  of  Washington  as
captain  of  engineers  in  the  7th  New  York  regiment,
he  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers on  17  Aug.,
1861,  and  directed
to  form  a  camp
of  instruction  in
Scarsdale,  N.  Y.
In  April,  1862,  he
joined  the  South
Atlantic  expedi-
tion and  had
charge  of  the
forces  in  Savan-
nah river.  Gen.
Viele  command-
ed the  movement
that  resulted  in
the  capture  of
Fort  Pulaski,  and
also  took  Norfolk
and  its  navy-yard,
becoming  military
governor  of  that
city  from  its  capture  in  May,  1862,  until  October,
1863.  After  superintending  the  draft  in  northern
Ohio,  he  resigned  on  20  Oct.,  1863,  and  resumed  his
engineering  practice.  In  1883  he  was  appointed
commissioner  of  parks  for  New  York  city,  and  in
1884  he  was  president  of  the  department.  He  was
elected  as  a  Democrat  to  congress  in  1884,  but  he
was  defeated  in  his  canvass  for  re-election  in  1886.
Gen.  Viele  is  president  of  the  Equitable  home
building  association,  for  building  nouses  in  the
vicinity  of  Prospect  park,  Brooklyn,  to  be  sold  to
tenants  who  agree  to  use  them  as  "homes  only.  Be-
sides papers  on  engineering,  sanitation,  and  physi-
cal geography,  he  has  published  a  "  Hand-Book  for
Active  Service  "  (New  York,  1861),  and  a  "  Topo-
graphical Atlas  of  the  City  of  New  York"  (1865).

VIGER,  Denis  Benjamin,  Canadian  member
of  parliament,  b.  in  Montreal,  19  Aug.,  1774;  d.
there,  13  Feb.,  1861.  He  was  a  lawyer  of  good
standing,  was  elected  to  the  legislative  chamber  in
1808,  took  an  active  part  in  the  controversy  that
led  to  the  insurrection  of  1837,  and  had  been  a
delegate  to  London  in  1828  and  1831  to  lay  the
grievances  of  his  countrymen  before  the  imperial
parliament.  At  the  opening  of  the  rebellion  he
was  arrested  on  the  charge  of  sedition,  and  im-
prisoned, but  soon  afterward  was  liberated  without
trial,  and  elected  to  parliament.  After  the  dismis-
sal of  the  Lafontaine-Baldwin  cabinet  in  1843,
Lord  Metcalfe  asked  Mr.  Viger  to  become  a  mem-
ber of  the  new  cabinet,  which  he  did,  assuming
the  post  of  premier.  He  was  afterward  for  several
years  a  member  of  the  legislative  council  of  Can-
ada. Mr.  Viger  gave  the  city  of  Montreal  a  piece
of  land  now  known  as  Viger  square  and  garden.

VIGER.  James,  Canadian  archaeologist,  b.  in
Montreal,  Canada,  in  1787;  d.  there  in  1858.  He
was  educated  in  the  College  of  St.  Raphael.  Mon-
treal, and  served  as  an  officer  under  De  Salaberry
in  the  war  of  1812.  In  1832  he  was  elected  first
mayor  of  Montreal,  and  recommended  by  Lord
Gosford,  the  governor-general,  for  a  seat  in  the
executive  council.  As  an  antiquarian  and  archae-
ologist he  was  devoted  to  the  investigation  of
early  Canadian  history.  He  wrote  twenty-eight
volumes,  entitled  the  "  Sabertache,"  and  formed  an
invaluable  collection  of  manuscripts,  having  given
years  to  the  examination  of  historic  monuments,
the  clearing  up  of  obscure  points,  verifying  dates,
and  restoring  the  correct  orthography  of  names,


292


VIGIER


VIGNE


Parts  of  the  "  Sabertache  "  appeared  in  the  "  Biblio-
theque  Canadienne  "  and  the  "  Encyclopedic  Cana-
dienne."  The  greater  part  is  unpublished,  but
has  been  consulted  by  scholars  interested  in  Cana-
dian history,  both  in  America  and  Europe.  Mr.
Viger  was  first  president  of  the  National  society
of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  and  was  also  for  several
years  lieutenant-colonel  of  militia.  His  published
works  are  "  Relation  de  la  mort  de  Louis  XV.,  roi
de  France  "  (Montreal,  1812) ;  "  Observations  en
amelioration  des  lois  des  chemins  telles  qu'en  force
dans  le  Bas-Canada  en  1825  "  ;  "  Rapports  sur  les
chemins,  rues,  ruelles,  ponts  de  la  cite  et  paroisse
de  Montreal,  avec  notes"  (1841);  "  Archeologie
religieuse  du  diocese  de  Montreal "  ;  and  "  Sou-
venirs historiques  sur  la  seigneurie  de  Laprairie"
(1857). His  best  writings  have  been  for  reviews.

VIGIER,  George  (ve-zhe-ay),  Central  Ameri-
can traveller,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  about  1710 ;  d.  in
Bordeaux,  France,  in  1779.  He  was  for  several
years  a  merchant  in  Havana,  afterward  founded  a
mercantile  house  in  San  Juan,  Nicaragua,  and,  be-
fore returning  to  France,  explored  the  province.
He  wrote  "  Notes  et  esquisses  de  voyage  a  travers
le  Nicaragua " (Bordeaux,  1768);  "Description  des
antiquites  et  des  mines  dans  la  province  de  Nica-
ragua" (1772) ;  and  "  Manuel  du  commercant  dans
les  Antilles  et  PAmerique  Centrale  "  (1775).

VIGNAN,  Nicolas,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Sain-
tonge  about  1587;  d.  in  Canada  about  1630.  He
went  to  New  France  with  Baron  de  Poutrin-
court  in  1606,  participated  in  Samuel  de  Cham-
plain's  second  voyage  of  discovery,  and  in  1610
volunteered  to  join  the  Indians  on  their  homeward
journey  and  winter  among  them.  He  embarked
in  the  Algonquin  canoes,  passed  up  Ottawa  river,
and  was  seen  no  more  for  a  twelvemonth.  In  1612
he  reappeared  in  Paris,  bringing  a  tale  of  won-
ders, averring  that  at  the  sources  of  the  Ottawa
he  had  found  a  great  lake  ;  that  he  had  crossed  it,
and  discovered  a  river  flowing  northward ;  that
he  had  descended  this  river  and  reached  the  shores
of  the  sea ;  that  there  he  had  seen  the  wreck  of  an
English  ship,  whose  crew,  escaping  to  land,  had
been  killed  by  the  Indians  ;  and  that  this  sea  was
distant  from  Montreal  only  seventeen  days  by
canoe.  The  clearness,  consistency,  and  apparent
simplicity  of  his  story  convinced  Champlain,  who
had  heard  of  a  voyage  of  the  English  to  the
northern  seas,  coupled  with  rumors  of  wreck  and
disaster  (evidently  the  voyage  of  Henry  Hudson
in  1610-'12,  when  he  discovered  Hudson  straits).
The  Marechal  de  Brissac,  the  President  Jeannin,
and  other  persons  of  eminence  about  the  court
urged  Champlain  to  pursue  a  discovery  that  prom-
ised such  important  results,  and  in  consequence,
early  in  the  spring  of  1613,  Champlain  crossed  the
Atlantic  again  and  sailed  up  St.  Lawrence  river,
accompanied  by  Vignan  as  a  guide.  On  27  May
he  left  the  island  of  St.  Helen,  opposite  Montreal,
with  Vignan,  three  soldiers,  and  one  Indian  in  two
canoes.  They  crossed  the  Lake  of  Two  Mountains,
and  advanced  up  Ottawa  river  as  far  as  the  rapids
of  Carrillon.  Carrying  their  canoes  across  the  rap-
ids, they  passed  the  cataracts  of  the  Chaudiere,  the
lake  of  the  same  name,  left  the  river  at  the  Fall  of
the  Chats,  and  crossed  to  Lake  Coulonge,  up  which
they  sailed  to  Tessouat,  the  village  of  a  powerful
Ottawa  chief.  Here  Champlain  learned  that  Vig-
nan had  remained  the  whole  winter  of  1610-'ll  at
Tessouat,  and  that  the  map  he  had  made  of  his
pretended  discoveries  was  valueless.  Vignan  fell
on  his  knees,  owned  his  treachery,  and  begged  for
mercy.  Vanity,  the  love  of  notoriety,  and  the
hope of  reward  seem  to  have  been  his  induce-


ments, yet,  but  for  this  alleged  discovery,  Cham-
plain would  not  have  been  given  the  means  of  re-
turning to  New  France,  and  thus  Vignan's  treach-
ery was  greatly  beneficial  to  the  exploration  and
colonization  of  Canada.  Champlain  pardoned  Vig-
nan for  these  reasons,  and  the  party  returned  to
Montreal,  where  Vignan  engaged  in  business  and
afterward  rendered  efficient  services  as  an  inter-
preter. He  died  amonp:  the  Ottawas.

VIGNAUD,  Jean  Henry  (veen-yo),  author,  b.
in  New  Orleans,  La.,  27  Nov.,  1830.  He  is  de-
scended from  an  ancient  Creole  family,  received  his
education  in  his  native  city,  and  was  a  teacher  in
the  public  schools  of  New  Orleans  in  1852-'6,  be-
ing at  the  same  time  connected  with  "  Le  Courrier,"
of  New  Orleans,  and  other  publications.  In  1857
he  established  in  the  town  of  Thibodeaux,  La.,  a
daily  entitled  "  L'Union  de  Lafourchu,"  which  he
edited  till  1860,  when  he  aided  in  founding  in  New
Orleans  a  weekly  review,  "  La  renaissance  Louisi-
anaise,"  which  did  much  to  encourage  the  study  of
French  literature  in  the  state.  In  1861  he  pub-
lished "  L'Anthropologie,"  a  work  partly  scientific
but  mainly  philosophical.  He  became  a  captain  in
the  6th  Louisiana  regiment,  Confederate  army,  in
June,  1861,  and  was  captured  in  New  Orleans  in
April,  1862.  In  March,  1863,  he  was  appointed  as-
sistant secretary  of  the  Confederate  diplomatic
commission  in  Paris.  At  the  same  time  he  was  a
contributor  to  the  "  Memorial  diplomatique,"  and
in  charge  of  the  theatrical  criticisms  in  several
dailies.  In  1869  he  became  secretary  of  the  Rou-
manian legation  in  Paris,  and  in  1872  he  was  offi-
cially connected  with  the  Alabama  commission  in
Geneva,  for  which  he  translated  nearly  all  the  pa-

Bers  presented  to  that  tribunal  in  behalf  of  the
rnited  States.  In  1873  he  was  U.  S.  delegate  at
the  International  diplomatic  metric  conference,  re-
ceived the  appointment,  14  Dec.  1875,  of  second
secretary  of  the  U.  S.  legation  in  Paris,  in  1882  was
U.  S.  delegate  at  the  International  conference  for
the  protection  of  sub-marine  cables,  and  on  11  April,
1882,  was  promoted  first  secretary  of  legation  at
Paris.  Mr.  Vignaud  has  contributed  memoirs  to
the  Institute  of  France  and  other  learned  societies,
and  since  1869  has  been  secretary  of  the  Societe
savante,  of  Paris.  He  has  in  preparation  a  "  His-
tory of  the  Formation  of  the  American  Union  "  and
a  "  History  of  the  Discovery  and  Occupation  of  the
Territory  of  the  United  States."

VIGNE,  Charles  de  la  (veen),  French  soldier,
b.  in  southern  France  about  1530;  d.  in  Fort  Caro-
line, Fla.,  20  Sept.,  1565.  He  accompanied  Jean  de
Ribaut  in  his  expedition  to  Florida  in  1562,  and  in
1564  returned  thither- with  Rene  de  Laudonniere
and  assisted  in  building  Fort  Caroline.  He  after-
ward proved  a  stanch  supporter  of  the  governor
during  the  mutinies  that  nearly  brought  about
the  ruin  of  the  first  colony  in  Florida.  During  the
winter  he  made  a  voyage  of  discovery  to  Cape
Canaveral  and  induced  the  Indians  of  the  coast  to
supply  the  colony  with  fish.  After  Ribaut's  ar-
rival in  August,  1565.  he  was  one  of  the  few  t  hat
supported  Laudonniere  in  the  council  of  war  and
opposed  Ribaut's  plan  for  attacking  the  Spaniards
by  sea.  Ribaut  having  prevailed,  La  Vigne  be-
came chief  of  the  night-watch  that  was  charged  to
guard  the  fort,  but  through  carelessness  neglected
to  post  sentries.  When  Menendez  de  Aviles  ap-
proached at  early  dawn  of  20  Sept.,  he  easily  car-
ried the  fort  and  slaughtered  its  defenders,  La
Vigne  being  among  the  first  killed,  and  Laudon-
niere escaping  with  only  a  few  men  to  the  ships.
La  Vigne  wrote  an  interesting  account  of  the
foundation  of  the  French  colony  in  Florida,  which


VIGO


VILLALOBOS


293


has  been  reprinted  by  Henry  Ternaux-Compans  in
his  "  Recueil  de  pieces  sur  la  Floride."  It  is  en-
titled "  Copie  d'une  lettre  venant  de  la  Floride "
(Paris,  1565).  It  is  the  more  valuable  as,  except
Le  Moyne's  and  Laudonniere's,  it  is  the  only  nar-
rative that  exists  of  the  colony  that  was  destroyed
by  Menendez  de  Aviles.

VIGO,  Francis,  fur-trader,  b.  in  Mondovi,  Sar-
dinia, in  1747;  d.  near  Vincennes,  Ind.,  22  March,
1835.  He  entered  the  Spanish  army  as  a  private
and  served  at  Havana  and  New  Orleans.  He  left
the  army  and  went  to  St.  Louis  when  he  was  about
twenty-five  years  old,  and  engaged  in  the  fur-trade
with  the  Indians,  with  whom  he  was  on  very
friendly  terms.  When  Col.  George  Rogers  Clark,
with  his  scantily  supplied  army,  visited  Kaskaskia,
Vigo  furnished  them  with  food  and  clothing  to
the  value  of  $20,000,  taking  his  pay  in  Virginia
Continental  money.  By  the  depreciation  of  the
latter  and  the  confiscation  of  his  property  by  or-
der of  Gov.  Hamilton,  the  British  commandant,  he
became  poor.  When  Col.  Clark  was  at  Kaskaskia,
Gov.  Hamilton  left  Detroit  with  the  purpose  of
capturing  him  and  his  army.  They  proceeded  as
far  as  Vincennes  and  were  quartered  at  Fort  Sack-
ville.  Clark  determined  to  capture  Hamilton,  and
sent  Vigo,  accompanied  by  one  man,  to  reconnoitre
the  fort.  Vigo  was  arrested  as  a  spy  when  he  was
within  seven  miles  of  it,  but,  being  a  Spanish  sub-
ject, was  discharged,  returned  to  St.  Louis,  and  re-
i'oined  Clark,  who  soon  afterward  took  the  fort,
n  1786,  Vigo  employed  Pierre  Menard,  afterward
the  first  lieutenant-governor  of  Illinois,  as  an  In-
dian-trader. They  became  great  friends,  and  in
1789  both  visited  Gen.  Washington  at  Carlisle,  Pa.,
and  consulted  him  in  reference  to  the  best  means
of  defending  the  country.

VILAS,  William  Freeman  (vy'-las),  postmas-
ter-general, b.  in  Chelsea,  Vt.,  9  July,  1840.  He
went  to  Wisconsin,  when  eleven  years  old,  with  his
parents,  who  settled  in  Madison.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  State  university  in  1858,  and  at  the
Albany  law-school  in  1860.  He  practised  in  Madi-
son till  the  civil  war  began,  when  he  entered  the
army  as  a  captain  in  the  23d  Wisconsin  volunteers.
He  rapidly  rose  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,
and  commanded  his  regiment  during  the  siege  of
Vicksburg  and  for  two  months  afterward.  Re-
signing his  commission  in  August,  1863,  he  re-
turned to  the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  be-
came a  lecturer  in  the  law  department  of  the
University  of  Wisconsin,  and  a  regent  of  the  insti-
tution. He  was  appointed  by  the  supreme  court
in  1875  one  of  the  board  that  for  three  years  was
engaged  in  revising  the  state  constitution.  He
declined  to  be  a  candidate  for  governor  in  1879.
In  1884  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature.  The
same  year  he  attended  the  Democratic  national
convention  as  a  delegate,  and  was  chosen  perma-
nent chairman.  On  5  March,  1885,  President
Cleveland  made  him  postmaster-general,  and  in
December,  1887,  he  was  transferred  to  the  portfolio
of  the  interior  to  succeed  Lucius  Q.  C.  Lamar,  who
had  been  appointed  to  the  bench  of  the  United
States  supreme  court.

VILLA  DARI AS,  Manoel  Duarte  Caldeiras
Centenera  de  (veel-lah-dah-ree'-as),  Portuguese
administrator,  b.  in  Alentejo,  Portugal,  in  1690 ;
d.  in  Lisbon  in  1759.  He  was  appointed  assistant
governor  of  Maranhab,  and  in  1745  captain-general
of  the  provinces  of  Itamaraca,  Parahiba,  and  Rio
Grande  do  Norte  in  Brazil,  which  greatly  im-
proved under  his  administration,  as  he  developed
agriculture  and  opened  roads  to  facilitate  com-
merce. He  built  the  government  palace  in  Para-


hiba, constructed  a  hospital,  collected  and  classi-
fied all  documents  that  relate  to  the  discovery  of
those  provinces,  and  wrote  two  valuable  works,
which  were  published  after  his  death,  "  Relacao  das
capitanias  de  Itamaraca,  Parahiba,  e  Rio  Grande
do  Reino  do  Brazil "  (Coimbra,  1761),  and  "  Relacao
das  Victorias  que  alcancaram  as  armas  portuguezas
contra  as  de  Mauricio  de  Nassau"  (1761).

VILLAFANE,  Angel  de  (veel-yah-fahn'-yay),
Spanish  navigator,  b.  in  the  beginning  of  the  16th
century;  wrecked  on  the  Florida  coast  in  1548.
He  was  a  skilful  navigator,  and  had  made  voyages
to  Santo  Domingo  and  to  Mexico  when  he  was
appointed  toward  the  end  of  1547  commander  of
an  expedition  that  sailed  from  San  Juan  de  Ulua  to
explore  the  coast  of  Florida.  He  began  the  first
Spanish  settlement  in  that  country,  but  had  diffi-
culties with  the  Indians,  and,  being  short  of  pro-
visions, re-embarked  to  find  a  more  convenient
place  to  plant  a  colony.  During  the  voyage  he
was  wrecked,  and  perished  with  most  of  his  men,
only  a  few  of  whom  found  their  way  to  Santo  Do-
mingo. The  papers  relating  to  his  expedition
have  been  published  by  Henry  Ternaux-Compans
in  his  "  Recueil  de  pieces  sur  la  Floride."  See
also  Francis  Parkman's  "Pioneers  of  France  in
the  New  World  "  (Boston,  1865).

VILLAGRA,  Gaspar  de  (veel-yah'-grah).  Span-
ish soldier,  b.  in  Alcala  about  1550 ;  d.  in  Mexico
about  1620.  He  served  in  Mexico,  and  as  captain
of  infantry  participated  in  the  expedition  that  was
sent  by  the  viceroy,  the  Count  de  Monterey,  in
1600,  to  conquer  New  Mexico,  under  command  of
Juan  de  Onate.  He  was  an  educated  man,  and  on
his  return  to  Mexico,  where  he  lived  after  retiring
from  service,  he  wrote  an  account  of  the  expedi-
tion in  verse,  under  the  title  "Historia  del  Nuevo
Mexico  "  (Alcala,  1610).

VILLAGUTIERREZ  T  SOTOMAYOR,  Jnan
de  (veel-yah-goo-te-air'-reth),  Spanish  soldier,  lived
in  the  end  of  the  17th  and  the  beginning  of  the
18th  centuries.  Very  little  is  known  about  his  life
except  that  he  participated  in  1697  as  an  officer  in
the  expedition  that,  under  Gen.  Melchor  de  Men-
cos  marched  from  Guatemala  against  the  province
of  Peten,  and  conquered  the  capital  of  the  Itzas,  on
an  island  of  the  Lake  of  Peten.  Villagutierrez
wrote  a  history  of  this  expedition,  under  the  title
of  "  Historia  de  la  Conquista  de  la  Provincia  del
Itza"  (Madrid,  1701),  which  is  valuable,  and  re-
lates the  interesting  fact  that  in  one  of  the  tem-
ples were  found  the  bones  of  Cortes's  war-horse,
which  was  left  sick  in  the  custody  of  one  of  the
caciques,  and  after  its  death  was  worshipped  by
the  natives.  They  also  sculptured  a  colossal  statue
of  the  animal,  which  is  still  to  be  seen,  partly  sub-
merged in  the  lake.

VILLALOBOS,  Rny  Lopez  de  (veel  yah-lo-
bos),  Spanish  navigator,  b.  in  Toledo  about  1500 ;
d.  in  Amboina,  Moluccas,  in  1544.  Little  is  known
of  his  early  life,  but  in  1540  he  was  famous  in  Mexico
as  a  skilful  navigator,  and  therefore  was  chosen
by  the  viceroy,  Antonio  de  Mendoza,  to  command
the  expedition  to  discover  Spice  islands,  that
were  still  unoccupied  by  the  Portuguese.  He  left
Acapulco  in  1542  in  command  of  four  vessels,  dis-
covered the  Caroline  and  Pelew  groups,  and
sighted  a  large  island,  which  he  called  Caesarea
Caroli,  and  which  is  supposed  to  be  Luzon.  Fi-
nally he  found  an  island  which  he  called  Antonio
or  Saragan,  and  there  established  a  colony,  not-
withstanding the  strenuous  opposition  of  the  na-
tives. Soon  his  provisions  and  ammunition  began
to  fail,  and  he  despatched  three  of  his  vessels  for
a  supply  to  Mexico;  but  they  were  wrecked  in


294


VILLALPANDO


VILLAROEL


sight  of  the  port  of  departure,  and,  driven  by
hunger,  he  abandoned  the  settlement  and  sought
refuge  in  Amboina,  where  he  and  the  survivors
were  imprisoned  by  the  Portuguese.  One  of  the
number,  Guido  de  Labezares,  escaped  in  1549  and
carried  to  Mexico  the  report  of  the  expedition.

VILLALPANDO,  Luis  de  (veel-yal-pan  -do),
Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  New  Castile  about  1480;
d.  in  Yucatan  about  1560.  He  entered  the  Fran-
ciscan order,  and  going  to  Mexico  in  1548  with
the  monks  sent  by  order  of  Charles  V.  for  the  prov-
ince of  Yucatan,  he  was  the  first  missionary  to
visit  Campeachy,  and  founded  the  earliest  mis-
sion among  the  Indians  of  Yucatan.  He  wrote  a
valuable  grammar  of  the  Maya  dialect,  which,  ac-
cording to  Leon  Pinelo  in  his  "  Epitome  de  la
Biblioteca  oriental  y  occidental,"  has  been  printed
under  the  title  "  Arte  y  Vocabulario  de  la  Lengua
Maya,"  although  no  copy  is  known  to  exist.  The
original  manuscript  is  still  preserved  among  the
archives  of  Simancas.

YILLARD,  Henry,  financier,  b.  in  Spire,  Ba-
varia, 11  April,  1835.  His  name  was  originally
Gustavus  Hilgard.  He  was  educated  at  the  uni-
versities of  Munich  and  Wiirzburg,  and  came  to
the  United  States  in  1853.  He  studied  law  for  a
time  in  Belleville  and  Peoria,  111.,  then  removed  to
Chicago,  and  wrote  for  papers.  In  1859  he  visited
the  newly  discovered  gold  region  of  Colorado  as
correspondent  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Commercial,"
and  on  his  return  published  a  volume  entitled
"  The  Pike's  Peak  Gold  Regions  "  (1860).  He  also
sent  statistics  to  the  New  York  "  Herald "  that
were  intended  to  influence  the  location  of  a  Pacific
railroad  route.  He  then  settled  in  Washington  as
political  correspondent  for  eastern  and  western
newspapers,  and  during  the  war  was  an  army  cor-
respondent. He  married  Fanny,  a  daughter  of
William  Lloyd  Garrison,  at  Washington'  on  3
Jan.,  1866,  went  to  Europe  as  correspondent  of
the  New  York  "  Tribune,"  returned  to  the  United
States  in  June,  1868,  and  shortly  afterward  was
elected  secretary  of  the  American  social  science
association,  to  which  he  devoted  his  labors  till
1870,  when  he  went  to  Germany  for  his  health.
While  living  at  Wiesbaden  he  engaged  in  the  ne-
gotiation of  American  railroad  securities;  and,
when  many  companies  defaulted  in  the  payment
of  interest,  after  the  crash  of  1873,  he  joined  sev-
eral committees  of  German  bond-holders,  doing  the
major  part  of  their  work,  and  in  April,  1874,  re-
turned to  the  United  States  to  represent  his  con-
stituents, and  especially  to  execute  an  arrange-
ment with  the  Oregon  and  California  railroad
company.  On  visiting  Oregon,  he  was  impressed
with  the  natural  wealth  of  the  region,  and  con-
ceived the  plan  of  gaining  control  of  its  few  trans-
portation routes.  His  clients,  who  were  large  cred-
itors also  of  the  Oregon  steamship  company,  ap-
proved his  scheme,  and  in  1875  Mr.  Villard  be-
came president  of  both  corporations.  He  was  ap-
pointed in  1876  a  receiver  of  the  Kansas  Pacific
railroad  as  the  representative  of  European  cred-
itors, and  was  removed  in  1878,  but  continued  the
contest  he  had  begun  with  Jay  Gould  and  finally
obtained  better  terms  for  the  bond-holders  than  they
had  agreed  to  accept.  The  European  investors  in
the  Oregon  and  San  Francisco  steamship  line,  after
building  new  vessels,  became  discouraged,  and  in
1879  Villard  formed  an  American  syndicate  and
purchased  the  property.  He  also  acquired  that  of
the  Oregon  steam  navigation  company,  which  op-
erated fleets  of  steamers  and  portage  railroads  on
the  Columbia  river.  The  three  companies  that  he
controlled  were  amalgamated,  under  the  name  of


the  Oregon  railway  and  navigation  company.  He
began  the  construction  of  a  railroad  up  Columbia
river,  and  failing  in  his  effort  to  obtain  a  perma-
nent engagement  from  the  Northern  Pacific  com-
pany, which  had  begun  its  extension  into  Wash-
ington territory,  to  use  the  Columbia  river  line  as
its  outlet  to  the  Pacific  ocean,  he  succeeded,  with
the  aid  of  a  syndicate  which  was  called  a  "  blind
pool,"  in  acquiring  control  of  the  Northern  Pacific
property,  and  organized  a  new  corporation  that  was
named  the  Oregon  and  Transcontinental  company.
After  some  contention  with  the  old  managers  of
the  Northern  Pacific  road,  Villard  was  elected
president  of  a  reorganized  board  of  directors  on

15  Sept.,  1881.  The  main  line  to  the  Pacific  ocean
was  completed,  with  the  aid  of  the  Oregon  and
Transcontinental  company;  but  at,  the  time  when
it  was  opened  to  traffic  with  festivities,  in  Sep-
tember, 1883,  the  "  bears  "  of  the  stock  market  ar-
ranged an  attack  on  the  securities  of  the  allied
companies,  and  Villard,  in  the  vain  endeavor  to
support  the  properties,  sacrificed  his  large  fortune,
and  on  4  Jan.,  1884,  resigned  the  presidency  of  the
Northern  Pacific  railroad.  After  spending  the  in-
tervening time  in  Europe,  he  returned  to  New
York  city  in  1886,  and  has  since  purchased  for
German  capitalists  large  amounts  of  the  securities
of  the  transportation  system  that  he  was  instru-
mental in  creating,  becoming  again  director  of  the
Northern  Pacific  company,  and  on  21  June,  1888,
again  president  of  the  Oregon  and  Transconti-
nental company.  He  has  given  a  large  fund  for
the  State  university  of  Oregon,  liberally  aided  the
University  of  Washington  territory,  founded  a  hos-
pital and  school  for  nurses  in  his  native  town,  and
devoted  large  sums  to  the  Industrial  art  school  of
Rhenish  Bavaria,  and  to  the  foundation  of  fifteen
scholarships  for  the  youth  of  that  province.

V1LLARET  DE  JQYEUSE,  Louis  Thomas,
(veel-ah-ray)  Count,  better  known  as  Villaret-
Joyeuse,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Auch  Gers  in
1750;  d.  in  Venice,  Italy,  24  July,  1812.  He  early
entered  the  life-guards,  but  in  1766  joined  the  navy
as  midshipman,  and  served  in  the  West  Indies  and
South  America.  He  was  promoted  post-captain,
was  in  Santo  Domingo  at  the  opening  of  the  troubles
of  1790,  and  aided  in  quieting  the  disturbance,  tak-
ing part  in  the  following  year  in  the  second  expe-
dition to  Santo  Domingo,  after  which  he  command-
ed the  station  of  the  Antilles.  He  was  made  rear-
admiral  in  September,  1793,  and  sailed  from  Brest,

16  May,  1794,  to  escort  a  convoy  of  wheat-ships
from  the  United  States  under  Admiral  Vanstabel.
On  28  and  29  May  and  1  June  he  engaged  Admiral
Howe's  fleet,  and,  although  both  squadrons  suffered
heavily,  the  convoy  passed  safely  and  anchored  at
Brest,  thus  saving  France  from  famine.  In  1801
he  was  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  naval
forces  for  Santo  Domingo,  and  arriving,  6  Feb.,
1802,  off  Cape  Francais,  succeeded,  by  well-con-
certed measures,  in  extinguishing  the  conflagration
that  had  been  begun  by  the  retreating  rebels.  On
3  April,  1802,  he  was  appointed  governor-general
of  Martinique  and  St.  Lucia,  which  post  he  re-
tained with  great  efficiency  for  seven  years.  After
the  battle  of  Trafalgar,  in  1805,  his  communica-
tions with  France  were  severed,  but  he  held  the
English  invaders  at  bay  till  1809,  when,  after  sus-
taining a  terrible  bombardment  in  Fort  Bourbon,
he  was  compelled  to  sign  an  honorable  capitula-
tion. In  1811  he  was  appointed  governor-general
of  Venice,  where  he  died.

VILLAROEL,  Gaspar  de  (veel-yah-ro-ail),  Pe-
ruvian R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Quito,  Ecuador,  in  1587;
d.  in  Arequipa  in  1671. He  became  an  Augustin-


VILLARS


VILLEGAIGNON


295


ian  monk,  going  afterward  to  Europe  on  a  mission
of  his  order.  While  in  Spain  he  wrote  "  Semana
santa  "  (Lisbon,  1631,  and  Madrid,  1632  and  1633),
and  "  Judices,"  another  religious  work  (1636).  Pie
returned  to  America  in  1638,  as  bishop  of  Santiago,
Chili,  and  during  the  earthquake  of  May,  1647,  al-
though severely  injured  by  the  fall  of  his  cathedral,
he  was  transported  to  the  public  square,  where  he
consoled  the  panic-stricken  population  during  the
night.  He  assisted  the  sufferers  and  rebuilt  the
cathedral  out  of  his  own  resources.  In  1651  he  was
promoted  archbishop  of  Arequipa,  in  Peru.  He
was  the  author  of  "  Gobierno  eclesiastico  pacifico  "
(Arequipa,  1650),  and  "  Primera  parte  de  las  his-
torias  sagradas"  (Madrid,  1670).

VILLARS,  Charles,  French  surgeon,  b.  in  Ba-
yonne  about  1760;  d.  in  Mexico  in  1814.  He  was
a  marine  surgeon,  served  in  Santo  Domingo  and
several  of  the  West  Indies,  afterward  practised
medicine  with  success  in  Porto  Rico,  and  about
1800  began  a  journey  through  the  West  Indies
and  South  America  to  popularize  vaccination,  visit-
ing also  Central  America  and  Mexico,  and  meeting
everywhere  with  great  success.  It  may  be  said
that  he  introduced  vaccination  where  it  was  alto-
gether unknown  or  distrusted.  He  wrote  "  Traite
et  art  de  la  vaccination"  (Havana,  1804);  "  Me-
moire  sur  les  proprietes  antisyphilitiques  de  cer-
taines  solanees  de  l'Amerique  du  Sud, '  addressed
to  the  Paris  academy  of  sciences  in  1808;  and
"Traite  du  quina"  (1814).

VILLASENOR  Y  SANCHEZ,  Jos6  Antonio
(veel-yah-sain'-yor),  Mexican  geographer,  b.  in
Mexico  about  1700  ;  d.  there  about  1760.  He
studied  in  the  College  of  San  Ildefonso,  and  was
employed  successively  as  chief  clerk  of  the  comp-
troller of  taxes  and  as  comptroller  of  the  quick-
silver revenue.  Later  he  was  appointed  cosmog-
rapher  of  New  Spain,  and  as  such  commissioned
in  1742,  by  the  viceroy,  Count  de  Fuenelara,  to
write  a  descriptive  history  and  geography  that  had
been  ordered  by  King  Philip  V.  He  is  the  author
of  "  Observacion  del  Cometa,  que  aparecio  en  el
hemisferio  de  Mexico  en  Febrero  y  Marzo  "  (Mexico,
1742) ;  "  Teatro  Mexicano ;  descripcion  general  de
los  Reinos  y  Provincial  de  laNueva  Espafia"  (1746);
"  Matematico  Computo  de  los  Astros  "  (1756) ;  and
of  a  geographic  map  of  the  Jesuit  province  of  New
Spain,  from  Honduras  to  California,  designed  in
1751,  and  engraved  and  published  in  Rome  (1754).

VILLAVERDE,  Cirilo  (veel-yah-vair'-day), Cu-
ban author,  b.  in  San  Diego  de  Nunez  in  1812.
In  1823  his  parents  took  him  to  Havana,  where  he
was  graduated  in  law  in  1832,  but  he  devoted  him-
self to  teaching  and  literature.  On  account  of  his
liberal  ideas  in  politics,  and  being  implicated  in  a
conspiracy  to  overthrow  the  Spanish  government,
he  was  arrested  in  1849  and  condemned  to  death,
but  escaped  and  fled  to  the  United  States.  He
fixed  his  residence  in  New  York,  where  he  pub-
lished for  some  time  a  newspaper  in  aid  of  the
revolutionary  party  of  Cuba.  Subsequently  he
was  also  the  editor  of  literary  magazines.  In  early
life  he  had  published  in  the  papers  short  sketches
of  Cuban  life  and  customs,  and  brief  romantic
narratives,  and  afterward  he  wrote  the  novels  "  El
espeton  de  oro,"  ''  Los  dos  amores,"  and  "  La  joven
de  la  flecha  de  oro  "  (Havana,  1837) ;  "  El  Guajiro  "
(1840) ;  "  El  Penitente";  *•  La  peineta  calada":  "La
tejedora  de  sombreros M  (1840-'5) ;  and  "  Cecilia
Valdes  "  (New  York,  1881).  The  last  is  his  master-
piece, a  genuine  Cuban  novel,  which  has  been  de-
servedly praised  by  the  most  competent  critics  in
Spain  and  Spanish  America.  Some  of  his  works
have  been  translated  into  German  and  French.


YILLEFRANCHE,  Charles  Pierre  de  (veal-
frahnsh),  historian,  b.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  1756;  d.
in  Havana,  Cuba,  in  1809.  He  was  of  French  de-
scent,, received  his  education  partly  in  New  Or-
leans and  in  Havana,  finished  his  studies  at  the
University  of  Seville,  and  entered  the  colonial  ad-
ministration in  1778.  He  held  posts  successively
in  Venezuela,  Cuba,  Porto  Rico,  Jamaica,  and
Louisiana,  but,  having  become  nearly  blind,  he
was  retired  on  a  pension  and  settled  in  Havana,
devoting  his  time  to  historical  researches  and  to
classifying  the  notes  and  documents  that  he  had
collected  in  the  colonial  offices  where  he  had  been
employed.  He  published  several  valuable  works,
among  them  "  Historiadores  primitivos  de  las  In-
dias  Occidentales  "  (Havana,  1797),  which  corrected
and  completed  Barcia's  history  (Madrid,  1749),  and
for  which  Villefranche  received  a  present  from  the
secretary  of  state,  and  "  Historia  de  la  fundacion
de  la  ciudad  de  Santiago  de  Cuba  "  (1804).

VILLEGAIGNON,  or  VILLEGAGNON,  Nico-
las Durand  (veel-gan-yong),  Chevalier  de,  French
naval  officer,  b.  in  the  castle  of  Villegaignon,  Seine
et  Marne,  in  1510 ;  d.  in  Beauvais,  near  Nemours.
9  Jan.,  1571.  In  1531  he  entered  the  Order  of
Saint  John,  of  which  his  uncle,  the  Marquis  Vil-
liers  de  l'lsle-Adam,  was  grand-master.  He  served
against  the  Turks,  Algiers,  and  Tripoli,  and  was
made  vice-admiral  of  Brittany.  It  has  been  as-
serted that  he  was  then  converted  to  the  Reformed
faith  ;  but  this  is  denied.  In  1555  he  obtained
through  Admiral  Gaspard  de  Coligny  the  privilege
of  founding  a  French  colony  in  Brazil  as  an
asylum  for  the  persecuted  Huguenots,  while  he
persuaded  the  king  that  the  Spanish  forces  would
thus  be  divided.  On  12  July,  1555,  he  sailed  from
Havre  with  two  ships,  carrying  a  nearly  equal
number  of  Protestant  and  Roman  Catholic  emi-
grants, several  young  volunteers  of  noble  families,
and  four  Roman  Catholic  priests.  On  13  Nov.  he
anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  and  took
possession  of  an  island  near  the  shore,  which
he  named  Coligny  island.  He  built  a  fort  and
opened  negotiations  with  the  Indians,  who  con-
tinued friendly  to  the  last.  A  convoy  of  emigrants
arrived  on  10  March,  1557,  among  them  four
Protestant  ministers,  and  Jean  de  Lory.  Religious
controversies  began,  and  Villegaignon  finally  for-
bade the  Protestants  to  celebrate  divine  service  ac-
cording to  John  Calvin's  teachings.  Some  of  them
re-embarked  on  4  Jan.,  1558,  and  Villegaignon,
fearing  for  his  safety,  transported  the  remaining
Protestants  to  remote  parts  of  the  Brazilian  coast.
The  colony  being  thus  reduced  to  about  200  men,
he  sailed  for  France  early  in  1559  for  the  purpose
of  collecting  re-enforcements,  and  take  the  com-
mand of  a  fleet  that  had  been  promised  by  Coligny,
with  which  he  intended  to  capture  the  Spanish  treas-
ure-vessels and  destroy  the  Portuguese  settlements
along  the  Brazilian  coast.  But  the  French  Prot-
estants refused  their  support,  charging  him  with
treason  to  their  cause,  and  named  him  the  "Cain
of  America."  His  former  relations  with  them
procured  him  likewise  a  cool  reception  at  court,
and  he  retired  to  his  commandery.  Villegaignon's
colony  subsisted  for  a  few  years  longer,  but,  being
abandoned  by  the  government,  the  French  were
finally  expelled,  20  Jan.,  1567,  by  Men  de  Saa  (g.  v.).
Villegaignon  was  reputed  one  of  the  most  skilful
navigators  of  the  16th  century,  and  he  acquired
distinction  also  as  a  historian  and  in  his  theologi-
cal controversies  with  Calvin  about  his  interference
in  religious  matters  in  South  America.  His  works
include  "  Caroli  V.  imp.  expeditio  in  Africam  et
Algieram "  (Paris,  1542);  "  De  bello  melitensi et


296


VILLEGAS  CORAS


VILLERAYE


ejus  eventu  Francis  imposito,  ad  Carolum  V.  com-
raentarius  "  (1553);  and  "Ad  Articulos  Calvinianae,
de  sacramento  Eucharistiae,  traditionis,  ab  ejus
ministris  in  Francia  Antarctia  evulgatae  respon-
siones,"  which  contains  a  relation  of  the  founda-
tion of  the  French  colony  in  Brazil  (1560).

VILLEGAS  CORAS,  Jos6  Antonio  (veel-yay-
gas),  Mexican  sculptor,  b.  in  Puebla  in  1713 ;  d.
there,  14  July,  1785.  He  was  graduated  in  philoso-
phy at  the  Jesuit  college,  and  devoted  himself  to
sculpture  and  architecture.  His  works  are  dis-
tinguished for  correct  anatomy,  good  drapery,  and
the  sweet  sympathetic  expression  of  the  Virgin's
face.  The  best  known  are  "  La  Purisima,"  in  the
church  of  San  Cristobal ;  the  virgins  of  the  con-
vents of  Carmen  and  Merced ;  and  a  "  San  Jose,"
in  the  convent  of  San  Pablo — all  in  his  native  city.

VILLENEUVE,  Alexandre  Louis  Ducrest
de,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Theil,  near  Vitre,  7
March,  1777;  d.  in  Paris,  22  March,  1852.  He  en-
tered the  naval  service  as  a  midshipman  in  1791,
took  part  in  an  expedition  to  the  Pacific  ocean,  and
in  the  following  year  joined  a  privateer  and  won
reputation  for  his  bravery.  Re-entering  the  navy
in  1796,  he  participated  in  1802  in  the  expedition
to  Santo  Domingo  under  Gen.  Leclerc,  and  he  was
with  Admiral  Pierre  de  Villeneuve  in  the  Antilles
in  1805,  and  at  Trafalgar.  In  1806  he  was  sent  by
Napoleon  on  a  special  mission  to  carry  the  latter's
orders  to  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Spanish  colonies,
and  he  was  employed  afterward  in  the  Gulf  of
Mexico,  and  promoted  to  post-captain  in  1814.
From  1815  till  1818  he  commanded  the  station  of
the  Antilles,  where  he  made  valuable  charts  of  those
parts.  He  was  sent  in  1821  on  a  scientific  mission
to  Havana  and  La  Plata,  assumed  command  of  the
station  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  in  1825,  and  pre-

fiared  a  chart  of  the  Bay  of  Vera  Cruz  and  the
sthmus  of  Panama.  He  was  recalled  in  1827,  sent
to  the  Mediterranean  sea  to  chase  the  Tunisian  and
Algerian  corsairs,  was  promoted  rear-admiral  in
1829,  commanded  the  division  that  blockaded  An-
vers  in  1832-'3,  and  was  afterward  maritime  pre-
fect at  Lorient,  retiring  from  active  service  in  1838.
The  charts  of  the  American  coast  that  Admiral
Villeneuve  prepared  have  long  been  standard  au-
thorities in  the  French  navy.

VILLENEUVE,  Jules  Edmond  Francois  de,
French  author,  b.  in  Paris,  27  Feb.,  1804 ;  d.  there,
5  Aug.,  1863.  He  emigrated  with  his  parents  to
Brazil  after  the  fall  of  Napoleon  I.,  was  admitted
to  the  Brazilian  naval  school,  and  served  after-
ward in  the  fleet,  attaining  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
commander,  but  he  resigned  in  1832  and  devoted
himself  to  literary  labors.  In  the  same  year  he
bought  the  "  Jornal  do  Commereio"  at  Rio  Janei-
ro, which  under  his  management  became  the  chief
periodical  in  the  country.  He  was  the  first  to
publish  reports  of  the  deliberations  of  the  Brazil-
ian parliament,  and  to  advocate  the  enfranchise-
ment of  the  negroes.  Villeneuve  returned  to  Paris
in  1844.  He  published  articles  on  Brazil  in  the
Paris  magazines,  and  "  Coup  d'ceil  sur  l'empire
du  Bresil  "  (Versailles,  1849) ;  "  La  guerre  civile
dans  l'Amerique  du  Sud"  (1858);  and  an  opera,
'•  Paraguassii, represented  at  Paris  in  1855.

VILLENEUVE,  Pierre  Charles  Jean-Bap-
tiste  Silvestre  de,  French  admiral,  b.  in  Valen-
soles.  Basses  Alpes,  31  Dec,  1763;  d.  in  Rennes,  22
April,  1806.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1778  and
served  in  the  American  Revolution  with  De  Gui-
chen  off  Dominica,  with  De  Grasse  at  Yorktown,
with  Bouille  at  Tobago,  and  afterward  in  Guiana.
He  rose  rapidly  in  the  service,  and,  after  several
scientific  cruises  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  along


the  coast  of  North  America,  was  promoted  rear-
admiral  in  1797.  On  30  May,  1804,  he  was  made
vice-admiral,  and  through  the  protection  of  his
old-time  friend,  Decres,  the  secretary  of  the  navy,
was  intrusted  with  the  execution  of  Napoleon's
plan  for  an  invasion  of  England.  The  choice  was
unfortunate,  as  Villeneuve,  although  a  reputed
tactician,  was  more  efficient  when  he  acted  as  lieu-
tenant. He  was  to  sail  with  Gravina's  Spanish
division  to  the  West  Indies,  rally  Missiessy's  and
Magon's  divisions  and  the  forces  at  Cayenne,  and,
returning  to  Europe,  unite  with  the  Spanish  fleet  at
Ferrol  and  Gautheaume's  division  at  Brest,  and  come
to  Boulogne  to  escort  Napoleon's  army  of  invasion,
with  75  ships  of  the  line  and  upward  of  80  frigates.
This  well-concerted  plan  failed  through  Ville-
neuve's  slow  movements,  and  the  most  powerful
naval  armament  that  was  ever  collected  was  not
utilized.  After  rallying  Gravina's  division  at  Ca-
diz, Villeneuve  sailed,  in  April,  1805,  to  the  West
Indies,  joined  the  Antilles  squadron,  under  Admi-
ral Magon,  stormed  Fort  Diamant  in  Martinique,
which  was  before  considered  impregnable,  and  ob-
tained re-enforcements  in  Martinique  and  Guade-
loupe. But  he  had  lost  precious  time,  and  Missi-
essy  had  already  left  for  France,  for  which  reason
he  resolved  to  return  to  Europe,  and  on  23-24  July
engaged  successfully  Sir  Robert  Calder's  division
off  Cape  Finisterre.  But,  instead  of  proceeding  to
Ferrol  and  Brest  with  his  superior  force,  he  en-
tered Cadiz  harbor  on  20  Aug..  and  remained  there
till  20  Oct.  Napoleon  despatched  Rosilly  to  super-
sede Villeneuve ;  but  the  latter,  on  hearing  the  re-
port, resolved  to  give  battle.  On  21  Oct.  he  en-
countered Lord  Nelson's  British  fleet  off  Trafal-
gar, and  was  defeated  after  ten  hours'  engagement
and  taken  prisoner.  On  his  release  he  went  to
Rennes,  but,  justly  fearing  Napoleon's  resentment,
committed  suicide.

VILLEPIGUE,  John  Bordenare,  soldier,  b.
in  Camden,  S.  C,  2  July,  1830;  d.  in  Port  Hudson,
La.,  9  Nov.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1854,  and  served  on  the  west-
ern border  as  a  lieutenant  of  dragoons  until  the
secession  of  South  Carolina.  Joining  the  Confed-
erate army,  he  was  made  a  captain  of  artillery,  and
soon  afterward  promoted  colonel  and  placed  in
command  of  Fort  McRae,  Pensacola,  Fla.  At  the
bombardment  of  this  post  he  was  severely  wound-
ed. He  was  transferred  to  Mobile,  and  a  few  weeks
later  to  Fort  Pillow,  which  he  strengthened  for  the
ensuing  bombardment  of  fifty-two  days,  which  was
sustained  until  he  was  ordered  to  evacuate.  His
brigade  opened  the  attack  and  covered  the  retreat
of  the  army  at  Corinth.  He  was  ordered  to  Port
Hudson  soon  afterward  with  a  major-general's  com-
mand and  the  assurance  of  promotion  to  that  rank,
but  reached  his  post  only  to  die  of  fever.

VILLERAYE,  Charles  Stanislas,  Viscount  de,
French  adventurer,  b.  in  Provence  about  1820 ;  d.
in  Guaymas,  Mexico,  13  July,  1854.  He  fought  in
Spain  for  the  cause  of  Don  Carlos,  but  squandered
his  inheritance,  and,  after  taking  part  in  the  troubles
in  southern  France  during  the  revolution  of  1848,
emigrated  in  the  following  year  to  California,  where
he  labored  in  the  gold  district  with  little  success.
He  was  among  the  first  to  join  Count  de  Raousset-
Boulbon,  his  kinsman,  became  his  secretary,  and
wrote  the  articles  of  incorporation  of  the  "  Restau-
roda "  company,  founded  in  Mexico  in  1852  with
the  aid  of  French  bankers,  which  obtained  from
the  Mexican  authorities  a  grant  of  gold-mines  that
had  been  abandoned  on  account  of  their  proximity
to  the  territory  of  the  warlike  Apaches.  While
Raousset  completed  his  preparations  in  Mexico,


VILLERE


VIN


297


Villeraye  went  to  organize  the  expedition  in  San
Francisco,  where  he  was  subsequently  joined  by
Raousset,  and  on  1  June,  1852,  they  landed  at
Guaymas  with  270  armed  men,  mostly  Frenchmen,
and  two  field-guns.  Gen.  Blanco,  the  Mexican  com-
mander in  Sonora,  prohibited  their  entrance  into
the  country:  but  they  marched  to  Hermosillo,
stormed  the  place,  and  plundered  stores  and  pri-
vate houses,  thus  causing  the  whole  country  to  rise
in  arms  against  them.  Raousset  sent  Villeraye  to
negotiate  the  withdrawal  of  the  expedition  from  So-
nora, but  Gen.  Blanco  demanded  an  unconditional
surrender.  The  French  attacked  the  Mexican
lines  at  the  rancho  of  San  Jose,  4  Nov.,  but  were
driven  back  after  a  desperate  action,  and  compelled
to  capitulate.  Raousset,  Villeraye,  and  a  few  offi-
cers returned  to  San  Francisco,  but  afterward  went
back  to  Mexico,  where  they  were  well  received  by
Santa- Anna.  Villeraye  sought  to  enter  the  Mexi-
can military  service,  but  the  successful  expedition
of  William  Walker  to  Lower  California  induced  him
to  join  Raousset  in  San  Francisco  in  November,
1853,  where  he  took  the  command  of  the  re-enforce-
ments that  were  sent  by  the  latter  to  Walker.  He
landed  at  Guaymas,  where  he  was  surrounded  and
compelled  to  capitulate  to  the  Mexican  forces ;  but
his  party  was  released  through  the  intervention  of
the  commander  of  the  British  sloop  "  Dido,"  on
the  plea  that  they  had  arrived  in  a  British  mer-
chant vessel.  Nearly  the  whole  party  was  after-
ward shipped  back  to  San  Francisco,  but  Villeraye
and  a  few  others  entered  a  battalion  of  foreigners
that  had  been  mustered  by  the  Mexican  authori-
ties for  the  protection  of  the  state.  The  strength
of  this  battalion  was  afterward  increased  by  re-
cruits sent  purposely  by  Raousset,  and  when  the
latter  landed,  1  July,  1854,  at  Algodones,  near
Guaymas,  Villeraye  was  commander  of  one  of  the
companies  of  the  foreign  battalion.  Being  secretly
devoted  to  the  cause  of  his  former  commander,  he
went  over  to  him  with  the  foreign  legion  at  his  at-
tack on  Guaymas,  13  July,  1854,  and  was  killed  in
the  midst  of  the  action.

VILLERE,  Joseph  Philippe  Roy  de  (vil-ray),
soldier,  b.  in  France :  d.  in  Louisiana  in  1769.  He
was  an  officer  in  a  French  regiment  that  was  sta-
tioned in  Canada,  his  father  having  come  to  Louisi-
ana with  Iberville's  first  expedition.  Afterward  he
was  naval  secretary  of  Louisiana.  In  1769  he  headed
an  insurrection  against  the  Spanish  authorities,  and
was  arrested,  and  killed. — His  son,  Jacques,  gov-
ernor of  Louisiana,  b.  near  New  Orleans,  La.,  28
April,  1761 ;  d.  there  in  1831,  was  a  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers  under  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  in
1814-'15,  and  counselled  him  to  accept  the  prof-
fered services  of  Pierre  Lafitte  and  his  outlaws,  and
to  flood  the  ground  on  which  the  British  troops
were  encamped  by  cutting  the  dikes  of  the  Mis-
sissippi. He  was  the  second  governor  of  Louisi-
ana, succeeding  William  C.  C.  Claiborne  in  1818,
and  continuing  in  office  four  years,  and  did  much
to  diminish  the  friction  between  the  French  popu-
lation and  the  U.  S.  authorities  and  English-speak-
ing emigrants. — Jacques's  son,  Gabriel,  soldier,  b.
in  Louisiana,  15  March  1785 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  6  July,  1852,  held  a  major's  commission  in  the
militia,  and  at  the  time  of  the  British  invasion  was
detailed  to  watch  the  Bayou  Bienvenu.  The  ene-
my, landing  at  Fisherman's  Village,  captured  him,
but  he  escaped  and  reached  New  Orleans,  giving
Gen.  Jackson  warning  of  their  approach.

YILLERMET,  Jules  Gtuillauine  Ferdinand
de  (veel-air-may),  French  scientist,  b.  in  Lan-
derneau  in  1802 ;  d.  in  La  Union,  Salvador,  in
1859. He  held  for  several  years  an  office  in  the


colonial  department  at  Paris,  and  in  1854  was
given  a  mission  to  Mexico  and  Central  America.
After  exploring  southern  Mexico  and  Lower  Cali-
fornia, where  he  suffered  great  hardships,  he  tried
to  enter  Sonora,  but  was  prevented  by  the  political
condition  of  the  state.  He  visited  Panama,  Costa
Rica,  and  Salvador,  studied  the  volcanoes  of  Que-
zaltenango,  Izalco,  and  San  Miguel,  and  prepared
a  valuable  geological  chart  of  Central  America.
He  died  from  yellow  fever  just  before  leaving  for
France.  Villermet's  explorations  were  continued
by  the  scientific  expedition  of  Auguste  Dolfus
and  Eugene  de  Montserrat,  and,  from  his  notes
and  the  materials  he  had  collected,  his  brother
published  "  Voyage  dans  le  San  Salvador,  suivi
d'une  etude  sur  les  volcans  de  l'Amerique  Cen-
trale  "  (2  vols.,  Geneva,  1860).

VILLIERS,  Jean  Pierre  (veel-yair),  French
missionary,  d.  in  Cayenne  in  1672.  He  sailed  in
1664  with  Lefevre  de  la  Barre  and  established  the
first  missions  in  Guiana.  In  1669  he  returned  to
France  for  supplies,  and,  arriving  in  the  follow-
ing year,  he  founded  a  convent  in  Cayenne,  with
seven  missionaries,  and  built  a  church  in  that  city.
He  came  into  collision  with  the  French  company
by  interfering  in  their  transactions  with  the
Indians,  and  was  imprisoned,  but  obtained  his
release  on  promising  not  to  offend  again.  Villiers
wrote  "  Etablissements  de  la  foi  fondes  dans  la  Nou-
velle  France  du  Sud,  des  sauvages  qui  l'habitent,
etc.,  avec  un  vocabulaire  de  la  langue  de  ces  peu-
ples  "  (Beauvais,  1690).

VILMOT,  Charles  Stanislas  (veel-mo), French
author,  b.  in  St.  Nazaire  in  1749 ;  d.  in  Nantes
in  1794.  He  held  an  office  in  the  quartermas-
ter's department  of  Count  Rochambeau's  army  in
1780-'2,  and  when  Marquis  de  Vaudreuil  embarked
the  French  contingent  for  Santo  Domingo,  he
chose  to  remain  in  the  United  States,  and  after-
ward engaged  in  business  in  Philadelphia.  He  re-
turned to  France  in  1786,  and  came  again  to  this
country  to  establish  a  ship-building  yard  at  Phila-
delphia for  French  speculators,  but  the  scheme
failed,  owing  to  the  French  revolution.  During
the  reign  of  terror  he  was  accused  of  being  a  party
to  the  noted  "  pacte  de  famine,"  and  was  drowned
in  Nantes  in  one  of  the  famous  "  noyades  "  organ-
ized by  Jean  Baptiste  Carrier.  He  wrote  "  Obser-
vations sur  les  services  administratifsdu  gouverne-
ment  des  Etats-Unis  de  l'Amerique  du  Nord "
(Nantes,  1786) ;  "  Journal  de  campagne,  notes  prises
pendant  la  guerre  de  l'independance  de  l'Amerique"
(1789);  and  "Notes  et  esquisses  sur  les  Etats-
Unis  de  l'Amerique  du  Nord  "  (1792).

VIN,  Moyse  Van,  Flemish  buccaneer,  b.  in
Flanders  about  1627;  d.  in  Panama  in  1678.  He
was  a  sailor  on  a  Flemish  vessel  trading  with
Santo  Domingo,  but  deserted  about  1650,  joined
the  buccaneers  in  Tortuga,  and  rose  rapidly
through  his  valor.  But  his  total  want  of  educa-
tion prevented  him  from  commanding  large  expe-
ditions, and  he  acted  as  lieutenant  of  Grandmont,
Van  Graaf,  Morgan,  and  Jacques  Nau,  with  whom
he  was  successively  associated  after  1660.  He  fol-
lowed the  last-named  in  all  his  expeditions  after
1666,  but  early  in  1670  abandoned  him,  when  he
was  planning  the  attack  on  Guatemala,  and,  join-
ing Henry  Morgan,  he  served  in  the  division  which
carried  the  fortress  on  Chagres  river,  and  assisted
in  the  capture  of  Panama.  After  Morgan's  flight
with  the  spoils,  Van  Vin  mustered  about  200  men
and  five  vessels,  made  a  raid  on  Puerto  del  Prin-
cipe, and  even  attacked  Porto  Bello.  He  ravaged
the  coast  of  Cam  peachy,  and  acquired  enormous
riches ;  but  he  did  not,  however,  enjoy  them,  as,


298


VINCENNES


VINCENT


having  entered  Panama  in  disguise,  he  was  recog-
nized, arrested,  and,  after  a  short  trial,  hanged  be-
fore the  palace  of  the  audiencia.

VINCENNES,  Jean  Baptiste  Bissot,  Sienr
de,  Canadian  explorer,  b.  in  Quebec  in  January,
1688;  d.  in  Illinois  in  1736.  He  was  the  tenth
son  of  Francois  Bissot,  a  rich  merchant  of  Quebec
and  owner  of  a  Canadian  seigniory,  and  a  near
relative  to  the  explorer  Louis  Joliet — some  say  his
nephew,  others  his  brother-in-law.  He  fought
against  the  Iroquois  at  Mackinaw  at  the  age  of
ten,  entered  the  Canadian  army  as  ensign  in  1701,
and  was  employed  in  the  west.  In  1704  he  was
sent  to  the  Miami  country,  where  he  rendered  valu-
able services  to  the  crown,  rescuing  some  Iroquois
Eioneers  from  the  Ottawas,  and  otherwise  greatly
efriending  the  Indians.  In  1712  he  saved  De-
troit from  the  invasion  of  the  Fox  Indians,  but
came  afterward  in  collision  with  La  Mothe  Cadil-
lac, the  commander  of  that  place,  who  asked  for
his  recall.  Vincennes's  fault  was  overlooked,  ow-
ing to  his  services,  and,  becoming  reconciled  with
Cadillac,  he  became  afterward  the  latter's  most
trusted  lieutenant.  He  was  employed  successively
in  the  Miami  country,  in  Ohio,  and  in  Michigan,
but  toward  1725  resided  on  the  present  site  of  the
city  of  Vincennes,  which  is  named  in  his  honor,
and  built  there  an  earth  fort  and  a  trading-post.
Early  in  1736  he  was  sent  to  assist  in  the.  expedi-
tion against  the  Chickasaws.  Mustering  about  100
Miami  Indians,  he  joined  D'Artaguette  and  they
entered  the  territory  of  the  Chickasaws  by  way  of
Illinois,  and  were  to  co-operate  with  an  invading
column  from  Louisiana.  The  latter  expedition
failed,  but  D'Artaguette  and  Vincennes,  unaware
of  the  danger,  pushed  forward.  Meanwhile  the
Chickasaws  collected  all  their  forces  and  attacked,
but  were  repelled  with  great  loss,  and  the  French
captured  several  villages.  But  the  Chickasaws
brought  about  the  desertion  of  the  Miamis,  and
the  invaders  were  finally  defeated,  nearly  all  being
killed  or  taken  prisoners.  D'Artagnette,  Vincen-
nes, Father  Senat,  and  others  were  burned  at  the
stake  in  the  principal  village  of  the  Chickasaws.

VINCENT,  Charles  (van-song),  Baron  de  St.,
West  Indian  soldier,  b.  in  Jeremie,  Hayti,  in  1739:
d.  in  Leogane  in  October,  1794.  He  entered  the
military  service,  fought  in  this  country  under
Rochambeau  in  1780-'l,  and  after  the  conclusion
of  peace  commanded  a  regiment  in  Tobago  and
Martinique.  In  1787  he  was  appointed  governor
and  commander-in-chief  at  Cape  Francais,  where
he  took  an  active  part  in  the  civd  wars  that  deso-
lated the  colony,  put  down  the  rebellion  of  Vin-
cent Oge  and  Chavannes,  and  checked  the  revolu-
tionary movement  that  was  led  by  Jean  Francois
and  Jean  Biassou.  He  sided  afterward  with  Gov.
Galband  against  Commissioner  Etienne  Polverel,
and  was  taken  prisoner  at  Cape  Francais,  but  par-
doned by  Polverel  on  account  of  his  military  tal-
ents. St.  Vincent  was  sent  to  oppose  the  progress
of  the  British,  who  had  landed  at  Jeremie,  19  Sept.,
1793,  and  drove  them  from  Tiburon,  but  was  de-
feated at  Leogane,  and  killed  in  the  action.

YINCENT,  Francis,  journalist,  b.  in  Bristol,
England,  17  March,  1822;  d.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,
23  June,  1884.  He  was  partly  educated  in  Eng-
land, emigrated  at  an  early  age  to  Dover,  Del.,
where  he  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  classics,
was  apprenticed  to  the  proprietor  of  the  "  Dela-
ware Gazette"  in  1839,  and  on  22  Aug.,  1845,
began  the  publication  in  Wilmington  of  a  news-
paper which  he  called  the  "  Blue  Hen's  Chicken,"
from  a  designation  that  was  given  to  the  Delaware
soldiers  in  the Revolution  on  account  of  their


fighting  qualities.  He  advocated  representation
according  to  population,  election  of  all  officers  by
the  people,  simplification  of  legal  procedure,  the
abolition  of  the  whipping-post  and  of  lotteries,
universal  common-school  education,  the  submis-
sion of  important  laws  to  the  popular  vote,  exemp-
tion of  household  goods  and  tools  from  seizure
for  debt,  the  ten  -  hour  working-day,  and  other
changes  in  the  constitution  and  statute  law  of
Delaware.  His  projects  met  with  opposition  from
the  leaders  of  parties,  but  gained  ground  among
the  people.  In  1850  the  Democrats  accepted  his
proposition  for  a  constitutional  convention,  which
met  on  4  March,  1853,  and  adopted  the  elective
principle  and  other  reforms,  but  left  representa-
tion disproportionate.  Many  who  approved  re-
vision voted  against  the  instrument,  with  the  ex-
pectation of  ultimately  securing  a  better  one,  but
after  Vincent  sold  his  paper  in  1854  the  agita-
tion ceased  until  he  temporarily  revived  the  ques-
tion in  1862,  when  he  had  purchased  the  "Com-
monwealth," and  changed  its  name  to  the  "  Blue
Hen's  Chicken."  He  was  a  member  of  the  Re-
publican party  from  its  first  organization  in  Dela-
ware, and  strongly  supported  the  government  in
his  journal  until  he  disposed  of  it  in  September,
1864.  He  began  the  publication  of  "Vincent's
Semi- Annual  Register  in  1860,  but  discontinued
it  at  the  beginning  of  the  war.  He  addressed  to
the  Cobden  club  an  "Essay  recommending  the
Union  of  Great  Britain  and  her  Colonies  and  the
United  States,  and  the  Final  Union  of  the  World
into  One  Great  Nation  "  (Wilmington,  1868).  This
scheme  he  discussed  further  in  a  paper  that  he  pre-
sented to  the  European  league  of  peace  at  its  meet-
ing at  Paris  in  1870.  In  July,  1871,  he  published
a  plan  for  a  railroad  from  New  York  to  London  by
way  of  Bering  strait,  which  he  also  laid  before
the  New  York  chamber  of  commerce  and  the  Na-
tional board  of  trade  in  Baltimore.  He  wrote  a
"  History  of  Delaware  "  (Philadelphia,  1870-'l).

YINCENT,  Frank,  traveller,  b.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  2  April,  1848.  He  was  educated  at  Yale,
from  which  college  he  received  the  honorary  de-
gree of  A.  M.  in  1875,  and  was  engaged  during  a
period  of  eleven  years  in  travel  and  exploration  in
all  parts  of  the  world.  Mr.  Vincent  is  a  member
of  many  geographical,  ethnological,  and  archaeo-
logical societies,  and  has  received  decorations  from
the  kings  of  Burmah,  Cambodia,  and  Siam.  His
valuable  collection  of  Siamese  and  Cambodian  anti-
quities and  art  and  industrial  objects  he  presented
in  1884  to  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art,  New
York  city.  The  ruined  temples  and  palaces  of
Cambodia  and  Cochin  China  were  described  for
the  first  time  in  his  book  entitled  "  The  Land  of
the  White  Elephant  "  (New  York,  1874).  Among
his  other  works  are  "  Through  and  Through  the
Tropics  "  (1876) ;  "  Two  Months  in  Burmah  "  (1877) ;
"  The  Wonderful  Ruins  of  Cambodia  "  (1878) ;
"Norsk,  Lapp,  and  Finn"  (1881);  "Around  and
about  South  America  "  (1888) ;  and  "  The  Republics
of  Central  America"  (1889).

YINCENT,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1765;  d.  in  London.  England,  21  June,
1848.  He  entered  the  British  army  as  ensign  in
July,  1781,  was  made,  a  lieutenant  in  August  of
the  following  year,  and  became  a  captain  in  Octo-
ber, 1786.  He  attained  the  grade  of  major  in  Way,
1795,  in  January,  1800,  that  of  lieutenant-colonel,
in  July,  1810,  that  of  colonel,  and  in  June,  1813,
was  made  a  major-general.  He  was  one  of  the
ablest  British  officers  in  Canada  during  the  war
of  1812— '15.  He  was  commandant  of  Fort  George,
and  when  compelled  to  evacuate  that  post,  in  1(^13,


VINCENT


VINCENT


299


crty&u^Ai  Chu^cjL^itr


took  position  at  Stony  Creek,  where  he  was  over-
taken by  Gen.  John  Chandler.  He  attempted  to
surprise  the  American  camp  at  night,  but  was  un-
successful. He  was  made  a  lieutenant-general  in
May,  1825,  and  a  full  general  in  November,  1841.

VINCENT,  John  Heyl,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Tuscaloosa,  Ala.,  23  Feb.,  1832.  He  was  educated
at  academies  in  Milton  and  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  began
to  preach  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  completed  his

training  for  the
ministryat  Wesley-
an  institute,  New-
ark, N.  J.,  and  in
the  four  years'  the-
ological course  of
the  New  Jersey
conference,  into
which  he  was  re-
ceived in  1853.  He
was  ordained  dea-
con in  1855  and  el-
der in  1857,  when
he  was  transferred
to  the  Rock  River
conference,  serv-
ing as  pastor  in
Galena,  Chicago,
and  elsewhere  till
1865.  In  that  year  he  established  the  "  Northwest
Sunday-School  Quarterly,"  and  in  1866  the  "Sun-
day-School Teacher."  He  was  appointed  general
agent  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Sunday-school
union,  and  in  1868  was  elected  by  the  general  con-
ference corresponding  secretary  both  of  the  union
and  of  the  tract  society,  in  which  posts  he  was  con-
tinued till  1884.  He  was  the  editor  of  the  Sunday-
school  publications  of  his  denomination,  conduct-
ing the  "  Sunday-School  Journal,"  published  in  New
York  city,  with  such  success  that  its  circulation  rose
from  16,500  to  160,000,  while  that  of  his  lesson-books
has  been  nearly  2,500,000  copies.  In  1873,  with
Lewis  Miller,  of  Akron,  Ohio,  he  projected  a  Sun-
day-school teachers'  institute  for  the  purpose  of  pre-
paring teachers  for  their  work  by  means  of  lectures
and  drills.  The  institute  first  met  at  Chautauqua,
N.  Y.,  in  August,  1874,  and  has  since  assembled
each  year  in  the  same  place.  It  has  extended  be-
yond the  limits  of  its  original  design,  and  given
rise  to  allied  institutions,  which,  as  well  as  the
Sunday-school  assemblies  and  the  international
lessons,  extend  their  benefits  to  members  of  all
Christian  bodies.  The  Chautauqua  literary  and
scientific  circle,  which  prescribes  courses  of  read-
ing for  all  classes  of  people,  was  founded  in  1878,
and  within  a  few  years  had  100,000  students  on  its
rolls.  In  connection  with  this  the  Chautauqua  uni-
versity was  established,  a  summer  school  in  which
lectures  on  most  of  the  arts  and  sciences  are  given,
and  of  which  Dr.  Vincent,  who  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Ohio  Wesleyan  university  in  1870,  and
that  of  LL.  D.  from  Washington  and  Jefferson  in
1885,  has  been  chancellor  from  the  beginning.  At
the  general  conference  of  1888  he  was  elected  a
bishop.  Among  his  published  works  are  "Little
Footprints  in  Bible  Lands"  (New  York,  1861);
"  The  Chautauqua  Movement "  (1886) ;  "  The  Home
Book"  (1886);  "The  Modern  Sunday  -  School  "
(1887);  and  "Better  Not"  (1887).— His  cousin,
Strong,  soldier,  b.  in  Waterford,  Erie  co.,  Pa.,
17  June,  1837;  d.  near  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  7  July,
1863,  after  passing  through  Erie  academy  and
working  for  two  years  in  his  father's  iron-foundry,
entered  the  scientific  school  at  Hartford,  Conn.,
next  became  a  student  of  Trinity  college,  and,
leaving  that,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1859.


He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1860,  and  began  practice  in  Erie.  When  the  civil
war  began  he  enlisted  as  a  private  for  three  months
in  the  volunteer  army,  was  chosen  2d  lieutenant,
and  soon  afterward  was  appointed  adjutant.  lie
re-enlisted  for  three  years,  was  made  major,  and
promoted  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  83d  Pennsyl-
vania infantry  in  September,  1861.  He  was  en-
gaged in  the  construction  of  siege-works  at  York-
town,  and  soon  after  the  battle  of  Hanover  Court-
House  was  prostrated  with  swamp  fever.  He  re-
turned to  his  regiment  in  October,  1862,  as  its
colonel,  and  at  Fredericksburg  temporarily  com-
manded a  brigade  in  a  difficult  retreat.  He  de-
clined the  appointment  of  judge-advocate  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  in  April,  1863,  took  command
of  his  brigade  as  ranking  colonel,  and  effectively
supported  Gen.  Alfred  Pleasonton's  cavalry  at
Aldie.  At  Gettysburg,  orders  having  come  from
the  front  from  Gen.  George  Sykes,  at  the  sugges-
tion of  Gen.  Gouverneur  K.  Warren,  for  a  brigade
to  occupy  Little  Round  Top,  Vincent,  in  the  ab-
sence of  the  division  commander,  assumed  the
responsibility  of  taking  up  his  own  brigade.  On
reaching  the  hill,  he  quickly  selected  a  position,
posting  his  men  on  the  left-hand  crest  of  Little
Round  Top,  and  in  the  hollow  between  it  and
Round  Top,  where  the  Confederates  made  their
first  attempt  to  ascend  the  ravine  and  turn  the
left  flank  of  the  National  army,  in  withstanding
which  his  force  was  supported  by  the  command  of
Gen.  Stephen  H.  Weed  and  the  battery  of  Capt.
Charles  E.  Hazlett  on  the  middle  crest  of  Little
Round  Top,  and  by  the  regiment  of  Col.  Patrick
II.  O'Rorke,  which  was  sent  up  by  Gen.  Warren
just  in  time  to  frustrate  the  flank  movement  of
the  enemy.  Vincent  was  shot  while  cheering  on
this  regiment  as  it  faltered  before  the  fire  of  the
Confederate  infantry. — Strong's  brother,  Boyd,
P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Erie,  Pa.,  18  May,  1845,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1867,  studied  theology,  and
after  serving  in  1871— '2  as  assistant  minister  of  St.
Paul's  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  Erie,  Pa.,
became  rector  of  a  new  church  in  that  town,  which
he  left  in  1874  to  assume  charge  of  Calvary  church
in  Pittsburg,  Pa.  He  was  elected  bishop  of  Dela-
ware in  1887  by  the  clergy,  but  was  not  confirmed
by  the  laity,  and  in  October,  1888,  was  chosen  as-
sistant bishop  of  southern  Ohio.

VINCENT,  Marvin  Richardson,  clergyman,
b.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  11  Sept.,  1834.  He  is
the  son  of  a  Methodist  clergyman,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1854,  and  for  the  ensuing  four
years  was  associated  with  Charles  Anthon  in  the
direction  of  Columbia  college  grammar-school.  In
1858  he  went  to  Troy,  N.  Y.,  as  professor  of  lan-
guages in  the  Methodist  university,  where  he  re-
mained four  years.  He  studied  theology  privately,
entered  the  Methodist  Episcopal  ministry  in  1860,
and  in  1862  became  pastor  of  a  church  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.  His  religious  views  having  changed,  he
attached  himself  to  the  Presbyterian  church,  and
on  18  June,  1863,  he  was  installed  as  pastor  of  a
church  of  that  denomination  in  Troy.  This  he
left  in  May,  1873.  to  enter  upon  the  pastorate  of
the  Church  of  the  Covenant  in  New  York  city,
which  he  left  in  1888  to  accept  a  professorship  in
the  Union  theological  seminary,  New  York  city.
He  received  the  degree  of  I).  D.  from  Union  college
in  1868.  Dr.  Vincent,  while  in  Troy  university,  in
collaboration  with  his  colleague,  Charlton  T.  Lewis,
translated  into  English  Johann  Albrecht  Bengel's
"Gnomon  of  the  New  Testament"  (2  vols.,  Phila-
delphia, 1860-2).  He  has  since  published,  besides
single  sermons,  tracts,  and  review  articles,  "Airfuse-


300


VINCENT


VINES


ment  a  Force  in  Christian  Training  "  (1867) ;  "  The
Two  Prodigals"  (1876);  "Gates  into  the  Psalm-
Country,"  a  series  of  discourses  (1878) ;  "  Stranger
and  Guest,"  a  book  of  tracts  (1879) ;  "  Faith  and
Character"  (1880);  "The  Minister's  Handbook"
(1882);  "In  the  Shadow  of  the  Pyrenees,"  a  vol-
ume of  travels  (1883) ;  "  God  and  Bread,"  sermons
(1884):  "The  Expositor  in  the  Pulpit"  (1884):
"Christ  as  a  Teacher"  (1886) ;  and  "  Word-Studies
in  the  New  Testament"  (3  vols.,  1887-9).

VINCENT,  Mary  Anne,  actress,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, England,  18  Aug.,  1818  ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
4  Sept.,  1887.  Sh%  made  her  first  appearance  on
the  stage,  under  her  maiden  name  of  Mary  Farley,
at  Cowes,  England,  on  25  April,  1835,  as  Lucy  in
George  Column's  farce  of  "  The  Review,"  and  in
August  of  the  same  year  married  James  R.  Vin-
cent, a  comedian,  with  whom  she  appeared  in  Eng-
land, Scotland,  and  Ireland,  till  1846,  when  they
came  to  the  United  States,  first  playing  in  the  Na-
tional theatre,  Boston,  on  11  Nov.,  in  "Popping
the  Question."  After  her  husband's  suicide,  10
June,  1850,  she  played  in  the  same  theatre  till  it
was  burned  in  1852,  and  then  joined  the  company
of  the  Boston  museum,  with  which  she  remained
connected  thenceforth.  She  played  a  great  variety
of  comedy  characters,  and  till  the  close  of  her  life
was  a  favorite  with  the  audiences  of  Boston,  and
did  much  to  elevate  and  dignify  her  profession  in
the  eyes  of  the  public.  Her  best-known  roles  were
Mrs.  Hardcastle,  Lady  Duberly,  the  Widow  Green,
and  Mrs.  Malaprop.

VINCENT,  Philip,  English  clergyman,  b.  near
Conisbrough,  Yorkshire,  England,  20  Nov.,  1600;
d.  probably  in  England  after  1638.  He  studied
at  the  University  of  Cambridge,  receiving  the  de-
gree of  A.  M.,  was  ordained  in  1625,  and  was
rector  at  Stoke  d'Abernon,  Surrey,  till  1629,  when
he  resigned  his  living.  After  the  death  in  1630  of
his  wife,  who  was  a  daughter  of  Sir  Christopher
Heydon,  a  writer  on  astrology,  he  began  a  wander-
ing life,  and  about  1632  sailed  for  Guiana.  He
subsequently  travelled  in  Germany,  and  in  1637
was  in  Massachusetts.  He  published  "  The  True
Relation  of  the  Late  Battle  fought  in  New  Eng-
land between  the  English  and  the  Pequot  Sal-
vages "  (London,  1638),  which  has  been  reprinted
in  the  "  Collections  "  of  the  Massachusetts  histori-
cal society,  3d  series,  vol.  vi.

VINCENT,  Thomas  McCnrdy,  soldier,  b.  near
Cadiz,  Harrison  co.,  Ohio,  15  Nov.,  1832.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  militarv  academy  in  1853,
and  on  8  Oct.,  1853,  became  2d  lieutenant  in  the
2d  artillery.  During  the  three  years  that  followed
he  served  with  his  company  in  Florida  during  ac-
tive operations  in  the  field  against  hostile  Indians,
and  from  severe  exposure  in  the  line  of  duty  be-
came dangerously  ill  in  May,  1855.  During  his
convalescence  Lieut.  Vincent  compiled  a  "  Sketch
of  South  Florida,"  which  was  used  by  troops  in  the
final  operations  pending  the  removal  ot  the  In-
dians, and  for  which  he  received  the  thanks  of  the
general-in-chief.  During  the  years  1855-'6  he  per-
formed the  duties  of  assistant  adjutant-general  and
quartermaster  and  commissary  of  subsistence.  He
served  with  his  company  at  Fort  Hamilton  and
Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  until  August,  1859,  when  he  was
detailed  as  principal  assistant  professor  of  chemis-
try at  the  military  academy.  Declining  the  ap-
pointment of  captain  in  the  18th  infantry,  he  was
appointed  assistant  adjutant-general  in  July,  1861,
and  assigned  to  the  Army  of  Northwestern  Vir-

finia,  being  engaged  in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.
n  August,  1861,  he  became  captain,  and  in  July,
1862,  major  of  staff. From  1861  till  1865  he  was


constantly  on  duty  in  the  adjutant-general's  office
at  Washington,  particularly  in  charge  of  the  "or-
ganization and  miscellaneous  business  of  the  vol-
unteer armies  of  the  United  States,"  persistent  ap-
plications for  service  in  the  field  being  disapproved
by  Sec.  Stanton  for  the  reason  that  "  the  public
interests  demanded  his  presence  in  the  war  depart-
ment." Not  only  did  the  responsibility  for  fram-
ing all  the  rolls  and  instructions  issued  for  the
government  of  the  volunteer  forces  in  service  dur-
ing the  war,  and  the  charge  connected  with  a  per-
sonnel of  more  than  90,000  commissioned  officers,
devolve  upon  Gen.  Vincent,  but  the  preparation  of
the  plan  (of  which  he  was  also  the  sole  author),  and
the  immediate  general  direction  of  the  work
under  it,  for  the  muster-out  and  disbandment  of
the  volunteer  armies,  numbering  1,034,064  officers
and  men,  distributed  to  1,274  regiments,  316  inde-
pendent companies,  and  192  batteries.  This  plan
was  prepared  in  advance  of  any  notification  from
the  secretary  of  war,  and  was  put  into  execution
immediately  upon  submission  to  that  officer  and
Gen.  Grant.  Since  the  war  Gen.  Vincent  has  been
identified  with  all  important  changes  in  the
methods  of  transacting  the  business  of  the  war  de-
partment, the  revision  of  army  regulations,  and  he
has  served  as  adjutant-general  of  various  depart-
ments, and  in  September,  1888,  was  ordered  to
Washington  on  duty.  He  became  lieutenant-
colonel  and  assistant  adjutant-general  in  July,
1881,  and  was  brevetted  to  the  grade  of  brigadier-
general,  U.  S.  army,  "  for  faithful  and  meritorious
services  during  the  rebellion."  Gen.  Vincent  has
made  several  reports  to  congress  on  "army  or-
ganization," and  is  the  author  of  "The  Military
Power  of  the  United  States  during  the  War  of  the
Rebellion"  (New  York,  1881).— His  brother,  Al-
bert Oliver,  soldier,  b.  in  Cadiz,  Ohio,  7  Feb.,
1842 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  9  Dec,  1882,  was  edu-
cated at  common  schools,  and  at  the  age  of  nine-
teen was  about  to  establish  himself  as  a  printer,
when,  at  the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  he  was  tend-
ered by  Sec.  Cameron  a  commission  as  2d  lieuten-
ant in  the  2d  artillery.  From  1861  till  1866  he
served  with  his  battery,  part  of  the  time  command-
ing it  during  all  the  operations  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  principally  with  horse  artillery  in  con-
junction with  the  cavalry,  comprising  thirty-five
battles  and  minor  affairs,  besides  continuous  and
rapid  marches.  He  was  commissary  of  musters
and  superintendent  of  volunteer  recruiting  service
in  1865,  and  served  with  his  regiment  in  California
and  Washington  territory  in  1865-'7.  He  was
brevetted  captain  for  Antietam,  major  for  Gettys-
burg, and  lieutenant-colonel  for  faithful  and  meri-
torious services,  13  Nov.,  1865,  and  declined  the  ap-
pointment of  captain,  38th  infantry,  in  July,  1866.
He  served  as  major  of  the  4th  Arkansas  cavalry  in
1864-'5,  and  was  retired  from  active  service  in  1869.
VINES,  Richard,  colonist,  b.  near  Bideford,
Devonshire,  England,  about  1585 ;  d.  on  the  island
of  Barbadoes  19  April,  1651.  He  was  educated  as
a  physician,  and  was  sent,  with  others,  to  Maine  in
1609,  to  explore  the  country  and  effect  a  settle-
ment, by  Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges,  who  appointed
him  his  confidential  agent  and  steward-general  of
the  province.  The  settlement  was  established  at
Winter  Harbor,  near  the  mouth  of  Saco  river,  in
1616-'17.  In  1629  Vines  and  John  Oldham  re-
ceived a  patent  of  lands,  that  are  now  occupied  by
the  town  of  Biddeford.  Me.,  from  the  council  of
Plymouth,  England.  He  was  the  principal  super-
intendent of  the  plantation  until  the  arrival  in  1635
of  William  Gorges,  who  appointed  him  a  coun-
cillor, and  left  the  government  in  his  hands  once


VINGUT


VINTON


301


more  on  returning  to  England  in  1643.  In  1645
the  general  court,  not  having  heard  from  the  pro-
prietor for  more  than  a  year,  constituted  a  provis-
ional government,  making  Vines  deputy  -  gover-
nor, with  authority  to  take  possession  of  the  prop-
erty of  Gorges  and  to  pay  his  debts.  The  rival
claims  to  the  proprietorship  of  the  province  raised
by  Alexander  Rigby,  a  lawyer  from  England,  who
belonged  to  the  party  of  parliament,  caused  Vines
such  trouble  that  before  the  close  of  1645  he  re-
signed his  office  and  returned  to  England.  Soon
afterward  he  settled  in  Barbadoes,  where  he  be-
came a  planter  and  practised  his  profession.

VINGUT,  Francisco  Javier,  educator,  b.  in
Cuba  in  1823.  He  came  to  the  United  States  about
1848,  and  for  many  years  was  professor  of  the
Spanish  language  and  literature  in  the  University
of  the  city  of  New  York.  He  edited  papers  called
"La  Aurora"  and  "La  Indiana"  in  Spanish  and  Eng-
lish, and  published  grammars  and  phrase-books  for
learning  the  Spanish.  English,  and  French  lan-
guages.— His  wife,  Gertrude,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  about  1830,  was  a  daughter  of  Sum-
ner L.  Fairfield,  the  poet.  Her  first  work  was
"  Irene,  or  the  Autobiography  of  an  Artist's  Daugh-
ter "  (Boston,  1854).  She  edited  "  Gems  of  Span-
ish Poetry,"  in  conjunction  with  her  husband  (New
York,  1855),  and  afterward  published  two  novels
entitled  "  Madeline  "  and  "  Naomi  Torrente :  the
Historv  of  a  Woman  "  (1864).

VINING,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Dover.  Del.,  23
Dec,  1758 ;  d.  there  in  February,  1802.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Continental  congress  from  1784  till
1786,  and  was  elected  to  the  1st  Federal  congress
as  the  only  representative  from  Delaware,  and  re-
elected for  another  term,  serving  from  6  May,  1789,
till  2  March,  1793.  He  was  then  sent  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  taking  his  seat  on  2  Dec,  1793,  and  serving
till  6  March,  1798,  when  he  resigned.

VINTON,  Frederic,  bibliographer,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  9  Oct.,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  Am-
herst in  1837,  and  studied  theology  at  Andover
and  New  Haven,  but  was  never  ordained.  Having
trained  himself  in  a  private  library  during  five
years,  he  entered  the  service  of  the  Boston  public
library  in  1856  as  first  assistant.  He  entered  the
new  building  on  Boylston  street,  with  the  30,000
volumes  that  had  been  given  by  Joshua  Bates,  and
organized  the  arrangement  that  now  exists.  He
assisted  in  preparing  the  "  Index  to  the  Catalogue
of  Books  in  the  Bates  Hall"  (1861)  and  the  "First
Supplement"  to  it  (1866).  He  removed  to  Wash-
ington, in  January,  1865,  to  become  first  assistant
in  the  library  of  congress,  and  held  the  post  eight
years.  He  there  prepared  six  annual  supplements
to  the  "  Alphabetical  Catalogue  of  the  Library  of
Congress  "  and  the  "  Index  of  Subjects  "  (2  vols.,
Washington,  1869).  In  1873  he  became  librarian
of  Princeton  college,  of  whose  library  he  printed
the  "  Subject  Catalogue  "  (New  York,  1884).

VINTON,  Frederick  Porter,  painter,  b.  in
Bangor,  Me.,  29  Jan.,  1846.  He  went  abroad  in
1875,  studied  for  some  time  under  Leon  Bonnat  in
Paris,  and  thence  went,  in  1877,  to  Munich,  where
he  studied  for  a  year  in  the  academy  under  Ferdi-
nand Wagner  and  Wilhelm  Diez.  Returning  to
Paris,  he  became  a  pupil  in  the  school  of  Jean  Paul
Laurens.  At  the  salon  of  1878  he  exhibited  "  Ital-
ian Girl,"  and  in  the  Paris  exposition  of  the  same
year  he  also  had  two  paintings.  In  1878  he  re-
turned to  the  United  States  and  opened  a  studio
in  Boston.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the
National  academy  in  1882.  His  works  painted
since  he  settled  in  Boston  are  mostly  portraits,  in-
cluding those  of  Sir  Lyon  Playfair  and  Alexander


H.Vinton  (1880);  Wendell  Phillips  (1881);  Will-
iam Warren  (1882);  Francis  Parkman  (1883);  An-
drew P.  Peabody  and  Gen.  Charles  Devens  (1884) ;
and  George  F.  Choate  and  George  F.  Hoar  (1885).

VINTON,  John  Adams,  genealogist,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  5  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Winchester,  Mass.,
13  Nov.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1828,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1831,  ordained  as  a  Congregational  minister,  16
May,  1832,  and  held  various  pastorates  in  Maine,
Vermont,  and  Massachusetts.  In  1846-'7  he  was
agent  of  the  American  society  for  ameliorating  the
condition  of  the  Jews,  and  in  1859-60  he  was
chaplain  to  the  state  almshouse  at  Monson,  Mass.
After  the  latter  date  he  held  no  charge,  but  resided
at  South  Boston  and  then  at  Winchester,  and  de-
voted himself  to  genealogical  researches.  He  con-
tributed many  articles  to  periodicals,  including
"  Reminiscences  of  the  Park  Street  Church  "  in  the
Boston  "  Recorder  "  (1849),  and  was  the  author  of
"The  Vinton  Memorial"  (Boston,  1858;  abridged
ed.,  entitled  "Sketches  of  the  Vinton  and  other
Families,"  1858);  "The  Giles  Memorial"  (1864);
"  The  Sampson  Family  in  America  "  (1864) ;  "  Deb-
orah Sampson,  the  Female  Soldier  of  the  Revolu-
tion," a  reprint,  with  introduction  and  notes,  of  a
rare  work  that  was  published  at  Dedham  in  1797
(1866);  "The  Symmes  Memorial."  containing  an
autobiography  of  the  author  (1873) ;  "  The  Upton
Memorial"  (printed  privately,  Bath,  Me.,  1874);
and  "The  Richardson  Memorial  "  (Portland,  1876).

VINTON,  John  Rogers,  soldier,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  16  June,  1801 ;  d.  near  Vera  Cruz.
Mexico,  22  March,  1847. He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1817,  served  in  Florida
and  Mexico,  and  was  killed  by  the  windage  of  a
cannon-ball,  at  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz. He  had
become  captain  in  the  3d  artillery  on  28  Dec,  1835.
He  was  brevetted  major  on  23  Sept.,  1846,  for  gal-
lantry at  Monterey,  and  the  degree  of  A.  M.  was
given  him  by  Brown  in  1837. — His  brother,  David
Hammond,  soldier,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  4  May,
1803;  d.  in  Stamford,  Conn.,  21  Feb.,  1873,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1822,
was  commissioned  to  the  4th  artillery,  and  in  1823
transferred  to  the  infantry. After  a  term  of  gar-
rison and  special  duty,  he  was  sent  to  Florida  in
1836,  where  he  was  employed  on  quartermaster  duty,
and  in  1837  was  made  quartermaster-general  of
Florida. He  continued  in  this  service  until  1846,
in  which  year  he  was  made  chief  quartermaster  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  John  E.  Wool,  with  the  rank  of
major,  and  served  in  Mexico. He  was  chief  quar-
termaster of  the  Department  of  the  West  in  1852-'6,
of  the  Department  of  Texas  in  1857-'61,  and  was
taken  prisoner  upon  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Twiggs
to  the  Confederates  in  February,  1861. Being  ex-
changed after  a  few  months,  in  August,  1861,  he  was
made  deputy  quartermaster-general  and  chief  quar-
termaster at  New  York,  where  until  1866  he  ren-
dered valuable  services. In  1864  he  was  brevetted,
for  faithful  and  meritorious  services,  colonel  and
brigadier-general. In  1866  he  became  assistant
quartermaster-general,  and  in  the  same  year  was
placed  upon  the  retired  list. — Another  brother,
Alexander  Hamilton,  clergyman,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  2  May,  1807;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
26  April,  1881,  studied  at  Brown  and  was  graduated
at  the  medical  department  of  Yale  in  1828. He
settled  in  Pomfret,  Conn.,  and  there  practised  his
profession  for  three  years. Then entering  the
General  theological  seminary  of the Protestant
Episcopal  church  he  was  graduated  in  1835  and
ordained  deacon  on  28  June,  1835,  by  Bishop  Ben-
jamin T.  Onderdonk. He  had  charge  of  St.  Paul's


302


VINTON


VINTON


in  Portland,  Me.,  in  1835,  and  was  made  priest  by
Bishop  Griswold  on  5  Oct.,  1836. His  successive

Sarishes  thereafter  were  Grace  church,  Providence,
L  I.  (1836-'42) ;  St.  Paul's,  Boston  (1842-'58) ;  Holy
Trinity,  Philadelphia  (1858-'61);  St.  Mark's,  New
York  city  (I861-r9) ;  and  Emmanuel  church,  Boston
(1869-'77).  Returning  to  Pomfret.  where  he  had
retained  his  home,  he  continued  during  the  winters
to  lecture  on  systematic  divinity  at  the  Episcopal
divinity-school  in  Cambridge,  Mass.  The  degree  of
S.  T.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York  in  1843,  and  by  Harvard  in
1853.  Dr.  Vinton  was  a  candidate  for  the  bishopric
of  Pennsylvania  in  1845,  but  was  defeated  by  Alonzo
Potter.  He  was  among  the  most  active  of  the  "  low
church  "  party  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.
Dr.  Vinton  was  the  author  of  a  volume  of  "  Ser-
mons" (Philadelphia,  1855);  "Lectures  on  Evi-
dences of  Christianity"  (1855);  and  "Sermons"
(Boston,  1867) ;  besides  which  he  published  single
sermons  and  contributed  to  reviews  and  maga-
zines.—  Another  brother,  Francis,  soldier  and
clergvman,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  29  Aug..  1809 ;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  29  Sept.,  1872,  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1830,  and  commis-
sioned 2d  lieutenant  in  the  3d  artillery.  Shortly
afterward  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  a  detachment
of  troops  destined  to  form  part  of  the  garrison  of
Fort  Snelling,  Minn.,  near  where  the  city  of  St.
Paul  now  stands.  He  served  against  the  Indians
in  Georgia  and  Alabama,  receiving  with  other
officers  the  thanks  of  congress  and  a  grant  of  land
in  Indiana.  He  was  next  stationed  at  Fort  Inde-
pendence, Boston  harbor,  occupied  his  leisure  in
studying  at  the  Cambridge  law-school,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  at  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  in  1834.
In  1836  he  resigned  from  the  army  and  entered
the  General  theological  seminary  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church.  On  30  Sept.,  1838,  he  was  or-
dained deacon,  and  on  8  March,  1839,  priest,  by
Bishop  Griswold.  The  chief  churches  of  which  he
was  successively  in  charge  were  St.  Stephen's,  Provi-
dence, R.  I.  (1840-'2);  Trinity,  Newport,  R.  I.
(1842-'4);  Emanuel,  and  Grace,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
(1844-'6) ;  and  Trinity,  New  York  city  (1855-'72).

(See  accompa-
nying illustra-
tion.) Hewas  re-
peatedly called
to  other  par-
ishes, and  in
1848  was  elect-
ed bishop  of  In-
diana; but  to
none  of  these
invitations  did
he  yield  assent.
In  1852  he  was
a  candidate  for
the  provision-
al bishopric  of
New  York,  but
was  defeated  by
one  vote.  In
1869  he  was
elected  profes-
sor of  ecclesias-
tical law  and
polity  in  the
General  theo-
logical seminary.  In  all  the  parishes  of  which  he
had  charge  his  oratory  attracted  large  congrega-
tions. He  was  also  widely  known  as  a  lecturer,
and  during  the  civil  war  was  a  frequent  public
speaker. He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from


Columbia  in  1848,  that  of  D.  C.  L.  from  William
and  Mary  in  1869.  Dr.  Vinton  published  "Ar-
thur Tremaine.  or  Annals  of  Cadet  Life"  (New
York,  1830);  "Evidences  of  Christianity"  (Phila-
delphia, 1855);  "Oration  on  the  Annals  of  Rhode
Island  and  Providence  Plantation"  (New  York,
1863) ;  "  Manual  Commentary  on  the  General  Can-
on Law  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  "  (New
York,  1870);  and  many  pamphlets  and  sermons. —
Francis's  son,  Arthur  Dndley,  lawyer,  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  23  Dec,  1852,  was  educated  at  the  Brook-
lyn polytechnic  institute,  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia college  law-school  in  1873,  and  entered  the  law-
office  of  Evarts,  Southmayd  and  Choate,  where  he
remained  six  years.  In  1879  he  formed  a  law  part-
nership with  Perry  Belmont  and  George  G.  Frc-
linghuysen,  under  the  firm-name  of  Vinton,  Bel-
mont and  Frelinghuysen.  In  1881  Mr.  Freling-
huysen  withdrew  and  in  1884  Mr.  Belmont  was
elected  to  congress,  and  Mr.  Vinton  retired  with  a
fortune;  but  he  had  become  an  investor  in  rail-
roads, which  proved  insolvent,  and  for  which  he
had  indorsed  largely.  He  is  now  assistant  to
the  editor  of  the  "North  American  Review,"  and
has  published  two  novels,  "  The  Pomfret  Mvsterv  "
(New  York,  1880),  and  "  The  Unpardonable  Sin  "
(1888). — John  Rogers's  son,  Francis  Laurens,  en-
gineer, b.  in  Fort  Preble,  Me.,  1  June,  1835;  d.  in
Leadville,  Col.,  6  Oct.,  1879,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1856,  and  assigned  to  the
1st  cavalry,  but  did  not  join  his  regiment,  and  on  the
expiration  of  his  graduating  leave  pf  absence  re-
signed on  30  Sept.,  and  entered  the  Ecole  des  mines
at  Paris,  where  he  received  the  degree  of  engineer
of  mines  in  1860.  He  was  then  an  instructor  in
Cooper  union,  New  York  city,  and  afterward  in
charge  of  explorations  in  Honduras  till  5  Aug.,
1861,  when  he  was  commissioned  captain  in  the
16th  infantry.  On  31  Oct.  he  became  colonel  of  the
43d  New  York  regiment,  with  which  he  served  in
the  peninsular  campaign,  and  after  a  month's  leave
of  absence  he  took  command  of  a  brigade  on  25
Sept.,  1862,  having  been  commissioned  brigadier-

feneral  of  volunteers  on  the  19th,  and  led  it  in  the
laryland  and  Rappahannock  campaigns  till  the
battle  of  Fredericksburg,  13  Dec,  1862,  where,  his
men  being  reluctant  to  advance,  he  himself  headed
the  charge,  and  received  a  disabling  wound  that
forced  him  to  resign  from  the  army  on  5  May,  1863.
His  appointment  as  brigadier-general  had  expired
on  3  March,  1863,  but  had  been  renewed  ten  days
later.  On  14  Sept.,  1864,  on  the  organization  of
Columbia  school  of  mines,  Gen.  Vinton  became  pro-
fessor of  mining  engineering  there,  and  in  1870  the
duties  of  his  chair  were  extended  so  as  to  include
civil  engineering ;  but  he  was  retired  on  15  Aug.,
1877,  and  from  that  time  till  his  death  acted  as  a
consulting  mining  engineer  at  Denver.  Col.  He
was  not  only  an  accomplished  mathematician,  but
a  good  draughtsman  and  musician.  Many  of  his
contributions  to  mining  journals,  notably  those  to
the  "Engineering  and  Mining  Journal,"  of  which
he  was  staff  correspondent  after  he  went  to  the  west,
and  his  professional  reports,  were  illustrated  by  his
own  hand.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Guard-
ian," a  poem  (New  York,  1869);  also  "Lectures
on  Machines,"  lithographed  from  notes  (1869) ;  and
"  Theory  of  the  Strength  of  Materials"  (1874).

VINTON,  Justus  Hatch,  missionary,  b.  in
Wellington.  Conn.,  in  1806 ;  d.  in  Kemendine,  Bur-
mah,  31  March,  1858.  He  was  graduated  in  1833  at
Hamilton  literary  and  theological  institution  (now
Madison  university),  and  in  July,  1834,  sailed  as  a
missionary  of  the  American  Baptist  board  to  Bur-
tnah,  where  he  labored  among  the  Karens  till  his


VINTON


VIVANCO


303


death,  being  stationed  successively  at  Chummerah,
Newville,  Maulmain,  where  he  had  charge  of  the
Karen  theological  seminary  in.  1851-2,  and  finally
at  Kemendine,  a  suburb  of  Rangoon.  At  one  time
eighteen  stations,  with  fifteen  churches,  were  un-
der his  care.— His  wife,  Calesta  Holman,  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Union,  Conn.,  in  1809  :  d.  in  Rangoon,
Burmah,  20  Dec,  1864,  was  educated  at  Wesleyan
academy,  Wilbraham,  Mass.,  and  married  Mr.  Vin-
ton in  1834.  She  was  successful  in  teaching  the
Karen  women,  and  was  the  author  of  several  hymn-
books  in  their  language.

VINTON,  Samuel  Finley,  congressman,  b.  in
South  Hadley,  Mass.,  25  Sept.,  1792;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  11
May,  1862.  He  was
graduated  at  Will-
iams in  1814,  stud-
ied law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in
1816,  and  began  to
practise  in  Gallipo-
lis,  Ohio.  He  was
chosen  to  congress
as  a  Whig,  serving
from  1  Dec,  1823,
till  3  March,  1837,
was  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Har-
rison ticket,  and
served  again  in  con-
gress in  1843-'51.
His  last  public  ser-
sp  vice was in  1862,

/  /> 2?°/7/  '■+■ when he  was ap-

O^^cT  r&m&n>  pointed  by  Presi-
dent Lincoln  to  ap-
E raise  the  slaves  that  had  been  emancipated  in  the
•istrict  of  Columbia  by  act  of  congress.  He  pub-
lished numerous  congressional  and  other  speeches,
including  "  Argument  for  Defendants  in  the  Case
of  Virginia  vs.  Garner  and  Others  for  an  Alleged
Abduction  of  Slaves  "  (1865).  His  daughter,  Made-
leine, married  Admiral  John  A.  Dahlgren.

VIOMENIL,  Antoine  Charles  du  Houx  (ve-
o-may-neel),  Baron  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Fau-
concourt,  Vosges,  30  Nov.,  1728:  d.  in  Paris,  9
Nov.,  1792.  He  was  descended  from  an  ancient
family  of  Lorraine,  entered  the  army  when  he  was
twelve  years  of  age  as  sub-lieutenant  in  the  regi-
ment Limousin,  was  promoted  captain  in  1747,
and  was  severely  wounded  at  the  capture  of  Ber-
gen-op-Zoom.  During  the  seven  years'  war  in
1756-63  he  served  with  credit  as  colonel  of  the
Dauphinois  volunteers,  and  he  was  commander  of
the  light  troops  in  Conde's  army  in  the  campaign
of  Hanover.  He  was  promoted  brigadier-general
in  1762,  commanded  the  Hainaut  regiment  during
the  Corsican  campaign  in  1768-'9,  and  assisted  in
the  pacification  of  the  island.  He  was  made  major-
general,  3  Jan.,  1770,  and  sent  to  Poland,  where  he
captured  for  the  confederation  of  Bar  the  fortress
of  Cracow.  In  1780  he  was  appointed  second  in
command  of  the  army  that  was  sent  under  Count
de  Rochambeau  to  assist  the  American  colonists  in
their  struggle  for  independence.  He  was  promoted
lieutenant-general,  13  June,  1781,  and  for  his  gal-
lant conduct  at  the  siege  of  Yorktown  in  October,
1781,  where  he  led  his  troops  in  the  storming
of  the  redoubt,  was  given  the  grand  cross  of  St.
Louis.  After  the  conclusion  of  peace  he  was  gov-
ernor of  La  Rochelle  in  1783-'9,  and  at  the  time
of  Louis  XVI. 's  flight  in  1791  was  named  to  ac-
company the  royal  family.  At  the  attack  on  the
Tuileries  palace,  10  Aug.,  1792,  he  was  so  severely


wounded  in  defending  the  king  that  he  died  a  few
weeks  later.  See  "  Lettres  particulieres  du  Baron
de  Viomenil  sur  les  affaires  de  Pologne  en  1771— '2  "
(Paris,  1808).— His  brother,  Charles  Joseph  Hya-
cinthe  dn  Houx,  Marquis  de,  French  soldier,  b.
in  the  castle  of  Ruppes,  Vosges,  22  Aug.,  1734;  d.
in  Paris,  5  March,  1827,  entered  the  military  ser-
vice in  1747,  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Law-
feld  and  at  the  siege  of  Bergen-op-Zoom,  and  in
1757,  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Chevert,  assisted
in  the  taking  of  Prague.  He  commanded  a  bri-
gade in  Corsica  in  1768-'9,  and  was  promoted
brigadier-general  in  1770  and  major-general,  4
March,  1780.  He  came  with  Rochambeau  to  this
country  as  commander  of  the  French  artillery,
took  a  commendable  part  in  the  capture  of  York-
town,  and  was  granted  a  pension  of  5,000  francs
for  his  valor  in  the  siege.  From  February,  1789,
till  November,  1790,  he  was  governor-general  of
Martinique,  where  he  vigorously  repressed  the
revolutionary  uprisings.  He  emigrated  in  1791,
served  in  the  army  of  Conde  in  1792-'7,  and  went
afterward  to  Russia,  where  he  became  general  of
cavalry  and  commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of
Samogitia.  In  1801  he  went  to  Portugal  at  the
invitation  of  King  Joao  VI.,  and  was  commander-
in-chief  of  the  Portuguese  army  till  1808,  when  he
removed  to  England.  After  the  restoration  of
Louis  XVIII.  he  was  made  a  peer  of  France  and
lieutenant-general,  4  June,  1814;  field-marshal,  3
July,  1816 ;  and  a  marquis,  31  Aug.,  1817.  Before
this  he  had  been  known  as  the  Chevalier  de  Vio-
menil.— His  cousin,  Antoine  Louis  du  Houx,
Chevalier  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Fauconcourt  in
1745;  d.  in  Dijon  in  1788,  entered  the  army  in
1760,  served  with  distinction  in  Germany  and  Po-
land as  colonel,  accompanied  in  1780  his  cousin
Antoine  to  this  country  as  his  first  aide-de-camp,
and  was  severely  wounded  at  the  capture  of  York-
town  in  October,  1781.  For  his  services  during  the
war  he  was  made  a  knight  of  St.  Louis,  and  granted
a  pension  and  a  petty  government  in  Burgundy.

YIROT,  Claude  Francis  (ve-ro),  French  mis-
sionary, b.  in  France,  16  Feb.,  1721 ;  d.  near  Fort
Niagara  in  July,  1759.  He  became  a  Jesuit  in
1738,  and  in  1750  was  sent  to  Canada,  where  he
labored  for  several  years  among  the  Abnaki  In-
dians with  great  success.  He  was  then  sent  to
Ohio  river,  where  he  founded  a  mission  among  the
Delawares  at  Sakunk  on  the  mouth  of  the  Big
Beaver.  The  influence  that  he  was  gaining  over
the  tribe  excited  the  jealousy  of  Pakanke,  chief  of
the  Wolf  tribe,  and  he  was  forced  to  leave.  He
afterward  acted  as  chaplain  to  a  body  of  French
soldiers,  and  was  killed  when  he  participated  in  an
attempt  to  relieve  Fort  Niagara.

VIVANCO,  Manuel  Ignacio  de  (ve-vahn -co),
Peruvian  soldier,  b.  in  Lima  in  1806;  d.  in  Santi-
ago, Chili,  in  1873.  He  was  destined  by  his  par-
ents for  a  literarv  career,  and  was  a  student  in  the
College  of  San  Carlos,  of  Lima,  when  San  Martin
landed  with  the  liberating  army.  Leaving  college,
he  entered  the  patriotic  ranks,  and  after  1821  took
part  in  all  the  campaigns  for  independence,  being
present  in  the  battles  of  Junin  and  Ayacucho.
After  the  war  he  continued  in  the  army,  and  was
appointed  director  of  the  military  college.  At
different  times  he  was  prefect  of  several  of  the  de-
partments of  the  republic,  including  Arequipa,
where  he  was  idolized  by  the  people.  After  the
death  of  Gamarra  and  the  strife  between  Gen.
Torrico  and  Gen.  Vidal,  Vivanco  proclaimed  him-
self, on  20  April,  1843.  supreme  director  of  the
nation.  But  the  anarchy  and  intestine  strife  con-
tinued ;  Castilla  overthrew  Vivanco's  government


304


VIVIER


VOGDES


in  1845,  and  the  latter  was  exiled.  In  1851  he
was  proclaimed  presidential  candidate  by  a  mili-
tary rising  in  Arequipa,  but  his  followers  were  soon
defeated.  In  1856  he  returned  secretly  from  exile,
and  the  whole  population  of  Arequipa  rose  under
his  banner  against  the  dictator.  Castillo  marched
against  Arequipa,  and,  although  Lizardo  Montero,
who  had  mutinied  with  the  frigate  "Apurimac"
and  declared  for  Vivanco.  occupied  Islay  and  in
1857  Arica,  thus  cutting  off  the  dictator's  com-
munications, Vivanco  was  besieged,  and  in  1858
defeated  at  Arequipa  and  again  sought  exile.
After  Castillo's  fall  in  1862  Vivanco  returned  to
his  country,  and  was  appointed  by  San  Roman
minister  to  Chili,  whence  he  was  recalled  by  Gen.
Pezet  to  negotiate  with  Spain  the  treaty  of  27
Jan.,  1865.  When  the  government  of  Pezet  was
overthrown  in  November,  1865,  Prado  exiled  Vi-
vanco again ;  but  he  returned  in  1868  and  was
elected  senator  for  the  department  of  Arequipa.
The  Spanish  academy  appointed  him  a  correspond-
ing member.  In  1873  he  went  to  Chili  for  the  res-
toration of  his  health,  and  died  there.  He  was  a
brilliant  and  accomplished  statesman,  but  his  turbu-
lent spirit  kept  him  in  continuous  strife,  and  by
his  repeated  revolutions  he  contributed  to  the  de-
moralization of  his  country.

VIVIER,  Jacques  du  (veev-yay),  French  natu-
ralist, b.  in  Lorient,  France,  in  1720;  d.  there  in
1793.  He  studied  botany  in  Paris,  held  an  office
in  the  laboratory  of  the  Academy  of  sciences,  and
sailed  as  secretary  of  a  commission  that  was  sent
to  South  America  to  measure  an  arc  of  the  meridian
under  Charles  Marie  de  la  Condamine.  When  the
authorities  of  Lima  induced  some  of  the  mathe-
maticians to  stay  in  South  America,  Vivier  re-
mained with  Jean  Godin,  was  employed  in  opening
sulphur-mines  at  Cochabamba,  and  held  for  some
time  the  chair  of  botany  and  mathematics  in  the
College  of  Lima.  In  1781  he  obtained  permission
to  return,  and  he  embarked  at  Cayenne  in  1782.
On  his  arrival  at  Paris  he  vainly  sought  to  recover
his  former  place  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Acade-
my of  sciences,  and  for  some  time  lived  in  pov-
erty, until  he  obtained  a  place  in  the  library  of  the
Duke  of  Penthievre.  His  published  works  include
"  Nova  genera  et  species  plantarum  quas  in  Ameri-
ca, Jac.  Vivierus  eollegit"  (3  vols.,  Paris,  1788-90)
and  "Sertum  Peruanum  "  (2  vols.,  1792) ;  and  his
manuscripts  contain  a  "  Flora  chilensis,"  which  has
never  been  published.

VIZCAINO,  Sebastian  (veeth-cah-ee'-no),  Span-
ish navigator,  b.  in  Huelva  about  1550 ;  d.  in  Aca-
pulco  in  1615.  He  followed  the  sea  early  in  life,
and,  acquiring  a  great  reputation,  was  made  chief
pilot  of  New  Spain.  Toward  the  close  of  the  16th
century  the  general  impression  in  Spain  was  that
California  contained  great  riches,  especially  in
pearls,  and  orders  were  given  in  1595  to  the  viceroy
of  Mexico  to  arm  an  expedition  for  the  purpose  of
exploring  that  country.  Vizcaino  was  chosen
commander,  and  leaving  Acapulco  in  1596  with
three  ships,  accompanied  by  missionaries,  he  en-
tered the  Gulf  of  California,  establishing  his  head-
quarters in  the  port  of  La  Paz,  where  he  built  bar-
racks and  a  church.  He  despatched  expeditions
to  the  interior ;  but  the  resistance  of  the  natives,
lack  of  provisions,  and  the  burning  of  the  barracks
disheartened  his  men,  and  in  October  of  that  year
he  returned  to  Acapulco.  In  1602  he  was  appointed
captain-general  of  a  new  expedition  that  was  de-
spatched by  the  Count  de  Monterey,  by  order  of
Philip  III.,  to  explore  the  Pacific  coast  north  of
Cape  Mendocino,  and  to  establish  in  the  neighbor-
hood a  suitable  harbor  of  refuge  for  vessels  from


Manila.  He  sailed  from  Acapulco,  5  May,  1602,
with  three  vessels,  accompanied  by  the  cosmog-
rapher  Geronimo  Martin,  and  in  June  discovered
in  latitude  36°  40'  N.  a  bay,  which  he  named  Mon-
terey, in  honor  of  the  viceroy.  He  began  to  sur-
vey the  coast,  taking  observations  of  every  notable
point  and  inlet  with  such  care  that  Alexander
von  Humboldt,  in  his  "  Essai  sur  le  royaume  de  la
Nouvelle  Espagne,"  said  that  "  no  pilot  had  ever
performed  his  duty  with  such  zeal."  After  pass-
ing Cape  Mendocino  he  arrived  at  Cape  Blanco  de
San  Sebastian  (now  Cape  Orford),  and  from  that

Eoint  despatched  the  frigate  "  Tres  Reyes,"  under
deut.  Martin  Aguilar,  to  the  north,  who  reported
on  his  return  that  he  had  reached  46°  N.,  where  he
discovered  the  mouth  of  a  large  river,  probably
the  Columbia,  which  foggy  weather  had  prevented
him  from  entering  for  any  distance.  Having  lost
many  of  his  crew  by  sickness,  Vizcaino  resolved
to  return,  and  entered  Acapulco  in  March,  1603.
His  report  was  forwarded  to  Madrid ;  but,  although
he  urged  upon  the  council  of  the  Indies  the  advan-
tage of  colonizing  the  countries  that  he  had  dis-
covered, as  he  had  failed  to  find  precious  metals,
little  attention  was  paid  to  hisadvice.  In  1610  he
commanded  an  expedition  to  Manila,  and,  being
carried  out  of  his  course,  discovered  near  Japan  a
group  of  islands  which  he  called  Islas  Ricas.  At
last  his  representations  about  colonizing  California
were  heeded,  and  a  new  expedition  under  his  com-
mand was  preparing  in  Acapulco  when  he  died.
From  the  observations  that  were  taken  by  Viz-
caino and  his  staff,  thirty-two  charts  were  designed
in  Mexico  by  the  cosmographer  Enrique  Martinez,
which  are  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  council
of  Indies,  and  are  remarkably  exact  for  the  time  in
which  they  were  made.  Vizcaino's  reports  of  his
two  voyages  to  California  were  published  by  Tor-,
quemada  in  his  "  Monarquia  Indiana "  (Madrid,
1615),  and  that  of  the  second  voyage  appeared  as
an  appendix  to  the  French  edition  of  Miguel  Vene-

fas's  "  Histoire  de  la  Californie  "  (Paris,  1767).  Leon
inelo,  in  his  "  Biblioteca  Oriental  y  Occidental "
(Madrid,  1629),  gives  extracts  of  a  manuscript  of
Vizcaino's  report  of  his  voyage  to  Manila,  dated
1611,  under  the  title  of  "  Relation  del  viage  y  des-
cubrimiento  de  las  Islas  Ricas,  que  estan  cerca  del
Japon,"  which  was  discovered  in  the  library  of
Barcia,  the  author  of  "  Historiadores  primitivos  de
las  Indias."  Hubert  H.  Bancroft  often  quotes
from  him,  in  his  historical  works. The  greater

Eart  of  Vizcaino's  narratives  has  been  published
y  Martin  Fernandez  de  Navarrete  in  his  "  Colec-
cion  de  Viajes  y  Descubrimientos,  etc."  (Madrid,
1625-'9),  and  by  Capt.  James  Burney  in  his  "  Collec-
tion of  Vovages  to  the  South  Sea  "  (London,  1811).
VOGDES,  Israel,  soldier,  b.  in  Willistown,
Chester  co.,  Pa.,  4  Aug.,  1816.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  and  promoted  2d
lieutenant,  1st  artillery,  1  July,  1837.  For  the  next
twelve  years  he  was  assistant  professor  and  principal
assistant  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  academy,
being  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  1838,  and  captain
in  1847.  He  was  stationed  in  Florida  from  1849
till  1856,  and  took  part  there  in  the  hostilities
against  the  Seminole  Indians.  After  being  in  com-
mand at  Fort  Moultrie,  S.  C,  and  connected  with
the  artillery-school  for  practice  at  Fortress  Monroe,
Va.,  in  1858-'61,  he  was  ordered  to  re-enforce  Fort
Pickens,  Fla.,  but  he  was  virtually  interdicted  from
carrying  out  his  orders  by  instructions  received
from  Washington  subsequent  to  his  arrival,  and  it
was  not  until  after  the  inauguration  of  President
Lincoln  that  he  was  finally  allowed  to  proceed
with the work. He was promoted major, 14


VOGDES


VOLK


305


May,  1861.  On  9  Oct.  he  was  engaged  in  repelling
the  Confederate  attack  on  Santa  Rosa  island,  Fla.,
during  which  he  was  captured.  After  his  release
in  August,  1862,  he  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
John  F.  Reynolds  in  the  Maryland  campaign  of
that  year.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  in  the  following  November,  and  was
in  command  of  Folly  island,  S.  C,  from  April  till
July,  1863,  when  he  took  part  in  the  construction
of  the  batteries  on  Lighthouse  inlet  for  the  pro-
posed attack  on  Morris  island.  He  took  part  in
that  engagement,  and  also  in  the  one  on  Folly
island.  From  August,  1863,  till  July,  1864,  he  was
occupied  in  the  operations  against  Fort  Sumter
and  the  city  of  Charleston.  On  1  June,  1864,  he
was  made  lieutenant-colonel,  and  on  1  Aug.  he
became  colonel.  After  seeing  further  service  in
Florida,  he  had  charge  of  the  defences  of  Nor-
folk and  Portsmouth,  Va.,  from  May,  1864,  till
April,  1865,  in  which  month  he  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general in  the  regular  army  for  gallant  and
meritorious  services  in  the  field  during  the  civil
war.  On  15  Jan.,  1866,  he  was  mustered  out  of  the
volunteer  service,  and  from  that  date  until  2  Jan.,
1881,  when  he  was  retired  at  his  own  request,  after
forty-three  years  of  active  service,  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  1st  regiment  of  artillery.

VOGDES,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  29  Dec,  1802 ;  d.  there,  29  Jan.,  1886.  He  be-
gan life  as  a  teacher,  but,  after  studying  law  in
Philadelphia,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1832,  and
in  1836  was  auditor  of  Philadelphia  county.  In
1838  he  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics
in  the  Central  high-school,  Philadelphia,  where  he
remained  till  he  resumed  his  law-practice  in  1861.
In  his  later  years  he  became  widely  known  by  his
decisions  of  legal  points  in  insanity  cases.  He
published  "United  States  Arithmetic"  (Philadel-
phia, 1845),  and  "  Elementary  Treatise  on  Mensu-
ration and  Practical  Arithmetic"  (1847).

VOGUE-,  Jean  Pierre  de,  Flemish  adventurer.
b.  in  Malines  in  1570 ;  d.  in  Brazil  in  1630.  He
was  a  captain  in  the  Spanish  army  when,  hearing
the  fabulous  description  of  the  country  of  the  Es-
meraldas,  he  went  to  Espiritu  Santo,  in  Brazil,
and  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  colony
that  had  been  founded  there.  The  establish-
ment soon  dissolved,  as  the  adventurers  were  only
anxious  for  riches ;  and  Vogue,  having  announced
that  he  knew  the  location  of  the  Mountain  of
Wealth,  was  soon  at  the  head  of  a  host,  and  led
an  expedition  to  the  interior  of  the  Mamalucos
country,  wandering  for  several  years  through  cen-
tral and  south  Brazil,  and  suffering  many  mis-
fortunes. His  confidence  in  ultimate  success  was
never  shaken,  but  he  was  abandoned  by  his  follow-
ers, and  fell  at  last  into  the  hands  of  the  Charcas
Indians.  It  is  supposed  that  he  died  during  his
captivity,  although  the  "  Colleccao  de  alguns  manu-
scriptos  curiosos "  credits  to  him  the  work  "  Jor-
nada por  el  descobrimento  de  las  Serras  Esme-
raldas  "  (Seville,  1690).

VOISIN,  Charles  Antoine  (vwah-zang),  Span-
ish missionary,  b.  in  Charlevoix,  Belgium,  in  1698 ;
d.  in  Panama  in  1764.  He  early  became  a  Jesuit,
and  was  attached  to  the  South  American  missions,
laboring  in  Venezuela,  Central  America,  Peru,  and
Chili.  In  1749  he  was  rector  of  the  College  of
Quito,  and  later  he  was  superior  of  the  Convent  of
Panama.  His  works  include  "  Antigiiedades  del
Peru"  (Anvers,  1762);  "Information  a  la  Real
Audiencia  de  Quito  sobre  el  descubrimiento  de
muchos  y  grandes  rios,  e  infinitas  naciones  barbaras

aue  los  tiabitan  "  (2  vols.,  1764) ;  and  "  Propagation
el  Evangelio  en  la  America  meridional"  (1766).
vol.  vi. — 20


VOISIN,  Pierre  Joseph,  French  naturalist,  b.
in  Toulouse,  Languedoc,  in  1759 ;  d.  in  Cayenne,
Guiana,  in  1821.  He  early  entered  the  colonial
service,  and  was  assistant  treasurer  of  Guiana  in
1792,  when  he  was  ordered  to  France  to  answer  for
his  administration  before  the  convention,  but  he
went  instead  to  Dutch  Guiana,  and  began  farming
on  Essequibo  river.  Later  he  removed  to  Parama-
ribo, and  was  commissioned  to  survey  the  south-
eastern counties  of  the  colony,  where  he  experi-
enced difficulties  of  all  kinds,  being  once  detained
as  hostage  by  marroon  negroes.  After  the  sur-
render of  French  Guiana  to  the  Portuguese  he  re-
turned to  Cayenne  in  1812,  and  was  employed  in
the  central  administration  till  he  was  pensioned  in
1818.  His  works  include  "  Statistique  des  parties
basses  de  la  Guiane  Hollandaise,  suivie  d'un  releve
du  cours  du  fleuve  Essequibo  "  (2  vols.,  Demerara,
1806) ;  "  Petite  histoire  naturelle  pittoresque  de  la
Guiane  Francaise "  (1808) ;  "  Traite  des  legumi-
neuses  de  la  Guiane  Hollandaise "  (1810) :  and
"  Monographic  de  la  Goyave  "  (Cayenne,  1814).

VOITURE,  Nicolas  Auguste  (vwah-tewr),
South  American  explorer,  b.  in  Santiago,  Chili,
about  1764 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1821.  He  was  the
son  of  a  French  merchant  of  Santiago,  received  his
early  education  in  Chili,  and  finished  his  studies  in
Paris,  where  he  was  a  journalist  during  the  revo-
lution, but  in  1794,  after  the  fall  of  the  Girondists,
returned  to  South  America.  Inheriting  an  inde-
pendent fortune  by  the  death  of  his  father,  he  be-
gan to  travel,  and  at  the  suggestion  of  a  German
hunter,  who  had  travelled  through  Patagonia  and
could  speak  some  of  the  Indian  dialects,  resolved
to  visit  that  country.  He  left  Montevideo  in  De-
cember, 1801,  but,  after  frequent  landings  on  the
desolate  coast  of  Patagonia,  abandoned  his  idea  of
visiting  the  interior.  He  made  valuable  nautical
observations  on  the  coast  and  at  the  entrance  to
the  Strait  of  Magellan,  visited  Tierra  del  Fuego,
doubled  Cape  Horn,  and  anchored  at  Valparaiso  in
October,  1803.  Soon  afterward  he  removed  to
Lima,  and  devoted  his  later  years  to  literature  and
science.  He  published  "  Ensayo  sobre  el  arte  de
navegar  "  (Lima,  1809) ;  "  Journal  d'un  voyage  aux
cotes  de  Patagonie,  dans  le  detroit  de  Magellan,
a  la  Terre  de  Feu,  et  a  la  cote  de  Chili "  (3  vols.,
Paris,  1812) ;  "  Ensayo  sobre  la  Patagonia  "  (Lima,
1814);  and  "Histoire  litteraire  de  l'Amerique  du
Sud  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1818).

VOLK,  Leonard  Wells,  sculptor,  b.  in  Wells-
town  (now  Wells),  Hamilton  co.,  N.  Y.,  7  Nov.,
1828.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  began  the  trade  of
marble-cutting  in  his  father's  shop  at  Pittsfield,
Mass.  In  1848  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  in
the  following  year  he  undertook  modelling  in  clay
and  drawing  without  instructors.  He  was  subse-
quently engaged  in  business.  In  1855  Stephen  A.
Douglas,  who  was  his  wife's  cousin,  aided  him  to
go  to  Italy  for  study.  Volk  remained  there  until
1857,  when  he  settled  in  Chicago.  His  first  sitter
for  a  portrait-bust — the  first  that  was  ever  modelled
in  that  city — was  his  patron,  and  he  subsequently,
in  1858,  made  a  life-size  statue  of  Mr.  Douglas  in
marble.  In  1860  he  executed  a  portrait-bust  of
Abraham  Lincoln,  the  original  marble  of  which
was  burnt  in  the  Historical  society  building  dur-
ing the  great  fire  of  1871.  He  revisited  Italy  for
study  in  1868-9  and  1871-2.  He  was  elected  an
academician  of  the  Chicago  academy  in  1867,  and
was  for  eight  years  its  president.  His  principal
works  are  the  Douglas  monument  in  Chicago,  sev-
eral soldiers'  monuments,  the  statuary  for  the
Henry  Keep  mausoleum  at  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  life-
size  statues  of  Lincoln  and  Douglas  in  the  state-


306


VOLLMERING


VON  SCHRADER


house,  Springfield,  111.  (1876),  and  portrait-busts
of  Henry  Clay,  Zachariah  Chandler,  Dr.  Daniel
Brainard,  Bishop  Charles  H.  Fowler,  David  Davis,
Thomas  B.  Bryan,  Leonard  Swett,  Elihu  B.  Wash-
burne,  and  many  others. — His  son,  Stephen  Ar-
nold Douglas  (known  as  Douglas),  artist,  b.  in
Pittsfield  Mass.,  23  Feb.,  1856,  studied  in  Italy
during  1871-'3,  and  was  the  pupil  of  Jean  L.  Ge-
rome,  in  Paris,  in  1873-'5  and  again  in  1876-'8.  In
1875  he  exhibited  at  the  salon  "  In  Brittany,"  and
his  "  Vanity "  was  at  the  Philadelphia  centennial
exhibition  of  1876.  His  other  important  works  are
"  In  the  Studio  "  (1880) ;  "  The  Puritan  Maiden  "
(1881);  "The  Puritan  Captives"  (1882);  "Accused
of  Witchcraft "  (1884) ;  and  "  The  Bride  "  (1886).
In  1 880  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Society  of
American  artists,  and  he  is  organizing  the  Minne-
apolis school  of  fine  arts,  of  which  he  is  director.

VOLLMERING,  Joseph,  artist,  b.  in  Anholt,
Westphalia,  27  Aug.,  1810 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,

24  Sept.,  1887.  He  was  a  pupil  of  the  academy  in
Amsterdam  in  1826-30,  after  which  he  travelled
for  several  years  in  Germany.  During  1835-44 he
studied  with  Barend  Cornelis  Koekkoek,  and  in
1847  he  removed  to  the  United  States.  He  opened
a  studio  in  New  York  and  was  elected  an  associate
member  of  the  National  academy  in  1853.  Among
his  works  are  "Indian  Falls,  near  Cold  Spring,
N.  Y."  (1848);  "View  on  the  Hudson";  "Holy
Shrine  at  Sunset "  (1852) ;  "  Study  of  Trees  "  (1865) ;
"  Sunset  Landscape  and  Adirondack  Mountains "
(1869) ;  "  The  Hudson  from  Garrison's" ;  and  "  New
York  from  Weehawken  Heights  "  (1872).

VOLNEY,  Constantin  Francois  Chassebceuf
Boisgirais,  Count  de,  French  author,  b.  in
Craon,  Maine-et-Loire,  3  Feb.,  1757;  d.  in  Paris,

25  April,  1820.  He  was  the  son  of  Francois  Chas-
sebceuf, a  barrister  of  Craon,  and  was  known  until
the  age  of  twenty-five  by  the  name  of  Boisgirais,
but  in  1782  he  adopted  that  of  Volney.  After  re-
ceiving his  education  at  the  colleges  of  Ancenis
and  Angers  he  was  given  his  inheritance  at  the
age  of  seventeen.  He  then  went  to  Paris,  where  he
studied  medicine,  philosophy,  and  chronology,  and
became  a  frequenter  of  the  philosophical  salons

of  Baron  Holbach
and  Madame  Hel-
vetius,  where  he
made  the  acquaint-
ance of  Voltaire,
Diderot,  D'Alem-
bert,  and  Benja-
min Franklin,  with
whom  he  main-
tained a  long  cor-
respondence. Af-
ter travelling  in
the  East  and  writ-
ing accounts  of  his
journeys,  he  found-
ed in  1788,  at  Ren-
nes,  the  journal
"  La  Sentinelle,"
was  elected  to  the
slates  -  general  in
1789,  and  in  1792
accompanied  Poz-
zo-di-Borgo  to  Cor-
sica. Being  driven  away  by  the  revolution,  he  re-
turned to  France  and  published  "  La  loi  naturelle  "
(Paris,  1793),  in  which  he  advocated  those  theories
by  which  he  is  now  best  known.  During  the  reign
of  terror  he  was  imprisoned  for  ten  months,  and
on  his  release  in  1794  he  became  professor  of  his-
tory in  the  Normal  college  at  Paris. That  same


year  he  dissuaded  Bonaparte  from  entering  the
Russian  service,  and  obtained  his  reinstatement  in
the  French  army.  In  1795  he  came  to  the  United
States  with  the  intention  of  settling  in  this  coun-
try, and  was  welcomed  by  George  Washington.
He  visited  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  Kentucky,  and
Louisiana,  engaged  in  a  controversy  with  John
Adams  concerning  the  latter's  work  on  the  con-
stitution of  the  United  States,  and  afterward
answered  Dr.  Joseph  Priestley,  who  had  attacked
Volney's  infidel  theories.  Volney's  letter  was  pub-
lished in  English  (Philadelphia,  1797).  While  in
this  country  Volney  predicted,  day  after  day.  the
operations  of  Bonaparte's  campaign  in  Italy,  point-
ing out  the  places  where  the  Austrians  were  to  be
defeated.  This  astonished  every  one,  while  many
looked  on  Volney  as  a  French  general  in  disguise.
Washington  asked  Volney  for  an  explanation,  and
he  replied:  "In  1792  I  met  at  Marseilles  and  in
Corsica  a  young  lieutenant  of  artillery,  and,  being
much  struck  by  his  conversation,  invited  him  to
my  house.  I  was  soon  satisfied  that  he  was  a  man
of  extraordinary  genius.  .  .  .  The  conversation  fell
on  the  war.  Bonaparte  developed  a  whole  plan  of
operations  to  be  pursued  either  in  Italy  or  in  Ger-
many. I  took  down  his  words,  and  he  now  follows
the  plan  of  campaign  that  he  explained  to  me  years
before."  Volney  showed  his  notes  to  Washington,
who  became  also  convinced  of  the  great  future  of
the  new  commander.  He  returned  to  Paris  early
in  1799,  refused,  after  the  coup  d'etat,  to  be  con-
sul with  Bonaparte  or  secretary  of  the  interior,
and  was  created  senator.  He  was  made  com-
mander of  the  Legion  of  honor  in  1804,  count  of
the  empire  in  1808,  and  a  peer  of  France  by  Louis
XVIII.  in  1814.  Volney,  who  was  a  member  of
the  French  institute  after  1800  and  of  the  Aca-
demie  Francaise  after  1803,  founded  the  Volney
prize  of  $240  to  be  awarded  every  year  by  the
academy  to  the  author  of  the  best  work  on  the
foundation  of  the  study  of  language.  He  had  in-
tended to  write  his  impressions  of  the  United  States
and  a  work  on  democratic  institutions  as  they  are
understood  here,  but  he  was  dissuaded  on  political
and  private  considerations,  among  them  being  his
friendship  for  Franklin  and  his  respect  for  Wash-
ington, whom  he  did  not  care  to  criticise,  but  he
wrote  "Tableau  du  climat  et  du  sol  des  Etats-
Unis  d'Amerique  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1803 ;  English
translation  by  Charles  Brockden  Brown,  Philadel-
phia, 1804).  His  other  works  include  "  Sur  la  chro-
nologie  d'Herodote"  (Paris,  1781);  "Voyage  en
Egypte  et  en  Syrie"  (Paris,  1787;  revised  ed.r
1822) ;  "  Considerations  sur  la  guerre  des  Turcs  et
des  Russes"  (London,  1788);  "  Chronologie  des
douze  siecles  anterieurs  au  passage  de  Xerxes  en
Grece"  (Paris,  1790);  "Les  ruines.  meditations
sur  les  revolutions  des  empires"  (Geneva,  1791),
a  philosophical  work  that  gave  Volney  a  great
reputation ;  "  Precis  de  l'etat  actuel  de  la  Corse  "
(1793);  "  Lecons  d'histoire  ancienne  "  (1799) ;  "Re-
cherches  nouvelles  sur  l'histoire  ancienne  "  (3  vols.,
1814) ;  "  L'alphabet  Europeen  applique  aux  langues
Asiatiques  "  (1819) :  "  Histoire  de  Samuel,  inventeur
du  sacre  des  rois  "  (1819) ;  and  "  Discours  sur  1 'etude
philosophique  des  langues"  (1820).  Adolphe  Bos-
sange  edited  "  CEuvres  completes  de  Volney,"  with
a  biography  (8  vols.,  Paris,  1820-'6).

VON  SCHRADER,  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in
Germany  about  1821 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  6
Aug.,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  the  military
academy  in  Berlin,  and  became  2d  lieutenant  in
the  army  of  the  duke  of  Brunswick,  in  which  his
father  was  a  lieutenant-general.  After  twenty
years'  service  in  Europe  he  came  to  this  country


VOORHEES


VOSE


307


at  the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  and  was  made
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  74th  Ohio  regiment.  He
was  soon  afterward  made  assistant  inspector-gen-
eral on  the  staff  of  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas,  and
served  with  credit  at  Chickamauga,  Stone  river,
Chattanooga,  the  Atlanta  campaign,  and  Nashville.
On  13  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  In  1867  he  was  commis-
sioned major  of  the  23d  regular  infantry  and  as-
signed to  duty  as  acting  assistant  inspector-general
of  the  district  of  Louisiana.

VOORHEES,  Daniel  Wolsey,  senator,  b.  in
Butler  county,  Ohio,  26  Sept.,  1827.  He  was  taken
to  Indiana  in  infancy  by  his  parents,  was  graduated
at  Indiana  Asbury  (now  De  Pauw)  university  in

1849,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1851,
and  began  to  prac-
tise in  Covington,
Ind.,  in  the  same
year.  He  was
an  unsuccessful
Democratic  can-
didate for  con-
gress in  1856,  and
in  1858  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  dis-
trict attorney  for
Indiana,  which  of-
fice he  held  until
1861.  In  1859  he
went  to  Virginia,
at  the  request  of
Gov.  Ashbel  P.
Willard,  of  Indi-
ana, to  defend  John  E.  Cook,  the  governor's  broth-
er-in-law, who  had  been  put  on  trial  for  participa-
tion in  John  Brown's  raid.  He  was  then  chosen  to
congress  and  served  from  1861  till  23  Feb.,  1866,
when  his  seat  was  contested  successfully  by  Henry
D.  Washburn,  but  he  sat  in  that  body  again  in
1869-'73.  During  his  service  in  the  house  he  was
a  member  of  the  committees  on  elections,  appro-
priations, the  judiciary,  the  revision  of  laws,  and
the  Pacific  railroad.  On  the  death  of  Oliver  P.
Morton,  Mr.  Voorhees  was  appointed  to  fill  his  seat
in  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving  from  12  Nov.,  1877,
and  he  was  elected  for  a  full  term  in  1879,  and
re-elected  in  1885.  In  early  life  Mr.  Voorhees  ob-
tained the  name  of  "  The  Tall  Sycamore  of  the
Wabash,"  by  which  he  is  still  frequently  called.
He  has  made  a  reputation  as  an  orator.

VOORHEES,  Philip  Falkerson,  naval  officer,
b.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  1792 ;  d.  in  An-
napolis, Md.,  26  Feb.,  1862.  He  entered  the  navy
as  a  midshipman,  15  Nov.,  1809,  and  was  engaged
in  the  second  war  with  Great  Britain,  taking  part
in  the  capture  of  the  "  Macedonian  "  by  the  "  United
States,"  and  of  the  "  Epervier  "  by  the  "  Peacock,"
for  which  he  received  a  medal  from  congress.  He
was  promoted  to  commander,  24  April,  1828,  and
to  captain,  28  Feb.,  1838,  and  in  1842-5  was  as-
signed the  frigate  "  Congress  "  on  her  first  cruise,
during  which  he  assisted  in  rescuing  the  stranded
British  steamer  "  Gorgon  "  in  La  Plata  river.  In
1844  Capt.  Voorhees  captured  an  armed  Argentine
squadron  and  an  allied  cruiser  which  had  fired
into  his  convoy,  a  Boston  bark,  where  some  fish-
ermen, chased  by  the  cruiser,  had  taken  refuge.
Capt.  Voorhees  released  this  squadron  after  an
apology  had  been  made,  but  detained  the  cruiser,
which  had  aggravated  the  assault  by  firing  under
a  false  flag.  Com.  Daniel  Turner  afterward  re-
leased the  cruiser,  but  justified  Capt.  Voorhees's


action  in  a  letter  to  the  Argentine  commander,
and  Voorhees  was  also  highly  praised  by  U.  S.
diplomatic  and  consular  representatives  and  for-
eign naval  officers  in  South  America.  Yet  this
capture  was  made  the  occasion  for  a  series  of
charges  on  which  he  was  tried  by  courts-martial  in
1845.  The  sentences  of  these  courts  were  not  ap-
proved, and  after  a  few  months'  suspension  Presi-
dent Pal k,  in  1847,  restored  Capt.  Voorhees  to  his
full  rank  in  the  navy,  and  gave  him  command  of
the  East  India  squadron— the  post  of  an  admiral
at  the  present  day,  that  grade  not  having  been  es-
tablished at  that  time,  "  in  manifestation  of  his
complete  rehabilitation  in  honor  as  well  as  in  rank
in  the  judgment  of  the  government "  as  declared
in  the  official  opinion  of  Attorney-General  Caleb
Gushing,  which  also  declared  the  proceedings  of
the  courts-martial  "  null  and  void."  He  returned
in  1851  in  his  flag-ship,  the  "  Plymouth,"  and  in
1855  was  placed  on  the  reserved  list.  He  regarded
this  as  an  injustice,  and  appealed  to  congress  for
reinstatement,  but  a  court  of  inquiry  reaffirmed
the  decision  of  the  board.  On  a  second  appeal
President  Buchanan  referred  the  whole  matter  to
Attorney-General  Jeremiah  S.  Black,  who,  in  an
opinion  dated  15  Oct.,  1858,  said :  "  The  history,
even  of  the  American  navy,  hardly  contains  an-
other instance  where  one  man  has  been  the  victim
of  so  many  blunders."  President  Buchanan,  with
the  consent  of  the  senate,  therefore  restored  him
to  the  leave  pay-list,  and  at  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  Capt.  Voorhees  urged  his  assignment  to  active
duty,  but  he  died  a  few  months  afterward.

YOORHIES,  John  Stevens,  publisher,  b.  in
New  York  city,  9  May,  1809;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
19  Nov.,  1865.  He  was  a  clerk  for  Oliver  Halsted,
who  had  established  a  law-book  store  in  New  York
city  in  1820,  became  his  partner,  and  finally  suc-
ceeded him  in  1842,  becoming  well  known  as  a
publisher  of  legal  works.  He  was  specially  kind
to  young  lawyers  in  furnishing  books  on  liberal
terms,  and  great  reliance  was  placed  on  his  judg-
ment and  knowledge  in  the  selection  of  law  libra-
ries. After  his  death  his  business  was  continued
by  the  firm  of  Baker,  Voorhies,  and  Co.  He  pro-
jected and  published  "  Sedgwick  on  Damages  "  (New
York,  1848);  "Voorhies's  Code  of  Civil  Procedure"
(New  York,  1851);  "Burrill's  Voluntary  Assign-
ments "  (1853) ;  "  Greenleaf's  Overruled  Cases  "
(1856) ;  "  Burrill's  Circumstantial  Evidence  "  (1856);
"Abbott's  Digest"  (5  vols.,  1860);  "Cleveland's
Banking  Laws  "  (1860) ;  and  many  other  works.

YOSE,  George  Leonard,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Augusta,  Me.,  19  April,  1831.  He  was  educated  in
Augusta  and  in  Salem,  Mass.  During  1849-'50  he
studied  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Har-
vard, then  began  his  career  as  assistant  engineer
on  the  Kennebec  and  Portland  railroad,  and  until
1859  was  engaged  on  various  railroads.  From
1859  till  1863  he  was  associate  editor  of  "The
American  Railway  Times  "  in  Boston,  and  then  for
three  years  he  resided  in  Salem,  Mass.  In  1866
he  removed  to  Paris,  Me.,  and  was  occupied  with
projects  in  Maine  and  New  Hampshire.  He  was
professor  of  civil  engineering  in  Bowdoin  college
from  1872  till  1881,  and  held  a  similar  chair  in  the
Massachusetts  institute  of  technology  from  1881  till
1886.  His  larger  works  include  "Handbook  of
Railroad  Construction  "  (Boston,  1857) ;  "  Oro-
graphic Geology,  or  the  Origin  and  Structure  of
Mountains  "  (1866) :  "  Manual  for  Railroad  Engi-
neers and  Engineering  Students "  (1873) ;  "  A
Graphic  Method  for  solving  Algebraic  Problems  "
(New  York,  1875) ;  "  Elementary  Course  of  Geomet-
ric Drawing  "  (Boston,  1878) ;  "  Memoir  of  George


308


VOSE


VROOM


W.  Whistler"  (1887);  and  "Bridge  Disasters  in
America:  the  Cause  and  the  Remedy"  (1887).

VOSE.  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Milton,  Mass.,  26
Nov.,  1738  ;  d.  there,  22  May,  1816.  He  was  chosen
colonel  of  militia  in  1774,  in  1776  went  to  Canada,
and  in  1777,  as  colonel  of  the  1st  Massachusetts
regiment,  joined  the  main  army  in  New  Jersey,
serving  at  Monmouth  and  in  Gen.  John  Sullivan's
campaign  in  Rhode  Island.  He  closed  his  services
in  Lafayette's  corps  at  Yorktown,  when  he  was
brevetted  brigadier-general.  His  brothers,  Elijah,
Moses,  and  William,  also  served  through  the
Revolutionary  war. — His  son,  Col.  Josiah  Howe,
rendered  important  service  in  the  war  of  1812  at
Portsmouth,  at  Sackett's  Harbor,  and  in  Canada.

VOSTEY,  or  YOTEY,  Gabriel  Henry  (vo-tay),
Count  de,  Haytian  historian,  b.  in  Cape  Francais
about  1768 ;  d.  there  in  1831.  He  was  a  mulatto,
son  of  a  French  officer,  and  was  first  known  under
the  name  of  Gabriel  Henry.  After  receiving  his
education  in  France,  he  returned  to  Hayti  and  be-
came lieutenant  in  the  colonial  militia,  but  subse-
quently he  joined  the  national  army  and  fought
under  Jean  Francois  and  Toussaint  l'Ouverture.
The  latter  gave  him  his  father's  estates  in  1800,
after  which  he  took  the  name  of  Count  de  Vostey.
In  1802  he  was  among  the  first  to  submit  to  Gen.
Victor  Leclerc,  but  afterward  he  joined  Dessa-
lines  with  a  regiment  that  he  raised  among  his
laborers,  and  assisted  in  the  campaign  that  ter-
minated in  November,  1804.  Afterward  quarrelling
with  Dessalines,  he  took  refuge  in  the  Spanish  part
of  the  island  till  the  elevation  of  Henry  Christophe,
when  he  returned  to  Hayti  and  became  a  courtier
and  the  historian  of  the  negro  king.  He  published
"  Essai  sur  l'invasion  Francaise  de  1802  "  (2  vols.,
Cape  Francais,  1811);  "Le  systeme  colonial  de-
voile  "  (1814) ; "  Reflexions  politiques  sur  l'etat

{>resent  des  noirs  e,t  des  blancs  "  (1817) ;  "  Essai  sur
es  causes  des  revolutions  de  Hayti "  (2  vols..  1819) ;
and  "  Memoires  pour  servir  a  1'administration  de
Toussaint  l'Ouverture  "  (2  vols.,  1824).

VOTAN,  founder  of  the  empire  of  Xibalbay.  He
lived,  according  to  Ramon  de  Ordoflez  y  Aguiar,
in  his  manuscript  "  Historia  del  cielo  y  de  la  tierra,"
about  955  b.  c,  or,  according  to  Francisco  Nunez
de  la  Vega,  in  his  "  Constituciones  Diocesanos  para
el  Obispado  de  Chiapas"  (Rome,  1702),  about  600
B.  c.  Votan  appears  to  have  been  a  generic  name
for  sovereigns  of  the  valley  of  Chiapas.  According
to  Ordofiez,  Votan  sailed  from  Cuba  with  his  peo-
ple, and,  after  coasting  Yucatan,  entered  the  La-
guna  de  Terminos,  went  up  Usumasinta  river,  and
on  one  of  its  branches,  the  Chacamas,  founded  the
city  of  Nachan  or  Culhuacan,  near  the  present  site
of  the  ruins  of  Palenque.  He  conquered  the  coun-
try with  little  difficulty,  and  became  its  legislator,
building  at  Nachan  a  temple,  where  he  deposited
the  archives  of  the  nation,  which  were  guarded  by
priests  and  nuns,  and  established  also  religious
mysteries,  which  were  celebrated  with  great  pomp
and  splendor  in  the  spring  and  autumn.  Votan
founded  also  the  cities  of  Zacatlan  or  Ciudad  Real,
Matlan  or  Quiche,  and  Huehuetlan  or  Soconusco.
It  is  also  asserted  that  he  promulgated  a  code  of
laws  for  his  empire,  which  attained  great  prosper-
ity, but  it  is  generally  conceded  that  the  legislator
of  Xibalbay  was  Balum-Votan,  who  lived  about
four  centuries  after  the  founder  of  the  empire.
He  is  said  to  have  written  the  national  code  of  the
Quiches.  "  Popol-Vuh,"  the  original  of  the  "  Teo-
maxtli,"  or  divine  book  of  the  Toltecs.  The  "  Po-
pol-Vuh "  was  first  translated  into  Spanish  about
1650  by  Friar  Francisco  Ximenes  {q.  v.),  and  Bras-
seur  de  Bourbourg  published  the  original  text  and


French  translations  (Paris,  1861).  The  traditions
of  the  Tzendales  in  regard  to  the  Votans  are  con-
firmed by  Francisco  de  Burgoa,  in  his  "  Palestra
Historical  6  Historia  de  la  provincia  de  San  Hipo-
lito  de  Guaxaca"  (Mexico,  1670);  by  Bernardino  de
Sahagun,  in  his  "  Historia  de  las  cosas  de  la  Nueva
Esparto":  by  an  anonymous  Mexican  author  of
Cuahutitlan,  a  contemporary  of  Montezuma  II.,  in
"  Historia  de  los  reynos  de  Culhuacan  y  Mexico,"
a  manuscript  in  the  Nahuatl  language,  "which  was
discovered  in  1850  by  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg  in
the  library  of  the  convent  of  San  Gregorio ;  and  by
many  other  authors.  Ordonez  asserts  that  he  pos-
sessed a  manuscript  history  of  the  reign  of  Balum-
Votan  in  the  original  language;  but  it  is  now  lost.

VREDENBURGH,  Peter,  jurist,  b.  in  Read-
ington,  N.  J.,  31  Oct.,  1805 ;  d.  in  St.  Augustine,
Fla.,  24  March.  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Rut-
gers in  1828,  admitted  to  the  bar  as  counsellor  in
1832,  and  began  practice  in  Freehold,  N.  J.  Sub-
sequently he  was  a  member  of  the  legislative  coun-
cil under  the  old  state  constitution.  In  1837-'52
he  was  prosecuting  attorney  of  Monmouth  county,
and  in  1855-'69  he  was  associate  justice  of  the  su-
preme court  of  New  Jersey.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  in  1866  by  Rutgers,  of  which
he  was  a  trustee  for  twenty-four  years.  Judge
Vredenburgh's  opinions  are  contained  in  the  New
Jersey  reports  between  1855  and  1870.  One  of  the
most  notable  was  delivered  in  the  case  of  Proprie-
tors of  Bridges  vs.  the  Hoboken  land  company.

YROOM,  Peter  Dumont,  governor  of  New  Jer-
sey, b.  in  Hillsborough  township,  N.  J.,  12  Dec,
1791 ;  d.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  18  Nov.,  1873.  He  was
the  son  of  Col.  Peter  D.  Vroom.  a  Revolutionary
officer.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1808,
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1813,  and  practised  in  vari-
ous counties  of  New  Jersey.  He  was  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1826-'9,  and  in  the  latter  year
was  elected  governor  of  New  Jersey  as  a  Jackson
Democrat  by  joint  ballot  of  the  two  houses,  which
was  the  method  of  election  at  that  time.  He  was
re-elected  in  1830-'l  and  1833-'6,  and  in  1837  was
appointed  by  President  Van  Buren  a  commissioner
to  adjust  the  claims  of  the  Indians  in  Mississippi,
was  a  member  of  congress  in  1839-'41,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Democrat,  and  a  member  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1844.  In  1852  he  was
a  presidential  elector,  and  in  1853-'7  was  minister
to  Prussia.  He  was  appointed  reporter  of  the  su-
preme court  of  New  Jersey  in  1865,  and  in  1868
was  again  a  presidential  elector.  The  degree  of
LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Columbia  in  1837
and  by  Princeton  in  1850.  He  published  "  Reports
of  the  Supreme  Court  of  New  Jersey "  (6  vols..
Trenton,  1866-'73).— His  son,  Peter  Dumont,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  18  April,  1842,  was  grad-
uated at  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute,  Troy,
N.  Y.,  in  1862.  He  served  in  the  civil  war,  being
wounded  at  South  Mountain,  was  promoted  major
of  the  2d  New  Jersey  cavalry  in  1863,  and  bre-
vetted lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  of  volunteers
for  meritorious  services  during  the  war.  He  be-
came 1st  lieutenant  in  the  3d  U.  S.  cavalry  in  July,
1866. — Another  son,  Garret  Dorset  Wall,  law-
yer, b.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  17  Dec,  1843,  was  gradu-
ated at  Rutgers  in  1862,  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1865,  appointed  district  attorney  in  1870,  and  re-

5>orter  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Jersey  in  1873.
le  was  elected  mayor  of  Trenton  in  1881,  and  re-
elected for  the  two  succeeding  terms.  Mr.  Vroom
possesses  one  of  the  finest  libraries  in  New  Jersey,
and  is  an  authority  on  questions  of  national  and
state  political  history.  He  has  published  "  Supreme
Court  Reports  "  (15  vols.,  Trenton,  N.  J.,  1873-88).


WACKERHAGEN


WADDELL


309


W


WACKERHAGEN,  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.
in  the  electorate  of  Hanover,  Germany,  22  May,
1774;  d.  in  Clermont,  N.  Y.,  1  Nov.,  1865.  He
was  educated  at  the  University  of  G5ttingen,  Ger-
many, and,  after  the  completion  of  his  theological
course,  was  for  some  time  employed  as  an  instruc-
tor in  a  seminary  for  young  ladies,  and  later  as
private  tutor  in  a  nobleman's  family.  In  1801  he
came  to  this  country,  where  for  three  years  he  was
private  tutor  to  the  only  son  of  a  merchant  of
Philadelphia.  He  was  pastor  of  Lutheran  con-
gregations at  Schoharie  and  Cobleskill,  N.  Y.,  in
1805-'15,  and  at  Germantown  and  Livingston  Man-
or, Columbia  county,  N.  Y„  from  1816  till  his  death.
During  this  time  he  also  preached  at  Ghent,
Athens,  West  Camp,  Pine  Plains,  Green  Bush,
Ancram  and  other  distant  places,  doing  pioneer
work  from  which  resulted  the  establishment  of
numerous  flourishing  congregations  in  the  state  of
New  York.  In  addition  to  his  pastoral  duties,  he
also  had  charge  for  several  years  of  the  academy
at  Clermont,  N.  Y.,  where  he  resided,  midway  be-
tween his  two  principal  congregations.  He  was  a
finished  classical  scholar  and  a  diligent  and  criti-
cal student  of  the  Bible.  In  1825  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Union  college.  Dr.  Wacker-
hagen  was  for  many  years  the  recognized  leader
of  the  Lutheran  church  in  New  York,  and  occu-
pied many  posts  of  honor  and  trust,  being  presi-
dent of  the  New  York  ministerium  for  twelve
years  and  trustee  of  Hartwick  seminary  for  thirty
years.  Though  he  was  one  of  the  most  learned
men  of  his  time,  his  retiring  modesty  prevented
him  from  publishing  the  results  of  his  studies.
Except  an  occasional  sermon,  he  issued  only  one
work,  "  InbegrifE  des  Glaubens  und  Sittenlehre  "
(Philadelphia,  1804).

WADDEL,  James,  preacher,  b.  in  Newry,  Ire-
land, in  July,  1739 ;  d.  in  Louisa  county,  Va.,  17
Sept.,  1805.  His  parents  emigrated  to  this  coun-
try in  the  son's  infancy,  settling  in  southwestern
Pennsylvania.  James  was  educated  at  Notting-
ham, under  Rev.  Samuel  Finley,  became  an  assist-
ant teacher  in  Rev.  Robert  Smith's  academy  in
Pequea,  Lancaster  co.,  afterward  emigrated  to
Virginia,  and,  under  the  influence  of  Samuel
Davies,  decided  to  study  for  the  ministry.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1761.  the  next  year  be-
came pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in  the  north-
ern neck  of  Virginia,  removed  to  the  Tinkling
Spring  church,  Augusta  county,  in  1775,  also
preached  in  Staunton,  and  in  1785  settled  on  an
estate  in  Louisa  county,  where  he  supplied  vacant
pulpits  and  was  principal  of  a  classical  school.
He  became  blind  about  1787,  but  continued  his
labors  without  interruption,  writing  as  well  as
preaching  with  great  industry,  and  was  known  as
"the  blind  preacher."  Before  his  death  he  or-
dered that  all  his  manuscripts  be  burned,  so  that
his  eloquence  has  become  a  matter  of  tradition.
The  best  idea  of  him  as  a  pulpit  orator  is  to  be
gathered  from  the  sketch  of  Dr.  Waddel  as  the
blind  preacher  in  William  Wirt's  "British  Spy."
This  was  written  in  1803,  when  Dr.  Waddel  was
old  and  infirm.  It  has  been  questioned  how  far
the  author  gave  himself  the  license  of  fiction  in
his  description,  but  Dr.  Waddel's  biographer,  Dr.
James  W.  Alexander,  says :  "  Mr.  Wirt  stated  to
me  that,  so  far  from  adding  colors  to  the  picture
of  Dr.  Waddel's  eloquence,  he  had  fallen  below  the
truth. In  person  he  was  tall  and  erect,  his  mien


was  unusually  dignified,  and  his  manners  graceful
and  eloquent.  Under  his  preaching,  audiences
were  irresistibly  and  simultaneously  moved,  like
the  wind-shaken  forest."  James  Madison,  who
had  been  his  pupil,  said  :  "  He  has  spoiled  me  for
all  other  preaching,"  and  Patrick  Henry  classed
him  with  Samuel  Davies  as  one  of  the  two  greatest
orators  he  had  ever  heard.  Dickinson  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1792.  One  of  his  daughters
married  the  Rev.  Archibald  Alexander.  See  a
"Memoir"  of  him  by  the  Rev.  James  W.  Alexan-
der, in  the  "  Watchman  of  the  South  "  (1846).

WADDELL,  Hugh,  soldier,  b.  in  Lisburn,
County  Down,  Ireland,  in  1734;  d.  in  Castle
Haynes,  New  Hanover  co.,  N.  C,  9  April,  1773.
He  emigrated  to  North  Carolina  in  1753,  was  clerk
of  the  council  in  1754-'5,  lieutenant  in  Col.  James
Innes's  regiment  in  the  Virginia  campaign  of
1754,  became  captain  in  1755,  built  Fort  Dobbs,
and  commanded  there  in  1756-'7.  He  led  the
North  Carolina  detachment  with  the  rank  of
major  in  the  expedition  to  Fort  Du  Quesne  in
1758,  and  became  colonel  the  next  year.  In  No-
vember, 1765,  he  led  the  armed  resistance  to  the
landing  at  Brunswick  of  the  English  sloop-of-
war  "  Diligence,"  which  contained  the  government
stamps,  seized  the  ship's  boat,  and  forced  Gov.
Tryon  to  deliver  to  the  people  William  Houston,
the  stamp- master,  from  whom  they  exacted  a
pledge,  which  he  signed  in  the  market-place,  that
he  would  "  never  receive  any  stamped  paper  which
might  arrive  from  England,  nor  officiate  in  any
way  in  the  distribution  of  stamps  in  the  province
of  North  Carolina."  This  act  of  patriotism  was  of
not  less  importance  in  the  history  of  pre-Revo-
lutionary  movements  in  North  Carolina  than  the
Boston  tea-party  in  Massachusetts.  In  1771  he
commanded  the  expedition  against  the  Regulators
with  the  rank  of  major-general.  During  the  in-
tervals of  his  military  career  he  frequently  served
in  the  legislature. — His  grandson,  Hugh,  lawyer,
b.  in  Newfields,  Bladen  co.,  N.  C,  in  1799 ;  d.  in
Wilmington,  N.  C,  1  Nov.,  1878,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1818,  and
studied  medicine,  but  abandoned  it  for  law,  attain-
ing high  rank  in  that  profession.  He  represented
Orange  county  in  the  legislature  in  1828,  was
speaker  of  the  state  senate  in  1836-'7.  and  again
a  member  of  that  body  in  1844-'6.  He  was  an
eloquent  debater  and  an  accomplished  man  of
letters. — His  son,  Alfred  Moore,  lawyer,  b.  in
Hillsborough,  N.  C,  16  Sept.,  1834,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  in
1853,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  became  clerk  of  the  court  of  equity  of  New
Hanover  county,  N.  C,  edited  the  "  Wilmington
Herald "  in  I860,  and  the  same  year  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Conservative-Union  convention  which
nominated  John  Bell  for  president.  During  the
civil  war  he  served  in  the  Confederate  army
as  lieutenant-colonel  of  cavalry.  He  was  chosen
to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in"  1870,  served  by  re-
election till  1879,  and  was  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  post-offices  and  post-roads  in  the  44th
congress.  He  was  defeated  in  the  next  election,
and  resumed  the  practice  of  law.  He  has  in  manu-
script "  A  Colonial  Officer  and  his  Times." — The
second  Hugh's  nephew,  James  Iredell,  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Pittsboro',  Chatham  co.,  N.  C,  in  1824;
d.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  15  March,  1886,  on  10  Sept.,
1841,  was  appointed  a  midshipman  in  the  U.  S.


310


WADDELL


WADE


navy,  and  in  May,  1842,  he  received  a  wound  in  a
duel  which  incapacitated  him  from  service  for
eleven  months  and  lamed  him  for  life.  He  did
good  service  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  naval  academy  at  Annapolis  in  1847,
and  while  on  a  cruise  on  the  Brazilian  station  in
September,  1855,  was  promoted  from  passed  mid-
shipman to  2d  lieutenant  and  navigator  of  the
"  Germantown."  He  was  detached  and  served  on
the  store-ship  "  Release  "  at  Aspinwall  during  the
building  of  the  Panama  railroad,  where  he  con-
tracted the  yellow  fever.  The  ship  went  to  sea
and  day  by  day  the  officers  and  crew  were  stricken
down  by  the  disease,  until  Lieut.  Waddell  was  the
only  officer  left  to  command  her  with  a  few  convales-
cent seamen.  The  vessel  finally  reached  Boston.
He  afterward  was  on  duty  at  the  naval  academy,
as  assistant  professor  of  navigation,  until  11  July,
1859.  In  the  spring  of  1860  he  sailed  in  the  "  Sagi-
naw "  for  the  China  station,  where  he  led  a  suc-
cessful expedition.  On  20  Nov.,  1861,  he  forwarded
his  resignation  to  the  secretary  of  the  navy,  but
on  11  Jan.,  1862,  when  he  arrived  in  New  York,  he
was  offered  a  command  in  the  U.  S.  bomb-fleet,
then  being  fitted  out  for  an  attack  on  New  Orleans,
which  he  declined.  In  February,  1862,  he  ran  the
blockade  from  Annapolis  to  Richmond,  where  he
entered  the  Confederate  navy,  his  commission  as
lieutenant  being  dated  27  March,  1862.  He  was
assigned  to  duty  on  board  the  ram  "  Louisiana  "  at
New  Orleans,  and  when  the  Confederate  fleet  at
that  port  was  dispersed  by  Farragut,  Lieut.  Wad-
dell was  sent  back  to  destroy  the  "  Louisiana,"
which  he  did  by  blowing  her  up.  He  then  served
at  Drewry's  Bluff,  on  James  river,  as  ordnance  of-
ficer, and  afterward  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  sub-
sequently was  ordered  to  England  to  take  com-
mand of  one  of  the  cruisers  that  was  fitting  out  at
Liverpool.  He  arrived  there  in  May,  1863,  and  on
5  Oct.,  1864,  was  ordered  to  the  command  of  the
'•Shenandoah"  for  a  cruise  in  the  Pacific  ocean.
She  was  originally  a  British  merchant  steamer.
The  "  Shenandoah  was  commissioned  off  Madeira,
19  Oct.,  1864,  and  steered  for  Australia.  Before
arriving  at  Melbourne,  25  Jan.,  1865,  Commander
Waddell  made  nine  captures.  The  "  Shenandoah  "
left  that  port,  8  Feb.,  1865,  and  in  three  months  be-
gan her  destructive  work  among  the  whalers  in
the  Okhotsk  sea,  Bering  sea,  and  the  Arctic  ocean.
Long  after  the  fall  of  the  Confederate  government
he  captured  and  sank  or  burned  vessels  until
2  Aug.,  1865,  more  than  three  months  after  the
surrender  of  Gen.  Lee,  when  he  met  with  the  Brit-
ish bark  "  Barracouta,"  from  whose  captain  he
heard  of  the  close  of  the  war.  After  this  he  stowed
away  his  guns  in  the  hold  and  at  once  sailed  for
Liverpool,  where  he  surrendered  the  ship  to  the
British  government.  He  and  his  crew  were  lib-
erated, and  on  10  Nov.,  1865,  the  "  Shenandoah "
was  delivered  to  the  U.  S.  consul  at  Liverpool.
The  sultan  of  Zanzibar  afterward  bought  her,  and
several  years  later  she  went  down  in  a  gale  with  all
on  board.  The  "  Shenandoah,"  while  under  Com-
mander Waddell,  captured  thirty-eight  vessels,  of
which  she  released  six  on  bond  and  destroyed
thirty-two.  She  was  the  only  vessel  that  carried
the  flag  of  the  Confederacy  around  the  world.
After  the  release  of  Waddell  he  remained  in  Liver-
pool, and  then  went  to  Paris  to  reside.  He  after-
ward returned  to  the  United  States,  and  in  1875
was  made  commander  of  the  "  San  Francisco,"  of
the  Pacific  mail  line  between  Yokohama  and  San
Francisco.  On  16  Mav,  1877,  his  steamer  struck
on  a  rock  and  sank.  All  the  passengers  were  saved,
and  the  captain  was  the  last  to  leave  the  ship.


WADDELL,  Moses,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rowan
county,  N.  C,  29  July,  1770 ;  d.  in  Athens,  Ga.,  21
July,  1840.  His  father,  William,  emigrated  from
the  vicinity  of  Belfast,  Ireland,  about  1764,  settling
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  subsequently  in  North
Carolina.  Moses  taught  to  obtain  means  to  enter
college,  was  graduated  at  Hampden  Sidney  in  1791,
and  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Presbyterian
church,  and  subsequently  taught  in  South  Caro-
lina. He  established  a  classical  school  in  Willing-
ton,  S.  C,  in  1804,  where  among  his  pupils  were
Hugh  S.  Legare,  John  C.  Calhoun,  and  James  L.
Petigru.  In  1819-'29  he  was  president  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Georgia.  The  College  of  South  Caro-
lina gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1807.  As  an
instructor  of  youth,  Dr.  Waddell  was  one  of  the
most  popular  and  successful  men  of  his  day.  Alex-
ander H.  Stephens  says  of  him :  "  In  his  insight
into  the  character  of  boys,  the  constitution  of  their
minds,  their  capacities  and  aptitudes,  and  in  draw-
ing out  and  developing  their  faculties  by  proper
training,  discipline,  and  government,  he  had  few,
if  any,  superiors  in  the  United  States."  He  pub-
lished "  Memoirs  of  Miss  Catherine  Elizabeth
Smelt "  (Augusta,  Ga.,  1819). — His  first  wife,  Cath-
erine, was  a  sister  of  John  C.  Calhoun,  and  his
second  wife  was  Elizabeth  W.  Pleasants,  of  Vir-
ginia.— Their  son,  James  Pleasants,  educator,  b.
in  Willington,  S.  C,  5  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Athens,
Ga.,  28  May,  1867,  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Georgia  in  1822,  became  principal  of  Richmond
academy,  taught  belles-lettres  and  oratory  in  the
Universitv  of  Georgia  in  1836-'40,  and  at  the  same
time  filled  the  chairs  of  Latin  and  Greek,  which  he
held  till  1856. — Another  son,  John  Newton,  edu-
cator, b.  in  Willington,  S.  C,  2  April,  1812,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Georgia  in  1829,
entered  the  ministry  of  the  Presbyterian  church
in  1841,  was  professor  of  Latin  and  Greek  in  the
University  of  Mississippi  in  1848-'57,  and  from  the
latter  date  till  1860  occupied  a  similar  chair  in  La
Grange  college,  Tenn.  He  was  then  president  of
that  institution  till  1862,  when,  the  town  being
occupied  by  the  National  army,  the  college  was
disbanded,  and  he  became  general  superintendent
of  Presbyterian  missions  in  the  Western  Confed-
erate army,  and  was  chiefly  instrumental  in  found-
ing the  asylum  for  the  orphans  of  Confederate
soldiers  in  Tuskegee,  Ala.  In  1865-'74  he  was
chancellor  of  the  University  of  Mississippi,  and  in
1879-'88  he  occupied  the  same  post  in  the  South-
western Presbyterian  university,  Clarksville,  Tenn.
The  University  of  Nashville  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1851,  and  the  University  of  Georgia
that  of  LL.  D.  in  1873.  Since  1874  he  has  been
secretary  of  the  board  of  ministerial  education  of
the  Southern  Presbyterian  church.

WADE,  Benjamin  Franklin,  senator,  b.  in
Feeding  Hills,  near  Springfield,  Mass.,  27  Oct.,
1800 ;  d.  in  Jefferson,  Ohio,  2  March,  1878.  His
ancestor,  Jonathan,  came  from  Norfolk,  England,
to  Massachusetts  in  1632.  His  father,  James,  a
soldier  of  the  Revolution,  removed  to  Andover,
Ohio,  in  1821.  The  son's  education  was  received
chiefly  from  his  mother.  He  shared  in  the  pioneer
work  of  his  new  home,  and  in  1823,  after  aiding  in
driving  a  herd  of  cattle  to  Philadelphia,  went  to
Albany,  N.  Y.,  where  he  spent  two  years  in  teach-
ing, also  beginning  the  study  of  medicine  with  his
brother,  and  at  one  time  working  as  a  common
laborer  on  the  Erie  canal  to  obtain  funds.  On  his
return  to  Ohio  he  began  the  study  of  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1827,  and  began  practice  in
Jefferson.  He  formed  a  partnership  with  Joshua
R. Giddings in  1831,  and  in 1835 was  elected


WADE


WADHAMS


311


tfZtt*«**e~


prosecuting  attorney  of  Ashtabula  county,  which
office  he  held  till  1837.  In  that  year  he  was  chosen
as  a  Whig  to  the  state  senate,. where,  as  a  member
of  the  judiciary  committee,  he  presented  a  report
that  put  an  end  to
the  granting  of  di-
vorces by  the  legisla-
ture. In  1839  he  was
active  in  opposition
to  the  passage  of  a
more  stringent  fugi-
tive-slave law,  which
commissioners  from
Kentucky  were  urg-
ing on  the  legislature.
The  law  passed,  but
his  forcible  speech
against  it  did  much
to  arouse  state  pride
on  the  subject  and  to
make  it  a  dead  letter.
His  action  cost  him
his  re-election  to  the
senate,  but  he  was
chosen  again  in  1841.  In  February,  1847,  he  was
elected  by  the  legislature  president-judge  of  the
3d  judicial  district,  and  while  on  the  bench  he
was  chosen,  on  15  March,  1851,  to  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate, where  he  remained  till  1869.  He  soon  be-
came known  as  a  leader  of  the  small  anti-slavery
minority,  advocated  the  homestead  bill  and  the
repeal  of  the  fugitive-slave  law,  and  opposed  the
Kansas-Nebraska  bill  of  1854,  the  admission  of
Kansas  under  the  Lecompton  constitution  of  1858,
and  the  purchase  of  Cuba.  After  the  assault  on
Charles  Sumner,  Robert  Toombs  avowed  in  the
senate  that  he  had  witnessed  the  attack,  and  ap-
proved it,  whereupon  Mr.  Wade,  in  a  speech  of
great  vehemence,  threw  down  the  gage  of  personal
combat  to  the  southern  senators.  It  was  expected
that  there  would  be  an  immediate  challenge  from
Toombs,  but  the  latter  soon  made  peace.  Subse-
quently Mr.  Wade,  Zachariah  Chandler,  and  Simon
Cameron  made  a  compact  to  resent  any  insult
from  a  southerner  by  a  challenge  to  fight.  This
agreement  was  made  public  many  years  afterward.
Wade  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run  with
other  congressmen  in  a  carriage,  and  it  is  related
that  after  the  defeat  seven  of  them  alighted,  at
Wade's  proposal,  being  armed  with  revolvers,  and
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  kept  back  the  stream  of
fugitives  near  Fairfax  Court-House.  This  incident,
as  narrated  in  the  journals,  made  a  sensation  at
the  time.  Mr.  Wade  labored  earnestly  for  a  vigor-
ous prosecution  of  the  war,  was  the  chairman  and
foremost  spirit  of  the  joint  committee  on  the  con-
duct of  the  war  in  1861-2,  and  was  active  in  urg-
ing the  passage  of  a  confiscation  bill.  As  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  territories,  he  reported
a  bill  in  1862  to  abolish  slavery  in  all  the  terri-
tories. He  was  instrumental  in  the  advancement
to  the  portfolio  of  war  of  Edwin  M.  Stanton,  whom
he  recommended  strongly  to  President  Lincoln.
Though  he  cordially  supported  the  administration,
he  did  not  hesitate  to  criticise  many  of  its  acts,
and  after  the  adjournment  of  the  38th  congress  he
issued,  with  Henry  Winter  Davis,  what  became
known  as  the  Wade-Davis  manifesto,  condemning
the  president's  proposed  reconstruction  policy.
Mr.  Wade  became  president  pro  tempore  of  the
senate,  and  thus  acting  vice-president  of  the
United  States,  on  2  March,  1867,  succeeding  La-
fayette S.  Foster.  He  advised  President  Johnson
to  put  on  trial  for  treason  a  few  of  the  Confeder-
ate leaders  and  pardon  the  rest,  and  was  radical  in


his  ideas  of  reconstruction.  In  the  impeachment
of  President  Johnson  he  voted  for  conviction.  In
1869,  at  the  close  of  his  second  term,  he  was  suc-
ceeded in  the  senate  by  Allen  G.  Thurman,  and  he
then  returned  to  his  home  in  Jefferson,  Ohio.  He
was  one  of  the  chief  members  of  the  Santo  Domingo
commission  in  1871,  and  then  became  attorney  for
the  Northern  Pacific  railroad.  He  was  chairman
of  the  Ohio  delegation  in  the  Cincinnati  national
convention  of  1876,  and  earnestly  advocated  the
nomination  of  Rutherford  B.  Hayes,  but  after  his
accession  to  the  presidency  Mr.  Wade  bitterly  con-
demned his  course  in  relation  to  the  southern
states.  Though  Mr.  Wade  had  been  called  "  Frank
Wade"  in  Ohio,  from  his  middle  name,  he  was
known  in  congress  and  throughout  the  country  as
Ben  or  "  Old  Ben "  Wade.  He  was  popularly
looked  upon  as  one  of  the  bulwarks  of  the  National
cause  in  the  darkest  hours  of  the  civil  war,  and
was  widely  admired  and  respected  for  his  fearless-
ness, independence,  and  honesty.  His  rugged  and
forcible  style  of  oratory  always  commanded  atten-
tion. See  his  "  Life,"  by  Albert  Gr.  Riddle  (Cleve-
land, Ohio,  1888). — His  son,  James  Franklin,  en-
tered the  army  on  14  May,  1861,  as  1st  lieutenant
of  the  6th  U.  S.  cavalry,  and  rose  in  rank  till  at
the  close  of  the  war  he  was  major  and  brevet
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  became  lieu-
tenant-colonel on  20  March,  1879,  and  colonel  of
the  5th  cavalry  on  21  April,  1887.

WADE,  Melancthon  Smith,  merchant,  b.  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  2  Dec,  1802 ;  d.  in  Avondale,
near  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  11  Aug.,  1868.  His  father,
David  E.  Wade,  removed  to  Ohio  from  New  Jer-
sey in  1789.  The  son  was  educated  in  his  native
place,  and  became  a  dry-goods  merchant,  but  re-
tired from  business  in  1840.  He  was  active  in
militia  matters,  holding  successively  the  offices  of
captain,  colonel,  and  brigadier-general,  and  on  1
Oct.,  1861,  was  commissioned  a  brigadier-general
of  U.  S.  volunteers.  He  was  the  first  post-com-
mander of  Camp  Dennison,  Ohio,  but  resigned
from  the  army,  18  March,  1862,  on  account  of
feeble  health.  He  devoted  his  leisure  to  the  culti-
vation of  fruit,  and  was  an  active  member  of  the
Cincinnati  horticultural  society.

WADHAMS,  Edgar  Philip,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Lewis,  Essex  co.,  N.  x„  21  May,  1817.  His  parents
were  Protestants,
and  destined  him
for  the  ministry
of  the  Episcopal
church.  After
studying  at  Mid-
dlebury  college,
Vt.,  he  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Gen-
eral theological
seminary,  New
York  city,  receiv-
ed deacon's  or-
ders, and  was  sta-
tioned for  some
time  near  Port
Henry.  He  was
received  into  the
Roman  Catholic
church  in  June,
1846,  entered  St.
Mary's  seminary,
Baltimore,  immediately  afterward,  to  prepare  for
the  priesthood,  and  was  ordained  on  15  Jan.,  1850.
He  was  appointed  assistant  at  the  cathedral  of  Al-
bany, and  continued  in  this  post  till  1865,  when  he
was  appointed  pastor  of  the  cathedral  and  vicar-


312


WADLEIGH


WADSWORTH


general  of  the  diocese.  In  1872  he  was  nominated
to  the  new  see  of  Ogdensburg,  and  on  5  May  he  was
consecrated  bishop.  He  was  installed  in  his  diocese
on  16  May,  and  at  once  began  an  energetic  adminis-
tration, building  many  churches  and  about  twenty
chapels  for  the  smaller  missions.  The  numerous
and  heavy  debts  that  were  incurred  for  these  build-
ings were  paid  after  a  few  years.  He  founded  schools
in  Ogdensburg,  which  he  placed  in  charge  of  the
Clerks  of  St.  Viateur.  Franciscan  sisters  opened
others  in  Croghan  and  Mohawk  Hill,  a  boys'  college
was  established  at  Watertown  by  the  Fathers  of  the
Sacred  Heart,  and  other  schools  Were  established
in  various  places.  The  improvement  of  the  clergy
has  also  been  an  object  with  Bishop  Wadhams,  and
with  this  view  he  established  annual  retreats  and
conferences,  with  periodical  examinations  for  the
younger  priests.  In  1888  there  were  98  churches
in  the  diocese  and  58  stations,  77  priests,  5  religious
communities  of  men,  and  13  of  women.

WADLEIGH,  Bainhridge,  senator,  b.  in  Brad-
ford, N.  H.,  4  Jan.,  1831.  He  received  a  liberal
education,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1850,  and  practised  in  Milford.  For  eight  terms,
between  1855  and  1872,  he  served  in  the  legislature,
where'  he  was  conspicuous  as  a  debater.  He  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  as  a  Republican,  to
succeed  James  W.  Patterson,  serving  from  4  March,
1873,  till  3  March.  1879.  In  that  body  he  was  a
member  of  the  committees  on  patents,  military
affairs,  and  elections.  After  his  retirement  from
the  senate,  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law.

WADSWORTH,  Benjamin,  educator,  b.  in
Milton,  Mass.,  in  1669 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  16
March,  1737.  He  was  the  son  of  Capt.  Samuel
Wadsworth,  who  fell  in  battle  with  the  Indians  at
Sudbury,  Mass.,  on  18  April,  1676,  and  the  spot
where  he  fell  is  designated  by  a  monument  that
this  son  erected  to  his  memory.  After  graduation  at
Harvard  in  1690  he  studied  theology,  was  licensed
to  preach,  became  assistant  teacher  in  the  First
church  in  Boston  in  November,  1693,  and  on  8
Sept.,  1696,  was  made  its  colleague  pastor.  On  7
July,  1725,  he  was  inaugurated  president  of  Har-
vard college,  and  he  held  this  post  until  his  death.
John  Eliot  says:  "The  general  opinion,  however,
was  that  he  was  better  fitted  for  the  pastor  of  a
church  than  to  be  master  of  the  school  of  the
prophets.  He  had  confined  his  studies  to  theology,
and  was  not  a  man  of  extensive  erudition,  or  much
acquainted  with  the  sciences."  He  published  nu-
merous essays  and  sermons,  which  include  "An
Artillery  Election  Sermon"  (1700)  and  "Five  Ser-
mons" (1711),  the  first,  dated  30  Sept.,  being  the
last  sermon  that  he  delivered  in  the  old  meeting-
house, which  was  burned  on  2  Oct.,  1711,  and  the
last  a  "  Thanksgiving  Sermon  for  God's  Goodness
in  providing  a  New  Meeting-House  for  the  Old
Church,"  an  account  of  the  fire.

WADSWORTH,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in
Litchfield,  Conn.,  8  May,  1814 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  1  April,  1882.  After  graduation  at  Union
college  in  1837  he  was  pastor  of  the  2d  Presbyte-
rian church  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  in  1842-50;  of  "the
Arch  street  Presbyterian  church,  Philadelphia,  in
1850-'62;  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in  San  Fran-
cisco in  1862-9 ;  of  the  3d  Reformed  Dutch  church,
Philadelphia,  in  1869-73;  of  the  Clinton  street
Presbyterian  church,  Philadelphia,  in  1873-'9 ;  and
of  the  Clinton  street  Immanuel  church,  Philadel-
phia, in  1879-'82.  Dr.  Wadsworth  was  among  the
most  eloquent  divines  of  his  day.  The  University
of  the  city  of  New  York  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1857.  His  sermons  were  published,  with  a
memoir  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1882-'4).


WADSWORTH,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Durham,
Conn.,  6  July,  1730;  d.  there,  22  Sept.,  1817.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1748.  From  1756  till
1786  he  was  town-clerk  of  Durham,  and  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  Revolution  he  became  a  member  of
the  committee  of  safety.  In  1776  he  was  colonel
and  brigadier-general  of  Connecticut  militia,  and
in  1777  he  was  appointed  2d  major-general.  In
the  latter  year  he  was  ordered  to  New  Haven  to
defend  the  towns  on  the  coast.  Subsequently  he
was  a  justice,  and  afterward  presiding  justice  of
the  New  Haven  county  court  of  common  pleas,  was
a  delegate  from  Connecticut  to  the  Continental
congress  in  1783-6,  and  from  1785  till  1790 a  mem-
ber of  the  executive  council. — His  nephew,  James,
philanthropist,  b.  in  Durham,  Conn.,  20  April,
1768;  d.  in  Geneseo,  N.  Y.,  8  June,  1844,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1787,  and  in  1790  removed
with  his  brother,  William,  to  Genesee  river,  pur-
chasing a  large  tract  of  land  in  what  is  now  the
town  of  Geneseo,  and  becoming  one  of  the  most
wealthy  land-proprietors  in  the  state.  At  his  per-
sonal expense  he  printed  and  circulated  publica-
tions on  education,  employed  lecturers  on  this  sub-
ject, and  offered  premiums  to  the  towns  that  should
be  the  first  to  establish  libraries.  In  1811  he  pro-
posed the  establishment  of  normal  schools,  and  in
1838  he  procured  the  enactment  of  a  school-library
law,  and  founded  a  library  and  institution  for  sci-
entific lectures  at  Geneseo,  which  he  endowed  with
f  10,000.  In  his  sales  of  land  he  always  stipulated
that  a  tract  of  125  acres  in  each  township  should
be  granted  free  for  a  church,  and  another  of  the
same  size  for  a  school. — James's  brother,  William,
soldier,  b.  in  Durham,  Conn.,  in  1732 ;  d.  in  Gene-
seo, N.  Y.,  in  February,  1833,  was  also  an  early
settler  in  western  New  York.  At  the  beginning  of
the  war  of  1812  he  was  brigadier-general  of  New
York  militia,  and  he  served  in  the  U.  S.  army  from
26  June  till  15  Nov.,  1812,  took  part  in  the  assault
on  Queenston  Heights,  13  Oct.,  1812,  where  he  was
in  command  when  the  Americans  surrendered,  and
gave  up  his  sword  in  person  to  Sir  Roger  Sheaffe,
— James's  son.  James  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Gene-
seo, N.  Y.,  30  Oct.,  1807 ;  d.  near  Chancellorsville,
Va.,  8  May,  1864,
was  educated  at
Harvard  and
Yale  and  studied
law  in  Albany,
completing  his
course  with  Dan-
iel Webster.  Al-
though he  was
admitted  to  the
bar  in  1833,  he
never  practised
his  profession,
but  devoted  him-
self to  the  man-
agement of  the
family  estate  in
western  New
York,  which

amounted  to  15,-
000  acres.  In
1852  he  was  elect-
ed president  of
the  State  agricul-
tural society,  in  which  he  was  interested  during  his
life.  He  promoted  education  and  the  interests  of
the  community  in  which  he  lived.  He  founded
a  public  library  in  Geneseo,  was  a  subscriber  to
the  endowment  of  Geneseo  college,  aided  in  estab-
lishing the  school-district  library  system,  and  was


WADSWORTH


WADSWORTH


313


active  in  philanthropical  labors.  Although  a  Fed-
eralist by  education  and  a  Democrat  by  conviction,
he  supported  the  Free-soil  party  in  1848,  and  con-
tinued to  act  in  defence  of  the  anti-slavery  move-
ment. He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Re-
publican ticket  in  1856  and  1860.  In  1861  he  was
a  delegate  to  the  Peace  convention  in  Washington,
and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  among
the  first  to  offer  his  services  to  the  government.
In  April,  1861,  he  was  commissioned  a  major-gen-
eral by  Gov.  Edwin  D.  Morgan,  but  the  appoint-
ment was  subsequently  revoked.  When  communi-
cation with  the  capital  was  cut  off,  he  chartered
two  ships  upon  his  own  responsibility,  loaded  them
with  provisions,  and  went  with  them  to  Annapolis,
where  he  superintended  the  delivery  of  the  sup-

Blies.  He  was  volunteer  aide  to  Gen.  Irvin  Mc-
>owell  at  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run,  where  he
was  commended  for  bravery  and  humanity.  After-
ward he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
9  Aug.,  1861,  assigned  to  a  command  in  the  ad-
vance under  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,  and  guard-
ed the  city  of  Washington.  On  15  March,  1862,  he
became  military  governor  of  the  District  of  Colum-
bia. In  the  autumn  of  1862  he  was  the  Republi-
can candidate  for  governor  of  New  York,  but  was
defeated  by  Horatio  Seymour.  In  the  following
December  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a
division  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  under  Gen.
Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  and  participated  in  the  bat-
tle of  Fredericksburg,  13  Dec,  1862.  He  displayed
freat  military  skill  in  the  command  of  the  1st
ivision  of  the  1st  army  corps  under  Gen.  John  F.
Reynolds.  At  Gettysburg  his  division  was  the
first  to  engage  the  enemy  on  1  July,  1863,  and  on
that  day  lost  2,400  out  of  4,000  men.  During  the
second  and  third  days'  fighting  he  rendered  good
service  in  maintaining  the  heights  on  the  right  of
the  line.  At  the  council  of  war  held  after  the  vic-
tory he  was  one  of  the  three  that  favored  pursuit
of  the  enemy.  Early  in  1864  he  was  sent  on  special
service  to  the  Mississippi  valley,  and  made  an  exten-
sive tour  of  inspection  through  the  southern  and
western  states.  On  the  reorganization  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  in  1864,  he  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  the  4th  division  of  the  5th  corps,  composed
in  part  of  his  old  command.  While  endeavoring
to  rally  his  troops  during  the  battle  of  the  Wilder-
ness, 6  May,  1864,  he  was  struck  in  the  head  by  a
bullet,  and  before  he  could  be  removed  the  enemy
had  gained  possession  of  the  ground  where  he  lay.
Although  unconscious,  he  lingered  for  two  days.
It  is  said  that  his  troops  were  inspired  by  his  he-
roic bearing  continually  to  renew  the  contest,  when
but  for  him  they  would  have  yielded.  He  was
brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers  on  6  May,
1864.  Horace  Greeley,  in  his  "  American  Conflict "
(Hartford,  1864-'6),  says :  "  The  country's  salvation
claimed  no  nobler  sacrifice  than  that  of  James  S.
Wadsworth,  of  New  York.  .  .  .  No  one  surren-
dered more  for  his  country's  sake,  or  gave  his  life
more  joyfully  for  her  deliverance."  In  1888  a
movement  was  in  progress  for  the  erection  in
Washington  of  a  monument  to  his  memory.

WADSWORTH,  Jeremiah,  congressman,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  in  1743  ;  d.  there,  30  April,  1804.
He  was  the  originator  of  numerous  plans  for  the
improvement  of  his  native  town,  and  held  several
local  offices.  During  the  war  of  the  Revolution  he
was  commissary-general  of  the  Continental  army.
In  1786-'8  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental
congress,  and  he  was  elected  a  representative  from
Connecticut  to  the  1st  congress  as  a  Federalist,
serving  bv  successive  elections  from  4  March,  1789.
till  3  March,  1795.


WADSWORTH,  Marshman  Edward,  geolo-
gist, b.  in  Livermore  Falls,  Me.,  6  May,  1847.  He
was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1869,  and  then  taught
in  Minnesota  and  Wisconsin.  In  1873  he  was
elected  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  Boston  dental
college,  and  in  1874  he  became  instructor  in  mathe-
matics and  mineralogy  in  Harvard.  He  held  an
assistantship  in  lithology  at  the  Museum  of  com-
parative zoSlogy,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1877-85,
and  was  professor  of  mineralogy  and  geology  in
Colby  university  in  1885-7.  Prof.  Wadsworth
was  called  in  1887  to  the  directorship  of  the  Michi-
gan mining-school,  with  the  chair  of  mineralogy,
petrography,  and  geology,  and  in  1888  he  was  ap-
pointed state  geologist  of  Michigan.  The  degree
of  Ph.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Harvard  in
1879  for  post-graduate  studies,  and  he  is  a  fellow
of  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science,  and  a  member  of  the  Boston  society  of
natural  history  and  other  scientific  bodies.  His
bibliography  embraces  nearly  100  titles  of  papers
on  geology,  lithology,  and  similar  subjects,  includ-
ing the  following  books,  "  Geology  of  the  Iron  and
Copper  Districts  of  Lake  Superior  "  (Cambridge,
1880) ;  "  The  Azoid  System  and  its  proposed  Sub-
divisions," with  Josiah  D.  Whitney  (1884) ;  "  Litho-
logical  Studies'"  (1884) ;  and  "  Preliminary  Descrip-
tion of  the  Peridotytes,  Gabbros,  Diabases,  and
Andesites  of  Minnesota  "  (St.  Paul,  1887).

WADSWORTH,  Peleg,  soldier,  b.  in  Duxbury,
Mass.,  in  1748 ;  d.  in  Hiram,  Oxford  co.,  Me.,  18
Nov.,  1829.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1769,
taught  in  Plymouth  with  Alexander  Scammell,  and
then  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits.  Early  in
the  Revolutionary  struggle  he  entered  the  army  as
a  captain  of  minute-men  in  Roxbury  and  became
aide  to  Gen.  Artemas  Ward.  Afterward  he  was
made  adjutant-general  for  Massachusetts,  and  was
present  at  the  battle  of  Long  Island,  1  Aug.,  1776.
He  became  brigadier-general  of  militia  in  1777,  and
was  second  in  command  of  the  Penobscot  expedi-
tion in  1779,  on  which  occasion  he  displayed  great
courage  and  was  taken  prisoner.  He  was  again
captured  in  his  house  by  a  party  of  British  soldiers
in  February,  1781,  and  imprisoned  in  the  fort  at
Castine,  whence  he  escaped  in  June.  In  1784  he
established  himself  in  business  in  Portland,  Me.,
where  he  was  much  employed  in  surveying.  In
1792  he  was  in  the  state  senate,  and  was  elected  to
congress,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1793,  till  3  March,
1807.  In  the  last-named  year  he  removed  to  Ox-
ford county,  Me.,  to  improve  a  large  tract  of  land
that  had  been  granted  to  him  by  the  government
for  his  services.  He  developed  the  resources  of
that  region,  and  was  appointed  major-general  of
Maine  militia. — His  son,  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.
about  1783 ;  d.  in  Tripoli  harbor,  4  Sept.,  1804.  en-
tered the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  28  Aug.,  1799.
He  was  attached  to  the  frigate  "Constitution,"
which  sailed  from  Boston  as  Preble's  flag-ship  in
August,  1803,  to  the  Mediterranean  for  the  Tripoli-
tan  war.  He  was  appointed  an  acting  lieutenant
in  that  ship,  and  took  part  in  the  engagements
with  the  Tripolitan  fleet  and  forts.  When  the
ketch  •'  Intrepid  "  was  fitted  out  as  a  floating  mine
to  explode  in  the  harbor  among  the  Tripolitan  ves-
sels, he  volunteered  to  serve  in  that  enterprise
(see  Somers,  Richard),  and  perished  with  his  com-
panions. His  sister  became  the  mother  of  the
poet  Longfellow,  who  was  named  for  him. — Another
son,  Alexander  Scammell,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  in  1790;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  5.
April,  1851,  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  2
April,  1804,  and  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  21
April,  1810. He  was  2d  lieutenant  of  the  frigate


314


WAFER


WAGNER


"  Constitution  "  during  her  memorable  escape  from
the  British  fleet,  and  also  took  part  in  the  engage-
ment with  the  frigate  "  Guerriere,"  19  Aug.,  1812,
for  which  he  received  a  silver  medal  and  was  in-
cluded in  the  vote  of  thanks  to  Hull  and  his  offi-
cers. He  was  1st  lieutenant  of  the  corvette  "  Ad-
ams "  during  her  cruise  in  1814  when  she  captured
ten  prizes,  but  was  chased  by  a  British  fleet  into
Penobscot  bay.  There  she  ran  ashore,  and,  to  pre-
vent capture,  was  destroyed  by  her  crew,  who
erected  a  fort  armed  with  the  guns  from  the  ship,
and  drove  the  enemy  away.  He  was  promoted  for
his  services  during  the  war  to  master-commandant,
27  April,  1816,  and  commanded  the  brig  "  Prome-
theus" in  the  Mediterranean  squadron  after  the
Algerine  war  in  1816-'17,  and  then  the  sloop  "  John
Adams  "  in  the  West  Indies,  suppressing  piracy  in
two  cruises — in  1818-'19  and  1821-2.  He  served  at
the  Washington  navy-yard  in  1823-'5,  and  as  in-
spector of  ordnance  in  1825-'9.  He  was  promoted
to  captain,  3  March,  1825,  surveyed  Narragansett
bay,  R.  I.,  and  commanded  the  frigate  "  Constella-
tion," of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  in  1829-'32.
He  was  commodore  commanding  the  Pacific  squad-
ron in  1834-'6,  a  member  of  the  board  of  navy
commissioners  in  1837-'40,  and  inspector  of  ord-
nance from  1841  till  1850.

WAFER,  Lionel,  British  surgeon,  b.  in  Wales
about  1640;  d.  in  London,  England,  about  1705.
He  made  several  voyages  to  the  South  sea  as  sur-
geon on  board  merchant  vessels,  and  in  1676  visited
the  Malay  archipelago.  In  1677  he  settled  in
Jamaica,  where  he  practised  his  profession  for
some  time,  but  in  1679  he  accepted  the  appoint-
ment of  surgeon  on  the  fleet  of  two  noted  bucca-
neers, named  Cook  and  Linen,  who  were  joined  by
others  while  cruising  along  the  coast  of  South
America. They  met,  in  Carthagena,  William  Dam-

{)ier,  who  induced  Wafer  to  enter  his  service.  The
after  participated  in  Dampier's  raids  in  the  West
Indies  and  on  the  Atlantic  coast,  and  accompanied
him  in  the  expedition  across  the  Isthmus  of  Darien
in  1680.  But  they  quarrelled,  and  Wafer  was  aban-
doned on  the  road  with  four  mutineers.  They
were  surrounded  by  hostile  Indians ;  but  one  of  the
soldiers,  who  understood  their  language,  told  the
natives  that  Wafer  was  a  great  magician,  and  he
lived  with  the  Indians  for  several  years,  till  he  ob-
tained permission  to  visit  his  own  country,  on
promising  to  return  and  marry  the  chief's  sister
and  to  bring  with  him  some  dogs  from  England.
He  sailed  away  in  1684  on  board  a  French  bucca-
neer. He  afterward  was  reconciled  with  Dampier,
and  sailed  with  him  till  1685,  when  he  became  sur-
geon on  board  Capt.  Nathaniel  Davis's  ship,  and
continued  to  lead  a  privateer's  life  in  the  South  sea.
In  1688  he  came  to  North  America  and  was  among
the  first  settlers  of  Philadelphia,  where  he  resided
in  1688-'90,  returning  in  the  latter  year  to  Lon-
don. He  wrote  "  A  New  Voyage  and  Description
of  the  Isthmus  of  America"  (London,  1699),  which
was  translated  into  French  (Paris,  1706),  and  Ger-
man (Halle,  1759).  It  contained  the  fullest  descrip-
tion that  had  been  published  of  the  Isthmus  of
Darien,  the  Indians  that  inhabited  it,  and  its  natu-
ral productions,  and  also  interesting  facts  regard-
ing Mexico,  communicated  to  him  by  a  Spanish
captain.  The  Swedish  version  (Upsala,  1789)  con-
tains also  an  interesting  description  of  New  Spain
that  is  attributed  to  Wafer.

WAGGAMANN,  George  Augustus,  senator,  b.
in  Somerset  county,  Md.,  in  1782 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  22  March,  1843.  He  was  educated  in  Mary-
land, and  practised  law  in  New  Orleans,  was  in-
terested in  sugar-planting,  and  held  various  offices,


including  that  of  secretary  of  state  of  Louisiana  in
1830-'3.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  in  place  of
Edward  Livingston,  resigned,  and  served  as  a  Whig
from  3  Jan.,  1832,  till  3  March.  1835.  He  died  from
the  effects  of  a  wound  that  he  received  in  a  duel.

WAGNER,  Daniel  Christian,  Alsatian  navi-
gator, b.  in  Mulhouse  about  1501 ;  d.  in  Patagonia
m  1552.  He  early  entered  the  Spanish  service,
and  acted  as  chief  pilot  in  Mexico  and  Peru.  In
1539  Gutierrez  de  Vargas,  bishop  of  Placencia,
sent  Admiral  Camargo  to  explore  the  Strait  of
Magellan.  The  fleet  sailed  from  Seville  in  Au-
gust. 1539,  Wagner  acting  as  chief  pilot,  anchored
on  20  Jan.,  1540,  near  Cape  Virgins,  and,  after  en-
tering the  strait,  stopped  at  Port  Famine,  but  was
forced  out  by  a  hurricane  and  two  vessels  sank,
the  crew  seeking  refuge  on  shore.  A  few  days
later  Admiral  Camargo  returned  to  search  for  the
shipwrecked,  and  Wagner  went  in  a  boat  to  re-
connoitre ;  but  a  new  tempest  carried  Camargo  out
to  sea,  and  he  entered  Islay,  in  Peru.  Wagner,
thus  abandoned  on  the  shore,  met  a  part  of  the
shipwrecked  crews,  and  with  their  help  built  bar-
racks in  which  they  wintered,  suffering  greatly
from  cold  and  famine.  In  the' summer  they  built
a  boat  and  they  arrived  in  Islay  in  December,  1541.
In  1552  Wagner  was  appointed  to  the  command
of  a  new  expedition  to  explore  the  strait,  but  died
during  the  journey.  The  "  Collection  des  grands
et  petits  voyages  (50  vols.,  Paris,  1750-'75)  at-
tributes to  Wagner  a  narrative  entitled  "  Relation
de  l'expedition  de  l'Amiral  Camargo  au  detroit
de  Magellan  en  1539-'40,  du  naufrage  de  deux  na-
vires  de  la  flotte,  et  des  souffrances,  aventures,  et
miraculeuse  echappe  des  naufrages."

WAGNER,  John,  surgeon,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  7  July,  1791 ;  d.  there,  22  May,  1841.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1812,  studied  medicine
in  New  York,  went  to  England  in  1815,  where
he  became  the  pupil  of  Sir.  Astley  P.  Cooper  for
three  years,  and,  while  attending  his  lectures,  was
employed  as  a  dresser  in  Guy's  hospital,  London.
Two  large  manuscript  volumes  on  surgery  and
anatomy  remain  as  a  register  of  the  important
cases  that  he  studied  during  this  period.  He  re-
ceived a  degree  from  the  Royal  college  of  surgeons,
and  also  studied  in  Paris  under  Dupuytren.  On
his  return  he  settled  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  where  he
soon  rose  to  eminence  as  a  surgeon.  He  success-
fully performed  the  third  operation  for  osteo-
sarcoma of  the  lower  jaw.  In  1826  he  began  a
course  of  dissections  and  demonstrations  in  practi-
cal anatomy.  In  the  art  of  making  and  preserv-
ing anatomical  preparations  he  was  rarely  excelled,
and  his  specimens,  which  still  remain,  are  models.
In  1829  ne  was  elected  professor  of  pathological
and  surgical  anatomy  in  South  Carolina  medical
college,  which  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  college
to  establish  this  department.  In  1832  he  succeeded
Dr.  James  Ramsey  in  the  chair  of  surgery.

WAGNER,  Moritz  Frieurich,  German  ex-
plorer, b.  in  Baireuth,  Bavaria.  3  Oct.,  1813.  He
received  his  education  at  the  University  of  Augs-
burg, was  afterward  clerk  in  a  mercantile  house  in
Marseilles,  and  in  1834  went  to  Paris,  Erlangen.
and  Munich,  to  study  natural  science.  He  visited
Algiers  in  1836-'8,  studied  geology  at  Gottingen
in  1838-'42,  explored  the  Caucasus  and  Armenia
in  1842-'6,  at  the  expense  of  the  Berlin  academy
of  sciences,  and  visited  Italy  in  1846-'9,  and  Asia
Minor,  Persia,  and  Kurdistan  in  1850-'l.  In
1852-'5,  with  Karl  von  Scherzer,  he  visited  the
United  States,  Central  America,  and  the  West
Indies,  and  he  went  again  to  America  in  1857,  at
the  invitation  of  King  Maximilian  II.  of  Bavaria.


WAGNER


WAINWRIGHT


315


He  explored  the  province  of  Chiriqui,  on  the  Isth-
mus of  Panama,  till  1858,  visiting  in  1859  the
western  Andes  of  Ecuador,  and  forming  rich  col-
lections in  natural  history.  On  his  return  to  Ger-
many in  1860  he  was  appointed  professor  of  ge-
ography in  the  University  of  Munich,  elected  an
associate  member  of  the  Munich  and  Berlin  acade-
mies of  sciences,  founded  and  became  director  of
the  Ethnographical  museum  of  Munich,  and  dis-
covered prehistoric  habitations  in  some  of  the  lakes
in  Bavaria,  principally  that  of  Starnberg.  Wagner
has  since  devoted  his  labors  exclusively  to  science.
His  works,  besides  those  that  describe  his  travels
in  the  Old  World,  include  "  Reisen  in  Nordamerika"
(3  vols.,  Leipsic,  1854),  "  Die  Republik  von  Costa-
Rica  in  Central- Amerika  "  (1856),  both  written
with  Scherzer ;  "  Ueber  das  Vorkommen  von  Pfahl-
bauten "  (Munich,  1867) ;  and  "  Ueber  Topogra-
phie,  Zweck  und  Alter  der  Pfahlbauten  "  (1867).
He  contributed  also  many  papers  describing  his
travels  to  Petermann's  monthly  collection  and  to
the  journal  of  the  Geographical  society  of  Berlin.

WAGNER,  Webster,  inventor,  b.  near  Palatine
Bridge,  N.  Y.,  2  Oct.,  1817;  d.  near  Spuyten  Duy-
vil,  N.  Y.,  13  Jan.,  1882.  He  received  a  common-
school  education  and  became  a  wagon-maker.  Sub-
sequently he  received  the  appointment  of  freight
agent  on  the  New  York  Central  railroad,  and  then
invented  the  sleeping-car.  In  1858  he  had  four  of
these  cars  in  operation,  and  their  use  gradually  ex-
tended until  they  were  adopted  on  all  the  lines  of
the  Vanderbilt  system.  In  1867  he  manufactured
the  first  drawing-room  car,  and  founded  the  Wag-
ner palace-car  company,  of  which  he  was  president
until  his  death.  He  also  invented  the  oval  car-
roof,  and  patented  the  elevated  panel.  Mr.  Wag-
ner was  elected  as  a  Republican  to  the  New  York
assembly  in  1870,  and  from  1871  till  1882  he  was
state  senator.  In  1880  he  was  a  delegate  to  the
Republican  national  convention.  He  was  killed  in
a  railroad  disaster  on  the  Hudson  river  road.

WAGNER,  William,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  15  Jan.,  1796 ;  d.  there,  17  Jan.,
1885.  He  received  an  academic  education,  and
was  desirous  of  studying  medicine,  but  his  parents
decided  otherwise,  and  he  entered  the  counting-
room  of  Stephen  Girard.  In  1816  he  was  sent  as
an  assistant  supercargo  on  a  trading  voyage  that
lasted  nearly  two  years.  On  this  voyage  he  made
large  collections  of  shells,  plants,  and  fossils,  which
formed  the  beginnings  of  his  museum.  Subse-
quently he  engaged  in  various  business  enterprises,
but  finally  retired  in  1840.  After  a  residence
abroad  of  two  years  in  1841-'2  he  returned  to
Philadelphia  and  devoted  himself  to  arranging  his
collections.  In  1847  he  began  to  deliver  scientific
lectures  to  those  that  were  interested,  and  in  1852
his  audiences  had  grown  so  large  that  he  was  com-
pelled to  secure  the  use  of  a  hall.  The  Wagner
free  institute  of  science  was  inaugurated  on  21
May,  1855,  with  a  corps  of  lecturers.  Ten  years
later  an  edifice  was  dedicated,  and  Mr.  Wagner
transferred  the  building  and  its  collections,  cabi-
nets, apparatus,  and  library  to  trustees  on  condi-
tion that  the  property  shall  forever  be  used  for
instruction  in  natural  science.  It  is  estimated  that
his  entire  benefaction  for  this  purpose  was  not
less  than  half  a  million  dollars,  lie  continued
president  of  the  institute  until  his  death,  and  was
a  member  of  learned  societies,  to  whose  proceed-
ings he  contributed  scientific  papers.

WAINWRIGHT,  Jonathan  Mayhew,  P.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Liverpool,  England,  24  Feb.,  1793;
d.  in  New  York  city,  21  Sept.,  1854.  He  was  of
American  parentage,  his  mother  being  a  daughter


of  Rev.  Jonathan  Mayhew,  of  Boston.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1812,  where  he  was  after-
ward tutor,  ordered  deacon  in  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church  in  Trinity  church,  Boston,  13  April,
1817,  ordained  priest  in  Christ  church,  Hartford,
Conn.,  29  May,  1818,  and  became  rector  of  the  lat-
ter. In  November,  1819,  he  removed  to  New  York,
and  became  assistant  minister  in  Trinity  church.
He  was  made  rector  of  Grace  church  in  1821,  and
remained  in  that  charge  until  1834,  when  he  be-
came rector  of  Trinity  church,  Boston.  In  1837
he  returned  to
Trinity  parish,
New  York,  as  as-
sistant in  charge
of  St.  John's
chapel,  which
post  he  retained
until  he  was  ele-
vated to  the  epis-
copate. He  re-
ceived the  de-
gree of  D.  D.
from  Union  col-
lege in  1823,  and
from  Harvard  in
1835.  The  de-
gree of  D.  C.  L.
was  conferred
upon  him  by  the /fyTl  /fa-  ■  J ' *-

University  of  Ox- V  /A<A/^t^^^-^^^r
ford, England. *

in  1852.  Dr.  Wainwright  was  consecrated  provis-
ional bishop  of  New  York  in  Trinity  church,  New
York,  on  10  Nov.,  1852.  He  was  for  many  years  sec-
retary of  the  house  of  bishops,  aided  in  the  estab-
lishment of  the  University  of  New  York,  and  was
considered  one  of  the  first  pulpit  orators  of  his  day.
Bishop  Wainwright  wielded  great  social  influence,
was  a  ripe  scholar,  and  was  a  devoted  lover  of
music,  contributing  toward  its  improvement  in  the
churches  of  his  denomination.  He  was  secretary
of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  General  theological
seminary  in  1828-'34,  and  a  trustee  or  officer  of
many  other  institutions  and  societies.  In  1844  he
engaged  in  a  controversy  with  his  friend  Rev.  Dr.
George  Potts,  which  grew  out  of  an  assertion  that
Rufus  Choate  made  at  a  celebration  of  the  New
England  society.  The  orator  said  that  the  Pilgrim
fathers  had  founded  a  "  state  without  a  king  and
a  church  without  a  bishop."  At  the  dinner  that
followed,  Dr.  Wainwright,  in  responding  to  a  sen-
timent, said  in  reply  that  "there  is  no  church
without  a  bishop.  The  subsequent  discussion
with  Dr.  Potts,  which  was  carried  on  in  nineteen
letters  in  the  New  York  "  Commercial  Advertiser,"
was  afterward  published  in  pamphlet-form  (1844).
His  other  works  include  "  Four  Sermons  on  Re-
ligious Education"  (New  York,  1829):  "Lessons
on  the  Church  "  (1835) ;  "  Order  of  Family  Prayer  "
(1845);  "Short  Family  Prayers"  (1850);  "The
Pathway  and  Abiding-Places  of  our  Lord,  illus-
trated in  the  Journal  of  a  Tour  through  the  Land
of  Promise"  (1851);  "The  Land  of  Bondage:
being  the  Journal  of  a  Tour  in  Egypt"  (1852);
single  sermons;  and  papers  in  periodicals.  He
also  prepared  three  books  of  music :  a  "  Book  of
Chants,  adapted  to  services  of  the  Episcopal
church  (1819) ;  "  Music  of  the  Church  "  (1828) ;  and
"The  Choir  and  Family  Psalter."  in  connection
with  Rev.  Dr.  William  A.  Muhlenberg  (1851):  and
edited  Bishop  Ravenscroft's  "Sermons,"  with  a
memoir  (2  vols.,  1830),  and  "  Life  of  Bishop  Heber,"
by  his  widow  (2  vols.,  1830).  See  a  "Memorial
Volume,"  containing thirty-four  of  his  sermons


316


WAINWRIGHT


WAIT


and  a  memoir  by  Bishop  Doane  (1856),  and  "  Life
of  Bishop  Wainwright,  by  Rev.  John  N.  Norton
(1858).  After  his  death  a  church  was  erected  to
his  memory  in  New  York  city. — His  son,  Jona-
than Mayhew,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  27  July.  1821 ;  d.  near  Galveston,  Tex.,  1  Jan.,
1863,  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  30  June,
1837,  attended  the  naval  school  at  Philadelphia  in
1842-'3,  and  became  a  passed  midshipman,  29  June,
1843.  He  was  appointed  acting  master,  10  Nov.,
1849,  and  commissioned  lieutenant,  17  Sept.,  1850.
He  was  on  special  duty  at  Washington  in  1861-,
and  commanded  the  steamer  "  Harriet  Lane,"
which  was  Admiral  Porter's  flag-ship  in  Farragut's
fleet  during  the  engagements  with  Fort  Jackson
and  Fort  St.  Philip  and  the  capture  of  New  Or-
leans in  April,  1862.  He  took  part  in  the  opera-
tions of  the  fleet  below  Vicksburg,  and  in  October,
1862,  commanded  the  "Harriet  Lane"  in  Com-
mander Renshaw's  squadron  at  the  capture  of
Galveston.  While  he  was  holding  possession  of
Galveston,  Gen.  Magruder  attacked  the  "  Harriet
Lane,"  then  lying  above  the  city.  Wainwright
was  killed  while  gallantly  leading  his  men  to  re-
pel the  Confederate  boarders,  and  in  ten  minutes
after  half  the  crew  of  the  "  Harriet  Lane "  were
shot  down  and  the  vessel  was  captured  by  the  Con-
federates.—  The  second  Jonathan  Mayhew's  son,
Jonathan  Mayhew,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  29  Jan.,  i849 ;  d.  at  sea,  19  June,  1870,  was
graduated  at  the  IT.  S.  naval  academy  in  1867,
was  promoted  to  master,  21  March,  1870,  and
while  serving  in  the  "  Mohican  "  he  had  command
of  the  boat  expedition  to  cut  out  the  pirate
steamer  "  Forward,"  which  was  operating  on  the
coast  of  Mexico,  manned  by  a  crew  of  filibusters.
The  "  Forward  "  was  lying  alongside  of  the  beach
in  the  lagoon  at  San  Bias  when  Wainwright  at-
tacked and  attempted  to  capture  the  ship  by  board-
ing. The  pirates  fired  on  the  boat's  crew,  and
shot  Wainwright.  The  crew  burned  the  steamer,
and  Wainwright  was  carried  on  board  ship,  where
he  died  the  next  day.  —  The  second  Jonathan's
daughter,  Marie,  now  Mrs.  Louis  James,  has  at-
tained some  reputation  as  an  actress.

WAINWRIGHT,  Richard,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  5  Jan.,  1817;  d.  near  New  Or-
leans, 10  Aug.,  1862.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a
midshipman,  11  May,  1831,  attended  the  naval
school  at  Norfolk  in  1837-'8,  and  became  a  passed
midshipman,  15  June,  1837.  In  1838-'41  he  served
on  the  coast  survey  in  the  brig  "  Consort."  He
was  commissioned  lieutenant.  8  Sept.,  1841,  com-
manded the  steamer  "  Water- Witch  "  on  the  home
station  in  1848-'9,  served  again  on  coast  survey  in
1851— '7,  and  cruised  in  the  steam  frigate  "  Merri-
mack "  in  1857-60.  He  was  stationed  at  the  Wash-
ington navy -yard  on  ordnance  duty  in  1860-'l,
promoted  to  commander,  24  April  of  the  latter
year,  and  given  the  flag-ship  "  Hartford  "  of  Ad-
miral Farragut's  fleet,  fitted  out  for  the  capture  of
New  Orleans.  During  the  passage  of  the  forts
the  Confederate  tug  "  Mosher  "  pushed  a  fire-raft
alongside  of  the  "  Hartford,"  which  threatened
the  destruction  of  the  ship.  Wainwright  distin-
guished himself  in  this  conflict  with  the  flames
and  continued  to  fight  the  forts  on  24-25  April.
He  participated  in  the  operations  of  Farragut's
fleet  below  Vicksburg,  and  was  highly  commended
by  the  admiral.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  still
commanded  the  "  Hartford."

WAIT,  Benjamin,  patriot,  b.  in  Markham  town-
ship, Upper  Canada,  7  Sept.,  1813.  He  engaged  in
the  Canadian  rebellion,  and  was  appointed  a  colonel
in  the  insurgent  forces  that  had  their  headquarters


on  Navy  island.  On  a  raid  into  Upper  Canada  he
was  captured,  brought  to  trial  for  high  treason,  and
condemned  to  be  hanged  on  25  Aug.,  1838.  Only
a  fortnight  intervened  between  his  sentence  and  its
intended  execution ;  but  in  that  short  time  his  wife,
Maria  Wait  {nee  Smith),  surmounting  almost  im-
possible difficulties  and  the  strong  opposition  of
Sir  George  Arthur,  governor  of  Upper  Canada,  ob-
tained from  Lord  Durham,  the  governor-general,,
a  commutation  of  his  sentence  from  death  to  trans-
portation for  life  to  Van  Dieman's  Land.  She  then
went  alone  and  almost  penniless  to  London  to  ob-
tain his  pardon.  The  case  was  laid  before  the
queen's  council,  but  they  opposed  any  clemency  so
long  as  the  disturbances  continued  to  exist  in
Canada.  Mrs.  Wait  supported  herself  at  first  by-
acting  as  companion  to  a  wealthy  lady,  and  then
as  teacher  in  an  infant-school,  meanwhile  making
constant  efforts  for  the  release  of  her  husband.
After  two  years,  her  health  broken  by  long-con-
tinued suspense  and  privation,  she  decided  to  join
her  husband  in  his  banishment.  She  was  about  to
embark  for  Van  Dieman's  Land  when  the  ministry
had  decided  to  grant  a  pardon  to  her  husband  and
his  six  surviving  companions  in  exile  if  it  should
be  recommended  by  the  governor-general  of  Can-
ada. She  set  out  at  once  for  Toronto:  but  she
received  from  the  governor  only  a  kindly  refusal.
Not  disheartened  by  this,  she  besought  the  mem-
bers of  the  legislature  to  exercise  their  influence,
and  succeeded  at  the  end  of  a  year  in  securing  the
signatures  of  fifty  of  the  number  to  her  petition.
With  this  she  again  waited  upon  the  governor,
who  again  declined  her  request.  She  then  induced
her  friends  in  the  legislature  to  introduce  a  resolu-
tion recommending  the  governor  to  urge  upon  the
queen  a  pardon  to  Wait  and  his  associate  exiles.
The  resolution  was  passed,  and  then  the  governor
yielded.  In  March,  1842,  an  order  was  issued  for
their  absolute  release.  Meanwhile  Wait  had  been
allowed  unusual  freedom  in  Van  Dieman's  Land,
and  at  the  very  time  when  the  British  ministry
were  signing  the  order  for  his  release,  he  succeeded
in  escaping  from  Hobart  Town.  He  had  arranged
with  an  American  whaler  to  take  him  and  a  single
companion  up  at  sea  from  a  small  boat;  but  they
were  missed  in  the  darkness,  and  then  for  thirteen
days  they  were  tossed  about  with  no  food  but  raw
fish.  At  last  they  were  seen  by  an  American  vessel
homeward  bound.  The  ship  was  wrecked  on  the
coast  of  Brazil,  but  none  perished.  Seven  months-
afterward,  ragged  and  penniless,  Wait  reached  the
United  States,  and  rejoined  his  devoted  wife,  who
was  teaching  at  Niagara  Falls.  But,  worn  out  with
her  efforts  in  her  husband's  behalf,  Mrs.  Wait's
health  had  given  way,  and  soon  after  his  return  she
died.  Wait  is  still  living  in  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.
WAIT,  Samuel,  educator,  b.  in  Washington
county,  N.  Y.,  19  Dec.  1789;  d.  in  Wake  Forest,
N.  C,  28  July,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bian college,  Washington,  D.  C.,  and  served  there
for  a  short  time  as  tutor.  In  1827,  having  already
been  ordained  to  the  Baptist  ministry,  he  removed
to  North  Carolina,  and  became  pastor  at  New
Berne.  The  remainder  of  his  life  was  devoted  to
the  promotion  of  the  educational  and  religious  in-
terests of  that  state,  and  few  men  have  accom-
plished more  for  these  interests,  especially  as  con-
nected with  the  Baptist  denomination.  Mainly
by  his  exertions  the  Baptist  state  convention  of
North  Carolina  was  organized  in  1830.  The  first
Baptist  newspaper  published  in  the  state  owed  its-
existence  to  his  labors.  He  was  active  in  estab-
lishing Wake  Forest  school,  which  subsequently
became  Wake  Forest  college,  and  was  president


H  B.Hall.  Jr.


D.APP1.ET0H  ci


WAIT


WAITE


317


of  it  from  its  foundation  to  1846,  a  period  of  four-
teen years.  In  1851-'6  he  had  charge  of  a  school
for  girls  in  Oxford,  N.  C.  .  He  has  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Wake  Forest  in  1849.

WAIT,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Ephratah,  N.  Y„
2  Feb.,  1821 ;  d.  in  Johnstown,  N.  Y.,  29  Dec,  1880.
He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1846,
and  became  district  attorney  of  Fulton  county,
N.  Y.,  in  1848.  In  1856  he  held  the  office  of  school
commissioner.  As  a  law-writer  Mr.  Wait  was  pains-
taking and  accurate.  Few  legal  works  have  been
more  widely  known  or  more  generally  cited  as
authority  than  his.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The
Law  and  Practice  in  Civil  Actions  and  Proceed-
ings in  Justices'  Courts  and  on  Appeals  to  the
County  Courts  in  the  State  of  New  York  "  (2  vols.,
Albany,  1865) ;  "  New  York  Annotated  Code  of
Procedure  "  (1871) ;  "  A  Table  of  Cases  affirmed,
revised,  or  cited  in  the  Reports  of  the  State  of
New  York  "  (1872) ;  "  The  Practice  in  Courts  of
Record  of  the  State  of  New  York"  (1872):  and
*'  Wait's  Actions  and  Defences  at  Law  and  in
Equity  "  (7  vols.,  1876-'9).  Mr.  Wait  also  edited
an  American  edition  of  Herbert  Broom  and  Edward
A.  Hadley's  "  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Eng-
land "  (2  vols.,  Albany,  1875),  and  prepared  a  con-
tinuation of  Clinton's  "  Digest  of  New  York  Re-
ports," which  was  published  as  "  Clinton  and  Wait's
Digest  of  New  York  Reports  "  (1876).

WAITE,  Carlos  Adolphus,  soldier,  b.  in  1800;
d.  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  7  May,  1866.  He  entered
the  IT.  S.  army  as  2d  lieutenant  of  infantry,  28
Jan.,  1820,  became  1st  lieutenant,  1  May,  1828,  and
captain,  3  July,  1836.  From  7  July,  1838,  till  8
May,  1845,  he  was  captain  and  assistant  quarter-
master. He  was  appointed  major  of  the  8th  in-
fantry, 16  Feb..  1847,  and  served  in  the  Mexican
war,  receiving  the  brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel,  20
Aug.,  1847,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at
Contreras  and  Churubusco.  and  colonel,  8  Sept.,
1847,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at  Mo-
lino  del  Rey,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  He
was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  5th  infantry  on
10  Nov.,  1851,  and  colonel  of  the  15th  infantry  on
5  June,  1860.  In  1864  he  was  placed  on  the  re-
tired list,  owing  to  impaired  health,  and  he  resided
in  Plattsburg  until  his  death.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  1865,
for  long  and  faithful  service  in  the  army.

WAITE,  Charles  Burlingame,  jurist,  b.  in
Wayne  county,  N.  Y.,  29  Jan.,  1824.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Knox  college,  111.,  studied  law  at  Gales-
burg  and  Rock  Island,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1847.  After  fifteen  years'  successful  prac-
tice, chiefly  in  Chicago,  he  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Lincoln  in  1862  associate  justice  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Utah.  In  1865  he  resigned  this
post  and  became  district  attorney  of  Idaho,  and  a
year  later  he  returned  to  Chicago,  since  which  time
he  has  devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuits.  Judge
Waite  has  published  a  "  History  of  the  Christian
Religion  to  the  Year  A.  D.  200 "  (Chicago,  1881),
and  made  numerous  contributions  to  the  press  on
suffrage  and  other  politico-legal  questions. — His
wife,  Catharine  Van  Valkenburg,  author,  b.  in
Dumfries,  Canada  West,  in  1829,  was  graduated
at  Oberlin  in  1853,  and  married  Mr.  Waite  the  next
year.  In  1859  she  established  Hyde  Park  seminary.
She  is  a  graduate  of  the  Union  college  of  law  and
a  member  of  the  Illinois  bar.  In  1886  she  founded
the  "  Chicago  Law  Times,"  a  quarterly  magazine,
of  which  she  is  the  editor.  Mrs.  Waite  is  active
in  all  movements  for  the  advancement  of  her  sex.
At  the  International  council  of  women  at  Wash-
ington she  was  elected  president  of  the  Woman's


J  international  bar  association,  26  March,  1888.  She
is  chief  manager  of  the  publishing-firm  of  C.  V.
Waite  and  Co.,  and  has  published  "  The  Mormon
Prophet  and  his  Harem  "  (Cambridge,  1865).

WAITE,  Henry  Matson,  jurist,  b.  in  Lvme,
Conn.,  9  Feb.,  1787:  d.  there,  14  Dec,  1869.  "His
ancestor,  Thomas,  who  came  from  England  to  Mas-
sachusetts about  1663,  is  believed  to  have  been  a  son
of  Thomas  Waite,  one  of  the  judges  that  signed
the  death-warrant  of  Charles  I.  Henry  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1809,  studied  law  with  Judge
Matthew  Griswold  and  his  brother,  Gov.  Roger
Griswold,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1812,  and
practised  law  in  Lyme.  In  1815  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature,  serving  several  years  as  rep-
resentative and  as  state  senator  in  1832-'3.  He
was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
errors  of  Connecticut  in  1834,  and  held  that  place
and  that  of  judge  of  the  superior  court  for  twenty
years.  In  1854  he  was  made  chief  justice  of  the
state  by  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  legislature.  In
1855  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  —  His
son,  Morrison  Reniick,  jurist,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn.,
29  Nov.,  1816  ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  23  March,
1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1837,  where
he  was  a  classmate  of  William  M.  Evarts,  Ben-
jamin Silliman,  and  Samuel  J.  Tilden,  and  be-
gan the  study  of  law  in  his  father's  office,  but  in
1838  travelled  extensively,  and  then  completed  his
legal  education  with  Samuel  M.  Young  in  Maumee
City,  Ohio.  In  1839  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  formed  a  partnership  with  Mr.  Young.  He
proved  himself  capable  of  grasping  all  the  minute
details  of  legal  controversies  and  rose  rapidly.
The  firm  removed  to  Toledo  in  1850,  and  contin-
ued until  his  youngest  brother,  Richard,  came  to
the  bar,  when  the  two  brothers  formed  a  partner-
ship. Mr.  Waite  in  the  mean  time  had  become
widely  known  for  his  successful  management  of
difficult  cases,  and  his  studious  habits  and  upright
character.  Opposing  counsel  often  said  that  his
assertion  on  any  question  of  law  was  unanswer-
able. During  more  than  three  decades  he  was  the
acknowledged  leader  of  the  Ohio  bar.  Politically
he  was  a  Whig  until  the  disbandment  of  that  par-
ty, after  which  he  was  a  Republican.  But  he  took
no  part  in  political  affairs,  although  repeatedly  so-
licited to  accept  a  nomination  to  congress,  and  he
declined  a  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  supreme  court
of  Ohio.  In  1849  he  was  a  member  of  the  Ohio
legislature.  He  first  attracted  national  attention  as
counsel  for  the  United  States  before  the  tribunal
of  arbitration  at  Geneva,  Switzerland,  in  1871— '2,
his  associates  being  Caleb  Cushing  and  William
M.  Evarts.  He  assisted  in  the  preparation  of  the
case,  and  was  chosen  to  argue  the  liability  of  the
English  government  for  permitting  Confederate
steamers  to  be  supplied  with  coal  in  British  ports
during  the  civil  war,  the  robust  clearness  and  di-
rectness of  his  logic  carrying  conviction  on  all
the  points  he  raised.  His  argument  was  pub-
lished (Geneva,  1872).  When  he  returned  in  1872,
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by
Yale.  In  1874  he  was  the  choice  of  both  political
parties  as  a  delegate  to  the  Ohio  constitutional  con-
vention, and  on  its  assembling  in  Cincinnati  he  was
unanimously  elected  its  president.  When  the  death
of  Chief-Justice  Chase  had  created  a  vacancy  in  the
highest  judicial  office  of  the  United  States,  two  or
three  eminent  jurists  were  successively  nominated
for  the  post,  but  their  names  were  withdrawn.  On
19  Jan.,  1874,  the  president  sent  to  the  senate  the
name  of  Mr.  Waite.  The  nomination  met  with
general  approval,  and  the  nominee  received  every
vote  that  was  cast. Mr.  Waite  took  the  oath  of


318


WAITE


WAKEFIELD


office  on  4  March,  1874,  and  immediately  entered
upon  its  duties.  He  rigidly  enforced  the  rules  and
precedents  of  the  court  in  all  matters  of  practice,
watched  the  docket,  and  pushed  the  business  rap-
idly. The  second  great  period  of  constitutional
interpretation  began  with  his  first  year  on  the
bench.  The  amendments  were  coming  up  for  ju-
dicial exposition,  and  questions  were  to  be  settled
as  to  the  powers  of  congress,  the  rights  of  states,
and  the  privileges  of  citizens.  Some  of  the  most
important  corporation  cases  that  were  ever  argued
in  the  United  States  came  before  him,  involving
the  most  intricate  questions  of  interstate  com-
merce. One  of  his  associates  on  the  bench  says :
"  His  administrative  ability  was  remarkable.  None
of  his  predecessors  more  steadily  or  more  wisely
superintended  the  court  or  more  carefully  ob-
served all  that  is  necessary  to  its  workings.  He
has  written  many  of  the  most  important  opinions
of  the  court  —  too  many  to  be  particularized."
Among  these  opinions  are  the  decision  on  the
head-money-tax  cases  in  1876,  on  the  polygamy
cases  in  1879,  on  the  election  laws  in  1880,  on  the
powers  of  removal  by  the  president,  and  the  Vir-
ginia land  cases  in  1881,  on  the  civil-rights  act
in  1883,  on  the  Alabama  claims,  the  legal  -  tender
act,  and  the  Virginia  coupon  -  tax  cases  in  1885,
on  the  express  companies  and  the  extradition  cases
in  1886.  and  on  the  Kansas  prohibition  cases,  the
Virginia  debt  cases,  the  national  banks,  and  the
affair  of  the  Chicago  anarchists  in  1887.  A
marked  feature  of  Chief-Justice  Waite's  judicial
career  was  the  pronounced  advocacy  of  the  doc-
trine of  state  rights  in  his  opinions.  His  concep-
tion of  our  novel  and  complex  theory  of  govern-
ment, and  his  independence  of  political  considera-
tions, are  clearly  shown  in  the  Ku-klux,  civil  rights,
and  other  decisions,  in  which  he  did  not  hesitate
to  set  aside  Republican  legislation  if  he  deemed  it
necessary ;  nor  was  he  deterred,  by  fear  of  being
accused  of  friendliness  to  large  corporations,  from

E renouncing  decisions  in  their  favor — for  example,
is  decision  on  the  validity  of  the  Bell  telephone
patents,  which  was  his  last  official  action.  He  was
assigned  to  the  4th  circuit,  which  included  Mary-
land, Virginia,  West  Virginia,  and  the  Carolinas,
and  also  acted  as  circuit  judge  in  New  York  in
consequence  of  the  disability  of  Justice  Ward
Hunt.  He  often  was  known  to  hurry  away  from
a  state  dinner,  to  bestow  conscientious  labor  upon
some  important  opinion,  working  late  into  the
night.  It  will  be  remembered  to  his  honor  that
he  never  allowed  any  whisperings  of  ambition  to
divert  his  attention  from  his  duties.  He  made  it
clear  to  the  country  in  the  most  emphatic  lan-
guage in  1876  that  he  would  not  be  considered  a
possible  candidate  for  president.  He  also  declined
to  serve  on  the  electoral  commission.  Judge  Waite
was  from  1874  till  his  death  one  of  the  Peabody
trustees  of  southern  education,  continuously  served
on  one  of  the  standing  committees  of  that  body,
and  was  also  on  the  special  committee  of  three  that
urged  on  congress  the  bestowal  of  national  aid  for
the  education  of  the  southern  negroes.  Robert  C.
Winthrop,  chairman  of  the  trustees,  at  their  an-
nual meeting  in  1888,  in  the  course  of  remarks  on
Judge  Waite's  life  and  character,  said  of  him:
"Coming  to  the  office  without  the  prestige  of
many,  or  perhaps  of  any.  of  those  whom  he  fol-
lowed, he  had  won  year  by  year,  and  every  year,
the  increasing  respect  and  confidence  of  the  whole
country,  and  the  warm  regard  and  affection  of  all
who  knew  him."  Services  were  held  in  the  capitol
by  the  two  houses  of  congress  before  the  removal
of  his  remains  to  Toledo. In  the  U.  S.  circuit


court  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  where  he  had  often  pre-
sided, members  of  the  bar  of  that  city  spoke  in  his
praise,  especially  alluding  to  his  kindliness  of  man-
ner and  impartiality  during  the  reconstruction  pe-
riod. "  Fortunate,  indeed,"  said  one  of  the  speak-
ers, "  that  there  was  a  man  who,  amidst  the  furious
passions  which  rent  the  country  and  shook  the
land,  could  hold  in  his  steady  and  equal  hand  the
balances  of  justice  undisturbed."  The  degree  of
LL.  D.  was  given  him  by  Kenyon  in  1874,  and  by
the  University  of  Ohio  in  1879.  Chief-Justice  Waite
was  of  medium  height,  broad-shouldered,  compact-
ly built,  and  erect.  His  step  was  light  and  firm,
and  all  his  movements  were  quick  and  decisive.
His  well-poised,  classically  shaped  head  was  mas-
sive and  thickly  covered  with  handsome  grayish
hair.  His  manners  were  graceful  and  winning,  but
unassuming.  He  was  one  of  the  most  genial  of
men,  and  his  whole  bearing  commanded  instant
respect.  His  private  character  was  singularly  pure
and  noble.  Judge  Waite  was  a  member  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  a  regular  at-
tendant on  its  services.  Mrs.  Waite,  four  sons,
and  one  daughter  survive  him.

WAITE,  Henry  Randall,' editor,  b.  in  Copen-
hagen, Lewis  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  Dec,  1845.  After
graduation  at  Hamilton  in  1868,  he  was  on  the
staff  of  the  Utica  "  Herald  "  in  1869-'70.  In  1873
he  was  graduated  at  Union  theological  seminary,
New  York  city,  where  he  had  edited  the  "  Univer-
sity Quarterly  Review."  In  1871-'4  he  was  pastor
of  the  American  church  in  Rome,  Italy,  and  he
was  on  the  staff  of  the  New  Haven  "  Journal  "  in
1875.  In  1876-7  he  edited  the  "International
Review,"  and  in  1876-'80  was  pastor  of  the  Pres-
byterian church  in  Pelham,  N.  Y.  In  1876  he
organized  the  National  reform  league,  and  in
1876-'7  was  president  of  the  Political  science  as-
sociation of  New  York.  In  1880-'3  he  was  a  spe-
cial officer  of  the  U.  S.  census.  In  1885-'6  he
edited  "  The  Citizen  "  in  Boston,  and  he  afterward
became  editor  of  "  Civics  "  in  New  York.  In  1885
he  founded  the  American  institute  of  civics,  of
which  he  has  since  been  president.  He  was  the
first  to  employ  the  term  "civics"  to  designate
those  branches  of  science  that  pertain  to  the  ele-
vation of  citizenship.  He  has  published  "  The  Mo-
tive of  St.  Paul's  Life "  (Rome.  1873)  and  "  Illit-
eracy and  the  Mormon  Problem  "  (Boston,  1885).

WAKEFIELD,  Cyrns,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Roxbury,  Cheshire  co.,  N.  H.,  7  Feb.,  1811 ;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  26  Oct.,  1873.  About  1827  he  went
to  Boston,  where  he  engaged  in  trade.  He  origi-
nated the  rattan  business  in  this  country,  and  dis-
covered several  methods  of  utilizing  the  rattan
waste,  while  of  the  split  rattans  he  made  furniture
and  carriage-bodies.  He  established  a  large  fac-
tory for  these  manufactures  in  South  Reading,
Mass.,  where  his  rattan-works  cover  seven  acres  of
ground.  In  1868  South  Reading  voted  to  change
its  name  to  Wakefield,  in  recognition  of  his  bene-
factions, particularly  the  gift  of  a  town-hall  that
cost  $100,000.  He  also  gave  $100,000  to  Harvard,
and  left  large  bequests  to  benevolent  objects.

WAKEFIELD,  Nancy  Amelia  Woodbury
Priest,  poet,  b.  in  Royalton,  Mass.,  7  Dec,  1836 ;
d.  in  Winehendon,  Mass.,  21  Sept.,  1870.  Her
maiden  name  was  Priest,  and  in  1865  she  married
Lieut.  Arlington  C.  Wakefield.  Her  fame  rests  on
the  popular  poem  "  Over  the  River."  which  first
appeared  in  the  Springfield,  Mass.,  "  Republican  "
in  1857.  A  collection  of  her  poems  was  published
by  her  mother,  Mrs.  Francis  D.  Priest,  with  a
memoir  by  the  Rev.  Abijah  P.  Marvin,  of  Lan-
caster, Mass.  (Boston,  1871).


WAKELEY


WALCOT


319


WAKELEY,  Joseph  B.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dan-
bury,  Conn.,  in  1804 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  27
April,  1876.  At  an  early  age  he  was  apprenticed
to  a  hat-manufacturer  in  his  native  town,  but
studied  for  the  ministry,  and  was  admitted  to  the
Methodist  Episcopal  conference  of  New  York  in
1828.  In  1857  he  settled  in  Poughkeepsie,  but  he
was  subsequently  appointed  pastor  of  a  church  in
Lexington  avenue,  New  York.  He  was  the  author
of  "  The  Heroes  of  Methodism  "  (New  York,  1856)
and  "  Lost  Chapters  recovered  from  the  Early
History  of  American  Methodism  "  (1858) ;  edited
"  Reminiscences,"  by  the  Rev.  Henry  Boehm,  Bish-
op Asbury's  travelling  companion  (1865) ;  and  also
published  "Anecdotes  of  the  Wesleys,"  with  an
introduction  bv  John  McClintock  (1869).

WALBACH,  John  Baptiste  de  Barth,  Baron
de  Walbach,  soldier,  b.  in  Minister,  valley  of  St.
Gregory,  upper  Rhine,  Germany,  3  Oct.,  1766 ;  d.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  10  June,  1857.  He  was  the  third
son  of  Count  Joseph  de  Barth,  and  received  his
military  education  at  Strasburg.  In  1786-'92  he
was  a  lieutenant  in  the  Lauzun  hussars.  He  re-
turned to  his  native  land  to  join  the  army  of  the
Comte  d'Artois,  brother  of  Louis  XVI.  He  was
present  during  the  campaign  of  1792  in  Champagne
in  the  advance  of  the  Prussian  army  until  it  was
disbanded  at  Maestricht,  on  6  Jan.,  1793,  partici-
pated in  the  attack  on  Frankfort,  and  subsequently
served  during  the  campaign  of  1793  in  attacks  on
the  French  lines  at  Germersheim,  Langenkandel,
and  Weissenburg.  In  October,  1793,  he  accepted  a
captaincy  in  the  Hussars  de  Rohan  in  the  German
service,  and  took  part  in  covering  the  retreat  of
the  Duke  of  York  upon  Holland  and  Germany.  In
1798  he  obtained  a  six  months'  leave  of  absence,
with  a  view  of  visiting  his  father,  who  had  come  to
the  United  States  at  the  opening  of  the  French
revolution.  But  the  father  had  died  in  Philadel-
phia, and  his  estate  had  betn  sold  by  the  sheriff.
Resigning  his  commission  in  ihe  Hussars  de  Rohan,
in  April,  1798,  he  was  appointed  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  William  Macpherson.  He  became  1st  lieuten-
ant of  U.  S.  cavalry  and  adjutant  on  10  Jan.,  1799,
was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Alexander  Hamilton  in
May.  assistant  adjutant-general  to  Gen.  William
North  in  September,  and  in  December  was  assigned
to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Charles  C.  Pinckney,  whom  he
assisted  in  preparing  regulations  for  the  cavalry.
In  February,  1801,  he  was  made  1st  lieutenant  in
the  regiment  of  artillerists  and  engineers,  and  on
25  Oct.  following  he  was  appointed  aide-de-camp
to  Gen.  James  Wilkinson.  He  was  retained  in
April,  1802,  as  1st  lieutenant  of  artillery,  and  be-
came adjutant,  1  Dec,  1804.  He  was  promoted
captain,  31  Jan.,  1806,  made  assistant  deputy  quar-
termaster-general in  March,  1812,  assistant  adju-
tant-general, with  the  rank  of  major,  in  June,  1813,
and  on  6  Aug.,  1813,  adjutant-general. He  took

Sart  in  the  battle  of  Chrysler's  Field,  Canada,  11
fov.,  1813.  Gen.  George  W.  Cullum,  in  his  "  Cam-
paigns and  Engineers  of  the  War  of  1812-'15,"
says  that  the  enemy,  "  discovering  our  disorder  and
slackened  fire,  pushed  vigorously  forward  and  en-
deavored by  a  flank  movement  to  capture  our  can-
non, when  Adjutant-General  Walbach,  a  German
veteran  in  our  army  who  had  seen  much  foreign
service,  gave  the  order  to  '  charge  mit  de  dragoons,'
and  thus  saved  the  pieces."  On  1  May.  1815,  he  re-
ceived the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel  "  for  meri-
torious services."  He  became  major  of  artillery,
25  April,  1818,  brevet  colonel  for  "  ten  years'  favor-
able service,"  1  May,  1825,  lieutenant-colonel  in
the  1st  regiment  of  artillery,  30  May,  1832,  and  colo-
nel of  the  4th  artillery,  19  March,  1842. In  May,


1850,  he  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general,  to
date  from  11  Nov.,  1823.  Gen.  Walbach  possessed
mental  and  physical  vigor  till  an  advanced  age.  He
married  in  Philadelphia  in  1807,  and  had  two  sons,
John  de  Barth,  who  entered  the  navy,  and  Louis
Augustus  de  Barth,  who  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1834,  and  died  a  captain  of  ordnance,  26
June,  1853.

WALBRIBGE,  Arthur  Dewey,  musical  com-
poser, b.  in  Gaines,  Orleans  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  April,
1843 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  14  Dec,  1872.  After
graduation  at  Princeton  in  1867  he  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1871,  and  practised  in
Rochester.  He  was  the  author  of  the  words  and
music  of  several  popular  songs,  including  "  Now  I
lay  me  down  to  Sleep  "  (1866) ;  "  Sleeping  where
the  Daisies  grow  "  (1870) ;  "  Baby  meets  me  on  the
Stairs"  (1871);  and  college  songs.

WALBRIDGE,  Hiram,  lawyer,  b.  in  Ithaca,
N.  Y.,  2  Feb.,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  Dec,
1870.  He  removed  to  Ohio  with  his  parents  at  an
early  age,  was  educated  at  the  university  of  that
state,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1842,
was  elected  colonel  of  militia  the  same  year,  and
in  1843  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general.  With
others  he  formed  a  plan  to  establish  four  news-
papers in  Texas,  to  advocate  the  independence
of  that  country,  and  to  create  an  anti-annexation
sentiment ;  but  the  annexation  of  Texas  rendered
their  enterprise  futile,  and  Walbridge  returned  to
Toledo,  whence  he  removed  to  New  York  in  1847
to  engage  in  commercial  transactions.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  5
Dec,  1853,  till  3  March,  1855,  and  advocating  a
Pacific  railroad  bill  and  the  introduction  of  ;i
bill  to  regulate  the  militia  of  the  seas,  which  at-
tracted public  attention.  He  was  a  personal  friend
of  President  Lincoln,  and  during  the  war  he  fre-
quently addressed  the  boards  of  trade  in  western
cities,  advocating  a  support  of  the  government.  He
was  vice-president  of  the  National  commercial  con-
vention at  Chicago,  and  subsequently  presided  at
similar  conventions  in  Detroit  and  Louisville.  At
these  meetings  he  advocated  free  banking,  a  re-
duction of  taxation,  and  the  development  of  the
resources  of  the  west. — His  brother,  Henry  S.  (1809-
1869),  served  in  congress  as  a  Whig  from  1  Dec,

1851,  till  3  March,  1853,  and  was  a  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  New  York.  He  was  killed  in  a
railroad  accident  in  the  Bergen  tunnel,  near  Ho-
boken,  N.  J.

WALCOT,  Charles  Melton,  actor,  b.  in  Lon-
don, England,  in  1815 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10
May,  1868.  He  was  educated  at  Eton,  and  became
an  architect,  but  left  his  profession  for  the  stage,
came  to  this  country,  made  his  first  appearance  in
1839  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  acquired  popularity.
He  frequently  played  at  the  old  Olympic  theatre
and  at  Wallack's.'but  in  1866  removed  to  Phila-
delphia. He  was  particularly  excellent  in  eccentric
comedy,  and  was  also  a  prolific  playwright.  Among
his  original  and  arranged  plays  are  "  The  Course  of
True  Love  "(1839);  "Washington,  or  Valley  Forge"
(1842) ;  "  The  Custom  of  the  Country  "  (1848) ;  "  The
Haunted  Man "  (1848) ;  "  David  Copperfield "
(1848) ;  "  Hoboken  "  (1849) ;  "  Edith  "  (1849) ;  "  One
Cast  for  Two  Suits"  (1854);  "  Hiawatha  "  (1855) ;
and  "A  Good  Fellow"  (1857).  His  songs  include
"  My  Love  is  a  Sailor  Boy  "  and  "  My  own  Little
Rose."— His  son,  Charles  Melton,  actor,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  1  July,  1840.  was  graduated  at  St.
John's  college,  Fordham,  N.  Y.,  in  1858,  and  in
that  year  made  his  debut  in  Charleston.  He  is
successful  in  light  comedy  and  is  a  member  of  the
Lyceum  theatre  company  of  New  York.


320


WALCOTT


WALDEN


WALCOTT,  Charles  Doolittle,  paleontolo-
gist, b.  in  New  York  Mills,  N.  Y.,  31  March,  1850.
He  was  educated  in  public  schools  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,
and  in  1870  turned  his  attention  to  geological  work
in  the  central  part  of  the  state.  In  1876  he  became
assistant  to  James  Hall,  the  state  geologist,  and  in
1879  he  was  appointed  assistant  geologist  on  the
U.  S.  geological  survey.  His  first  work  was  in
southern  Utah,  and  in  1882  he  was  engaged  in  the
survey  of  the  Eureka  district  in  Nevada.  In  1883
he  investigated  the  geology  of  the  Grand  canon  of
the  Colorado,  and  in  1884  devoted  his  attention  to
the  Cambrian  geology  of  New  York  and  eastern
Vermont.  Subsequently  he  was  engaged  in  ex-
amining the  deposits  of  Deer  creek  coal-field  in
Arizona  and  the  palaeozoic  area  in  central  Texas.
In  June,  1883,  he  was  appointed  paleontologist  in
charge  of  the  palaeozoic  division  of  invertebrate
paleontology  of  the  U.  S.  geological  survey.  He
is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  since  1882
has  been  a  fellow  of  the  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  science.  His  bibliography  in-
cludes papers  in  scientific  journals,  the  transactions
of  learned  societies,  and  the  volumes  of  the  U.  S.
geological  survey.

WALDECK,  Jean  Frederic  de,  archaeologist,
b.  in  Paris,  France,  16  March,  1766;  d.  there,  30
April,  1875.  When  nineteen  years  of  age  he  went
with  Levaillant  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and
made  explorations  in  South  Africa. On  his  return

to  Paris  in  1788
he  began  to  study
art  under  the  guid-
ance of  David  and
Prud'hon,  and  this
experienceenabled
him  to  make  au-
thentic records  of
his  travels,  espe-
cially those  in  Cen-
tral America.  He
was  present  at  the
siege  of  Toulon  in
1793.  and  in  1794
joined  the  army  in
Italy.  In  1798  he
followed  the  expe-
dition to  Egypt,
but  did  not  serve,
and,  when  Napo-
leon's plans  failed,
he  decided  to  travel  in  Africa. With  four  eom-

E anions,  he  left  Assouan,  crossed  the  desert  of
(ongola,  and  passed  the  Dji  bel-el-Eumery.  The
four  travellers,  however,  succumbed  to  fatigue  and
sickness,  and  De  Waldeck  alone  lived  to  reach  the
coast,  after  four  months  of  weary  travel,  danger,
and  privation.  He  returned  to  France,  and  sub-
sequently embarked  for  the  Mauritius,  going  from
there  to  the  Indian  ocean.  In  1819  he  visited
Chili  with  Lord  Cochrane,  and  went  upon  an
archaeological  expedition  to  Guatemala.  He  re-
turned to  England  in  1822  and  settled  in  Lon-
don, where  he  was  engaged  in  making  the  litho-
graphs to  illustrate  a  work  bv  Capt.  del  Rio  on
the  ruins  of  Palenque  and  Chiapas.  From  his
own  observations  he  was  led  to  believe  that  these
designs  were  incorrect,  and  he  determined  to  visit
the  ruins.  He  left  England  for  Mexico,  as  engineer
for  the  silver-mines  of  Tlalpujahua.  and,  after  re-
maining there  a  short  time,  visited  the  Toltec  and
Aztec  ruins.  The  French  government  had  granted
him  a  pension  of  2,000  francs  in  1826,  and  with  this
encouragement  he  spent  several  years  in  studying
the  details  of  the  Palenque  ruins,  making  drawings


(!hJ:  cL  tfJcLJt


of  them  and  maps  of  the  country,  and  collecting
specimens  of  the  flora  and  fauna.  "  Having  lost  the
greater  part  of  his  sketches  and  note-books,  he  was
obliged  to  give  up  his  researches,  and  returned  to
Europe  after  twelve  years  spent  in  America.  On
his  return  he  pursued  his  archaeological  studies,
and  sold  his  drawings  of  the  Palenque  ruins  to  the
French  government.  They  were  published  in  1863,
and  De  Waldeck  was  engaged  to  make  the  litho-
graphs, though  he  had  passed  his  hundredth  year.
Two  of  his  Mexican  pictures  were  exhibited  in  1869,
under  the  title  of  "Loisir  du  centenaire."  In  the
same  year  he  sent  the  senior  editor  of  this  work
the  original  picture  from  which  the  accompany-
ing portrait  and  autograph  are  taken.  In  1870  he
exhibited  "  Ruins  of  the  Province  of  Tzendales."
While  in  Mexico  he  discovered  in  a  convent  of
nuns  the  unique  copy  of  a  work  of  Aretino,  with
illustrations  by  Jules  Romain  and  Marc  Antonio
Raimondi,  which  had  caused  the  banishment  of
the  two  artists,  and  had  been  confiscated  and  de-
stroyed by  the  Inquisition,  the  copy  deposited  in
the  archives  being  afterward  abstracted  and  find-
ing its  way  to  Mexico.  M.  de  Waldeck  was  made
a  member  of  the  Council  of  American  archaeology.
He  spent  the  last  forty  years  of  his  life  in  Paris,
retaining  his  faculties  to  the  end.  He  published
"  Voyage  archaeologique  et  pittoresque  dans  la  Yu-
catan "  (Paris,  1837),  and,  with  Brasseur  de  Bour-
bourg,  "  Monuments  anciens  du  Mexique,  Palenque,
et  autres  ruines  de  l'ancienne  civilisation  "  (1866).
.  WALDEN,  John  Morgan,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Lebanon,  Warren  co.,  Ohio,  11  Feb.,  1831.  He  was
graduated  at  Farmers'  (now  Belmont)  college,  near
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  1852,  and  engaged  in  educa-
tional work  for  two  years  and  in  editorial  work  for
four  years,  during  the  last  year  and  a  half  of  which
he  was  editor  and  publisher  of  a  free-state  paper
in  Kansas.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  Topeka
legislature,  and  of  the  Leavenworth  constitutional
convention  at  the  time  of  its  adoption  of  a  consti-
tution in  1858,  under  which  he  was  elected  super-
intendent of  public  instruction.  In  September  of
that  year  he  left  Kansas  and  entered,  as  a  minister,
the  Cincinnati  conference  of  the  Methodist  Epis-
copal church,  where  he  occupied  several  important
posts.  After  a  few  years  he  was  elected  correspond-
ing secretary  of  the  Freedmen's  aid  commission,  an
undenominational  society.  He  remained  in  this
office  until  August,  1866,  when,  on  the  organization
of  the  Freedmen's
aid  society  of  the
Methodist  Episco-
pal church,  he  was
chosen  its  first  cor-
responding secre-
tary, and  he  has
been  officially  con-
nected with  it  ever
since,  being  its  pres-
ident at  the  present
time.  In  1868  he  was
elected  one  of  the
publishing  agentsof
the  Western  Meth-
odist book  concern,
and he held that

Eost  sixteen  years,
[e  was  a  member  of

till 1884,  when  he

was  elected  bishop.  He  is  a  man  of  great  in-
dustry and  capacity  for  business,  giving  atten-
tion to  everything  that  is  committed  to  his  care,


WALDERSEE


WALDO


321


r7La^<^^uJct£jt^^u^_.


WALDERSEE,  Mary,  Countess  von,  b.  in  New
York  city,  3  Oct.,  1837.  She  is  the  daughter  of
David  Lee,  a  New  York  merchant,  who  left  his
-widow  and  five  children  a large fortune. The

second  daughter,
Blanche,  married
Augustus  Charles
Murray,  a  com-
mander in  the
British  navy,  and
the third, Jose-

ghine,  married
;aron  August  von
Waechter,  ambas-
sador of  the  king
of  Wiirtemberg  to
the  French  court.
The  baroness  sent
for  her  youngest
sister,  Mary,  to
live  with  her  in
Paris,  where  she
met  and  married
Prince  Frederick
of  Schleswig-Hol-
stein-Sonderburg-
Augustenburg-Noer,  who  had  been  driven  into  exile
by  the  Austro-Prirssian  army  in  1864.  Miss  Lee,
however,  not  wishing  to  be  trammelled  by  the  ex-
acting etiquette  that  attaches  to  high  rank,  induced
the  prince  to  renounce  his  rights  and  titles  as  a
member  of  the  royal  house  of  Denmark.  He  subse-
quently accepted  from  the  emperor  of  Austria  the
title  of  Prince  of  Noer,  the  name  of  his  principal
estate.  The  prince  died  shortly  after  his  marriage
while  on  a  visit  to  the  Holy  Land,  2  July,  1865,
and  the  princess  then  returned  to  Paris,  where  she
resided  with  the  Baroness  Waechter  until  the  be-
ginning of  the  Franco-Prussian  war,  when  she  ac-
companied the  latter  to  Wiirtemberg.  In  1871
she  married  Count  von  Waldersee,  the  successor  of
Field-Marshal  von  Moltke,  and  lived  with  him  for
some  time  at  Hanover.  There  she  soon  became
widely  known  through  her  interest  in  local  chari-
ties. Since  she  has  resided  in  Berlin  she  has  been
equally  zealous  in  good  works.  She  was  for  years
the  friend  of  Emperor  Frederick  William,  of  Ger-
many, and  of  the  Empress  Victoria.

WALDO,  Albigence,  surgeon,  b.  in  Pomfret,
Conn.,  27  Feb.,  1750;  d.  in  Windham  county,
Conn.,  29  Jan.,  1794.  He  was  educated  by  the
clergyman  of  his  native  town,  studied  medicine,
and  acquired  an  extensive  practice.  On  1  July,
1775,  he  was  appointed  surgeon's  mate  of  the  8th
regiment,  under  Col.  Jedediah  Huntington,  which
was  then  stationed  in  Roxbury,  but,  owing  to  im-
paired health,  he  was  discharged  on  6  Sept.,  1775.
On  14  Dec,  1776,  he  was  appointed  by  the  com-
mittee of  war  of  Connecticut  chief  surgeon  of  the
ship  "  Oliver  Cromwel,,"  and  on  3  April,  1777,  he
joined  Col.  Huntington's  newly  raised  regiment  as
surgeon,  and  served  in  the  campaigns  in  New
Jersey  and  Pennsylvania.  At  Monmouth  and
Valley  Forge  his  professional  service  in  the  inocu-
lation for  small-pox  gained  him  much  reputation.
He  was  a  friend  of  David  Humphreys,  who  in  his
"  Life  of  General  Putnam,"  acknowledges  Dr.  Wal-
do's aid  in  its  compilation.  He  was  a  founder  of
the  Medical  society  in  Windham  county,  which
was  the  first  society  in  Connecticut.  Dr.  Waldo  left
numerous  medical  and  surgical  treatises  in  manu-
script, illustrated  by  well-executed  drawings,  and
also  a  large  collection  of  valuable  historical  docu-
ments. His  diary  at  Valley  Forge  was  published
in  the  "  Historical  Magazine  "  (New  York,  1861).
vi.— 21


WALDO,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Windham,
Conn.,  10  Sept.,  1762;  d.  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  30
July,  1864.  His  early  years  were  spent  on  his
fathers  farm,  and  in  1778  he  entered  the  Revolu-
tionary army  for  a  month's  service  during  a  time
of  imminent  peril  in  New  London.  Afterward  he
enlisted  as  a  volunteer  in  the  service  of  the  state.
He  was  captured  at  the  battle  of  Horseneck.  and
imprisoned  in  the  sugar-house  in  New  York,  where
he  endured  many  hardships,  but  after  two  months
he  was  exchanged,  and  then  resumed  his  labors  on
the  farm.  After  graduation  at  Yale  in  1788  he
studied  theology,  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the
association  of  Windham  county,  and  from*  1792
till  1809  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  West  Suffolk,  Conn.,  with  the  interval  of  a  few
months  of  missionary  labor  in  Pennsylvania  and
New  York.  He  then  preached  in  Colchester,  Sa-
lem, and  Cambridgeport,  Mass.,  and  went  to  Rhode
Island  to  labor  in  the  cause  of  education  under  the
protection  of  the  Society  for  promoting  Christian
knowledge.  He  was  also  pastor  in  Harvard,  Mass.,
and  at  Exeter,  R.  I.,  where  he  labored  twelve
years,  after  which  he  retired.  In  1855,  at  the  age
of  ninety-three,  he  was  made  chaplain  of  the  house
of  representatives.  He  was  familiarly  known  as
"  Father  Waldo,"  and  is  one  of  several  undoubted
centenarians  mentioned  in  this  work.

WALDO,  Leonard,  astronomer,  b.  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  4  March,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at
Marietta  in  1873,  and,  after  spending  a  few  months
at  the  Cincinnati  observatory,  entered  the  Colum-
bia college  school  of  mines  and  became  assistant
in  astronomy  in  1873.  In  the  following  year  he
was  appointed  assistant  astronomer  on  the  expedi-
tion that  was  sent  to  Hobart  Town,  Tasmania,  to
observe  the  transit  of  Venus.  He  was  appointed
assistant  at  the  Harvard  observatory  in  1875,  and
continued  there  until  1880,  after  which,  until  1887,
he  was  astronomer  in  charge  of  the  horoiogical
bureau  of  the  Winchester  observatory  of  Yale,
where  his  work  included  the  comparison  of  ther-
mometers with  standard  instruments.  He  was
also  active  in  causing  the  introduction  of  a  uni-
form time  system  in  Connecticut.  The  degree  of
S.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Harvard  for  origi-
nal investigations  in  1879,  and  he  received  the
degree  of  A.  M.  from  Yale  in  1880.  He  has  con-
tributed reports  of  his  astronomical  researches  to
scientific  journals,  and  is  the  author  of  cyclopaedia
articles  and  popular  papers  on  technical  subjects.

WALDO,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
in  1696;  d.  on  Penobscot  river,  Me.,  23  May,  1759.
His  father.  Jonathan,  was  a  wealthy  merchant  of
Boston,  and  was  a  brigadier-general  at  the  capture
of  Louisburg.  The  son  was  a  landed  proprietor,  re-
sided at  Falmouth,  Me.,  and  commanded  a  regi-
ment at  Louisburg.  There  were  remarkable  coin-
cidences between  his  life  and  that  of  his  friend,  Sir
William  Pepperell.  They  lived  in  Maine,  were
councillors  together,  commanded  regiments,  and
were  together  at  Louisburg,  passed  a  year  together
in  England,  were  born  the  same  year,  and  died
nearly  at  the  same  time.  His  family  exercised
much  influence  in  Maine  on  account  of  their  im-
mense estate.  —  His  son,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in
Maine  in  1721 ;  d.  there,  16  April,  1770,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1743,  and  settled  in  Falmouth,
where  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  general
court  in  1744.  In  that  year  he  was  also  commis-
sioned a  colonel  in  the  British  army.  In  1753  he
went  to  Europe  with  authority  from  his  father  to
procure  emigrants  to  settle  the  Waldo  patent,  and
was  successful  in  this  mission.  In  1760  he  was  ap-
pointed judge  of  probate  for  Cumberland  county,


322


WALDO


WALDSTEIN


retaining  this  office  until  his  death,  and  thus  hold-
ing the  first  probate  courts  in  Maine.  For  eight
years  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature. — An-
other son,  Francis,  b.  in  Falmouth,  Me.,  in  1723 ;
d.  in  London,  England,  in  1784,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1747.  He  was  appointed  collector  of  the
first  custom-house  in  Maine  in  1758,  his  authority
extending  from  Cape  Porpus  to  the  Kennebec,
and  held  this  post  until  1770.  In  1763  he  issued,
"  in  pursuance  of  strict  orders  from  the  surveyor-
general,  a  proclamation  against  smuggling  rum,
sugar,  and  molasses,  which  had  previously  been
winked  at,  and  the  officers  were  directed  to  execute
the  law  with  rigor."  In  1762-'3  he  was  a  repre-
sentative to  the  general  court  from  Falmouth,  but,
forfeiting  the  favor  of  the  popular  party,  he  was
not  re-elected.  After  the  burning  of  Falmouth  he
went  to  England,  and  never  returned,  for  in  1778
he  was  proscribed  and  banished  as  a  loyalist,  and
his  property,  which  passed  to  the  state  under  the
confiscation  act,  was  sold  in  1782.

WALDO,  Samuel  Lovett,  artist,  b.  in  Wind-
ham, Conn.,  6  April,  1783 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  16
Feb.,  1861.  He  had  art  instruction  in  his  native
state,  and  painted  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  He  went  to
London  in  1806,  and  three  years  later  opened  a
studio  in  New  York,  where  he  remained  until  his
death.  He  was  successful  as  a  portrait-painter,  and
was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National  academy
in  1847.  His  likeness  of  Peter  Remsen  is  owned  by
the  New  York  historical  society,  and  several  of  his
portraits  are  in  the  city-hall.  New  York.  About
1812  William  Jewett  came  to  him  for  instruction,
but  proved  so  useful  that  they  formed  a  partner-
ship. They  jointly  executed  several  works,  in  which
they  were  successful.  Among  these  is  one  of  John
Trumbull,  the  painter,  and  another  of  Chief-Jus-
tice Andrew  Kirkpatrick,  of  New  Jersey.

WALDO,  Samuel  Putnam,  author,  b.  in  Con-
necticut in  1780;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  in  March,
1826.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Narrative  of  a  Tour
of  Observation  made  during  the  Summer  of  1817,
by  James  Monroe,  President  of  the  United  States,
with  Sketch  of  his  Life  "  (Philadelphia,  1818 ;  Hart-
ford, 1820) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  "
(Hartford,  1820) ;  "  Life  and  Character  of  Stephen
Decatur  "  (2d  ed.,  Middletown,  Conn.,  1821) ;  and
"  Biographical  Sketches  of  Com.  Nicholas  Biddle,
Paul  Jones,  Edward  Preble,  and  Alexander  Mur-
ray "  (Hartford,  1823).  He  also  prepared  for  pub-
lication Archibald  Robbins's  "  Journal  of  the  Loss
of  the  Brig  '  Commerce '  upon  the  Western  Coast
of  Africa." (See  Riley,  James.)

WALDRON,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  Alcester,
England,  2  Sept.,  1615;  d.  in  Dover,  N.  H.,  27
June,  1689.  He  came  to  this  country  first  in
1635,  and,  remaining  two  years,  made  some  land
purchases  and  returned  to  England.  There  he
married,  and  came  in  1640  to  reside  permanently
at  Cocheco  (now  Dover),  N.  H.  He  was  elected  a
representative  to  the  general  court  at  Boston  in
1654-'76,  and  in  1666-'8  was  speaker  of  the  house,
also  in  1673,  1674,  and  1679.  In  1672  he  was  given
commission  as  captain,  and  in  1674  he  was  made
sergeant-major  in  the  military  forces  of  the  prov-
ince. In  1680  he  became  major-general.  In  Janu-
ary, 1680,  he  was  elected  one  of  the  first  council-
lors of  the  province.  In  1681,  upon  the  death  of
President  John  Cutts,  Waldron  was  chosen  as
deputy  president  to  fill  the  place  made  vacant.  His
command  over  the  military  forces  threw  him  into
constant  association  with  the  Indians.  Owing  to
trouble  in  1676,  they  treasured  up  a  grudge  against
him,  which  culminated  in  his  death  thirteen  years
later  in  a  barbarous  manner. — His  son,  Richard,  b.


in  Dover,  N.  H.,  in  1650 ;  d.  there,  30  Nov.,  1730,
was  deputy  to  the  first  assembly  in  1680,  a  coun-
cillor in  1681,  chief  justice  of  the  court  of  common
pleas,  judge  of  probate,  and  for  many  years  chief
military  officer  of  New  Hampshire.  He  repre-
sented Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  at  Boston  in  1691.  In
1681  he  married  Hannah  Cutts,  a  daughter  of
President  Cutts,  who  died  with  her  infant  son
the  following  year.  In  1693  he  married  Eleanor,
a  daughter  of  Richard  Vaughan,  and  grandniece
of  John  Cutts. — Their  son,  Richard,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, N.  H„  21  Feb.,  1694;  d.  there  in  1753,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1712,  was  a  judge
and  councillor  and  secretary  of  the  province  in
1737.  He  was  for  many  years  widely  known  as
Secretary  Waldron.  He  married  Elizabeth  West-
brooke,  daughter  of  Col.  Thomas  Westbrooke,  31
Dec.,  1718.  —  Their  great-grandson,  Edmund
Quincy  Sheafe,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dover,  N.  H.,  6
July,  1812;  d.  in  Pikesville,  Md.,  16  April,  1888,
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1833,  and  was  for
many  years  a  professor  in  New  York  and  Phila-
delphia. Later  he  read  law,  and  went  into  practice
in  Cincinnati  in  1842.  On  15  Dec,  1847,  after  be-
coming a  convert  to  the  Roman  Catholic  faith,  and
studying  divinity  under  Bishop  Kenrick,  he  was
ordained priest. Before  his  ordination  he  was

Erofessor  of  belles-lettres  in  the  University  of  St.
louis.  His  first  pastorate  was  the  southern  half
of  New  Jersey,  and  next  the  Cathedral  church  of
Philadelphia,  where  he  remained  eight  years,  found-
ing a  Magdalen  home,  and  St.  Vincent's  asylum
for  the  care  of  infants.  From  1857  till  1860  he  had
charge  of  St.  Matthew's  church  at  Washington,
D.  C.  From  1860  till  1869  he  was  president  of
Borromeo  college,  Pikesville,  Md.  He  resigned  his
office  in  1869,  and  the  last  nine  years  of  his  life
were  spent  in  the  seclusion  of  a  home  for  aged  and
infirm  clergymen  in  Pikesville.

WALDSEEMULLER,  Martin  (valt  -zay-muel-
ler),  German  geographer,  b.  in  Freiburg  about  1470 ;
d.  after  1522.  He  published  an  "  Introduction  to
Cosmography,  with  the  Four  Voyages  of  Americus
Vespucius  "  (1507),  in  which  he  advocated  the  ap-
plication of  the  name  America  to  the  New  World.
WALDSTEIN,  Charles,  archaeologist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  30  March,  1856.  He  studied  at  Colum-
bia in  1871-'3  and  at  the  University  of  Heidelberg
in  1873-'5,  where  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
on  completing  his  course.  In  1876  he  was  at
Leipsic,  but  in  October  of  that  year  he  went  to
London,  where  he  studied  in  the  British  museum.
He  delivered  a  course  of  art  lectures  in  the  mu-
seum during  that  winter,  then  spent  the  greater
part  of  the  years  1878-'9  in  Italy  and  Greece,  and
was  present  at  the  German  excavation  at  Olympia.
On  his  return  to  England  in  1880  he  delivered  lec-
tures in  various  places,  becoming  university  lec-
turer in  classical  archaeology  in  Cambridge  in  that
year.  His  influence  was  soon  felt  by  the  art  stu-
dents there,  and  in  1882  he  was  made  "  reader  "  in
Greek  art  in  the  university  (a  new  form  of  profes-
sorship). He  turned  his  attention  toward  founding
a  new  archaeological  school,  and  for  its  purposes
a  museum  of  art  has  been  created  in  connection
with  the  Fitzwilliam  museum,  of  which  latter  in-
stitution he  has  since  1883  been  a  director.  In
1888,  while  still  holding  his  appointments  in  Cam-
bridge, he  was  called  to  the  directorship  of  the
American  school  of  archaeology  at  Athens.  His
reputation  has  been  gained  chiefly  by  his  discov-
eries, among  which  are  that  the  so-called  "A pol-
ios" are  simply  athletes,  the  identification  of  a
head  found  in  the  Louvre  as  the  work  of  Pheidias,
and  that  of  a  Hermes  in  Ephesian  silver-work  on  a


WALES


WALKE


323


patera  from  Bernay  in  France.  In  April,  1883,  he
delivered  a  course  of  lectures  before  the  Royal  in-
stitute of  Great  Britain,  and  in  1886  he  lectured  at
Columbia  college,  New  York  city.  The  honorary
degrees  of  A.  M.  in  1882  and  of  L.  H.  D.  in  1887
were  conferred  on  him  by  Columbia,  and  those  of
A.  M.  in  1882  and  Litt.  D.  in  1887  by  Cambridge.
Dr.  Waldstein  is  one  of  the  foreign  editors  of  the
"American  Journal  of  Archaeology,"  and  he  has
contributed  on  his  specialties  to  journals  on  both
sides  of  the  Atlantic.  He  has  also  published  "  The
Balance  of  Emotion  and  Intellect "  (London,  1878)
and  "  Essays  on  the  Art  of  Pheidias  "  (1885).

WALES,  James  Albert,  caricaturist,  b.  in
Clyde,  Ohio,  30  Aug..  1852:  d.  in  New  York,  6
Dec,  1886.  After  leaving  school,  he  apprenticed
himself  to  a  wood-engraver  in  Toledo,  but  soon
afterward  went  to  Cincinnati,  and  thence  to  Cleve-
land, where  he  drew  cartoons  for  the  "  Leader "
during  the  presidential  canvass  of  1872.  After
working  for  some  time  in  Chicago  and  Cleveland,
he  went  to  New  York  in  1873,  and  two  years  later
secured  an  engagement  on  an  illustrated  news-
paper. Afterward  he  was  employed  on  "  Puck,"
in  which  some  of  his  best  works  appeared.  In
1881  he  went  abroad,  and  after  his  return  he  be-
came one  of  the  founders  of  "  The  Judge,"  and  was
for  some  time  its  chief  cartoonist.  He  returned  to
"  Puck  "  in  1885.  Wales  was  the  only  prominent
caricaturist  of  the  newer  school  who  was  a  native
American.  He  was  clever  at  portraiture,  and  pro-
duced some  excellent  cartoons.

WALES,  Philip  Skinner,  surgeon,  b.  in  An-
napolis, Md.,  27  Feb.,  1837.  He  was  educated  at
the  University  of  Maryland,  and,  after  a  course  of
study  in  the  medical  department  there,  settled  in
Baltimore,  and  finally  in  Washington.  He  en-
tered the  navy  as  an  assistant  surgeon,  7  Aug.,
1856,  was  commissioned  surgeon,  12  Oct.,  1861,
and  served  in  the  steamer  "  Fort  Jackson,"  of  the
North  Atlantic  and  Western  Gulf  squadrons,  in
1862-'5.  He  was  a  member  of  the  board  of  exam-
iners in  1873-'4,  commissioned  medical  inspector,
30  June,  1873,  and  appointed  surgeon-general  of
the  navy  and  chief  of  the  bureau  of  medicine  and
surgery  on  26  Jan.,  1880,  serving  until  27  March,
1884.  When  President  Garfield  was  shot  he  as-
sisted in  attendance  for  a  short  time.  While  he
was  chief  of  the  bureau  of  medicine,  unscrupu-
lous clerks  in  his  office  contrived  to  defraud  the
government,  and  he  was  tried  by  a  court-martial
and  suspended  for  five  years  for  neglect  of  duty,
though  acquitted  of  all  real  responsibility  for  the
acts  of  his  subordinates.  He  is  a  member  of  va-
rious medical  societies,  and  the  author  of  "  Me-
chanical Therapeutics"  (Philadelphia,  1867);  "A
New  Method  of  controlling  the  Velum  Palati "
in  the  New  York  "  Medical  Record "  for  Novem-
ber, 1875  ;  "  A  New  Rectal  Dilator  and  Explorer  "
(Washington,  1877);  and  papers  in  the  "American
Journal  of  Medical  Science  "  and  in  the  "  Phila-
delphia Medical  and  Surgical  Reporter."  He  has
in  preparation  a  large  work  on  medical  science.

WALES,  Salem  Howe,  journalist,  b.  in  Wales,
Hampden  co.,  Mass.,  4  Oct.,  1825.  He  was  edu-
cated at  common  schools  and  in  Utica  (N.  Y.)  acad-
emy, engaged  in  journalism,  and  was  associated  in
the  publication  of  the  "  Scientific  American."  He
was  president  of  the  department  of  parks,  New
York  city,  in  1873,  the  Republican  candidate  for
mayor  of  New  York  in  1874,  president  of  the  de-
partment of  docks  in  1876,  and  of  the  park  com-
mission in  1880-'5.  He  wrote  a  series  of  letters  on
European  travel  in  1855  and  1867  for  the  New  York
"  Sun  "  and  "  Scientific  American."


WALES,  Samuel,  educator,  b.  in  Raynham,
Mass.,  2  March,  1748 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  18
Feb.,  1794.  He  was  descended  from  Nathaniel
Wales,  an  emigrant  from  England,  who  landed  at
Boston,  Mass.,  in  1635.  Samuel  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1767,  was  minister  of  Milford  in  1770-'82,
and  in  the  latter  year  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Yale,  where-  he  was  professor  of  divinity  from
12  June,  1782,  till  his  death.  He  published  "Dan-
gers of  Our  National  Prosperity,"  an  election  ser-
mon (Hartford,  1785). — His  son,  John,  senator,  b.
in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  31  July,  1783 ;  d.  in  Wil-
mington, Del.,  3  Dec,  1863,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1801,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  in  his  native  state.  After  practis-
ing for  two  years  in  Baltimore,  he  removed  in  1815
to  Wilmington,  Del.,  where  he  continued  to  follow
his  profession  for  about  thirty  years.  He  was  one
of  the  original  promoters  of  Delaware  college,
president  of  one  of  the  oldest  banks  in  Wilming-
ton, and  bore  a  principal  part  in  obtaining  the  city
charter,  and  in  the  earlier  steps  to  construct  the
railway  between  Philadelphia  and  Baltimore  by
way  of  Wilmington.  In  1845  Mr.  Wales  was  ap-
pointed secretary  of  state  of  Delaware,  and  in
March,  1849,  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to
fill  the  unexpired  term  of  John  M.  Clayton,  who
had  entered  the  cabinet  of  President  Taylor.  Mr.
Wales  served  in  the  senate  till  3  March,  1851,  when
he  was  succeeded  by  James  A.  Bayard.

WALES,  William,  English  astronomer,  b.
about  1734;  d.  in  London,  England,  in  1798.  He
was  sent  by  the  British  government  to  Hudson
bay  to  observe  the  transit  of  Venus  in  1769,  and
afterward  accompanied  Capt.  James  Cook  on  his
second  and  third  voyages,  becoming  on  his  return
to  England  mathematical  master  of  Christ's  hos-
pital and  secretary  to  the  board  of  longitude.  Be-
sides other  works,  he  published  "  General  Observa-
tions made  at  Hudson's  Bay  "  (London,  1772).

WALKE,  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Princess
Ann  county,  Va.,  24  Dec,  1808.  He  was  ap-
pointed from

Ohio a mid-  „, -Tu,  >

shipman  in  the  -'V***^  "***

navy,  1  Feb.,
1827,  became  a
passed  mid-
shipman, 10
June,  1833,  and
a  lieutenant,  9
Feb.,  1839,  and
during  the
Mexican  war
served  in  the
Gulf  squadron
as  exebutive
of  the  bomb
brig  "  Vesuvi-
us," was  pres-
ent at  the  cap-
ture of  Vera
Cruz  and  par-
ticipated in  the  r
expeditions  to  Alvarado,  Tobasco,  and  Tuspan.
He  was  promoted  to  commander,  14  Sept.,  1855,
and  during  the  secession  excitement  in  the  south-
ern states  he  was  at  Pensacola  navy-yard,  where
he  assisted  in  the  removal  of  Lieut.  Adam  J.  Slem-
mer's  command  to  Fort  Pickens,  by  which  that
fort  was  saved  to  the  Union.  In  January,  1861,
he  was  ordered  to  Vera  Cruz,  but  took  the  respon-
sibility of  conveying  the  loyal  officers,  seamen,
and  marines,  with  their  families,  to  New  York,
when  the  navy-yard  was  seized  by  the  secessionists.


s^^/pY^2Ae_


324


WALKEM


WALKER


He  was  court-martialed  for  this  disobedience  of
orders,  and  reprimanded  by  the  secretary  of  the
navy ;  but  as  this  reprimand  was  published  by  Sec.
Gideon  Welles,  it  was  more  of  a  compliment  to
him  for  his  good  judgment  than  a  censure  for  the
disobedience  of  orders.  He  com  manded  the  steamer
"Mount  Vernon  "  from  May  till  September,  1861,
after  which  he  was  assigned  to  duty  in  the  Mis-
sissippi river  flotilla,  where  he  served  with  ability
until  September,  1863.  He  commanded  the  gun-
boat "  Taylor  "  and  the  squadron  of  gun-boats  at
the  battle  of  Belmont  in  co-operation  with  Gen.
Grant,  by  whom  he  was  complimented  for  his  ser-
vices in  protecting  the  retreat.  He  had  the  gun-
boat "  Carondelet "  in  the  engagement  and  capture
of  Fort  Henry,  6  Feb.,  1862,  for  which  he,  with
other  officers  of  Flag-Officer  Foote's  squadron,  re-
ceived a  vote  of  thanks  from  congress  and  the
state  of  Ohio.  With  the  same  vessel  he  was  in  the
capture  of  Fort  Donelson,  13-16  Feb.,  1862,  during
which  he  bore  the  brunt  of  the  engagement.  In
this  ship  he  ran  the  batteries  of  Island  No.  10,  17
March,  1862,  a  feat  that  had  never  been  performed
before  by  the  Mississippi  river  flotilla.  It  was  done
at  night  during  a  violent  storm  with  only  the  light-
ning and  the  flashes  of  the  enemy's  guns  to  indi-
cate the  course  down  the  river.  After  this  he
led  in  the  "Carondelet"  at  the  battle  at  Fort
Pillow,  11  May,  1862,  and  at  Memphis,  6  June,

1862,  when  the.Confederate  gun-boats  were  captured
and  sunk,  during  which  contest  he  chiefly.engaged
the  ram  "  Arkansas."  He  was  commissioned  a
captain,  16  July,  1862,  and  took  command  of  the
iron-clad  ram  "  Lafayette,"  in  which  he  ran  the
batteries  at  Vicksburg,  and  served  in  the  battle  of
Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  29  April,  1863.  He  dispersed
Gen.  Richard  Taylor's  army  at  Simmsport,  La.,
and  blockaded  the  mouth  of  Red  river,  4  June,

1863.  He  was  transferred  to  the  steamer  "  Fort
Jackson,"  24  July,  1863.  and  continued  to  render
valuable  services  on  the  Mississippi  river  until  24
Sept.,  1863,  when  he  was  detached  and  placed  in
command  of  the  steamer  "  Sacramento  "  to  chase
the  "  Alabama."  He  was  promoted  to  commodore,
25  July,  1866,  and  to  rear-admiral,  13  July,  1870,
and  voluntarily  went  on  the  retired  list,  26  April,
1871.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Naval  Scenes  in  the
Civil  War  "  (New  York,  1877).  He  is  a  good  artist,
and  his  sketches  of  the  scenes  in  the  civil  war  are
valuable  additions  to  the  above-mentioned  work.

WALKEM,  George  Anthony,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  in  Newry,  Ireland,  14  Nov.,  1834,  and  came  to
Canada  with  his  father,  Charles,  who  was  on  the
Royal  engineer  staff  in  Canada.  He  was  educated
at  McGill  college,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1855.  He  settled
in  British  Columbia  in  1862,  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  for  several  years  preceding  the  union
in  1867,  appointed  a  member  of  the  executive  coun-
cil, 12  Jan.,  1872,  and  was  chief  commissioner  of
lands  and  works  from  that  date  till  23  Dec,  of  the
same  year,  when  he  became  attorney-general.  He
held  this  portfolio  till  11  Feb.,  1874,  when  he  be-
came premier.  He  occupied  the  latter  office  again
in  1878,  was  appointed  puisne  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  British  Columbia  in  1882,  and  became  re-
vising-officer  in  1885.  In  June,  1874,  he  was  a
delegate  from  British  Columbia  to  England  to  pre-
sent the  case  of  that  province  on  the  subject  of
the  differences  between  it  and  the  Dominion  gov-
ernment relative  to  the  construction  of  the  Cana-
dian Pacific  railway,  which  differences  were  ami-
cably settled  by  the  friendly  intervention  of  Lord
Carnarvon.  Mr.  Walkem  is  president  of  the  Law
society  of British Columbia, a fellow of the


Royal  geographical  society,  and  a  member  of  the
British  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence.— His  brother,  Richard  Thomas,  lawyer,
b.  in  Waterford,  Ireland,  30  Sept.,  1840,  was  edu-
cated at  McGill  college,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1865,  and  began  practice  in  Kings-
ton. He  became  queen's  counsel  in  1880,  the  same
year  was  appointed  professor  of  equity  in  Queen's
university,  Kingston,  which  chair  he  still  fills,  and
since  1884  has  been  vice-president  of  the  art-school.
He  has  been  a  delegate  to  the  synod  of  the  diocese
of  Ontario  for  twenty  years,  and  for  fifteen  years
to  the  provincial  synod.  He  published  a  work  on
"  Wills  "  (Toronto,  1874),  and  "  The  Married  Wom-
en's Property  Acts  "  (1875).

WALKER,  Abraham  Joseph,  jurist,  b.  near
Nashville,  Tenn.,  in  1818 ;  d.  in  Montgomery,  Ala.,
25  April,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Nashville
university  in  1838,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1841,
and  began  practice  at  Jacksonville,  Ala.,  in  1842.
He  became  a  successful  lawyer  and  Democratic
legislator,  and  in  1852  removed  to  Talladega.  He
was  appointed  one  of  the  state  chancellors  in  1854,
was  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court  in  1856-'9,
and  its  chief  justice  in  1859-'-68.

WALKER,  Alexander,  journalist,  b.  in  Fred-
ericksburg, Va.,  13  Oct.,  1819.  He  received  a  good
education,  taught  while  pursuing  legal  studies,  was
graduated  at  the  law  department  of  the  University
of  Virginia,  and  removed  to  New  Orleans,  La.,
where  he  practised  law  and  became  a  journalist  at
the  same  time.  He  was  the  editor  of  the  "  Jeffer-
sonian,"  which  was  established  as  the  organ  of
the  Louisiana  Democracy,  and  afterward  of  the
'•  Delta,"  the  "  Times,"  the  "  Herald,"  the  "  Pica-
yune," and  for  some  time  of  the  Cincinnati  "  En-
quirer." He  was  appointed  judge  of  the  city
court  of  New  Orleans  by  the  governor,  and  in
January,  1861,  was  a  member  of  the  secession  con-
vention of  Louisiana.  He  has  published  "  Jackson
and  New  Orleans "  (New  York,  1856) :  "  Life  of
Andrew  Jackson  " ;  and,  during  the  civil  war,  "  His-
tory of  the  Battle  of  Shiloh  "  (New  Orleans)  and
"  Butler  at  New  Orleans."

WALKER,  Amasa,  political  economist,  b.  in
Woodstock,  Conn.,  4  May,  1799;  d.  in  Brookfield,
Mass.,  29  Oct.,  1875.  He  received  a  district-school
education  in
North  Brook-
field,  where
among  his  fel-
low -  students
was  William  C.
Bryant.  In  1814
he  entered  com-
mercial life,  and
in  1820  formed
a  partnership
with  Allen  New-
ell in  North
Brookfield,  but
three  years  later
withdrew  to  be-
come the  agent
of  the  Methu-
en  manufactur-
ingcompany.  In
1825  he  formed
with  Charles  G.
Carleton the

firm  of  Carleton  and  Walker,  of  Boston,  Mass.,
but  in  1827  he  went  into  business  independently.
In  1840  he  withdrew  permanently  from  commer-
cial affairs,  and  in  1842  he  went  to  Oberlin,  Ohio,
on  account,  of  his  great  interest  in  the  college


^ytL^^ct.  ste^L


WALKER


WALKER


325


there,  and  gave  lectures  on  political  economy  at
that  institution  until  1848.  After  serving  in  the
legislature,  he  became  the  Free-soil  and  Democratic
candidate  for  speaker,  and  in  1849  was  chosen  to
the  Massachusetts  senate,  where  he  introduced  a
plan  for  a  sealed-ballot  law,  which  was  enacted  in
1851,  and  carried  a  bill  providing  that  Webster's
Dictionary  should  be  introduced  into  the  com-
mon schools  of  Massachusetts.  He  was  elected
secretary  of  state  in  1851,  re-elected  in  1852,  and
in  1853  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  convention
for  revising  the  state  constitution,  becoming  the
chairman  of  the  committee  on  suffrage.  He  was
appointed  in  1853  one  of  the  examiners  in  politi-
cal economy  in  Harvard,  and  held  that  office  un-
til 1860,  and  in  1859  he  began  an  annual  course
of  lectures  on  that  subject  in  Amherst,  which  he
continued  until  1869.  Meanwhile,  in  1859,  he  was
again  elected  to  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  and
in  1860  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  electoral
college  of  that  state,  casting  his  ballot  for  Abraham
Lincoln.  He  was  also  elected  as  a  Republican  to
congress,  and  served  from  1  Dec,  1862,  till  3  March,
1863.  Mr.  Walker  is  best  known  for  his  work  in
advocating  new  and  reformatory  measures.  In
1839  he  urged  a  continuous  all-rail  route  of  com-
munication between  Boston  and  Mississippi  river,
and  during  the  same  year  he  became  president  of
the  Boston  temperance  society,  the  first  total  ab-
stinence association  in  that  city.  He  was  active
in  the  anti-slavery  movement,  though  not  to  the
extent  of  recommending  unconstitutional  methods
for  its  abolition,  and  in  1848  he  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Free-soil  party.  Mr.  Walker  was
a  member  of  the  first  International  peace  congress
in  London  in  1843,  and  was  one  of  its  vice-presi-
dents, and  in  1849  he  held  the  same  office  in  the
congress  in  Paris.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  him  by  Amherst  in  1867.  In  1857  he
began  the  publication  of  a  series  of  articles  on
political  economy  in  "  Hunt's  Merchant's  Maga-
zine," and  he  was  accepted  as  an  authority  on
questions  of  finance.  Besides  other  contributions
to  magazines,  he  published  "  Nature  and  Uses  of
Money  and  Mixed  Currency "  (Boston,  1857),  and
"  Science  of  Wealth,  a  Manual  of  Political  Econo-
my "  (1866),  of  which  eight  editions  have  been  sold,
and  it  has  been  translated  into  Italian.  With
William  B.  Calhoun  and  Charles  L.  Flint  he  issued
"  Transactions  of  the  Agricultural  Societies  of
Massachusetts  "  (7  vols.,  1848-'54). — His  son,  Fran-
cis A  in  asa.  statistician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2  July,
1840,  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1860,  and  be-
gan the  study  of  law  under  Charles  Devens,  and
George  F.  Hoar  in  Worcester.  He  joined  the
loth  Massachusetts  volunteers,  commanded  by  Col.
Devens,  on  1  Aug.,  1861,  as  sergeant-major,  and
became  assistant  .adjutant-general  of  the  brigade
under  Gen.  Darius  N.  Couch  on  14  Sept.,  1861,
with  the  rank  of  captain.  On  11  Aug..  1862,  he
was  made  adjutant-general  of  G-en.  Couch's  divis-
ion, with  the  rank  of  major,  and  he  was  promoted
colonel  on  the  staff  of  the  2d  armv  corps,  23
Dec,  1862.  Thereafter  he  continued  with  that
corps  as  adjutant-general,  serving  successively  on
the  staffs  of  Gen.  Gouverneur  K.  Warren  and  Gen.
Winfield  S.  Hancock,  and  was  severely  wounded
at  Chancellorsville,  1  May,  1863,  and  captured  at
Ream's  Station,  25  Aug.,  1864.  He  was  confined  in
Libby  prison,  in  consequence  of  which  his  health
was  impaired,  so  that  he  resigned  on  12  Jan.,  1865.
The  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  was
conferred  on  him  on  13  March,  1865.  He  taught
Latin  and  Greek  at  Williston  seminary  during
1865-'7, and then was assistant editor of the


"Springfield  Republican."  In  1869  he  became
chief  of  the  bureau  of  statistics  in  the  treasury  de-
partment at  Washington,  and  in  1870-'2  he  held
the  office  of  superintendent  of  the  9th  census.
During  1871-2  he  was  also  commissioner  of  Indian
affairs.  He  was  called  to  the  professorship  of  po-
litical economy  and  history  in  the  Sheffield  scien-
tific school  of  Yale  in  1873,  and  held  that  chair  till
1881,  when  he  was  elected  to  the  presidency  of  the
Massachusetts  institute  of  technology.  Meanwhile,
from  May  till  November,  1876,  he  was  chief  of  the
bureau  of  awards  at  the  World's  fair  in  Philadel-
phia, and  during  1879-81  he  was  superintendent  of
the  10th  census  while  on  leave  of  absence  from  Yale.
He  held  the  lectureship  on  tenure  of  land  at  Har-
vard in  1883.  While  residing  in  New  Haven  he  was
a  member  of  the  city  and  state  boards  of  education,
and  on  his  removal  to  Boston,  Mass.,  he  was  called
on  to  serve  similarly  in  that  state.  The  degree  of
A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Amherst  in  1863
and  by  Yale  in  1873,  that  of  Ph.  D.  by  Amherst  in
1875,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Amherst  and  Yale  in
1881,  by  Harvard  in  1883,  by  Columbia  in  1887,
and  by  St.  Andrews,  Scotland,  in  1888.  He  was
U.  S.  commissioner  to  the  International  monetary
conference  in  Paris  in  1878,  and  was  elected  in
1878  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  He  is
president  of  the  American  statistical  society  and
of  the  American  economic  association,  and  is  an
honorary  fellow  of  the  Royal  statistical  society  of
London.  His  writings  include  annual  reports  as
superintendent  of  the  9th  census  (3  vols.,  Wash-
ington, 1870-'2),  as  commissioner  of  Indian  af-
fairs (1872),  as  superintendent  of  the  10th  census
(3  vols.,  1879-'81),  and  as  president  of  the  Massa-
chusetts institute  of  technology  (5  vols.,  Boston,
1883-'8) ;  and  he  has  compiled  "  Commerce  and
Navigation  of  the  United  States "  (2  vols.,  Wash-
ington, 1868-'9) ;  "  Ninth  Census  "  (4  vols.,  1872-'3) ;
''Statistical  Atlas  of  the  United  States"  (1874);
"  Judges'  Reports  on  Awards "  (8  vols.,  Philadel-
phia, 1878) ;  and  "  Tenth  Census  "  (24  vols.,  Wash-
ington, 1883  et  seq.).  President  Walker  is  the  au-
thor of  "  The  Indian  Question  "  (Boston,  1874) ;
"  The  Wages  Question  "  (1876) ;  "  Money  "  (1878) ;
"  Money,  Trade,  and  Industry  "  (1879) ;  "  Land  and
its  Rent "  (1883)  ;  "  Political  Economy  "  (New
York,  1883) ;  and  "  History  of  the  Second  Army
Corps  "  (1886).

WALKER,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  England  in
1753;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  13  Jan.,  1818.  He  settled
in  New  York  at  an  early  age,  became  a  merchant,
served  in  the  Revolution  as  captain  in  the  2d  New
York  regiment,  and  was  aide-de-camp  to  Baron
Steuben,  and  in  1781-2  to  Gen.  Washington.  Af-
ter the  war  he  was  secretary  to  the  governor  of
New  York,  and  then  became  a  broker  in  New  York
city.  He  was  naval  officer  of  New  York  under
Washington's  administration,  and  was  a  representa-
tive in  congress  from  New  York  in  1801-'3.  In
1797  he'  became  agent  of  the  vast  estates  of  the
Earl  of  Bute  in  central  New  York,  and  he  was
identified  with  the  progress  and  growth  of  Utica.

WALKER,  Charles  Manning,  journalist,  b.  in
Athens,  Ohio,  25  Dec,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Ohio  in  1854,  was  clerk  in  the
U.  S.  treasury  department  from  May,  1861,  till
November,  1862 ;  5th  auditor  U.  S.  treasury  from
November,  1862,  till  July,  1869 ;  and  chief  clerk
in  the  post-office  department  from  July,  1883,  till
July,  1885.  He  has  been  for  many  years  an  edito-
rial writer  on  the  Indianapolis  "  Journal,"  and  has
published  "  History  of  Athens  County,  Ohio,  and
incidentally  of  the  Ohio  Land  Company,"  and  the
"  First  Settlement  of  the  State  at  Marietta,  with  Per-


326


WALKER


WALKER


sonal  and  Biographical  Sketches  of  the  Early  Set-
tlers "  (2  vols.,  Cincinnati,  1869) ;  "  Life  of  Oliver
P.  Morton  "  (Indianapolis,  1877) ;  "  Life  of  Alvin
P.  Hovey  "  (1888).

WALKER,  Cornelius,  clergyman,  b.  near  Rich-
mond, Va.,  12  June,  1819.  His  education  and
training  were  obtained  at  the  Episcopal  high-school
at  Richmond.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in  St.  Paul's
church,  Alexandria,  12  July,  1845,  by  Bishop
Meade,  and  priest  in  Grace  church,  Lexington,  23
Sept.,  1846,  by  the  same  prelate.  He  was  minister
in  Amherst  county,  Va.,  in  1845-'7,  assistant  min-
ister in  St.  Paul's  church.  Richmond,  in  1847-8,
rector  of  Christ  church,  Winchester,  in  1848-'60,
of  Christ  church,  Alexandria,  in  1860-'l,  and  of
Emmanuel  church,  Henrico,  in  1862-'6.  He  was
appointed  professor  of  church  history  in  the  Theo-
logical seminary  of  Virginia  in  1866,  and  served
for  ten  years,  when  he  was  made  professor  of  sys-
tematic divinity  and  homiletics.  The  degree  of
D.  D.  was  given  him  by  William  and  Mary  college
in  1859.  Ur.  Walker  has  been  a  frequent  contribu-
tor to  reviews  and  magazines,  and  has  furnished
articles  on  "  Liturgies,"  "  Evidences  of  Christian-
ity," "Ecclesiastical  History,"  and  other  similar
subjects  for  religious  cyclopaedias.  He  has  pub-
lished "  Biography  of  Rev.  William  Duval,  City
Missionary "  (Richmond,  1854);  "Life  and  Corre-
spondence of  Rev.  William  Sparrow,  D.  D.,  Pro-
fessor in  the  Theological  Seminary,  Va."  (Philadel-
phia, 1876) ;  "  Biography  of  the  Rev.  Charles  W.
Andrews,  D.  D."  (1877) ;  and  "  Sorrowing  not  with-
out Hope  "  (New  York,  1887).

WALKER, '  Freeman,  senator,  b.  in  Charles
City  county,  Va.,  25  Oct.,  1780 ;  d.  in  Richmond
county,  Ga.,  23  Sept.,  1827.  He  removed  to  Georgia
in  1797,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  prac-
tice in  1802  in  Augusta,  soon  becoming  eminent
in  his  profession.  In  1807  he  was  a  member  of  the
legislature,  and  in  1819  he  was  elected  United  States
senator  from  Georgia,  but  in  1821  he  resigned.  His
speech  on  the  Missouri  compromise  question  at-
tracted general  attention.

WALKER,  George,  senator,  b.  in  Culpepper
county,  Va.,  in  1768;  d.  in  Nicholasville,  Ky.,  in
1819.  He  was  an  early  settler  in  Kentucky,  where
he  held  a  leading  place  at  the  bar,  and  was  a  member
of  the  legislature.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  senator
from  Kentucky  in  place  of  George  M.  Bibb,  re-
signed, serving  from  10  Oct.,  1814,  till  2  Feb.,  1815.

WALKER,  George,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Peter-
borough, N.  H.,  in  1824 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
15  Jan.,  1888.  He  was  educated  at  Yale  and  at
Dartmouth,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1842,  and
studied  law  at  Harvard,  where  he  received  his  de-

Eree  in  1845.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at
pringfield,  Mass.,  practising  law  there  from  1847
till  1875,  was  elected  to  the  Massachusetts  senate
in  1857,  was  re-elected,  and  in  1868  was  a  member
of  the  lower  house.  He  was  instrumental  in  intro-
ducing the  national  system  of  banking  into  the
state,  engaged  in  business  in  Springfield,  Mass.,
and  became  president  of  the  Third  national  bank
of  that  city.  In  1865  he  was  sent  to  Europe  on
a  confidential  mission  by  Sec.  Hugh  McCulloch,
and  wrote  an  article  on  the  public  debt  and  re-
sources of  the  United  States,  which  was  published
in  the  "Revue  des  deux  mondes"  and  republished
in  German  papers.  In  1869  he  visited  Europe  on
business  connected  with  the  state  of  Massachu-
setts, and  on  his  return  settled  in  New  York  city,
engaged  in  banking,  and  was  elected  vice-president
of  the  Gold  and  stock  telegraph  company.  In
1879  he  was  sent  to  Europe  on  a  confidential
mission  by  Sec.  William  M.  Evarts,  visited  Eng-


land, France,  and  Germany,  and  made  investiga-
tions with  special  reference  to  the  question  of  a
bimetallic  monetary  standard.  He  was  consul-
general  in  Paris  from  1880  till  1887,  when  he  re-
signed, returned  to  this  country,  and  resided  in
Washington,  D.  C,  till  his  death.

WALKER,  Gilbert  Carlton,  congressman,  b.
in  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  1  Aug.,  1832;  d.  in  New
York  city,  11  May,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at
Hamilton  college  in  1854,  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1855,  and  settled  in  Oswego,  N.  Y.  He  re-
moved to  Chicago,  111.,  in  1859,  and  engaged  in
politics  while  practising  his  profession.  In  1864
he  settled  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  where  he  became  presi-
dent of  the  Exchange  national  bank,  and  in  July,
1869,  he  was  elected  governor  of  Virginia  by  a
majority  of  18,000  over  Henry  H.  Wells,  who  was
at  that  time  military  governor  of  the  state.  At
the  expiration  of  his  service  he  was  chosen  to
congress  as  a  Conservative,  serving  from  1875
till  1879.  He  resumed  his  profession  in  1879,  and
removed  to  New  York  city.

WALKER,  Henderson,  governor  of  North
Carolina,  b.  in  North  Carolina  in  1660:  d.  near
Edenton,  N.  C,  14  April,  1704.  He  adopted  the
profession  of  law,  and  became  a  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  and  president  of  the  council,  introduc-
ing many  judicial  reforms.  From  1699  until  his
death  he  was  governor  of  North  Carolina,  assum-
ing that  post  by  virtue  of  his  office  as  president  of
the  council,  and  not  under  any  appointment  as
deputy  by  the  governor-general  at  Charleston.
George  Bancroft  says  of  his  rule,  "  While  Eng-
land was  engaged  in  world-wide  wars,  here  the  in-
habitants multiplied  and  spread  in  the  enjoyment
of  peace  and  liberty."  The  stone  that  marks
Walker's  grave  also  records  that  "  North  Carolina,
during  his  administration,  enjoved  tranquillitv."

WALKER,  Sir  Hovenden,  British  officer,  b.  in
Somersetshire,  England,  about  1660 ;  d.  in  Dublin,
Ireland,  in  January,  1726.  He  entered  the  navy  in
his  youth,  became  a  captain  in  1692,  and  rear-
admiral  of  the  white  in  1710,  and  in  1711  was
knighted  by  Queen  Anne.  In  the  last-named  year
he  commanded  the  fleet  that  sailed  from  Boston
on  30  July,  for  the  conquest  of  Canada.  Delays,  a
badly  organized  method  of  supplies,  and  the  in-
competency of  its  leaders  made  the  expedition  a
failure.  Half  of  Walker's  ships  were  wrecked  in  a
storm  on  Isle  aux  OSufs,  on  St.  Lawrence  river,
and  Walker  returned  to  England,  where  he  charged
that  his  troubles  had  been  due  to  want  of  proper
co-operation  on  the  part  of  the  New-Englanders.
These  charges  were  answered  by  Jeremiah  Dura-
mer  in  a  "  Letter  to  a  Noble  Lord  concerning  the
Late  Expedition  to  Canada"  (London,  1712).  In
1715  Walker's  ship,  the  "Edgar,"  of  seventy-four
guns,  blew  up  at  Spithead,  and  nearly  all  the  crew
perished.  He  was  blamed  for  negligence  in  the
matter,  and,  his  Canadian  experience  being  still
fresh  in  the  public  mind,  he  was  dismissed  the
service.  He  then  settled  on  a  plantation  in  South
Carolina.  Admiral  Walker  published  in  his  vindi-
cation "  A  Journal  or  Full  Account  of  the  Late
Expedition  to  Canada  "  (London,  1720).

WALKER,  Isaac  P,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1813;  d.  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  1  April,  1872.  He
adopted  the  profession  of  law,  removed  to  Wiscon-
sin in  1841,  practised  in  Milwaukee,  and  took  an
active  part  in  early  political  events  in  the  state.
He  served  in  the  territorial  congress  in  1847-'8,
and  in  the  latter  year  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate as  an  Anti-slavery  Democrat.  His  policy  in
that  body  was  deemed  timid  by  his  constituents,
for,  although  he  wished  to  preserve  the  Union,  lie


WALKER


WALKER


327


did  not  properly  represent  their  attitude  on  the
Wilmot  proviso.'  He  was  not  returned  in  the  next
election,  retired  from  politics,  and  resumed  the
practice  of  law.

WALKER,  James,  president  of  Harvard,  b.  in
Burlington,  Mass.,  16  Aug.,  1794;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  23  Dec,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1814,  studied  theology  at  Cambridge,  and  was
pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  in  Charlestown  for
twenty-one  years.  During  this  period  he  was  ac-
tive in  his  parochial  duties  and  in  advocating  the
cause  of  school  and  college  education,  lectured  ex-
tensively and  with  success,  and  was  a  close  student
of  literature  and  philosophy.  In  1831-'9  he  was
an  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Examiner."  He  re-
signed his  pastorate  in  July,  1839,  the  following
September  became  professor  of  moral  and  intel-
lectual philosophy  in  Harvard,  was  elected  its
president  in  1853,  and  held  office  till  his  resigna-
tion in  1860.  He  devoted  the  remainder  of  his  life
to  scholarly  pursuits,  and  left  his  valuable  library
and  $15,000  to  Harvard.  That  college  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1835,  and  Yale  that  of  LL.  D.
in  I860.  He  published  numerous  sermons,  ad-
dresses, and  lectures,  including  three  series  of  lec-
tures on  "Natural  Religion,"  and  a  course  of
Lowell  institute  lectures  on  "  The  Philosophy  of
Religion " ;  "  Sermons  preached  in  the  Chapel  of
Harvard  College  "  (Boston,  1861) ;  a  "  Memorial  of
Daniel  Appleton  White  "  (1863) ;  and  a  "  Memoir
of  Josiah  Quincy"  (1867).  After  his  death  a  vol-
ume of  his  "  Discourses  "  appeared  (1876).  He  also
edited,  as  college  text-books,  Dugald  Stewart's
"  Philosophy  of  the  Active  and  Moral  Powers "
(1849),  and  Dr.  Thomas  Reid's  "  Essays  on  the  In-
tellectual Powers,  Abridged,  with  Notes  and  Illus-
trations from  Sir  William  Hamilton  and  Others  "
(1850).  See  "Memorial"  (Cambridge.  1875),  and
"Services  at  the  Dedication  of  a  Mural  Monu-
ment to  James  Walker  in  the  Harvard  Church  in
Charlestown  "  (1884).

WALKER,  James  Barr,  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29  July,  1805 ;  d.  in  Wheaton,
111.,  6  March,  1887.  His  father  died  when  the  son
was  a  child,  and  he  and  his  widowed  mother  re-
sided near  Pittsburg,  where  James  worked  in  a
factory,  was  errand-boy  in  a  country  store,  and
then  labored  four  years  in  a  printing-office.  At
the  age  of  twenty  he  walked  to  New  York,  where
he  became  clerk  in  the  office  of  Mordecai  M.  Noah,
and  he  was  afterward  a  teacher  in  New  Durham,
N.  J.  He  then  studied  law  in  Ravenna,  Ohio,  was
graduated  at  Western  Reserve  college  in  1831,  and
then  edited  successively  the  "  Ohio  Observer "  at
Hudson,  the  "  Watchman  of  the  Valley "  at  Cin-
cinnati, and  the  "  Watchman  of  the  Prairies "  at
Chicago  (now  the  "  Advance  ") — all  religious  news-
papers. He  also  engaged  in  the  publication  and
sale  of  books,  but  abandoned  it  for  the  ministry,
and  in  1841  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  presby-
tery of  Chicago.  He  then  resided  in  Mansfield,
Ohio,  where  he  established  a  private  asylum  for
orphans,  and  he  was  for  some  time  acting  pastor  of
a  church  in  Sandusky.  He  was  lecturer  on  the
harmony  between  science  and  revealed  religion  at
Oberlin  college  and  Chicago  theological  seminary.
Western  Reserve  college  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  Dr.  Walker  was  the  author  of  "  The  Phi-
losophy of  the  Plan  of  Salvation,"  published  anony-
mously under  the  editorship  of  Prof.  Calvin  E.
Stowe  (Boston,  1855),  which  went  through  several
editions  in  England,  and  has  been  translated  into
five  foreign  languages,  including  Hindustanee ;
"God  revealed  in  Nature  and  in  Christ,"  in  op-
position to  theories  of  development  (1855) ;  "  Phi-


losophy of  Scepticism  and  Ultraism  "  (1857) ;  "  Phi-
losophy of  the  Divine  Operation  in  the  Redemption
of  Man  "  (London,  1862) ;  "  Poems  "  (1862) ;  "  Living
Questions  of  the  Age  "  (Chicago,  1869) ;  and  "  Doc-
trine of  the  Holy  Spirit"  (1870).

WALKER,  James  Bradford  Richmond,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  15  April,  1821.  He
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1841,  and  at  Andover
theological  seminary  in  1846,  was  ordained  the
next  year,  and  in  1847-'53  served  as  pastor  of  a
Congregational  church  in  Bucksport,  Me.  He  oc-
cupied a  charge  in  Holyoke,  Mass.,  in  1855-64,  in
Hartford  in  1864-'7,  and  subsequently  has  devoted
himself  to  literary  pursuits  there,  and  in  Boston,
where  he  now  resides.  He  has  published  "  Memo-
rial of  the  Walkers  of  the  Old  Plymouth  Colony  "
(Northampton,  Mass.,  1861) ;  and  "  The  Genealogy
of  John  Richmond  "  (1866).

WALKER,  James  Baniel,  senator,  b.  in  Lo-
gan county,  Ky.,  13  Dec,  1830.  He  removed  to
Arkansas  in  1847,  was  educated  in  private  schools
and  at  Ozark  institute,  Ark.,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  practice  in  Fayetteville,  Ark.,  in  1850.
During  the  civil  war  he  served  as  colonel  of  an
Arkansas  regiment  in  the  Confederate  army.  After
the  war  he  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession,
was  solicitor-general  of  the  state  of  Arkansas,  a
presidential  elector  in  1876  on  the  Tilden  and  Hen-
dricks ticket,  and  in  1878  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.
senate  as  a  Democrat,  serving  till  3  March,  1885.

WALKER,  James  Murdock,  lawyer,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  10  Jan.,  1813 ;  d.  there,  18  Sept.,
1854.  He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  South
Carolina  in  1830,  studied  law  under  Mitchell  King,
and  in  1834  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  where  he  at-
tained high  reputation.  He  served  several  terms
in  the  legislature,  and  was  active  in  benevolent  and
educational  enterprises.  Mr.  Walker  published
"The  State  vs.  The  Bank  of  South  Carolina"
(Charleston,  1836) ;  "  An  Inquiry  concerning  the
Use  and  Authority  of  Roman  Jurisprudence  in
the  Law  concerning  Real  Estate"  (1850);  "The
Theory  of  Common  Law "  (1852) ;  and  a  "  Tract
on  Government "  (1853).

WALKER,  James  Perkins,  publisher,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in  1829 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
10  May,  1868.  He  engaged  in  literary  pursuits
at  an  early  age,  becoming  a  contributor  to  the  re-
ligious press,  and  editing  the  "Oriental  Annual"
in  New  York  in  1857,  the  "Religious  Educator"
in  1860-'l,  "  The  Altar  at  Home,"  and  subsequently
was  a  member  of  the  publishing-house  of  Walker,
Wise,  and  Co.  in  Boston,  Mass.  He  published
"Faith  and  Patience,"  a  story  for  boys  (Boston,
1860);  "Book  of  Raphael's  Madonnas"  (1860);
and  "  Sunny-Eyed  Tim  "  (1861).  See  a  "  Memoir  "
of  him,  with  selections  from  his  writings  (1869).

WALKER,  Jesse,  missionary,  b.  in  North  Caro-
lina about  1760;  d.  in  Cook  county,  111.,  5  Oct.,
1835.  He  emigrated  to  Tennessee  about  1800,  be-
came a  travelling  preacher  in  the  western  confer-
ence of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1802,
and  served  in  Tennessee  and  Kentucky  till  1806,
when  he  was  appointed  a  missionary  to  Illinois.
He  engaged  in  revival  work  in  that  state  with  great
success,  erected  churches,  and  established  congrega-
tions. He  was  then  appointed  to  Missouri,  where
his  lessons  of  temperance  and  industry  exercised  a
beneficial  influence  on  the  pioneer  community.  He
became  presiding  elder  of  the  Illinois  district  in
1812,  conference  missionary  in  1819,  and  in  1820
built  the  first  Methodist  Episcopal  church  and
formed  the  first  Methodist  Episcopal  congregation
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.  At  that  time  there  were  only
three  persons  of  that  denomination  in  the  town.


328


WALKER


WALKER


He  went  on  a  mission  to  the  Mississippi  river  In-
dians in  1823,  established  several  schools,  and  is
credited  with  many  converts.  "  Father  Walker,"
as  he  was  called,  was  without  early  advantages  of
education,  but  by  his  shrewd  common  sense,  and
by  ignoring  all  personal  needs,  as  well  as  difficul-
ties, did  efficient  work  in  the  pioneer  ministry.

WALKER,  John,  Canadian  manufacturer,  b.  in
Inverary,  Argyllshire,  Scotland,  24  Jan.,  1832.  He
was  educated  at  his  native  place  and  at  Stirling
academy,  and  came  to  Canada  in  1864.  He  served
in  the  Port  Erie  Fenian  affair  of  1866,  and  after-
ward was  attached  to  the  militia,  from  which  he
retired  in  1884  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.
Mr.  Walker  was  vice-president  of  the  first  Canada
Pacific  railway  company,  and  president  of  the
School  of  art  and  design,  is  active  in  various  finan-
cial and  industrial  societies,  and  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  London,  Ont.,  Protestant  orphans'
home.  In  1865  he  purchased  for  Scotch  capitalists
the  large  tract  of  oil-producing  land  that  belonged
to  George  Brown,  and  afterward  he  erected  chemi-
cal works  and  an  oil-refinery  at  London,  Ont.  In
1874  he  was  chosen  to  the  Canadian  parliament;
but  his  election  was  contested  in  the  courts,  he
was  unseated,  and  in  the  second  appeal  to  the  con-
stituency failed  of  election.  He  was  afterward
registrar  of  deeds  for  Middlesex  county,  Ontario.

WALKER,  John  Grimes,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Hillsborough,  N.  H.,  20  March,  1835.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in 1856,

f>romoted  to  master,  22  Jan.,  1858,  and  became
ieutenant,  23  Jan.,  1858.  During  the  civil  war
he  served  on  the  Atlantic  coast  blockade  in  the
steamer  "Connecticut"  in  1861,  and  was  trans-
ferred to  the  steamer  "  Winona  "  of  the  Western
Gulf  blockading  squadron  in  1862.  In  this  vessel
he  participated  in  the  engagements  that  ended  in
the  capture  of  New  Orleans,  with  the  subsequent
operations  against  Vicksburg  in  1862.  He  was
promoted  to  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,
and  had  command  of  the  river  iron-clad  "Baron
de  Kalb"  of  the  Mississippi  squadron  in  1862-'3,
in  which  he  participated  in  the  attacks  on  Vicks-
burg and  operations  in  Yazoo  river  in  the  winter
of  1862-'3,  co-operating  with  Gen.  William  T.  Sher-
man and  the  army.  He  participated  in  both  attacks
on  Haines's  Bluff,  in  the  Yazoo  river  expedition
against  the  Confederate  gun-boats,  in  the  capture
of  Fort  Hindman  and  Yazoo  City,  and  in  the  at-
tack on  Fort  Peinberton.  For  these  services  he
was  highly  commended  by  Admiral  Porter  in  his
report,  and  also  in  his  "  Naval  History  of  the  Civil
War."  After  he  had  forced  a  passage  through
Yazoo  pass,  he  took  command  of  the  naval  battery
with  cannon  from  the  gun-boats  in  the  bombard-
ment of  Vicksburg  from  the  rear,  which  contrib-
uted greatly  to  the  final  surrender.  After  the  fall
of  that  place  he  had  command  of  the  naval  expe-
dition against  Yazoo  river  in  co-operation  with
5,000  troops  in  transports.  Walker  led  in  the  "  De
Kalb,"  and  while  engaging  the  batteries  his  vessel
ran  foul  of  a  torpedo,  which  exploded  and  caused
the  vessel  to  sink  almost  instantly,  a  second  tor-
pedo exploding  under  her  stern  as  she  went  down.
He  commanded  the  steamer  "  Saco"  on  the  North
Atlantic  blockade  in  1864.  and  the  "  Shawmut "  in
1865,  in  which  he  participated  in  the  capture  of
forts  near  Wilmington.  He  was  promoted  and
advanced  over  others  for  his  services  during  the
war  to  the  grade  of  commander  on  25  July.  1866,
served  at  the  naval  academy  in  1866-'9,  and  com-
manded the  frigate  "  Sabine  "  on  a  special  cruise
in  1869-70.  He  was  promoted  to  cap>tain,  25  June,
1877,  appointed  chief  of  the  bureau  of  navigation


and  office  of  detail,  22  Oct.,  1881,  for  four  years,
and  reappointed  in  1885  for  a  second  term.  He
is  the  senior  captain  on  the  list,  and  is  entitled  to
be  promoted  to  commodore  upon  the  first  occur-
rence of  a  vacancy.

WALKER,  John  Williams,  senator,  b.  in
Virginia  in  1789;  d.  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  23  April,
1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1806
with  the  valedictory,  and  studied  law.  In  1810  he
settled  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  where  he  followed  his
profession,  and  was  several  times  elected  to  the
legislatures  of  Mississippi  and  Alabama.  He  pre-
sided over  the  convention  that  framed  the  first
constitution  of  Alabama,  and  was  elected  its  first
U.  S.  senator,  but  resigned  after  a  year  on  account
of  the  failure  of  his  health. — His  son,  Leroy
Pope,  lawver,  b.  near  Huntsville,  Ala.,  8  July,
1817 ;  d.  there,  22  Aug.,  1884,  studied  law,  attained
a  high  place  at  the  bar  of  northern  Alabama,  early
entered  public  life,  was  speaker  of  the  Alabama
house  of  representatives  in  1847-'50,  and  served  as
judge  of  the  state  circuit  court  in  1850-'3.  He
became  well  known  as  an  advocate  of  the  policy
of  internal  improvement  and  of  secession,  and  in
1861-'2  was  Confederate  secretary  of  war,  direct-
ing the  military  operations  by  which  the  civil  war
was  begun.  He  was  also  commissioned  brigadier-
general  in  the  Confederate  army,  but  resigned,
1  March,  1862.  After  the  war  he  resumed  the
practice  of  law  at  Huntsville.

WALKER,  Jonathan,  reformer,  b.  on  Cape
Cod,  Mass.,  in  1799 ;  d.  near  Muskegon,  Mich.,  1
May,  1878.  He  was  captain  of  a  fishing  vessel,  in
his  youth,  but  about  1840  he  went  to  Florida,  where
he  became  a  railroad-contractor.  He  was  interested
in  the  condition  of  the  slaves,  and  in  1844  aided
several  of  them  in  an  attempt  to  make  their  escape
in  an  open  boat  from  the  coast  of  Florida  to  the
British  West  Indies.  After  doubling  the  capes,  he
was  prostrated  by  illness,  and  the  crew  being  ig-
norant of  navigation,  they  would  all  have  been
drowned  had  thev  not  been  rescued  by  a  wrecking-
sloop  that  took  \Valker  to  Key  West,  whence  he
was  sent  in  irons  to  Pensacola.  On  his  arrival
there  he  was  put  in  prison,  chained  to  the  floor,
and  deprived  of  light  and  proper  food.  Upon  his
trial  in  a  U.  S.  court,  he  was  convicted,  sentenced
to  be  heavily  fined,  put  on  the  pillory,  and
branded  on  his  right  hand  with  a  hot  iron  with
the  letters  "S.  S.,"  for  "  slave-stealer,"  a  U.  S.
marshal  executing  the  sentence.  He  was  then
remanded  to  jail,  where  he  was  confined  eleven
months,  and  released  only  after  the  payment  of  his
fine  by  northern  Abolitionists.  For  the  subsequent
five  years  he  lectured  on  slavery  in  the  northern
and  western  states.  He  removed  to  Michigan
about  1850,  where  he  resided  near  Muskegon  until
his  death.  A  monument  was  erected  to  his  mem-
ory on  1  Aug.,  1878.  He  was  the  subject  of  John
G.  Whittier's  poem  "  The  Man  with  the  Branded
Hand."  See  "  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Slave  Power
in  America,"  by  Henry  Wilson  (Boston,  1874).

WALKER,  Joseph  Reddeford,  guide,  b.  in
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  in  1798;  d.  in  Ignacio  valley,
Contra  Costa  co.,  Cal.,  27  Oct.,  1876.  He  removed
to  Jackson  county,  Mo.,  in  1818,  began  his  career
as  a  guide  on  the*  frontier  in  1822,  served  in  that
capacity  with  Capt.  Bonneville's  expedition  to  the
Rocky  mountains  in  1832,  conducted  a  partv  from
Great  Salt  Lake  to  California  in  1833,  when  he  dis-
covered the  Yosemite  lake  and  valley  and  the
river  that  bears  his  name,  found  Walker's  pass  in
1834,  and  made  many  subsequent  trips  across  the
plains.  He  resided  in  Contra  Costa  county,  Cal.,
during  his  later  life.


WALKER


WALKER


329


WALKER,  Katherine  Kent  Child,  author,  b.
in  Pittsford,  Vt.,  about  1840.  She  is  a  daughter
of  the  Rev.  Willard  Child,  D.  D.,  and  in  1863  mar-
ried the  Rev.  Edward  Ashley  Walker,  who  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1856,  and  died  in  1866  after  a
brief  pastorate  at  the  Old  South  church,  Worcester.
Mass.  She  wrote  a  famous  article  on  the  "  Total
Depravity  of  Inanimate  Things,"  which  appeared
originally  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly  "  for  Septem-
ber, 1864,  has  contributed  to  various  magazines,
and  published  a  version  of  Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim's
Progress,"  for  children  (New  York,  1869) ;  "  From
the  Crib  to  the  Cross "  (1869) ;  and  a  "  Life  of
Christ "  (1869).  She  has  also  made  translations
from  the  German.

WALKER,  Robert  John,  statesman,  b.  at
Northumberland,  Pa.,  23  July,  1801 ;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  11  Nov.,  1869.  His  father  was  a  sol-
dier of  the  Revolution,  and  a  judge  of  the  common

pleas,  of  the  high
court  of  errors  and
appeals  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  of
the  U.  S.  district
court.  After  his
graduation  in  Au-
gust, 1819,  at  the
state  university  at
Philadelphia,  with
the  first  honor  of
a  large  class,  he
began  the  practice
of  law  at  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  in  1822,
with  great  success.
In  1826  he  remov-
ed to  Mississippi,
where  he  entered
vigorously  in  to  la  w
and  politics,  taking  an  active  part  in  1832  and  1833
against  nullification  and  secession.  In  January,
1833,  in  the  Natchez  "Journal,"  he  made  an  ex-
tended argument  against  the  doctrine  of  disunion
and  in  favor  of  coercion  against  rebellious  states,
which  was  highly  extolled  by  James  Madison.  In
January,  1836,  he  was  Union  candidate  for  the  U.  S.
senate  in  opposition  to  George  Poindexter,  and  was
elected,  and  at  this  time  he  influenced  the  legisla-
ture of  Mississippi  to  adopt  resolutions  denouncing
nullification  and  secession  as  treason.  In  1840  he
was  re-elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  by  a  two-to-one
majority  over  the  orator  Sergeant  S.  Prentiss.  Dur-
ing his  service  in  the  senate  he  took  an  active  part
in  its  debates,  especially  in  opposition  to  John  C.
Calhoun.  He  supported  the  administrations  of
Andrew  Jackson  and  Martin  Van  Buren ;  but
when  the  latter  disapproved  of  the  annexation  of
Texas,  Walker  opposed  him,  and  in  the  Baltimore
convention  of  1844  labored  for  the  nomination  of
James  K.  Polk  to  the  presidency.  By  Mr,  Polk  he
was  appointed  secretary  of  the  treasury,  which  office
he  held  till  5  March,  1849.  In  his  course  in  the
senate  Mr.  Walker  opposed  the  Bank  of  the  United
States  and  the  distribution  of  the  surplus  revenue
among  the  states,  advocating,  instead,  its  applica-
tion to  the  public  defences.  He  opposed  a  protec-
tive tariff,  and  in  a  speech  on  3  March,  1836,  pro-
posed the  celebrated  Homestead  bill.  He  sustained
witli  much  energy  the  treaty  for  suppressing  the
African  slave-trade,  and  throughout  his  political
career  always  and  consistently  advocated  gradual
emancipation,  exhibiting  his  sincerity  in  1838  by
manumitting  all  his  own  slaves.  He  sustained
New  York  in  the  McLeod  case,  and  introduced  and
carried  the  resolution  of  1837  recognizing  the  in-


dependence of  Texas.  He  was  the  first  to  propose
the  annexation  of  Texas  by  a  letter  in  the  public
prints  in  January,  1844,  recommending,  as  a  con-
dition, a  scheme  for  gradual  emancipation  and
colonization,  which  was  fiercely  attacked  by  John
C.  Calhoun.  While  secretary  of  the  treasury  he
prepared  and  carried  the  tariff  of  1846,  various  loan
bills,  the  warehousing  system,  the  Mexican  tariff,
and  the  bill  to  organize  the  department  of  the  in-
terior. After  leaving  the  treasury,  he  was  offered
by  President  Pierce  in  1853  the" post  of  commis-
sioner to  China,  which  he  declined.  The  part  that
he  took  in  the  events  that  immediately  preceded
the  civil  war  was  active.  He  opposed  the  repeal
of  the  Missouri  compromise,  though  after  it  be-
came a  law  he  supported  it  on  the  ground  that
was  assumed  by  Stephen  A.  Douglas.  In  1857  he
accepted  the  post  of  governor  of  Kansas  on  the
pledge  of  President  Buchanan  that  the  state  con-
stitution should  be  submitted  to  the  vote  of  the
people;  but  after  rejecting  the  forged  and  fraudu-
lent returns  in  Kansas,  and  opposing  the  Lecomp-
ton  constitution,  Mr.  Walker  resigned,  and,  going
before  congress,  defeated  the  attempt  to  force  the
corrupt  measure  on  the  territory.  After  Abraham
Lincoln's  election  Mr.  Walker  took  ground,  ear-
nestly and  immediately,  in  favor  of  re-enforcing
the  southern  forts  and  of  sustaining  the  Union  by
force  if  necessary.  In  April,  1861,  he  addressed  a
great  meeting  in  Union  square,  New  York,  advo-
cating prompt  and  vigorous  measures,  and  he  did
this  when  many  of  the  best  men  of  both  parties
deprecated  a  resort  to  extremities.  His  decided
course  had  great  influence  in  shaping  the  policy  of
the  government.  Early  in  1863  he  joined  James
R.  Gilmore  in  the  conduct  of  the  "  Continental
Monthly,"  which  the  latter  had  established  the
year  before  to  advocate  emancipation  as  a  politi-
cal necessity,  and  he  wrote  for  it  some  of  its  ablest
political  articles.  In  the  same  year  he  was  ap-
pointed by  the  government  financial  agent  of  the
United  States  in  Europe,  and  succeeded  in  nego-
tiating $250,000,000  of  the  5-20  bonds.  Returning
to  the  United  States  in  November,  1864,  he  de-
voted himself  thereafter  to  a  large  law-practice  in
Washington,  and  to  writing  for  the  "  Continental
Monthly  "  articles  on  financial  and  political  topics,
in  which  he  was  understood  to  present  the  views
of  the  state  and  treasury  departments.  During
this  period  he  was  influential  in  procuring  the  rati-
fication of  the  Alaska  treaty  and  in  securing  the
passage  of  the  bill  for  a  railroad  to  the  Pacific.
During  his  public  life  of  nearly  forty  years  Mr.
Walker  exercised  a  strong  and  often  controlling
influence  on  affairs.  He  had  a  broad  and  compre-
hensive mind,  and  a  patriotism  that  embraced  the
whole  country.  As  a  financier  he  takes  high  rank.
WALKER,  Thomas,  planter,  b.  in  Gloucester
county,  Va.,  25  Jan.,  1715 ;  d.  at  Castle  Hill,  Albe-
marle co.,  Va.,  9  Nov.,  1794.  His  progenitor,
Thomas,  was  an  early  settler  of  Virginia,  and  a
member  of  the  Provincial  council  in  1662.  The
younger  Thomas  was  educated  at  William  and
Mary,  adopted  the  profession  of  medicine,  and
settled  in  Fredericksburg,  Va.  In  1750  he  went
on  an  expedition  to  the  west,  and  was  probably
the  first  white  man  that  entered  Kentucky,  pre-
ceding Daniel  Boone  by  thirteen  years.  His  hatchet
with  which  he  marked  the  trees  that  divided  the
lands  that  he  had  bought  from  the  Indians  was
discovered  a  few  years  ago,  and  is  preserved  in  the
Louisville,  Ky.,  museum.  Walker  mountains  in
southwestern  Virginia  are  named  in  his  honor.
He  was  commissary -general  of  Virginia  troops
under George  Washington in  Braddock's  army,


330


WALKER


WALKER


and  was  at  that  general's  defeat  in  1755. In  1768
he  was  a  commissioner  with  Andrew  Lewis  on  the

fiart  of  Virginia  to  treat  with  the  Six  Nations  of
ndians  at  Fort  Stanwix,  N.  Y.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Virginia  house  of  burgesses  in  1775,
organized  a  plan  of  defence,  and  served  on  the
second  general  committee  of  safety.  With  his
son,  Col.  John  Walker,  he  was  commissioned  to
treat  with  the  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  Indians  in  1777,  in
order  to  conciliate  them  toward  the  colonists  dur-
ing the  Revolution,  and  in  1778  he  was  president
of  the  board  of  commissioners  to  determine  the
boundary-line  between  Virginia  and  North  Caro-
lina. Gen.  Walker  was  the  intimate  friend  of
Gen.  Washington,  both  his  wives  being  near  kins-
women of  the  latter,  and  he  was  the  guardian  of
Thomas  Jefferson.  By  his  marriage  with  the  wid-
ow of  Nicholas  Merriwether  he  came  into  posses-
sion of  one  of  the  most  valuable  landed  properties
in  Virginia,  known  as  the  Castle  Hill  estate,  which
subsequentlv  became  the  property  of  his  relative,
William  C.  Rives. — His  son,  John,  senator,  b.  at
Castle  Hill,  Albemarle  co.,  Va,  13  Feb.,  1744;  d.
in  Orange  county,  Va.,  2  Dec,  1809,  was  carefully
educated,  settled  on  his  estate,  Belvoir,  Albemarle
co.,  and  engaged  in  planting.  During  the  Revo-
lution he  was  extra  aide  to  Gen.  Washington,  who,
in  a  letter  addressed  to  Patrick  Henry,  dated  Mor-
ristown,  N.  J.,  24  Feb.,  1777,  explains  his  post  as
one  of  great  trust  and  importance,  and  recom-
mends him  for  "ability,  honor,  and  prudence."
In  1790  he  was  appointed  by  the  governor  U.  S.
senator  in  place  of  William  Grayson,  deceased,
serving  from  4  May,  1790,  to  6  Dec.  of  the  same
year,  when  the  senator  that  was  chosen  by  the
legislature  took  his  seat.  He  married  Elizabeth
Moore,  granddaughter  of  Gov.  Alexander  Spots-
wood.  See  the  "  Page  Family  in  Virginia,"  by
Richard  C.  M.  Page  (New  York,  1883).

WALKER,  Timothy,  clergyman,  b.  in  Woburn,
Mass.,  27  July,  1705 ;  d.  in  Concord,  N.  H..  1  Sept.,
1782.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1725,
studied  theology,  and  was  settled  on  18  Nov.,  1730,
as  first  minister  of  the  plantation  of  Penacook
(now  Concord,  N.  II.).  He  was  soon  called  to  lead
his  parishioners  in  a  legal  defence  of  the  title  to
their  farms,  which  they  had  paid  for  and  wrested
from  the  wilderness.  Penacook,  twenty-five  miles
beyond  its  nearest  white  neighbor  at  the  time  of
its  settlement,  had  been  granted  in  1726  by  Massa-
chusetts to  100  carefully  selected  settlers  from  her
towns  of  Bradford,  Andover,  and  Haverhill,  who
had  at  once  improved  their  grant.  The  boundary-
line  between  that  province  and  New  Hampshire
was  then  undetermined,  and  the  latter,  claiming
the  same  territory,  granted  it  in  1727  to  "  the  Pro-
prietors of  Bow,"  among  whom  were  influential
members  of  its  government,  who  took  no  possession
and  made  no  improvements.  When,  in  1740,  the
settlement  of  this  line  threw  the  township  into
New  Hampshire,  the  Bow  claimants  sought  pos-
session of  it  through  suits  brought  in  interested
courts,  which  were  uniformly  decided  in  their  favor,
leaving,  as  their  only  hope,  to  the  defendants  of
retaining  their  homes  an  appeal  to  the  king  in
council.  Mr.  Walker,  to  prosecute  an  appeal,  went
to  England  three  times,  first  in  1753,  a  second  time
in  1755,  and  a  third  in  1762,  urging  his  cause  as
best  he  could  until  December,  1762,  when  the  king
in  council  decided  that  a  change  of  provincial
boundaries  did  not  affect  the  title  to  private  prop-
erty that  had  been  acquired  in  good  faith.  This
decision  substantially  ended  a  controversy  which
had  distressed  his  people  for  thirty  years.  Until
the  treaty  of  Paris  in  1763  the  situation  of  the


town  had  exposed  its  inhabitants  to  the  atrocities
of  the  French  and  Indian  wars.  At  times  they
lived  in  garrisons,  and  went  armed  to  church,  where
their  pastor  preached  to  them  with  his  gun  in  the
pulpit.  In  his  religious  views  Mr.  Walker  was  a
moderate  Calvinist,  approving  the  "  half-way  cov-
enant" then  in  use,  and  opposing  George  White-
field,  against  whom  he  preached  a  sermon  (Boston,
1743).  His  scholarship  was  more  than  respectable,
and  his  sermons  and  diaries  show  that  he  retained
through  life  his  early  acquaintance  with  the  clas-
sics. He  acquired  from  necessity  some  knowledge
of  the  law,  and  many  of  the  early  legal  papers  of
his  people  are  in  his  handwriting.  He  was  an
ardent  patriot  in  the  Revolution,  and  it  was  one
of  his  greatest  griefs  that  his  son-in-law,  Benjamin
Thompson  (afterward  Count  Rumford),  embraced
the  Tory  cause.  He  was  the  sole  minister  of  Con-
cord for  fifty-two  years. — His  son,  Timothy,  jurist,
b.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  26  June,  1737;  d.  there,  5
May,  1822,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1756,
studied  theology,  and  preached  several  years,  but
was  never  settled.  At  the  opening  of  the  Revolu-
tion he  became  an  active  participant  in  the  resist-
ance to  British  rule.  He  was  a  member  of  the
4th  and  5th  New  Hampshire  provincial  congresses
and  of  the  first  house  of  representatives  in  1776
under  the  state  constitution,  and  was  one  of  the
committee  of  the  council  and  house  to  draft  a
declaration  of  independence.  He  was  a  member
of  the  committee  of  safety  from  July,  1776,  till
January,  1777,  a  state  councillor  in  1777,  and  a
senator  in  1784.  In  1788  he  did  his  utmost  to  ren-
der operative  the  constitution  of  the  United  States
by  its  ratification  by  New  Hampshire  as  the  ninth
state.  Upon  the  reorganization  of  the  state  courts
in  1777  he  was  made  a  justice  of  the  court  of  com-
mon pleas  for  Rockingham  county,  which  office
he  held  for  twenty-three  years.  He  took  an  active
part  in  the  conventions  of  1778,  1781,  and  1791,
for  amending  the  state  constitution,  and  was  four
times  elected  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  con-
gress, but  never  took  his  seat.  He  was  an  early
member  of  the  Republican  party,  and  its  first  can-
didate for  governor.  As  his  judicial  duties  per-
mitted, he  shared  the  business  activities  of  his
town,  serving  twenty-one  years  as  moderator  of  its
annual  meetings,  twenty-four  years  as  chairman
of  its  board  of  select-men,  and  forty-three  years  as
clerk  of  its  proprietary.  He  loved  agriculture,  and
was  continually  improving  his  paternal  estate. —
The  first  Timothy's  great-grandson,  Joseph  Bur-
been,  agriculturist,  b.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  12  June,
1822,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1844,  studied  law
at  Harvard,  and  was  admitted  to  the  New  Hamp-
shire bar  in  1847.  Subsequently  he  left  the  pro-
fession and  devoted  himself  to  the  care  of  inherited
estates,  an  extensive  farm,  and  general  business.
Mr.  Walker  has  been  a  director  in  various  financial
companies,  and  in  1847  was  appointed  a  member  of
the  board  of  trustees  of  the  New  Hampshire  asylum
for  the  insane,  and  subsequently  became  its  secre-
tary and  financial  agent.  He  has  been  vice-president
of  the  New  England  historic-genealogical  society,
and  took  deep  interest  in  founding  the  New  Hamp-
shire college  of  agriculture  and  the  mechanic  arts.
He  represented  his  city  in  the  legislatures  of  1866-'7.
As  chairman  of  a  special  committee,  he  drew  and
reported  the  bill  that  established  the  college,  and
he  has  been  a  trustee  and  lecturer  before  the  stu-
dents on  drainage  and  irrigation,  to  which  subjects
he  gave  observation  and  study  during  extended
travel  in  Europe.  He  has  contributed  much  to
historical  research  and  to  the  agricultural  interests
of  the  state,  and  has  published  "  Land  Drainage  "


WALKER


WALKER


331


(Nashua,  1871);  "Forests  of  New  Hampshire"
(Concord,  1872) ;  "  Ezekiel  Webster  Dimond  "
(1877) ;  "  History  of  Town  Meeting-House  "  (1881) ;
"  Prospective  Agriculture  in  New  Hampshire "
(1883);  "Rogers,  the  Ranger"  (1885);  "Oats"
(Manchester,  1887) ;  and  other  monographs.

WALKER,  Timothy,  jurist,  b.  in  Wilmington,
Mass.,  1  Dec,  1806 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  15  Jan.,
1856.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1826,
taught  mathematics  at  the  Round  Hill  school,
Northampton,  Mass.,  in  1826-'9,  studied  at  Harvard
law-school  in  the  latter  year  and  in  1830,  and  re-
moved to  Cincinnati  in  1831,  where  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  and  settled  in  practice.  With
Judge  John  C.  Wright  he  established  the  Cincin-
nati law-school  in  1833,  and  when  in  1835  it  was
united  with  Cincinnati  college  he  assumed  entire
charge  of  that  department,  and  was  professor  of
law  there  till  1844.  He  was  president- judge  of
Hamilton  county  court  of  common  pleas  in  1842-'3,
founded  the  "  Western  Law  Journal "  in  1843,  and
was  its  editor  for  several  years,  at  the  same  time
practising  his  profession.  Harvard  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1854.  He  translated  Fischer's
"  Elements  of  Natural  Philosophy  "  (Boston,  1827) ;
was  the  author  of  "  Elements  of  Geometry  "  (1828)
and  "  An  Introduction  to  American  Law,"  for  stu-
dents (Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1837:  revised  ed.,  by  J.
Bryant  Walker,  1869);  and  delivered  several  dis-
courses, including  "  The  Dignity  of  Law  as  a  Pro-
fession "  (Cincinnati,  Ohio,  1837) ;  "  On  the  History
and  General  Character  of  the  State  of  Ohio  "  (1838) ;
"  John  Quincy  Adams  "  (1848) ;  "  The  Reform  Spirit
of  the  Day,"  delivered  before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa
society  of  Harvard  (Boston,  1850) ;  and  "  Daniel
Webster,"  a  memorial  (1852). — His  brother,  Sears
Cook,  mathematician,  b.  in  Wilmington,  Mass.,  28
March,  1805 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  30  Jan.,  1853,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1825,  and  taught  near
Boston,  and  subsequently  in  Philadelphia,  whither
he  removed  in  1827.  He  built  an  observatory  for
the  Philadelphia  high-school  in  1837,  which  was
the  first  of  importance  in  this  country  except  that
at  Hudson,  Ohio,  and  introduced  a  superior  class
of  instruments.  From  its  equipment  in  1840  until
1852  he  published  in  the  "Proceedings"  of  the
Philosophical  society  and  in  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  Science  "  the  astronomical  observations  and
investigations  that  he  made  there.  He  was  em-
ployed in  the  Washington  observatory  in  1845-'7,
where,  on  2  Feb.,  1847,  four  months  after  the  dis-
covery of  the  planet  Neptune,  he  identified  it  with
a  star  that  had  been  observed  by  Lalande  in  May,
1795.  From  1847  until  his  death  Mr.  Walker  had
charge  of  the  longitude  computations  of  the  U.  S.
coast  survey.  With  Prof.  Alexander  D.  Bache  he
developed  the  method  of  determining  differences
of  longitude  by  telegraph,  which  was  put  in  suc-
cessful operation  in  1849,  and  introduced  the
chronographic  method  of  recording  observations.
His  parallactic  tables,  first  prepared  in  1834,  greatly
reduced  the  time  in  computing  the  phases  of  an
occultation.  He  published  various  astronomical
and  mathematical  papers  of  value,  including  "  A
Memoir  on  the  Periodical  Meteors  of  August  and
November  "  (Philadelphia,  1841) ;  "  Researches  rela-
tive to  the  Planet  Neptune"  (1850);  and  "Ephem-
eris  of  the  Planet  Neptune  for  1848-52"  (1852).
See  an  "  Address  in  Commemoration  of  Sears  Cook
Walker,  delivered  before  the  American  Association
for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  19  April,  1854,"
by  Benjamin  A.  Gould,  Jr.  (Cambridge,  Mass.,  1854).

WALKER,  William,  Canadian  merchant,  b.
in  Scotland  in  1793  ;  d.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  18  May,
1863. He  went  to  Canada  in  1815,  engaged  in  busi-


ness, and  was  a  partner  in  the  firms  of  Forsyth,
Richardson  and  Co.,  Montreal,  and  of  Forsyth,
Walker  and  Co.,  Quebec.  He  was  part  owner  and
one  of  the  building  committee  of  the  ocean  steamer
"  Royal  William,"  which  was  constructed  at  Que-
bec and  was  the  first  steam  vessel  that  crossed  the
Atlantic  from  British  America.  In  1848  he  retired
from  business.  In  1839  Mr.  Walker  was  appointed
a  member  of  the  special  council  of  Canada,  and  in
1842  he  became  a  life  member  of  the  legislative
council  by  royal  mandamus.  He  raised  and  com-
manded the  Quebec  volunteer  rifle  corps,  was  the
first  president  of  the  Quebec  and  Riviere  du  Loup
railway  company,  president  of  the  Quebec  board
of  trade,  and  deputy  master  of  Trinity  house.  He
was  the  first  chancellor  of  the  University  of  Bish-
op's college,  Lennoxville,  Canada  East,  which  con-
ferred on  him  the  honorary  degree  of  I).  C.  L.

WALKER,  William,  adventurer,  b.  in  Nash-
ville, Tenn.,  8  May,  1824 ;  d.  in  Trujillo,  Honduras,
12  Sept.,  1860.  He  studied  law  in  Nashville  and
medicine  in  Heidelberg,  Germany,  was  a  journalist
in  New  Orleans  and
San  Francisco,  and
finally  settled  in  the

Sractice  of  law  in
[arysville,  Cal.  In
July,  1853,  he  organ-
ized an  expedition
for  the  conquest  of
the  state  of  Sonora,
Mexico,  and,  elud-
ing the  vigilance  of
the  authorities  of  the
port  of  San  Francis-
co, early  in  Novem-
ber landed  at  La
Paz,  Lower  Califor-
nia, with  170  men
and  three  field-guns.
He  then  issued  a
manifesto  to  the  peo-
ple, proclaimed  him-
self president  of  the
Pacific  republic,  and,
having  received  re-enforcements,  set  out  in  Janu-
ary, 1854,  for  Sonora.  He  was  pursued  by  a
strong  force  of  Mexicans,  and,  as  he  was  near  the
frontier,  he  surrendered  to  the  U.  S.  commander
at  San  Diego,  Cal.  In  May,  1854,  he  was  tried  at
San  Francisco  for  violating  the  neutrality  laws,  and
was  acquitted.  He  continued  to  plan  expeditions
against  Sonora,  but  was  compelled  to  abandon
them,  and  in  1855  he  was  induced  by  American
speculators  in  Nicaragua  to  interfere  in  the  intes-
tine troubles  in  that  country,  ostensibly  in  aid  of
the  Democratic  party  there.  He  landed  at  Realejo
on  11  June,  with  sixty-two  followers,  was  joined  by
a  small  native  force,  and  endeavored  to  take  pos-
session of  the  southern  transit  route.  He  was  de-
feated at  Rivas,  but,  being  re-enforced  with  170
native  soldiers,  routed  the  Nicaraguan  army  of  540
men  at  La  Virgen  on  1  Sept.,  took  possession  of
the  city  of  Grenada  on  15  Oct.,  and  by  a  treaty
with  Gen.  Ponciano  Corral,  the  opposing  leader,
was  made  secretary  of  war  and  commander-in-chief.
Recruits  rapidly  arrived  from  the  United  States,
and  on  1  March,  1856,  Walker  had  1,200  men.  In
the  mean  time  he  charged  Corral  with  conspiracy,
presided  over  a  court-martial  for  his  trial,  and  sen-
tenced him  to  be  shot  on  8  Nov.,  1855.  War  began
with  Costa  Rica,  and  Walker  was  defeated  at  Gu-
anacaste  on  20  March.  1856,  but  routed  the  enemy
at  Rivas  on  11  April,  and  hostilities  ceased.  He
was  then  in  undisputed  control  of  Nicaragua,  but


332


WALKER


WALKER-MARTINEZ


to  replenish  his  treasury  he  broke  up  the  inter-
oceanic  transit  route  by  confiscating  the  property
and  revoking  the  charter  of  the  Vanderbilt  steam-
ship company.  He  caused  himself  to  be  elected
president,  and  in  September,  1856,  annulled  the
existing  prohibition  of  slavery.  His  minister,  whom
he  sent  to  Washington,  was  recognized  by  Presi-
dent Pierce.  Walker's  arbitrary  acts  soon  provoked
an  insurrection,  which  was  assisted  by  several  sur-
rounding states  and  by  agents  of  the  Vanderbilt
company.  He  was  defeated  in  several  encounters,
burned  the  city  of  Grenada,  which  he  was  unable
to  hold,  and  on  1  May,  1857,  surrendered  with  six-
teen officers,  at  San  Juan  del  Sur,  to  Com.  Charles
H.  Davis,  of  the  U.  S.  sloop-of-war  "  Mary,"  which
conveyed  him  to  Panama.  Thence  he  went  to  New
Orleans  and  was  put  under  bonds  to  keep  the
peace,  but  returned  to  Nicaragua  in  November.
He  soon  organized  a  new  force,  but  in  December
Com.  Hiram  Paulding,  of  the  U.  S.  navy,  compelled
him  and  his  132  men  to  surrender,  and  took
them  to  New  York.  President  Buchanan  declined
to  recognize  Walker  as  a  prisoner,  on  the  ground
that  his  arrest  on  foreign  soil  was  illegal.  He
sailed  with  a  new  expedition  from  Mobile,  Ala.,  in
October,  1858,  but  was  arrested  at  the  mouth  of
Mississippi  river  and  tried  at  New  Orleans  and
acquitted.  In  June,  1860,  he  again  set  out  with
a  small  force  from  that  city,  intending  to  create
a  revolution  in  Honduras.  He  reached  Trujillo
and  issued  a  proclamation  against  the  govern-
ment; but  his  arrest  was  demanded  by  the  com-
mander of  the  British  man-of-war  "  Icarus,"  and
he  was  forced  to  retreat  to  Tinto  river,  where
he  surrendered  on  3  Sept.,  1860.  The  commander
of  the  "  Icarus "  delivered  him  to  the  Honduras
authorities  on  their  demand,  and  he  was  tried  by
court-martial  and  shot.  He  published  "  The  War
in  Nicaragua  "  (Mobile,  1860).  See  also  "  Walker's
Expedition  to  Nicaragua"  by  William  Vincent
Wells  (New  York,  1856)  and  "  Reminiscences  of
the  Filibuster  War  in  Nicaragua,"  by  Col.  Charles
W.  Doubleday  (1886).

WALKER,  William  David,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  New  York  city,  29  June,  1839.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1859,  and  at  the  General  theo-
logical seminary,  New  York,  in  1862,  was  ordered
deacon  by  Bishop  Horatio  Potter  in  the  Church  of
the  Transfiguration,  29  June,  1862,  and  ordained
priest  in  Calvary  church,  29  June,  1863,  by  the
same  prelate.  He  passed  the  entire  term  of  his
priesthood  as  assistant  minister  of  Calvary  church
in  special  charge  of  the  chapel  connected  with  that
church.  He  was  consecrated  missionary  bishop  of
northern  Dakota  in  Calvary  church,  20  Dec,  1883.
The  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by
Racine  college  in  1884.  He  is  the  author  of  sev-
eral published  addresses.

WALKER,  William  H.  T.,  soldier,  b.  in  Georgia
in  October,  1816 ;  d.  near  Decatur,  Ga.,  26  July,
1864.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1837,  served  in  the  Florida  war,  was
wounded  three  times  at  the  battle  of  Okeechobee.
25  Dec,  1837,  and  was  brevetted  1st  lieutenant
for  services  in  that  action.  He  resigned  from  the
army  in  1838,  was  reappointed  in  1840  as  1st
lieutenant  of  infantry,  served  in  the  Florida  war
of  1840-'2,  and  became  captain  in  1845.'  During
the  Mexican  war  he  participated  in  all  the  im-
portant battles,  and  was  brevetted  major  in  the
U.  S.  army  for  gallant  conduct  at  Contreras  and
Churubusco,  and  lieutenant-colonel  for  Molino  del
Rey,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  He  was  on
recruiting  service  in  1849-'52,  became  deputy  gov-
ernor of  the  East  Pascagoula  branch  military  asy-


lum in  the  latter  year,  and  in  1854-'6  was  com-
mandant of  cadets,  and  instructor  in  military  tactics
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  He  became  major
in  1855,  served  on  the  frontier,  and  in  1860  resigned.
He  entered  the  Confederate  army  in  1861.  became
a  major-general,  served  principally  in  the  west,
and  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Decatur.

WALKER,  William  Johnson,  benefactor,  b.
in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  15  March,  1790;  d.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  2  April,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1810,  studied  medicine,  and  successfully
practised  his  profession  in  his  native  town.  Late
in  life  he  came  into  possession  of  a  large  fortune,
of  which  he  gave  to  benevolent  objects  about
$400,000  during  his  life-time,  and  by  his  will  left
nearly  $1,000,000  to  institutions  of  learning.

WALKER,  William  McCreary,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  2  Sept.,  1813 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  19  Nov.,  1866.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman, 1  Nov.,  1827,  became  a  passed  midship-
man, 10  June,  1833,  and  was  promoted  to  lieuten-
ant, 8  Dec,  1838,  serving  in  Lieut.  Charles  Wilkes's
exploring  expedition  in  command  of  the  "  Flying
Fish,"  in  which  he  participated  in  the  discovery
of  the  Antarctic  continent  in  1838-'42.  He  com-
manded the  steamer  "  Union  "  on  the  home  station
in  1843-'4,  and  cruised  in  the  Mediterranean  squad-
ron as  aide  in  1844-"6.  He  was  promoted  14  Sept.,
1855,  and  commanded  the  frigate  "Constellation  "
in  1856.  He  served  on  special  duty  on  boards  and
inspecting  duty  until  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  was  commissioned  a  captain,  16  July,  1862,
and  commanded  the  steamer  '•  De  Soto  "  through-
out the  civil  war.  He  was  one  of  the  most  success-
ful blockaders  during  the  war,  and  captured  more
prizes  than  any  other  vessel.  Capt.  Walker  died
of  heart  disease  at  the  naval  hospital  in  New  York.
He  was  the  author  of  a  work  on  "  Screw  Propul-
sion "  (New  York,  1861).

WALKER,  William  S.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
Hampshire,  6  Dec,  1793 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  24
Nov.,  1863.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,
30  Nov.,  1814,  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  13  Jan.,
1825,  and  to  master-commandant,  8  Sept.,  1841,
and  commanded  the  sloop  "  Concord  "  on  the  coast
of  Africa  in  1841-2,  and  the  receiving-ship  at
Boston  in  1843-6.  He  saw  no  service  during  the
Mexican  war.  He  commanded  the  sloop  "Sara-
toga," on  the  Asiatic  station,  in  1850-'4,  was  pro-
moted to  captain,  14  Sept.,  1855,  and  served  at  the
receiving-ship  at  Boston  in  1854-'5,  after  which  he
was  on  leave  until  the  civil  war  began,  when  he
was  ordered  to  command  the  steam  sloop  "  Brook-
lyn," but  his  failing  health  compelled  him  to  de-
cline to  go  to  sea.  He  was  placed  on  the  retired
list,  and  promoted  to  commodore,  16  Julv,  1862.

WALKER-MARTINEZ,  Carlos,  Chilian  poet,
b.  in  Valparaiso  in  1842.  In  September,  1865,  he
was  studying  law  at  the  University  of  Chili,  when
war  with  Spain  began,  and  he  enlisted  in  the  navy,
participating  in  the  engagement  of  Abtao,  7  Feb.,
1866.  In  the  same  year  he  founded  the  literary
magazine  "  La  Republica  Literaria,"  at  the  head
of  which  he  remained  while  he  was  in  Chili.  He
was  appointed  in  1867  secretary  of  the  legation  in
Bolivia,  was  graduated  in  law  in  1868,  and  travelled
through  Europe  and  the  United  States.  On  his
return  in  1870  he  was  elected  to  congress  for  the
department  of  Vallenar,  and  became  secretary  of
the  chamber  of  deputies.  In  1873  he  was  appointed
charge  d'affaires  of  Chili  in  Bolivia,  and  in  1874
he  became  minister  in  the  same  republic  During
the  war  of  1879-'80  he  was  president  of  the  "  So-
ciedad  Protectora,"  and  in  1880-'2  he  was  an  editor
of  the  journal  "  El  Nuevo  Ferrocarril." During


WALK-IN-THE-WATER


WALLACE


333


the  cholera  epidemic  of  1886-7  he  was  founder
and  president  of  the  Red  Cross  society.  He  is  still
a  member  of  congress,  where  he  is  well  known  as
a  parliamentary  orator.  He  has  written  "  Paginas
■de  viage  "  (Santiago,  1871) ;  •'  Poesias  liricas  "  (3
vols.,  1872) ;  "  Romances  Americanos  "  (2  vols.,
1874) ;  "  Manuel  Rodriguez,"  a  historic  drama  in
verse  (1874) ;  "  El  Proscripto  "  (1875);  and  "  Diego
Portales"(1877).

WALK-INTHEWATER,  or  M  Y-EE-RAH,  In-
dian chief,  d.  about  1817.  He  was  a  Huron  of  the
Wyandot  tribe,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of
1812  offered  his  services  to  Gen.  William  Hull ;  but
they  were  declined,  owing  to  the  unwillingness  of
that  officer  to  employ  savages.  He  was  afterward
forced  by  circumstances  to  join  the  British  at  Mai-
den, but  he  was  instrumental  in  persuading  several
tribes  to  remain  neutral,  and  in  a  council  at  that
place  he  vindicated  his  course  in  a  speech  that  was
•called  by  his  enemies  "  American  talk."  After
this  Walk-in-the-Water  and  his  associates,  openly
breaking  with  Tecumseh  and  the  Prophet,  declined
to  remain  with  the  British,  and  deserted  from  Gen.
Henry  Proctor  at  Chatham,  Canada.  At  the  bat-
tle of  the  Thames  he  offered  his  services,  with  those
of  sixty  warriors,  conditionally,  to  Gen.  William
Henry  Harrison,  who  declined  them,  and  the  In-
dians returned  to  Detroit  river.

WALL,  Garret  Dorset,  senator,  b.  in  Middle-
town,  Monmouth  co.,  N.  J.,  10  March,  1783 ;  d.  in
Burlington,  N.  J.,  22  Nov.,  1850.  He  received  an
academical  education,  studied  law  at  Trenton,  and
was  licensed  in  1804  as  an  attorney,  and  in  1807  as
a  counsellor  at  law.  At  one  time  during  the  war
of  1812  he  commanded  a  volunteer  company  from
Trenton  at  Sandy  Hook.  He  was  clerk  of  the
state  supreme  court  in  1812-'17,  and  quartermaster-
general  of  New  Jersey  in  1815-'37.  In  1827  he
was  chosen  to  the  legislature  and  in  1829  he
was  elected  governor,  but  declined  the  office  to  ac-
cept that  of  IT.  S.  district  attorney.  From  1835
till  1841  he  sat  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  from  1849
till  his  death  he  was  a  judge  of  the  court  of  errors
arfd  appeals. — His  son  James  Walter,  senator,
b.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  26  May,  1820 ;  d.  in  Elizabeth,
N.  J.,  9  June,  1872,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1838,  studied  law  with  Daniel  Haines;  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1841,  and  began  to  prac-
tise in  his  native  place,  holding  the  office  of
commissioner  in  bankruptcy.  He  removed  to  Bur-
lington, N.  J.,  in  1847,  and  devoted  himself  to
literary  pursuits,  becoming  mayor  of  the  city  in
1854.  During  the  early  part  of  the  civil  war  he
-attacked  the  administration  for  interfering  with
the  liberty  of  the  press,  writing  a  severe  letter  to
Montgomery  Blair,  and  he  was  imprisoned  for  sev-
eral weeks  in  Fort  Lafayette.  It  is  said  that  he
offered  to  furnish  20,000  Belgian  rifles  to  the  so-
called  "  Knights  of  the  Golden  Circle "  for  use
against  the  U.  S.  government.  He  was  chosen  to
the  U.  S.  senate  in  1863  to  fill  the  unexpired  term
of  John  R.  Thomson,  deceased,  and  served  from
21  Jan.  till  3  March  of  that  year.  In  1869  he  re-
moved to  Elizabeth.  Mr.  Wall's  publications  in-
clude "Foreign  Etchings"  (Burlington,  1856);  "Es-
•says  on  the  Early  English  Poets."  which  appeared
in  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine  "  ;  and  various
essays  and  addresses.

WALLACE,  Alfred  Russel,  English  natural-
ist, b.  in  Usk,  Monmouth,  8  Jan.,  1822.  He  re-
ceived his  education  at  the  grammar-school  of
Hertford,  was  for  some  time  a  land-surveyor,  and
assistant  to  his  elder  brother,  an  architect,  engag-
ing afterward  in  the  study  of  natural  sciences.
In  1848  he  visited  South  America,  explored  the


basin  of  Amazon  and  Rio  Negro  rivers,  and  re-
sided for  several  months  in  Para.  He  formed  ex-
tensive collections  in  ornithology  and  botany,  and,
through  a  long  sojourn  among  "the  Indians  of  the
Upper  Amazon,  obtained  valuable  information
concerning  their  dialects,  habits,  and  manners.
Most  of  those  collections  were  lost  at  sea  when  he
returned  to  England  in  1852.  From  1854  till  1862
he  visited  the  Malay  archipelago,  studied  the  flora
and  fauna  of  Molucca,  Celebes,  and  New  Guinea,
and  arrived,  independently  of  Charles  R.  Darwin's
researches,  at  a  theory  of  natural  selection,  which
he  developed  in  a  paper  that  he  sent  to  Sir  Charles
Lyell  entitled  "  On  the  Tendencies  of  Varieties  to
depart  Indefinitely  from  the  Original  Type  "  (Lon-
don, 1858).  Besides  works  on  his  eastern  travels
and  the  theory  of  natural  selection,  Wallace  is  the
author  of  "  Travels  on  the  Amazon  and  Rio  Negro,
with  Remarks  on  the  Vocabularies  of  the  Amazo-
nian Languages  "  (London,  1853) ;  "  Palm-Trees  of
the  Amazon  and  their  Uses  "  (1853) ;  "  On  the  Geo-
graphical Distribution  of  Animals,"  which  was  is-
sued simultaneously  in  English,  French,  and  Ger-
man (2  vols.,  1876);  "Island  Life"  (1880);  and
"  Land  Nationalization  "  (1882).

WALLACE,  David,  congressman,  b.  in  Lancas-
ter county,  Pa.,  4  April,  1799 ;  d.  in  Indianapolis,
Ind.,  3  Sept.,  1859.  He  removed  with  his  father's
family  to  Brookville,  Ind.,  in  1817,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1821,  and  was
assistant  professor  of  mathematics  there  for  two
years,  but  resigned  from  the  army,  studied  law,
and  established  a  lucrative  practice  in  Franklin
county,  Ind.  He  served  several  terms  in  the  legis-
lature, was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  con-
vention, lieutenant-governor  in  1831-'4,  and  gov-
ernor in  1837-'40.  During  that  service  he  was
active  as  an  advocate  of  internal  improvements
and  in  establishing  a  school  system.  He  was  cho-
sen to  congress  as  a  Whig  in  1840,  served  one  term,
and,  as  a  member  of  the  committee  on  commerce,
gave  the  casting-vote  in  favor  of  an  appropriation
to  develop  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse's  magnetic  tele-
graph, which  vote  cost  him  his  re-election.  He  re-
turned to  practice  in  1842,  and  from  1856  until  his
death  was  judge  of  the  Marion  county  court  of
common  pleas.  He  was  a  popular  political  speak-
er and  a  laborious  and  impartial  jurist. — His  son,
Lewis,  soldier,  b.  in  Brookville,  Franklin  co.,  Ind.,
10  April,  1827,  received  a  common-school  educa-
tion, and  at  the
beginning  of  the
Mexican  war  was
a  law-student  in
Indiana.  At  the
call  for  volunteers
he  entered  the
army  as  a  1st  lieu-
tenant in  compa-
ny H,  1st  Indiana
infantry.  He  re-
sumed his  profes-
sion in  1848,  which
he  practised  in
Covington  andsub-
sequently  in  Craw-
fordsville,  Ind.,
and  served  four
years  in  the  state
senate.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil

war  he  was  appointed  adjutant-general  of  Indiana,
soon  afterward  becoming  colonel  of  the  11th  Indi-
ana volunteers,  with  which  he  served  in  West  Vir-
ginia, participating  in  the  capture  of  Romney  and


cLq^o. hfo^Lto^tJZ,.


334


WALLACE


WALLACE


the  ejection  of  the  enemy  from  Harper's  Ferry.
He  became  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  3  Sept.,

1861,  led  a  division  and  the  centre  of  the  Union  lines
at  the  capture  of  Fort  Donelson.  and  displayed
such  ability  that  his  commission  of  major-general
of  volunteers  followed  on  21  March,  1862.  The  day
before  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  his  division  was  placed
on  the  north  side  of  Snake  creek,  on  a  road  leading
from  Savannah  or  Crump's  landing,  to  Purdy.  He
was  ordered  by  Gen.  Grant,  on  the  morning  of  6
April  (the  first  day  of  the  battle),  to  cross  the  creek
and  come  up  to  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman's  right,
which  covered  the  bridge  over  that  stream,  that  gen-
eral depending  on  him  for  support ;  but  he  lost  his
way,  and  did  not  arrive  until  the  night.  He  rendered
efficient  service  in  the  second  day's  fight,  and  in  the
subsequent  advance  on  Corinth. In November,

1862,  he  was  president  of  the  court  of  inquiry  on
the  military  conduct  of  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell  in  the
operations  in  Tennessee  and  Kentucky.  In  1863
he  prepared  the  defences  of  Cincinnati,  which  he
saved  from  capture  by  Gen.  Edmund  Kirby  Smith,
and  was  subsequently  assigned  to  the  command  of
the  middle  department  and  the  8th  army  corps,  with
headquarters  in  Baltimore,  Md.  With  5,800  men
he  intercepted  the  march  of  Gen.  Jubal  A.  Early
with  28,000  men  on  Washington,  D.  C,  and  on  9
July,  1864.  fought  the  battle  of  the  Monocacy.
Although  he  was  defeated,  he  gained  sufficient
time  to  enable  Gen.  Grant  to  send  re-enforcements
to  the  capital  from  City  Point.  By  order  of  Gen.
Henry  W.  Halleck,  he  was  removed  from  his  com-
mand, and  superseded  by  Gen.  Edward  O.  C.  Ord ;
but  when  Gen.  Grant  learned  the  particulars  of  the
action,  he  immediately  reinstated  Wallace,  and  in
his  official  report  in  1865  says :  "  On  6  July  the
enemy  (Early)  occupied  Hagerstown,  moving  a
strong  column  toward  Frederick  city.  Gen.  Wal-
lace, with  Rieketts's  division  and  his  own  com-
mand, the  latter  new  and  mostly  undisciplined
troops,  pushed  out  from  Baltimore  with  great
promptness  and  met  the  enemy  in  force  on  the  Mo-
nocacy,near  the  crossing  of  the  railroad  bridge.  His
force  was  not  sufficient  to  insure  success,  but  he
fought  the  enemy  nevertheless,  and,  although  it  re-
sulted in  a  defeat  to  our  arms,  yet  he  detained  the
enemy  and  thereby  served  to  enable  Wright  to  reach
Washington  before  him."  Returning  to  his  com-
mand, Gen.  Wallace  was  second  member  of  the  court
that  tried  the  assassins  of  President  Lincoln,  and
president  of  that  which  tried  and  convicted  Capt.
Henry  Wirz,  commandant  of  Andersonville  prison.
Gen.  Wallace  was  mustered  out  of  volunteer  ser-
vice in  1865,  returned  to  the  practice  of  law  in
Crawfordsville,  was  governor  of  Utah  in  1878-'81,
and  in  1881  became  U.  S.  minister  to  Turkey,  serv-
ing till  1885,  when  he  again  resumed  practice  in
Crawfordsville.  He  has  lectured  extensively  in
this  country,  and  is  the  author  of  two  successful
novels,  entitled  "  The  Fair  God,"  a  story  of  the
conquest  of  Mexico  (Boston,  1873).  "Ben-Hur,  a
Tale  of  the  Christ,"  of  which  290,000  copies  have
been  sold  (New  York,  1880) ;  a  "  Life  of  Benjamin
Harrison  "  (1888) ;  and  "  The  Boyhood  of  Christ  "
(1888).— His  wife,  Susan  Arnold  Elston,  author,
b.  in  Crawfordsville,  Ind.,  25  Dec,  1830.  was  edu-
cated there,  and  married  Gen.  Wallace  in  1852.
Her  maiden  name  was  Elston.  She  has  written
many  articles  for  newspapers  and  magazines,  her
short  poem, "  The  Patter  of  Little  Feet,"  attaining
wide  popularity.  Her  other  publications  are  "  The
Storied  Sea  "  (Boston,  1884) ;  "  Ginevra,  or  the  Old
Oak  Chest "  (New  York,  1887) ;  the  "  Land  of  the
Pueblos,"  with  other  papers  (1888) ;  and  "  The  Re-
pose in  Egypt "  (1888).


WALLACE,  Sir  James,  British  naval  officer,
d.  in  London,  England,  6  March,  1803.  He  be-
came a  lieutenant  in  the  royal  navy,  11  March,
1755,  was  promoted  commander  in  1762,  and  was
made  post-captain  in  1771.  He  was  stationed  at
Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1774-'5,  in  command  of  the
"  Rose,"  a  twenty-gun  frigate,  and  greatly  annoyed
the  people  of  Rhode  Island  by  the  detention  of
their  shipping  and  attempts  to  carry  off  their
property.  On  this  account  there  was  a  spirited
correspondence  between  Wallace  and  Gov.  Nicho-
las Cooke.  To  Com.  Abraham  Whipple,  whose
leadership  in  the  attack  on  the  "  Gaspee  "  was  now
avowed,  Wallace  wrote :  "  You,  Abraham  Whipple,
on  the  10th  of  June,  1772,  burned  his  Majesty's
vessel,  the  'Gaspee,'  and  I  will  hang  you  at  the
yard-arm  " ;  to  which  Whipple  replied  :  "  To  Sir
James  Wallace,  Sir :  Always  catch  a  man  before
you  hang  him."  Not  long  afterward  he  bombard-
ed Bristol,  R.  I.  In  1777  he  had  the  "  Experi-
ment," of  fifty  guns,  and  he  afterward  served  in
the  "  Nonesuch,"  of  sixty-four  guns.  In  October,
1777,  he  ascended  Hudson  river  on  a  marauding
expedition,  burned  the  town  of  Kingston,  where
the  legislature  was  then  in  session,  and  plundered
other  places,  wantonly  destroying  private  property.
At  Livingston  Manor  they  heard  of  Burgoyne's
surrender,  and  returned  to  New  York.  He  saw
much  service  on  the  coast  during  the  war,  and  was
detested  for  his  severity.  On  24  Sept.,  1779,  he
was  captured  in  the  "  Experiment "  by  Count  D'Es-
taing.  He  commanded  the  "  Warrior "  in  Rod-
ney's victory  over  De  Grasse.  Sir  James  became
a  rear-admiral,  12  April,  1794,  vice-admiral,  1  Jan.,
1795,  and  admiral  of  the  blue,  1  Jan.,  1801.  In
1793-'5  he  was  governor  of  Newfoundland.

WALLACE,  James  Hope,  British  officer,  b.  in
Rankeilour,  Fifeshire,  Scotland.  7  June,  1807;  d.
in  Featherstone  Castle,  Northumberland,  England.
7  Jan.,  1854.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Gen.  John
Hope,  fourth  Earl  of  Hopetoun,  entered  the  Cold-
stream guards  in  1821,  and  served  in  that  regi-
ment till  1844,  when  he  retired  with  the  rank  of
lieutenant-colonel.  He  went  to  Canada  with  his
regiment  in  1838,  and  in  November  of  the  same
year  was  selected  by  the  governor-general,  Lord
Seaton,  to  raise  volunteers  for  service  in  the  prov-
ince. In  less  than  a  week  after  receiving  the  com-
mission he  had  succeeded  in  organizing  the
"Queen's  volunteers,"  a  regiment  of  1,000  men,
ready  to  perform  garrison  duties  in  Quebec,  which
enabled  the  Grenadier  guards  to  be  moved  up  the
country.  Soon  after  leaving  Canada,  Col.  Hope
succeeded  to  the  estates  of  his  uncle,  Lord  Wal-
lace, whose  name  he  took,  but  not  the  title.

WALLACE,  John  Bradford,  lawyer,  b.  in
Somerset  county,  N.  J.,  17  Aug.,  1778 ;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  7  Jan.,  1837.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1794,  adopted  the  profession  of  law,
and  in  1797  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Philadel-
phia, where  he  practised  with  eminent  success.
He  wrote  ably  in  defence  of  the  Federal  party.
His  publications  include  "  Remarks  on  the  Law  of
Bailment "  (Philadelphia,  1840)  and  editions  of
"Reports  of  Cases  of  the  Third  Circuit  Court"
(1801),  and  "Abbot  on  Shipping"  (1802).  See  a
"Memoir"  by  his  wife  (printed  privatelv,  1848).
— His  son,  John  William,  author,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  17  Feb.,  1815 ;  d.  there,  12  Jan.,  1884,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1833,  studied  law  in  Philadelphia  and  in  the
Temple,  London,  became  the  standing  master  in
chancery  in  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania
in  1844,  was  reporter  of  the  3d  circuit  of  the
U.  S.  circuit  court  in  1842-'53,  and  in  1863-'76


WALLACE


WALLACE


335


Ja^LJ^^Z^J


was  reporter  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  United
States.  In  1860-'84  he  was  president  of  the  histori-
cal society  of  Pennsylvania.  He  published  "  Re-
porters, chronologically  arranged,  with  Occasion-
al Remarks  upon
their  Respective
Merits "  (Phila-
delphia, 1843) ;
"  Cases  in  the  Cir-
cuit Court  of  the
United  States  for
the  3d  District"
(2  vols.,  1849-'53) ;
"  Cases  argued
and  abridged  in
the  U.  S.  Supreme
Court"  (23  vols.,
1864  -  76) ;  and
"An  Old  Phila-
delphian,  Colo-
nel William  Brad-
ford, of  1776  "
(1884).  He  also
edited  "  British
Crown  Cases  Re-
served" (6  vols.,
1839-'53) ;  an  address  delivered  at  the  celebration
of  the  New  York  historical  society,  3  May,  1863,  of
the  200th  anniversary  of  the  death  of  William  Brad-
ford (Albany,  N.  Y.,*1863);  and,  after  the  death  of
Horace  Binney  Wallace,  revised  the  4th  edition  of
John  William  Smith's  "  Leading  Cases "  (2  vols.,
1857);  and  "American  Leading  Cases"  (2  vols.,
1857). — Another  son,  Horace  Binney,  scholar,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  Feb.,  1817;  d.  in  Paris,
France,  16  Dec,  1856,  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1835.  studied  medicine,  chemistry,  and  law,  the
latter  under  his  father  and  Charles  Chauncey,  but
never  adopted  a  profession,  devoting  himself  to  lit-
erary pursuits.  He  travelled  in  Europe  in  1849-'50
and  in  1852,  giving  assiduous  study  to  philosophi-
cal subjects.  In  a  fit  of  insanity,  produced  by  over-
work, he  committed  suicide.  Auguste  Comte  said  of
him :  "  In  him  heart,  intellect,  and  character  united
in  so  rare  combination  and  harmony  that,  had  he
lived,  he  would  have  aided  powerfully  in  advanc-
ing the  difficult  transition  through  which  the  19th
century  has  to  pass."  He  was  the  author  of  a  novel
entitled  "  Stanley,  or  the  Recollections  of  a  Man  of
the  World  "  (Philadelphia,  1838) ;  aided  Rufus  W.
Griswold  in  the  preparation  of  his  "  Napoleon  and
the  Marshals  of  the  Empire "  (2  vols.,  1847) ;  and
also  wrote  "  Art,  Scenery,  and  Philosophy  in  Eu-
rope, with  other  Papers  "  (1855) ;  and  "  Literary
Criticism,  and  other  Papers  "  (1856).  With  J.  I.
Clarke  Hare  he  edited  "  American  Leading  Cases
in  Law"  (2  vols.,  1847);  John  William  Smith's
"  Leading  Cases "  (2  vols.,  1852) ;  and  White  and
Tudor's  "  Leading  Cases  in  Equity  "  (2  vols.,  1852).
WALLACE,  William,  Canadian  member  of
parliament,  b.  near  Galston,  Ayrshire,  Scotland,  4
Feb.,  1820.  He  was  educated  at  the  parish  school,
emigrated  to  Canada  in  1840,  founded  the  "  British-
Canadian  "  newspaper  at  Simcoe  in  1861,  and  has
been  its  editor  and  proprietor  ever  since.  He  was
elected  for  South  Norfolk  to  the  Canadian  parlia-
ment in  1872,  re-elected  in  1874  and  1878,  and  re-
tired in  1882.  He  has  been  reeve  of  Simcoe,  a
member  of  the  county  council,  and  was  elected
mayor  of  Simcoe  in  1884.  He  favors  imperial  fed-
eration, and  introduced  to  the  Canadian  parlia-
ment in  1873  resolutions  bearing  on  that  question.
WALLACE,  William  A,  senator,  b.  in  Clear-
field, Pa.,  28  Nov.,  1827.  He  received  an  academic
education,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1847,  and


devoted  himself  to  his  profession  till  his  entrance
into  politics  in  1862  as  a  member  of  the  state  sen-
ate. He  served  five  successive  terms  in  that  body,
was  its  speaker  in  1871,  senatorial  delegate  and
chairman  of  the  Pennsylvania  delegation  to  the
National  Democratic  convention  in  1872,  chairman
of  the  Democratic  state  committee  of  Pennsylvania
for  five  years,  and  a  member  of  the  commission
to  suggest  amendments  to  the  state  constitution
in  1874.  In  1875-'81  he  was  U.  S.  senator,  having
been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  He  was  returned  to
the  state  senate  in  1882,  and  was  the  author  of
the  arbitration  statute  and  several  amendments  to
the  Pennsylvania  railroad  laws.  He  became  in-
terested in  developing  the  mineral  resources  of  cen-
tral Pennsylvania  in  1881,  and  was  president  of  the
Beech  Creek  railroad.

WALLACE,  William  Harvey  Lamb,  soldier,
b.  in  Urbana,  Ohio,  8  July,  1821 ;  d.  in  Savannah,
Tenn.,  10  April,  1862.  He  removed  with  his  father
to  Illinois  in  1832,  and  adopted  the  profession  of
law,  which  he  was  licensed  to  practise  in  1846,  but
the  same  year  volunteered  as  a  private  in  the  1st
Illinois  regiment  for  the  Mexican  war.  He  rose  to
the  rank  of  adjutant,  participated  in  the  battle  of
Buena  Vista  and  other  engagements,  and  after  the
peace  resumed  his  profession,  becoming  district
attorney  in  1853.  In  May,  1861,  he  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  11th  Illinois  volunteers,  and  at  the
battle  of  Fort  Dortelson,  in  February,  1862,  he  com-
manded a  brigade  in  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand's
division,  with  ability  that  led  to  his  appointment
as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  In  the  suc-
ceeding battle  of  Shiloh  he  commanded  Gen.
Charles  F.  Smith's  brigade,  which  for  six  hours
withstood  the  assault  of  the  enemy,  and  was  the
last  to  leave  the  field.  Wallace  fell,  mortally
wounded,  in  an  ineffectual  attempt  to  resist  the
enemy.  See  James  Grant  Wilson's  "  Sketches  of
Illinois  Officers  "  (Chicago,  1862).

WALLACE,  William  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Syra-
cuse, N.  Y.,  14  April,  1839.  He  was  educated  under
private  tutors,  studied  law  in  Hamilton  college,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1859.  He  was
mayor  of  Syracuse  in  1873-'4,  United  States  district
judge  for  northern  New  York  from  1874  till  1882,
and  since  the  last-named  year  has  been  United
States  circuit  judge  for  the  2d  judicial  circuit,
which  includes  the  states  of  New  York,  Vermont,
and  Connecticut.  Syracuse  university  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1882.

WALLACE,  William  Ross,  poet,  b.  in  Lex-
ington, Ky.,  in  1819 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  5  May,
1881.  He  was  educated  at  Bloomington  and  South
Hanover  college,  Ind.,  studied  law  in  Lexington,
Ky.,  and  in  1841  removed  to  New  York  city,  where
he  practised  his  profession,  and  at  the  same  time
engaged  in  literary  pursuits.  His  first  work  that
attracted  favorable  criticism,  a  poem  entitled  "  Per-
dita,"  published  in  the  "Union  Magazine,"  was
followed  by  "  Alban."  a  poetical  romance  (New
York,  1848),  and  "Meditations  in  America,  and
other  Poems  "  (1851).  Other  fugitive  verses  that
attained  popularity  include  "  The  Sword  of  Bunker
Hill,"  a  national  hvmn  (1861) ;  "  Keep  Step  with
the  Music  of  the  Union  "  (1861) ;  and  "  The  Lib-
erty Bell "  (1862).  William  Cullen  Bryant  said  of
his  writings :  "  They  are  marked  by  a  splendor  of
imagination  and  an  affluence  of  diction  which  show
him  the  born  poet."

WALLACE,  William  Vincent,  musician,  b.  in
Waterford,  Ireland,  1  June,  1814 ;  d,  in  Haute  Ga-
ronne, France,  12  Oct.,  1865.  Under  the  tuition
of  his  father  he  early  wrote  pieces  for  the  bands
and  orchestras  of  his  native  place. When  eighteen


336


WALLACK


WALLACE


years  of  age,  for  the  purpose  of  recovering  his
health  by  a  voyage,  he  sailed  for  Sydney.  Australia,
remaining  during  several  years  and  leading  a  life
of  adventure.  Prom  Australia  he  went  to  New
Zealand,  made  a  whaling-voyage  in  the  South  seas.
and  finally  landed  in  the  East  Indies.  He  visited
most  of  the  interior  provinces  of  Hindostan  and
spent  some  time  in  tiger-hunting.  Prom  Hindo-
stan, Wallace  sailed  for  Chili,  and  in  turn  visited
Peru  and  Buenos  Ayres,  giving  concerts  in  the
large  cities  of  those  countries.  This  musical
progress  was  gradually  extended  to  Mexico  and
the  West  Indies.  His  earliest  appearance  in  the
United  States  as  a  virtuoso  was  in  New  Orleans.
Thence  he  travelled  through  the  Union  for  several
years,  giving  entertainments  in  the  large  cities.
Later  Wallace  went  to  England,  turning  his  atten-
tion to  the  composition  of  operas.  In  London  he
produced  in  succession  "  Maritana  "  and  "  Matilda
of  Hungary."  The  first  named  readily  found  its
way  to  the  chief  opera-houses  of  the  European
-continent.  La^er  the  composer  brought  out  "  Lur-
line,"  "  The  Maid  of  Zurich,"  "  The  Amber  Witch,"
•"  Love's  Triumph,"  and  "  The  Desert  Flower."  Af-
ter a  short  stay  in  Paris,  for  the  restoration  of  his
health,  he  again  crossed  the  Atlantic,  landing  at
Rio  Janeiro.  Thence  he  sailed  for  New  Orleans,
whence  he  continued  a  prolonged  concert  tour  in
the  principal  cities  of  the  Union.  As  a  performer
on  the  violin  and  piano-forte  Wallace  was  more
than  respectable,  and  free  from  sensationalism.
His  compositions  for  the  piano-forte  are  melodious
and  effective.  As  an  opera-composer  he  was  de-
ficient in  the  science  of  instrumentation,  but  he
well  understood  how  to  write  for  the  voice,  and
many  of  his  melodies  combine  fluency  and  grace
with  the  charms  of  originality.  This  is  particu-
larly the  case  with  his  first  two  lyric  dramas.  His
earliest  works  continue  to  hold  the  stage.

WALLACK,  James  William,  actor,  b.  in  Lam-
beth, England,  24  Aug.,  1794;  d.  in  New  York
oity.  25  Dec,  1864.  His  parents  were  comedians,
who  performed  at  the  London  minor  play-houses
and  in  the  British  provinces.  His  first  appearance
on  the  stage  was  as  a  child  at  the  Surrey  theatre
in  London.  Soon  afterward  he  performed  in  ju-
venile characters  at  Drury  Lane,  and  at  the  age
of  eighteen  entered  on  a  permanent  career  at  the
same  house  as  Laertes  in  "  Hamlet."  He  also
acted  in  the  British  provinces  and  in  Ireland,
gradually  winning  his  way  to  popularity  as  a  use-
ful representative  of  drama  and  comedy.  In  1824
Wallack  became  stage-manager  at  Drury  Lane,
and  rose  to  the  performance  of  secondary  roles  in
tragedy.  Later  he  played  at  the  Haymarket,  and
officiated  as  stage-manager  at  the  Princess's  thea-
tre. For  about  twenty  years  his  attention  was
divided  between  the  theatres  of  the  United  States
and  those  of  his  native  land.  He  made  numer-
ous voyages  to  this  country,  where  he  was  always
received  with  favor.  On  the  occasion  of  his  first
visit  to  the  United  States,  in  1818,  he  boldly  ad-
vanced himself  to  the  interpretation  of  Macbeth,
Romeo,  Shylock,  Coriolanus,  Hamlet,  and  Rich-
ard III.,  without  making  any  favorable  impression.
But  in  the  principal  roles  in  "  The  Stranger,"
"  Pizarro,"  and  "  The  Gamester,"  closely  copied  in
the  manner  of  Eemble,  he  attracted  favorable  con-
sideration. From  1818  until  1845  Wallack  per-
formed at  intervals  in  all  the  principal  cities  of
the  Union.  Among  his  best  renderings  were  the
chief  characters  in  "  The  Brigand,"  "  The  Rent-
Dav,"  "  The  Wonder."  "  Don  Caesar  de  Bazan,"
"  Wild  Oats,"  and  the  refined  comedy  parts  of
Mercutio,  Jaques,  and  Benedick. "Love's  Ritor-


nello,"  as  sung  by  him  in  "  The  Brigand,"  was
hummed  from  one  end  of  the  land  to  the  other.
In  1822  Wallack  met  with  an  accident,  in  which
his  leg  was  fractured  by  the  overturning  of  a  stage-
coach between  New  York  and  Philadelphia.  This
mishap  retired  him  from  active  life  for  about
eighteen  months ;  from  its  effect  he  never  en-
tirely recovered.  From  1837  until  its  destruc-
tion by  fire  Wallack  conducted  the  New  York  Na-
tional theatre.  There  he  presented  a  repertory  of
the  best  plays  in  the  English  language,  rendered
by  a  company  such  as  never  before  had  been  seen
in  this  country.  In  1852  he  assumed  the  manage-
ment of  Wallack's  lyceum,  and  in  1861  established
Wallack's  theatre.  As  *a  performer  he  was  en-
dowed with  a  fine  personality ;  his  voice  was  highly
melodious,  set  off  by  flexibility  and  careful  elocu-
tion, and  his  knowledge  of  stage-effect  was  unex-
celled. In  refined  and  eccentric  comedy  Wallack
had  few  superiors.  Some  of  his  roles  in  the
romantic  dramas  of  his  own  creation  were  en-
tirely unequalled,  and  have  passed  away  with  him.
— His  son,  John  Lester,  actor,  b.  in  New  York
city,  1  Jan.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Stamford,  Conn.,  6  Sept.,
1888,  spent  his  in-
fancy and  boyhood
in  England.  At  the
age  of  twenty  he  was
entered  as  lieuten-
ant in  the  British
army,  but  after  two
years'  service  he
abandoned  his  mili-
tary career.  Ambi-
tious of  following  in
the  footsteps  of  his
father,  he  began  his
new  experience  on
the  Dublin  stage  in
the  part  of  Don  Pe-
dro in  "  Much  Ado
about  Nothing."  He
remained  there  two
seasons,  which  were
followed  by  an  en-
gagement at  Edinburgh  and  a  brief  connection
with  the  Haymarket  theatre  in  London.  In  this
countrv  Mr."  Wallack  at  first  became  known  as
John  W.  Lester,  making  his  first  appearance  as
such  at  the  New  York  Broadway  theatre,  27  Sept.,
1847,  as  Sir  Charles  Coldstream  in  Dion  Boucicault's
adaptation  of  "  Used  Up."  After  two  years'  con-
nection with  this  establishment  he  appeared  in  suc-
cession at  several  other  houses — the  Bowery,  Bur-
ton's, Niblo's,  and  Brougham's  lyceum.  In  1852
he  joined  the  company  at  his  father's  theatre,
where  he  acted  as  stage-manager  and  played  lead-
ing parts.  On  the  death  of  the  elder  Wallack,  in
1864,  he  succeeded  him  as  proprietor  of  Wallack's
theatre,  which  he  conducted  with  more  or  less  suc-
cess for  twenty-four  years.  On  21  May,  1888,  af-
ter his  managerial  retirement,  Mr.  Wallack  was
the  recipient  of  a  brilliant  dramatic  testimonial
that  netted  the  beneficiary  the  unexampled  pro-
ceeds of  $20,000.  Among  the  actor's  best  per-
formances were  Don  Felix  in  "  The  Wonder,  St.
Pierre  in  "  The  Wife,"  Alfred  Evelyn  in  "  Money."
Charles  Surface  in  "  The  School  for  Scandal,"
Young  Marlowe  in  "She  Stoops  to  Conquer,"  Harry
Dornton  in  "The  Road  to  Ruin,"  and  Claude
Melnotte  in  "  The  Lady  of  Lyons."  In  his  youth
Mr.  Wallack  had  a  pleasing  tenor  voice,  which  he
often  used  to  advantage.  In  many  respects  his
abilities  were  similar  to  his  father's.  But,  unlike
him,  he  never  aspired  to  the  leading  roles  in  trage-


OU4i^y4hu


oJI^cJCj>


WALLBRIDGE


WALLER


3X


dy  or  those  of  the  heavy  sentimental  drama,  but
wisely  confined  his  efforts  to  genteel  comedy  and
romantic  youthful  characters.  He  wrote  for  the
stage  "The  Veteran  "  and  "Rosedale,"  both  of  which
were  deservedly  popular,  and  prepared  three  papers
that  were  published  in  "  Scribner's  Magazine  "  in
October  and  following  months  after  his  death.

WALLBRIDGE,  Lewis,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Belleville,  Ont.,  27  Nov.,  1816.  He  studied  law,
was  admitted  as  a  barrister  in  1839,  and  became
queen's  counsel  in  1856.  He  was  elected  to  the
Canadian  parliament  in  1857,  became  a  member
of  the  executive  council  in  1863,  and  speaker  of
the  Canadian  assembly  the  same  year.  In  1882  he
was  appointed  chief  justice'  of  Manitoba.

W ALLEN,  Henry  Davies,  soldier,  b.  in  Sa-
vannah, Ga.,  19  April,  1819 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
2  Dec,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1840  in  the  class  with  William  T.
Sherman  and  George  H.  Thomas,  and  was  as-
signed to  the  4th  infantry.  His  first  service  was
in  the  Florida  war  in  1840-'2,  and,  after  garrison
duty  during  1842-'5,  he  was  engaged  in  the  mili-
tary occupation  of  Texas  and  in  the  war  with  Mex-
ico, being  wounded  at  Palo  Alto.  After  five  years
of  frontier  duty  at  Detroit  and  Plattsburg,  he  was
sent  to  the  Pacific  coast,  where  he  remained  until
the  beginning  of  thfiicivil  war,  serving  in  various
forts,  with  the  Yakima  expedition  in  1855,  and  in
command  of  the  exploring  expedition  to  Salt  Lake
in  1859.  Meanwhile  he  had  been  promoted  captain
on  31  Jan.,  1850,  and  major  on  25  Nov.,  1861.  He
was  acting  assistant  inspector-general  of  the  De-

Jartment  of  New  Mexico  from  June,  1862,  till
une,  1864,  and  in  command  of  a  regiment  at  Fort
Schuyler,  N.  Y,  thereafter  until  May,  1865.  The
brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  were  given
him  on  23  Feb.,  1865,  and  that  of  brigadier-general
on  13  March,  1865,  while  the  actual  rank  of  lieu-
tenant-colonel was  conferred  on  him,  30  July,  1865.
For  a  year  he  served  in  the  west,  and  commanded
successively  the  district  of  the  Gila  and  the  district
of  Arizona,  but  in  1867  he  was  given  command
of  Governor's  island,  New  York  harbor,  which
post  he  held  until  1869.  In  1872  he  was  on  the
Yellowstone  expedition,  and  on  19  Feb.,  1873,  he
was  made  colonel  of  the  2d  infantry.  He  was
retired  from  active  service  on  18  Feb.,  1874,  and
subsequently  resided  in  New  York  city.

WALLER,  Frank,  artist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
12  June,  1842.  During  1863-8  he  was  engaged
in  business  in  New  York.  In  1870-'l  he  studied
under  John  G.  Chapman  in  Rome.  The  following
year  he  travelled  in  Egypt  with  Edwin  White,  mak-
ing many  studies  and  sketches  for  future  works.
He  was  one  of  the  founders  in  1875  of  the  Art-
students'  league,  of  which  he  was  also  the  first
president,  and  for  which  he  wrote  "  Report  on  Art
Schools  "  (New  York,  1879).  His  paintings  include
"Tombs  of  the  Caliphs "  (1874) ;  " Interior  of  my
Studio ; "  "  Caravan  on  the  Desert "  (1878) ;  "  In-
terior of  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art  "  (1879) ;
"  Temple  of  Kom  Ombos  "  (1881)  ;  "  Eventide,
Venice  "  (1883) ;  "  Testing  his  Toledo  "  (1884) ;  and
"Hop-Picking"  (1885).  Of  the  last  three  he  has
also  made  etchings.  He  has  adopted  architecture
as  a  profession,  and  now  devotes  his  attention
principally  to  that  art. — His  brother,  Elwyn,  chem-
ist, b.  in  New  York  city,  22  March,  1846,  was  grad-
uated at  Harvard  in  1867,  and  at  the  Columbia
school  of  mines  in  1870,  with  the  degree  of  engineer
of  mines.  In  1871  he  became  an  assistant  in  the
department  of  analytical  chemistry  in  the  School
of  mines,  in  1871  he  became  an  instructor,  and
since  1885  he  has  been  professor  of  analytical
vol.  vi. — 22


chemistry.  He  was  appointed  assistant  sanitary
inspector  on  the  New  York  health  board  in  May,
1872,  and  in  1875  became  its  chemist,  which  place
he  filled  until  1885.  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  for  post-graduate  researches  by
Columbia  in  1875.  He  is  a  member  of  various
scientific  bodies  and  a  fellow  of  the  London
chemical  society.  Dr.  Waller  was  connected  edi-
torially with  "  The  American  Chemist."  and  has
contributed  articles  on  water,  food,  and  sanitary
and  analytical  chemistry  to  scientific  journals.
The  chapter  on  "  Disinfection  "  in  Buck's  "  Treatise
on  Hygiene  "  (New  York,  1879),  and  that  on  "  Wa-
ter "  in  Parkes's  "  Manual  of  Practical  Hygiene "
(1883),  were  written  by  him.  He  has  edited  Cairns's
"Manual  of  Quantitative  Analysis "  (New  York,
1879),  and  has  contributed  a  "Report  on  Butter"
to  the  New  York  state  dairy  commissioners'  report
published  in  1885.

WALLER,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Spottsylvania
county,  Va.,  23  Dec,  1741 ;  d.  in  Abbeville,  S.  0, 4
July,  1802.  By  reason  of  his  notorious  wickedness
in  early  life,  he  was  styled  "  Swearing  Jack  Waller  "
and  "The  Devil's  Adjutant."  He  was  especially
hostile  to  the  Baptists,  and  was  "one  of  the  grand
jury  that  prosecuted  the  Rev.  Lewis  Craig,  of  that
denomination,  for  preaching.  Craig's  address  to
the  jury  deeply  impressed  him,  and  was  the  means
of  his  conversion.  He  soon  became  a  Baptist
preacher,  travelling  extensively,  and  attracting
crowds  of  hearers  to  his  zealous  ministrations.
But  the  intolerant  spirit  that  he  had  once  shared
now  made  him  its  victim.  He  lay  113  days  in
four  different  jails  of  Virginia,  and  was  repeatedly
scourged.  He  was  one  of  the  most  laborious  and
useful  of  the  pioneer  preachers  of  the  south.

WALLER,  John  Lightfoot,  clergyman,  b.  in
Woodford  county,  Ky.,  23  Nov.,  1809 :  d.  in  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  10  Oct.,  1854.  He  was  educated  under
private  tutors,  and  became  an  accomplished  scholar.
After  teaching  for  several  years,  he  took  in  1835
editorial  charge  of  the  "  Baptist  Banner,"  and  sub-
sequently he  edited  that  paper  when  it  was  com-
bined with  the  "  Western  Pioneer  "  in  Louisville,
Ky.  In  1840  he  was  ordained  to  the  Christian
ministry,  and  he  was  for  a  time  pastor  of  a  church
in  Woodford  county.  In  1845  he  established  the
"  Western  Baptist  Review,"  afterward  called  the
"  Christian  Repository,"  of  which  he  remained  edi-
tor until  his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the  con-
vention that  in  1849  formed  the  present  constitu-
tion of  Kentucky,  and  in  that  body  displayed
debating  talent  of  a  high  order.  In  1842  he  en-
gaged in  a  celebrated  debate  with  the  Rev.  Nathan
L.  Rice  on  the  subject  of  baptism.  He  resumed
in  1850  editorial  charge  of  the  "Baptist  Banner
and  Western  Pioneer."  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Madison  university  in  1852.

WALLER,  Thomas  McDonald,  governor  of
Connecticut,  b.  in  New  York  city  about  1840.  He
was  left  an  orphan  at  the  age  wf  nine,  and  was  a
newsboy  for  some  time,  but  he  attracted  the  atten-
tion of  a  citizen  of  New  London,  Conn.,  who
adopted  him,  and  whose  name  he  assumed.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  Connecticut  bar
in  1861,  and  attained  note  as  an  advocate.  He
early  entered  politics,  became  well  known  as  a  pub-
lic speaker,and  served  in  the  legislature  in  1867, 1868,
1872,  and  1876,  being  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  Dur-
ing his  last  term  he  was  speaker  of  the  house.  In
1870  he  was  secretary  of  state,  and  in  1873  he  be-
came mayor  of  New  London.  He  served  as  state's
attorney  in  1876-83,  and  in  1882  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  Connecticut,  after  canvassing  the  state  in
his  own  behalf,  contrary  to  custom. On  the  ex-


338


WALLERTON


WALLIS


Biration  of  his  term  he  was  appointed,  in  1885,
r.  S.  consul-general  at  London,  England.
WALLERTON, Charles Louis Auguste,

French  naturalist,  b.  in  Sainte-Menehould  in  1721 ;
d.  in  Nancy  in  1788.  He  was  sent  to  Mexico  in
1759  to  study  the  botany  of  that  country,  at  the
suggestion  of  the  Academy  of  sciences  of  Paris,
and  obtained  a  special  privilege  to  enter  the  Span-
ish dominions.  Landing  in  V era  Cruz  in  October,
1760,  he  explored  the  province  of  Michoacan,
where  he  formed  a  rich  herbarium  of  medicinal
plants,  and  afterward  he  searched  the  public  libra-
ries and  the  convents  for  information  about  the
remedies  that  were  formerly  used  by  the  Aztecs.
He  then  visited  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  Santo  Do-
mingo, and  Cuba,  and  made  a  thorough  explora-
tion of  the  latter  island.  On  his  return  to  France
in  1765,  with  an  herbarium  of  1,500  medicinal
plants,  he  was  elected  corresponding  member  of
the  Academy  of  sciences,  and  secretary  of  the
Academy  of  Nancy,  where  he  settled.  He  wrote
"  Traite  explicatif  d'un  herbier  de  plantes  medici-
nales  recueillies  dans  un  voyage  a  la  Nouvelle  Es-
pagne,  dans  l'isthme  de  Darien  et  a  l'ile  de  Cuba  "
(3  vols., Nancy,  1767-70);  "  Monographic des  mala-
dies syphilitiques  et  des  simples  en  usage  chez  les
anciehs  Indiens  du  Mexique"  (1770);  and  "Ta-
bleau de  la  flore  du  royaume  de  la  Nouvelle  Es-
pagne,  et  en  particulier  de  la  province  de  Mechoa-
can  "  (2  vols.,  1775-'9).

WALLEY,  John,  soldier,  b.  probably  in  Lon-
don, England,  in  1644;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  11
Jan.,  1712.  He  was  a  son  of  the  Rev.  Thomas  Wal-
ley.  On  12  Feb.,  1689,  he  commanded  the  first  ex-
pedition against  the  French  and  Indians  in  Canada,
and  in  August,  1690,  he  sailed  from  Boston  as  the
lieutenant  of  Sir  William  Phips  in  a  second  ex-
pedition. He  landed  near  Quebec  with  about
1,200  men,  and  after  some  courageous  but  ineffect-
ual fighting,  and  an  unsuccessful  bombardment
by  Phips's  fleet,  he  re-embarked.  Walley  was  one
of  the  principal  founders  of  the  town  and  church
of  Bristol,  became  a  member  of  the  council  in
1687,  and  was  captain  of  the  Ancient  and  honorable
artillery  of  Boston.  His  journal  of  the  Canadian
expedition  is  printed  in  Thomas  Hutchinson's
"History  of  Massachusetts."

WALLING,  Henry  Francis,  cartographer,  b.
in  Burrillville,  R.  I.,  11  June,  1825;  d.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  8  April,  1888.  He  was  educated  at
public  schools  and  was  fitted  for  college,  but  be-
came assistant  librarian  in  the  Providence  athe-
naeum. While  so  engaged  he  studied  mathematics
and  surveying,  and  entered  the  office  of  Barrett
Cushing,  a  civil  engineer  in  Providence,  whose
partner  he  became  in  1846.  He  began  topographic
work  in  1849,  and  prepared  atlases  containing  full
maps  and  scientific  descriptions  of  most  of  the
northern  states  and  the  Dominion  of  Canada.  In
1867  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  civil  engineering
in  Lafayette,  which  he  filled  for  three  years,  and
then  resigned  to  accept  an  appointment  as  assist-
ant on  the  U.  S.  coast  survey.  Subsequently  he
became  connected  with  the  U.  S.  geological  survey,
and  in  1884  was  assigned  to  duty  in  connection
with  the  geodetic  survey  of  Massachusetts,  on  the
preparation  of  the  state  maps,  on  which  work  he
was  engaged  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  was  a
fellow  of  the  American  association  for  the  advance-
ment of  science,  and  of  the  American  society  of
civil  engineers,  to  whose  proceedings  he  contributed
papers  of  value.  It  was  said  that  "  to  him  more
than  to  any  one  else  is  due  the  better  appreci-
ation of  good  maps,  which  is  now  bearing  fruit  in
the  work  of  the  national  survey."


WALLIS,  Gustav,  German  botanist,  b.  in  Lune-
burg,  Prussia,  1  May,  1830  ;  d.  in  Cuenca,  Ecuador,
20  July,  1878.  Little  is  known  of  his  early  life.
In  1860  he  began  his  search  for  botanical  rarities
in  tropical  America  for  a  horticultural  house  in
Brussels.  His  explorations  were  confined  chiefly
to  Amazon  river  and  its  tributaries,  the  mountain-
ous coast-line,  and  the  Isthmus  of  Panama.  He
also  visited  the  Philippine  islands  for  a  London
house,  and  before  his  death  began  to  explore  the
Pacific  coast  of  Ecuador  at  his  own  expense.  He
enriched  horticulture  with  1,000  new  species.

WALLIS,  Samuel,  English  navigator,  b.  about
1720;  d.  in  London  in  1795.  He  entered  the  navy,
commanded  a  division  of  cutters  in  Canada  in
1760,  and  after  the  conclusion  of  peace  was  charged
with  the  completion  of  the  discoveries  of  Capt.
John  Byron  in  the  Pacific.  Sailing  from  Plym-
outh, 22  Aug.,  1766,  he  anchored  in  the  following
November  near  Cape  Virgins  on  the  coast  of  Pata-
gonia, where  he  had  intercourse  with  the  natives,
and  discovered  that  they  were  not  giants,  as  had
been  asserted  by  former  navigators.  On  17  Sept.
he  entered  the  Strait  of  Magellan,  which  he  ex-
plored for  four  months.  Leaving  the  strait  on  11
April,  Wallis  discovered  Pentecost  island  on  3
June,  1767,  and  later  Queen  Charlotte  island.  He
returned  to  Dover,  19  May,  1768,  and  in  1780
was  appointed  commissioner  of  the  admiralty,
which  post  he  retained  till  his  death.  Wallis's
narrative  was  published  in  John  Hawkesworth's
collection,  entitled  "  An  Account  of  the  Voyages
undertaken  for  making  Discoveries  in  the  South-
ern Hemisphere"  (3  vols.,  London,  1773).

WALLIS,  Severn  Teackle,  lawyer,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  8  Sept.,  1816.  He  was  graduated  at  St.
Mary's  college,  Baltimore,  in  1832,  studied  law
with  William  Wirt  and  John  Glenn,  and  in  1837
was  admitted  to  the
bar.  Mr.  Wallis  early
developed  a  taste  for
literature  and  con-
tributed to  periodi-
cals many  articles  of
literary  and  histori-
cal criticism,  also  oc-
casional verses.  He
became  a  proficient
in  Spanish  literature
and  history  and  was
elected  a  correspond-
ing member  of  the
Royal  academy  of
history  of  Madrid  in
1843.  In  1846  he  was
chosen  a  fellow  of
the  Royal  society  of
northern  antiquaries
of  Copenhagen.  In
1847  he  visited  Spain  and  in  1849  the  U.  S.  govern-
ment sent  him  on  a  special  mission  to  that  coun-
try to  examine  the  title  to  the  public  lands  in  east
Florida,  as  affected  bv  roval  grants  during  the  ne-
gotiations for  the  treaty'of  1819.  From  1859  till
1861  he  contributed  largely  to  the  editorial  columns
of  the  Baltimore  "Exchange,"  and  he  has  also-
written  for  other  journals.  He  was  a  Whig  till
the  organization  of  the  American  or  Know-Noth-
ing  party,  after  which  he  was  a  Democrat.  In  1861
he  was  sent  to  the  house  of  delegates  of  Maryland,
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  proceedings  of
the  legislature  of  that  year  at  Frederick.  He  was
chairman  of  the  committee  on  Federal  relations,
and  made  himself  obnoxious  to  the  Federal  au-
thorities by  his  reports,  which  were  adopted  by  the-


c^X/^%4


WALLON


WALSH


339


legislature,  and  which  took  strong  ground  against
the  civil  war,  as  well  as  against  the  then  prevailing
doctrine  of  military  necessity.  In  September  of
that  year  Mr.  Wallis  was  arrested  with  many
members  of  the  legislature  and  other  citizens  of
the  state,  and  imprisoned  for  more  than  four-
teen months  in  various  forts.  He  was  released
in  November,  1862,  without  conditions  and  with-
out being  informed  of  the  cause  of  his  arrest.  He
then  returned  to  the  practice  of  the  law  in  Balti-
more. In  1870,  on  the  death  of  John  P.  Kennedy,
he  was  elected  provost  of  the  University  of  Mary-
land. In  December,  1872,  as  chairman  of  the  art
committee  of  private  citizens  appointed  by  the
Maryland  legislature,  he  delivered  the  address
upon  the  unveiling  of  William  H.  Rinehart's  statue
of  Chief-Justice  Taney.  He  has  contributed  to  pe-
riodicals, and  has  published  "  Glimpses  of  Spain  "
(New  York,  1849) ;  "  Spain :  her  Institutions,  Poli-
tics, and  Public  Men"  (Boston,  1853);  a  "Dis-
course on  the  Life  and  Character  of  George  Pea-
body  "  (Baltimore,  1870) ;  and  numerous  pamphlets
on  legal  and  literary  subjects.

WALLON,  Louis  Florentin  (vol-long),  mission-
ary, b.  in  Bourges,  France,  about  1670 ;  a.  in  Peru
in  1725.  After  serving  in  the  army  he  became  a
Jesuit  at  Saint- Acheul,  and  went  to  Peru  in  1714,
after  visiting  Paraguay,  Chili,  and  the  West  Indies.
He  intended  to  take  charge  of  a  mission  in  the
Philippine  islands,  but  remained  in  Peru  instead,
and  founded  a  prosperous  mission  in  the  plateau
of  Quito,  where  he  died.  He  wrote  several  inter-
esting accounts  of  his  travels,  which  were  printed
in  the  "Collection  des  lettres  edifiantes  et  curi-
euses,  envoyees  des  missions  etrangeres"  (Paris,
1715-'80).  Among  them  are  "  Voyage  aux  Indes
Orientales,  par  le  Paraguay,  le  Chili  et  le  Perou,
fait  en  1712,  '13-'14,"  which  describes  the  condition
of  the  Indians  in  South  America  at  the  beginning
of  the  18th  century ;  and  "  Etat  des  missions  de  la
Compagnie  de  Jesus  dans  le  Perou."

WALN,  Robert,  merchant,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  22  Feb.,  1765 ;  d.  there,  24  Jan.,  1836.  His
great  -  great  -  grandfather,  Nicholas,  an  English
Quaker,  came  to  this  country  with  William  Penn
in  1682,  and  bought  a  tract  of  land  in  what  is  now
the  city  of  Philadelphia.  He  took  an  active  part
in  public  affairs,  was  a  member  of  the  first  grand
jury  that  was  called  in  1683,  and  represented  Bucks
county  in  the  first  legislature  of  Pennsylvania
from  that  year  till  1695,  when  he  removed  to
Philadelphia,  and  in  1711  became  a  director  in  the
first  public  school  of  that  city.  He  died  there  in
1721.  Robert  was  educated  at  the  Friends'  acade-
my in  his  native  city.  He  inherited  a  large  estate,
and  with  his  brother  Jesse  continued  the  business
that  had  been  established  by  his  father,  which  be-
came widely  known  in  the  East  India  and  China
trade,  and  almost  equalled  that  of  Stephen  Girard
in  the  comprehensive  character  of  its  enterprises.
He  served  in  the  legislature  several  years,  and  in
congress  from  1798  till  1801  as  a  Federalist,  and
was  a  member  of  the  common  council  of  Phila-
delphia. During  the  war  of  1812  he  built  one  of
the  first  cotton-factories  in  the  country,  and,  being
also  largely  interested  in  iron-works,  he  became  a
strong  protectionist.  He  was  the  author  of  an
"  Answer  to  the  Anti-Protective  Report  of  Henry
Lee,"  while  the  excitement  on  the  tariff  question
was  at  its  height,  and  of  "  Seven  Letters  to  Elias
Hicks,"  which  attracted  great  attention. — His  son,
Robert,  poet,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25  Oct.,
1794;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  4  July,  1825,  was
liberally  educated,  and  devoted  himself  to  litera-
ture. He  published  "  The  Hermit  in  America  on


a  Visit  to  Philadelphia"  (Philadelphia,  1819;  2d
series,  1821);  "American  Bards,"  a  satire  (1820);
"  Sisyphi  Opus,  or  Touches  at  the  Times,  with  oth-
er Poems  "  (1820) ;  "  Life  of  Lafayette  "  (1825-'6) ;
"  History  of  China  "  (1825) ;  and  numerous  contri-
butions to  periodicals.  He  edited  John  Sanderson's
"  Biography  of  the  Signers  of  the  Declaration  of  In-
dependence "  from  the  third  volume,  contributing
several  of  the  subsequent  lives  (7  vols.,  1820-'7).

WALSH,  Benjamin  Dann,  entomologist,  b.
in  Frome,  Worcestershire,  England,  21  Sept.,
1808 ;  d.  in  Rock  Island,  111.,  18  Nov.,  1869.  He
was  graduated  at  Cambridge,  and  it  was  the  de-
sire of  his  parents  that  he  should  study  for  the
ministry.  His  own  inclinations  led  him  into  lit-
erary work,  and  he  wrote  extensively  for  periodi-
cals, including  a  pamphlet  on  university  reforms,
almost  all  the  suggestions  in  which  he  lived  to  see
practically  carried  out.  In  1838  he  came  to  the
United  States  and  settled  in  Henry  county,  111.,
where  for  thirteen  years  he  led  a  secluded  life,  de-
voted to  the  care  of  his  farm.  His  health  becom-
ing impaired,  he  removed  to  Rock  Island  in  1851,
and  there  followed  the  lumber  business  for  seven
years.  His  active  entomological  career  began  after
his  retirement  from  business,  and  thereafter  he
contributed  regularly  from  his  observations  and
experience  to  various  journals  and  proceedings  of
societies.  In  October,  1865,  the  "  Practical  Ento-
mologist "  was  founded  in  Philadelphia,  his  name
appeared  as  its  associate  editor  from  the  west,  and
ultimately  the  editorial  management  passed  entire-
ly into  his  hands.  During  the  session  of  1866-'7
the  legislature  of  Illinois  authorized  the  appoint-
ment of  a  state  entomologist,  and  Mr.  Walsh's
name  was  presented  for  confirmation.  Although
final  action  was  deferred  by  the  state  senate  until
its  next  session,  he  discharged  the  duties  of  the
office,  and  as  acting  state  entomologist  issued  his
first  annual  report  for  1867.  He  was  a  member
of  various  scientific  societies,  and  was  regarded  as
a  standard  authority  on  his  specialty.  His  more
important  entomological  works  were  published  in
the  "Proceedings  of  the  Philadelphia  Entomo-
logical Society."  Mr.  Walsh  was  associated  with
Charles  V.  Riley  in  founding  the  "  American  En-
tomologist "  in  1868,  and  was  its  senior  editor  until
his  death.  In  addition  to  the  works  that  have  been
mentioned,  he  published  "  Walsh's  Comedies  of
Aristophanes  "  (London,  1837).

WALSH,  John,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Mooncoin,  County  Kilkenny,  Ireland,  24  May,  1830.
After  completing  his  classical  studies  he  entered
St.  John's  college,  Waterford,  where  he  took  a
course  of  theology.  Resolving  to  devote  himself
to  foreign  missions,  he  went  to  Canada  in  1852,
entered  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  Montreal,  and
was  ordained  a  priest  on  1  Nov.,  1854.  He  was  sta-
tioned for  two  years  at  Brock,  and  was  then  ap-
pointed pastor  of  St.  Mary's  parish,  Toronto.  He
was  afterward  transferred  to  St.'Paul's,  and  sub-
sequently was  made  rector  of  the  cathedral,  but
was  reappointed  pastor  of  St.  Mary's.  He  was  then
nominated  to  the  see  of  Sandwich,  and  consecrated
bishop  on  10  Nov.,  1867.  In  18G8  ho  removed  his
episcopal  residence  from  Sandwich  to  London,  and
in  1869  he  procured  from  the  Propaganda  a  decree
that  made  London  the  titular  diocese.  He  at  once
entered  on  the  task  of  removing  the  enormous
debt  that  weighed  on  his  flock,  and  in  a  few
months  succeeded  in  paying  $40,000.  He  began
with  zeal  to  build  churches  and  found  schools,
academies,  and  convents,  but  at  the  end  of  two
years  his  health  failed,  and  he  was  not  able  to  at-
tend the  Vatican  council. In  1875  he  published  a


340


WALSH


WALSH


work  on  the  questions  that  were  discussed  in  that
body.  In  1876  he  paid  his  first  visit  to  Rome,  and.
after  his  return  in  the  following  year,  the  tenth
anniversary  of  his  consecration  was  appropriately
celebrated.  In  1881  he  laid  the  corner-stone  of  the
new  cathedral  of  London,  which  is  now  nearly  fin-
ished, and  is  unequalled  among  Canadian  churches.
In  1882  he  visited  Ireland,  returning  the  same
year.  In  1884  he  took  part  in  the  deliberations  of
the  third  plenary  council  of  Baltimore  at  the  spe-
cial invitation  of  the  American  bishops.  During
Bishop  Walsh's  episcopate  twenty-eight  churches
were  built  and  five  were  enlarged,  and  more  than
$500,000  were  spent  on  church  improvement.
Three  convents  were  built,  and  a  new  orphanage
was  founded  and  placed  under  the  care  of  the
Sisters  of  St.  Joseph.  The  College  of  Sandwich  was
opened  by  the  Basilian  Fathers,  and  nine  academies
and  nine* convents  were  established.  The  number
of  priests  have  increased  to  seventy-seven,  and  the
Roman  Catholic  population  to  about  70,000.

WALSH,  John  Johnson,  missionary,  b.  in
Newburg,  N.  Y.,  4  April,  1820 ;  d.  in  Amenia,  N.  Y.,
7  Feb.,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  college
in  1839,  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in
1843,  was  ordained,  and  sailed  the  same  year  as  a
missionary  under  the  American  board  for  India,
where  he  occupied  stations  at  Futtehghur,  Myn-
poorie,  and  Allahabad  till  1873.  Returning  home
in  1874,  he  was  pastor  at  Millerton,  N.  Y.,  for  two
years,  and  subsequently  lived  in  Amenia.  Mr.
Walsh  had  just  left  India  for  the  United  States,
and  thus  escaped  the  massacre  of  the  mission  at
Futtehghur  by  the  Sepoys  in  1857.  He  published
"  A  Memorial  of  the  Futtehghur  Mission  and  her
Martyred  Missionaries  "  (Philadelphia,  1859).

WALSH,  Michael,  educator,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1763 ;  d.  in  Amesbury,  Mass.,  20  Aug.,  1840.  He
came  to  America  when  a  youth  and  became  a
teacher  in  Marblehead  academy  about  the  time  of
its  organization  in  1792,  where  Judge  Joseph  Story
was  one  of  his  pupils.  Harvard  gave  him  the
degree  of  A.  M.  in  1803.  He  was  the  author  of
a  "Mercantile  Arithmetic"  (Newburyport,  1801),
and  a  "  New  System  of  Book-keeping  "  (1826).

WALSH,  Michael,  politician,  b.  in  Youghal,
Ireland,  7  March,  1810;  d.  in  New  York  city,  17
March,  1859.  He  went  to  Baltimore  in  his  youth,
received  a  good  education,  and  became  a  lithog-
rapher. Removing  to  New  York,  he  entered  the
assembly  in  1839,  and  continued  for  many  years
to  be  a  leader  of  the  Democratic  party.  He  estab-
lished in  1840  "  The  Knickerbocker,"  which  was
stopped  after  two  years'  existence  by  his  conviction
and  imprisonment  for  the  publication  of  a  libel.
On  his  release  he  began  "The  Subterranean,"  an
abusive  and  scurrilous  sheet,  that  came  to  an  end
in  a  few  years.  On  his  release  he  served  in  con-
gress, having  been  elected  in  1853-'5  as  a  Demo-
crat, and  was  then  sent  on  a  confidential  mission  to
England  and  to  Mexico  by  the  government.  Mr.
Walsh  visited  the  camps  of  the  great  contending
powers  in  the  Crimea,  and  was  for  a  time  the  guest
of  Carroll  Spence,  then  U.  S.  minister  in  Constan-
tinople, having  reached  there  from  Sebastopol  pen-
niless and  without  suitable  clothing.  He  had  great
talents,  independence,  and  honesty,  and  was  a  keen
satirist,  and  his  letters  from  abroad  were  unrivalled
in  their  vein.  He  was  found  dead  in  the  area  of
a  house  in  New  York  city.  He  published  his
"  Speeches,  Poems,  and  other  Writings "  (New
York,  1843).

WALSH,  Robert,  author,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
in  1784;  d.  in  Paris,  7  Feb.,  1859.  His  father,  a
native  of  Ireland,  was  a  merchant  of  Baltimore.


JWW  "Uhdj^


He  was  educated  at  the  Roman  Catholic  college  at
Baltimore  and  at  the  Jesuit  college  at  Georgetown,
D.  C,  where  in  1796  he  delivered  a  poetical  ad-
dress before  Gen.  Washington,  who  was  then  presi-
dent. He  afterward  spent  a  number  of  years  in
Europe,  and,  returning  to  this  country  in  1809,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
practice  in  Philadelphia.  In  consequence  of  deaf-
ness he  abandoned  law  and  engaged  in  journal-
ism. In  1811  he  began  the  publication  of  the
first  quarterly  that  was  issued  in  the  United
States,  "  The
American  Re-
view of  His-
tory and  Poli-
tics," which  he
continued  two
years,  and  in
1817-'18  edit-
ed the  "Ameri-
can Register."
In  1819  he  es-
tablished the
"  National  Ga-
zette "  at  Phil-
adelphia, and
remained  con-
nected with  it
till  1836,  when
he  sold  it  to
William  Fry.
He  also  edit-
ed the  "Maga-
zine of  For-
eign Literature,"  and  resuscitated  the  "  American
Review"  in  March,  1827,  which  he  continued  to  edit
with  much  ability  for  ten  years.  About  1836  he
went  to  reside  in  Paris,  where  he  was  U.  S.  consul
in  1845-'51,  and  remained  there  till  his  death.  He
was  at  one  time  a  writer  for  Dennie's  "  Portfolio,"
wrote  biographical  prefaces  to  an  edition  of  the
English  poets  in  fifty  small  volumes,  and  biographi-
cal sketches  for  "  Delaplaine's  Repository  "  and
for  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Americana,  and  while  in
Europe  he  corresponded  with  the  "Journal  of
Commerce"  and  the  "National  Intelligencer."
He  was  a  member  of  the  American  philosophical
society  and  the  Royal  Spanish  academy  of  history.
His  "  Letter  on  the  Genius  and  Disposition  of  the
French  Government  "  (Philadelphia,  1810)  was  re-
published in  England,  where  it  was  very  popular,
and  passed  through  four  editions.  Mr.  Walsh's
other  books  include  "Correspondence  respecting
Russia,"  with  Robert  Goodloe  Harper  (1813) ;  "Es-
say on  the  Future  State  of  Europe  "  (1813) ;  "  Ap-
peal from  the  Judgment  of  Great  Britain  respect-
ing the  United  States  "  (1819) :  "  The  Museum  of
Foreign  Literature  and  Science  "(1822);  and  "Di-
dactics :  Social,  Literary,  and  Political  "  (2  vols.,
1836).  He  also  issued  "The  Select  Speeches  of
George  Canning "  (Philadelphia,  1835)  and  "The
Select  Speeches  of  Windham  and  William  Huskis-
son  "  (1841),  for  both  of  which  he  wrote  biographical
sketches. — His  grandson,  William  Shenard,  au-
thor, b.  in  Paris,  France,  1  Feb.,  1854,  is  the  son  of
Robert  M.  Walsh,  who  was  secretary  of  legation
in  France,  and  held  various  other  diplomatic  posts
in  Europe  and  in  South  America.  He  spent  his
boyhood  in  Italy.  In  1867  he  came  with  nis  fam-
ily to  this  country,  studied  at  Georgetown  college,
D.  C,  was  graduated  at  the  law  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1876,  and  in  the
same  year  accepted  a  post  as  reader  and  critic
with  J.  B.  Lippincott  and  Co.,  during  which  con-
nection he  has  compiled,  edited,  or  written  about


WALSH


WALTER


341


twenty  juvenile,  historical,  and  scientific  books,
under  various  pen-names,  chiefly  under  that  of
"  William  Shepard.'*  In  1886  he  became  editor  of
"  Lippincott's  Magazine."  He  has  published  un-
der his  own  name  "  Faust :  the  Legend  and  the
Poem,"  a  critical  commentary  (Philadelphia,  1887),
and  "  Paradoxes  of  a  Philistine  "  (1888).

WALSH,  William,  Canadian  R.  C.  archbishop,
b.  in  Waterford,  Ireland,  in  November,  1804;  d.
in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  10  Aug.,  1858.  He  was
educated  in  theology  and  philosophy  in  St.  John's
college,  Waterford,  and  was  ordained  a  priest  on
25  March,  1828.  He  exercised  his  ministry  for
the  following  ten  years  in  the  archdiocese  of  Dub-
lin, where  he  was  nominated  bishop  of  Calcutta.
He  was  permitted  to  decline  the  appointment,  but
in  1834,  in  obedience  to  the  command  of  his  supe-
riors, he  consented  to  become  coadjutor  vicar  apos-
tolic of  Nova  Scotia.  On  the  creation  of  the  see  of
Halifax  in  1845  he  became  bishop,  and  in  1852  he
was  made  archbishop  of  the  same  diocese.  He  not
only  contributed  to  the  advancement  of  the  Ro-
man Catholic  church  in  Nova  Scotia,  but  did  much
to  increase  the  general  well-being  of  the  prov-
ince. He  labored  to  create  a  Roman  Catholic
literature,  and  for  this  purpose  published  transla-
tions of  the  works  of  St.  AlphonsusLiguori,  Grif-
fet's  "  Meditations,*'  Berthier's  "  God  and  I,"  and
the  "  Spiritual  Maxims "  of  St.  Vincent  de  Paul.
His  original  works  are  "Lenten  Manual"  (New
York,  1855);  "Catholic  Offering"  (1855);  and
"  Eucharistica  "  (1856).

WALTER,  Nehemiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ire-
land in  December,  1663 ;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  17
Sept.,  1750.  He  was  of  English  parentage,  and
came  with  his  father,  Thomas,  to  this  country  in
1679,  settling  in  Boston.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1684,  and,  after  living  for  a  time  in
Nova  Scotia,  became  colleague  to  John  Eliot,  the
apostle  to  the  Indians.  He  was  minister  of  Rox-
bury, Mass.,  from  17  Oct.,  1688,  till  his  death.  Mr.
Walter  married  a  daughter  of  Increase  Mather.
He  published  "  An  Essay  on  the  Sense  of  Indwell-
ing Sin  in  the  Regenerate  "  (Boston,  1707) ;  "  Prac-
tical Discourses  on  the  Holiness  of  Heaven "
(1726) ;  and  a  posthumous  volume  of  "  Sermons
on  Isaiah  LV.  "  (1755). — His  son,  Thomas,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  13  Dec,  1696 ;  d.  there,
10  Jan.,  1725,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1713,
and  ordained  as  his  father's  colleague,  19  Oct.,  1718.
He  published  "  Grounds  and  Rules  of  Music  Ex-
plained "  (Boston,  1721) ;  "  A  Sermon  at  the  Bos-
ton Lecture"  (1723);  and  "Infallibility  may  Some-
times Mistake,"  an  essay  (1724). — Thomas's  nephew,
William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  7
Oct.,  1737 ;  d.  in  Boston,  5  Dec,  1800,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1756,  ordained  by  the  bishop
of  London  in  1764  as  a  minister  of  the  Anglican
church,  and  on  22  July  of  the  same  year  installed
rector  of  Trinity  church,  Boston.  He  sympathized
with  the  loyalists,  and,  resigning  the  rectorship  of
Trinity  church,  17  March,  1776,  accompanied  Gen.
Howe  to  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  with  his  familv  and
many  others.  He  afterward  went  to  New  York,
acted  for  some  time  as  chaplain  of  a  British  regi-
ment, and,  returning  to  Is  ova  Scotia,  received  a
grant  of  land  from  the  crown  as  compensation  for
his  losses,  which  amounted  to  £7,000.  He  re-
turned to  Boston  in  1791,  and  the  next  year  became
rector  of  Christ  church  in  that  city,  where  he
ministered  till  his  death.  In  1796  he  was  invited
to  deliver  the  Dudleian  lecture  at  Harvard  col-
lege, and  in  1798  he  pronounced  the  anniver-
sary discourse  before  the  Massachusetts  humane
society,  which  was  published. The  degree  of  D.  D.


was  conferred  on  him  by  King's  college,  Aberdeen,
in  1784. — William's  grandson,  Lynde  Minshall,
journalist  (1799 — 1842),  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1817,  established  the  "  Boston  Transcript "  in
1830,  and  was  editor  till  1842. — Another  grandson
of-  William,  William  Bicker,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, 19  April,  1796;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  23
April,  1822,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1818,  and
studied  divinity  at  Cambridge,  but  did  not  preach.
He  possessed  an  active  fancy  and  great  facility  of
versification.  Mr.  Walter  contributed  odes,  son-
nets, and  translations  to  the  newspapers  and  maga-
zines, and  in  1822  went  to  the  southern  states  to
give  lectures  on  poetry.  He  published  "  Poems  "
(Boston,  1821),  and  "  Sukey  "  a  poem  (1821).  The
latter  was  suggested  by  Pitz-Greene  Halleck's
"  Fanny,"  which  appeared  in  1819.

WALTER,  Thomas,  botanist,  b.  in  Hampshire,
England,  about  1745 ;  d.  near  Charleston,  S.  C,
about  1800.  He  received  a  liberal  education  in
England,  but,  emigrating  to  this  country,  settled
on  a  plantation  in  St.  Stephen's  parish,  S.  C.  There
he  followed  the  business  of  a  planter  and  devoted
his  leisure  to  botany.  In  his  garden  he  cultivated
the  plants  that  he  subsequently  described,  and  sev-
eral species  have  since  been  named  after  him.  His
principal  publication  is  "  Flora  Caroliniana,  se-
cundum Systema  Vegetabilium  perillustris  Linnsei
digesta  "  (London,  1788).

WALTER,  Thomas  Ustick,  architect,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  Sept.,  1804 ;  d.  there,  30  Oct.,
1887.  His  early  education  was  liberal  but  not  col-
legiate, and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  he  entered  the
office  of  William  Strickland,  the  architect  of  the
mint  and  the  custom-house,  Philadelphia.  After
acquiring  a  knowledge  of  linear  drawing  and  a
general  acquaintance  with  the  professional  prac-
tice of  architects,  he  resumed  his  general  studies,
prosecuted  them  for  seven  years,  and  after  two
more  years  with  Mr.  Strickland  he  began  practice
as  an  architect  in  1830.  His  first  important  work
was  the  new  county  prison  (1831),  which  is  now  gen-
erally known  as  Moyamensing  jail,  and  in  1833  he
made  the  original  designs  for  Girard  college,  and
was  sent  to  Europe  by  the  building  committee  of
that  institution,  that  he  might  study  there.  On  his
return  he  took  charge  of  the  college  building,  which
was  completed  in  1847,  and  which  it  is  claimed  is
the  finest  specimen  of  classic  architecture  on  this
continent.  Mr.  Walter's  next  great  work  was  the
breakwater  at  Laguayra  for  the  Venezuelan  gov-
ernment ;  in  1851  his  design  for  the  extension  of
the  capitol  at  Washington  was  adopted.  Having
been  appointed  government  architect,  he  removed
to  Washington,  and  remained  there  till  the  comple-
tion of  the  work  in  1865.  (See  illustration.) While


in  Washington  he  also  designed  the  extensions  of
the  patent-office,  treasury,  and  post-office  build-
ings, the  dome  on  the  old  capitol,  the  congressional


342


WALTER


WALTHALL


library,  and  the  government  hospital  for  the  in-
sane. Among  the  works  of  his  private  practice  in
Philadelphia  were  the  designs  for  St.  George's  hall,
the  Preston  retreat,  and  the  Biddle  and  Cowper-
thwaite  places  on  Delaware  river.  He  assisted  the
architect  of  the  new  Public  buildings  at  Philadel-
phia in  their  erection,  and  was  so  engaged  till  his
death.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Franklin  institute
after  1829,  held  its  professorship  of  architecture,
and  in  1860  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  that
subject  in  Columbia  college,  New  York.  He  was
a  member  of  the  American  philosophical  society
after  1841,  and  was  one  of  the  original  members
of  the  American  institute  of  architects,  of  which
he  was  president  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  from  the  University
of  Lewisburg,  Pa.,  in  1853,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from
Harvard  in  1857.

WALTER,  William  Henry,  musician,  b.  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  1  July,  1825.  He  removed  to  New
York  in  1842,  was  appointed  organist  in  Trinity
parish  in  1847,  and  placed  successively  in  charge
of  the  music  at  St.  John's  chapel,  St.  Paul's,  Trin-
ity church,  and  Trinity  chapel,  where  he  remained
until  1869.  He  studied  composition  under  Dr.
Edward  Hodges,  was  appointed  organist  at  Colum-
bia college,  New  York,  in  1856,  and  in  1865  re-
ceived the  honorary  degree  of  Mus.  Doc.  from  that
institution,  with  which  he  is  still  connected.  His
published  works  are  "  Manual  of  Church  Music  "
(New  York,  1860);  "Chorals  and  Hvmns"  (1866);
"  Common  Prayer  with  Ritual  Song  "  (1868) ;  "  Les-
sons in  Music"  (1882);  and  "Mass  in  C,"  with
Latin  and  English  text  (1886). — His  son,  George
William,  organist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  16  Dec,
1851,  at  the  age  of  eleven  was  placed  under  the
musical  instruction  of  John  K.  Paine,  of  Boston,
and  subsequently  under  Samuel  P.  Warren,  of  New
York.  In  1869  he  went  to  Washington,  D.  C,  and
was  given  the  degree  of  Mus.  Doc.  by  Columbian
university  of  that  city.  His  compositions  are  rather
for  the  virtuoso  than  for  the  popular  ear.  As  an
organist  he  is  known  for  his  powers  in  extemporane-
ous performance  and  novelty  in  registration.  His
musical  library  contains  more  than  8,000  works.

WALTER,  William  Joseph,  author,  b.  in
England ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  9  Oct.,  1846.  He
was  a  professor  in  St.  Edmund's  college,  Ware,
England,  till  1839,  when  he  emigrated  to  this
country,  and  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where,  at  the
time  of  his  death,  he  acted  as  secretary  to  the
British  consul.  His  chief  publications  were  "  Ac-
count of  a  Manuscript  of  Ancient  English  Poetry,
entitled  '  Clavis  Sciential,  or  Bretayne  s  Skyll-Kay
of  Knawing,'  by  John  de  Wageby  "  (London.  1816) ;
editions  of  "Marie  Magdalen's  Funerall  Teares"
and  others  of  Robert  Southwell's  poems ;  "  Sir
Thomas  More :  his  Life  and  Times  "  (Philadelphia,
1839) ;  "  Beauties  of  Sir  Thomas  More  "  (Baltimore,
1840):  "Mary,  Queen  of  Scots:  a  Journal  of  her
Twenty  Years'  Captivity,  Trial,  and  Execution"
(Philadelphia,  1840);  "St.  John  Chrysostom "
(1841) ;  and  "  The  New  Following  of  Christ "  (1841).

WALTERS,  William  Thompson,  merchant,
b.  on  the  Juniata  river,  Pa.,  23  May,  1820.  He  is
of  Scotch-Irish  ancestrv,  and  his  father,  Henry
Walters,  a  banker  of  Pennsylvania,  sent  him  to
Philadelphia  to  be  educated  as  a  civil  engineer.
He  was  placed  in  charge  of  a  large  smelting
establishment  in  Lycoming  county,  Pa.,  where
under  his  management  the  first  iron  that  was
manufactured  in  the  United  States  from  min-
eral coal  was  made.  In  1841  he  removed  to  Bal-
timore, Md.,  and  engaged  in  the  general  commis-
sion  business,  and in 1847 he established the


firm  of  W.  T.  Walters  and  Co..  wine-merchants.
When  the  first  line  of  steamers  between  Baltimore
and  Savannah  was  established  he  was  chosen  its
president,  and  from  that  time  he  has  been  a  direc-
tor in  every  line  from  Baltimore  to  the  south.  Af-
ter the  civil  war  he  aided  in  the  reorganization  of
the  southern  steamship  lines.  For  many  years  he
has  been  a  director  of  the  Northern  Central  rail-
way company,  and  he  is  also  interested  in  many
southern  lines.  From  1861  till  1865  he  resided  in
Europe,  where  he  became  the  personal  friend  of
many  prominent  continental  artists,  and  travelled
extensively  to  study  the  history  and  development
of  art  and  to  purchase  pictures  for  the  collection
that  he  had  begun  at  an  early  period.  He  was
art  commissioner  from  the  United  States  to  the
Paris  exposition  of  1867,  that  in  Vienna  in  1873,
and  that  in  Paris  in  1878.  He  is  one  of  the  per-
manent trustees  of  the  Corcoran  art  gallery  in
Washington,  D.  C,  and  is  also  chairman  of  the
purchasing  committee,  a  trustee  of  the  Peabody
institute,  and  chairman  of  its  committee  on  art.
He  is  also  a  trustee  of  the  estate  left  for  art
uses  by  the  sculptor  William  H.  Rinehart,  who
was  enabled  to  procure  his' art  education  largely
through  the  generosity  of  Mr.  Walters.  Albert
Wolff,  the  French  critic,  says  that  Mr.  Walters's
private  collection  is  the  most  complete  gallery  of
French  pictures  in  the  world  with  a  single  excep-
tion. He  owns  a  large  and  rare  collection  of
Bonvin's  water-colors,  and  many  Barye  bronzes.
His  collection  of  Oriental  porcelain,  and  ceramics
numbers  3,000  pieces.  For  many  years  Mr.  Wal-
ters has  annually  opened  his  gallery  to  the  pub-
lic, and  the  proceeds  are  devoted  to  the  Poor
association  of  Baltimore.  He  has  given  to  the
city  of  Baltimore  several  bronzes,  which  adorn
the  four  public  squares  adjoining  the  Washington
monument.  They  are  the  great  lion,  a  master-
piece made  by  Antoine  Louis  Barye,  in  1847,
for  the  Tuileries ;  four  groups — "  War,"  "  Peace,"
"  Strength,"  and  "  Order " — productions  of  the
models  made  by  Barye  for  the  exterior  decoration
of  the  Louvre ;  and  a  reproduction  in  bronze  by
Barbedienne  of  "  Military  Courage,"  made  by  Paul
Dubois  for  the  Lamoriciere  monument  in  Nantes.
He  has  also  given  to  the  city  a  reproduction  in
bronze  of  the  statue  of  Chief- Justice  Taney  in  An-
napolis, Md.,  made  by  Rinehart.  During  his  visit
to  Europe,  Mr.  Walters  became  interested  in  the
Percheron  horses ;  he  brought  eighteen  of  them  to
the  United  States  in  1866,  and  extended  the  importa-
tion of  this  stock.  To  increase  an  intelligent  inter-
est on  this  subject,  he  published  "  The  Percheron
Horse,"  from  the  French  of  Charles  Du  Hays,  with
artistic  etchings  (printed  privately,  New  York,
1886).  He  has  also  published  "Antoine  Louis
Barye,  from  the  French  of  Various  Critics  "  (Balti-
more, 1885),  and  "  Notes  upon  Certain  Masters  of
the  XIX.  Century  "  (New  York,  1886).

WALTHALL,  Edward  Cary,  senator,  b.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  4  April,  1831.  He  was  educated
at  Holly  Springs,  Miss.,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1852,  and  practised  at  Coffeeville,
Miss.  In  1856  he  was  elected  district  attorney  of
the  10th  judicial  district  of  Mississippi,  and  he
was  re-elected  in  1859,  but  resigned  m  1861  and
entered  the  Confederate  army  as  a  lieutenant  in
the  15th  Mississippi  infantry.  He  was  promoted
to  lieutenant-colonel,  and  commanded  the  regi-
ment in  the  battle  of  Fishing  Creek,  or  Mill
Springs,  Ky.,  19  Jan.,  1862.  Subsequently  he  be-
came colonel  of  the  29th  Mississippi  regiment,
and  he  was  promoted  brigadier,  13  Dec,  1862,
and  major-general,  6  June,  1864. His  service  was


WALTHER


WALTON


343


(fftfot^tt


in  the  western  array.  At  the  battle  of  Mission
Ridge,  after  the  National  forces  had  penetrated
the  Confederate  lines,  Gen.  Walthall,  under  direc-
tion of  Gen. Benjamin  F.  Cheatham,  threw  his

brigade  across  the
ridge  and  held  the
advancing  troops
in  check  until
darkness  enabled
the  Confederates
to  make  their  es-
cape. He  com-
manded the  rear-
guard of  General
John  B.  Hood's
army  after  that
general's  disas-
trous defeat  at
Nashville,  and
protected  them
from  capture  by
the  pursuing

forces  of  General
George  H.  Thom-
as. In  January,
1871,  Gen.  Walt-
hall resumed  the  practice  of  law  at  Grenada,
Miss.,  which  he  continued  until  March,  1885.  He
was  delegate  at  large  to  the  National  Demo-
cratic conventions  of  1868,  1876,  1880,  and  1884.
He  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Demo-
crat to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation
of  Lucius  Q.  0.  Lamar,  took  his  seat  on  12  March,

1885,  and  was  elected  by  the  legislature  in  January,

1886,  for  the  unexpired  term,  without  opposition.
He  was  unanimously  chosen  in  January,  1888,  for
the  term  that  will  end  in  1895.

WALTHER,  Carl  Ferdinand  Wilhelm,  theo-
logian, b.  in  Langenchursdorf,  Saxony,  25  Oct.,
1811;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  7  May,  1887.  He  was
the  youngest  son  of  Rev.  Gottlieb  Heinrich  Wil-
helm Walther  and  a  descendant  of  a  long  line  of
Lutheran  clergymen.  He  received  his  classical
education  in  the  gymnasium  at  Schneeberg,  in  the
Harz  mountain,  and  his  theological  training  at  the
University  of  Leipsic,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1833.  In  the  same  year  he  became  tutor  in  the
family  of  a  councilman  at  Kahla,  and  in  1837  be-
came pastor  at  Braunsdorf.  During  his  residence
at  Kahla  he  was  acquainted  with  Rev.  Martin
Stephan  in  Dresden,  who  was  at  that  time  at  the
height  of  his  popularity,  but  with  whom  Walther
could  not  always  agree.  When,  in  1838,  Stephan  gave
the  signal  for  emigration  to  this  country,  Walther,
with  a  number  of  his  members,  decided  to  accom-
pany them,  and  they  arrived  at  New  Orleans,  La.,
on  5  Jan.,  1839.  On  the  way  Stephan  disclosed
his  true  nature  as  a  religious  fanatic,  and  Walther
separated  from  him.  Some  of  the  emigrants  set-
tled in  St.  Louis,  while  others  went  to  the  interior
of  the  state,  especially  in  Perry  county.  Among
the  latter  was  Walther,  who  located  at  Altenburg,
as  a  Lutheran  pastor,  and  after  the  deposition  of
Stephan  became  the  deliverer  of  his  deluded  fol-
lowers. In  1841,  after  the  death  of  his  brother
Herman,  he  accepted  the  pastorate  of  the  Lutheran
congregation  of  Saxons  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he
restored  harmony  among  the  people  and  gave
them  a  proper  form  of  government.  His  labors
were  so  successful  that  in  the  fall  of  1842  he  dedi-
cated the  first  Lutheran  church  of  the  Holy  Trin-
ity in  St.  Louis.  He  became  the  recognized  leader
among  his  countrymen,  who  settled  in  large  num-
bers in  Missouri,  and  was  chief  in  the  movement
that  resulted  in  1847  in  the  organization  of  the


synod  of  Missouri,  Ohio,  and  other  states,  of  which
he  was  the  first  president,  and  which  is  now  the
largest  Lutheran  synod  in  the  country.  In  1849
the  theological  seminary  that  was  organized  at
Altenburg  in  a  log-hut,  9  Oct.,  1839,  was  removed
to  St.  Louis,  and  Mr.  Walther  was  elected  its  presi-
dent, which  post  he  held  until  his  death.  He  was
pre-eminently  the  leader  of  the  so-called  Missouri
Lutherans.  In  1872  the  synodical  conference  of
the  Evangelical  Lutheran  church  in  North  Amer-
ica was  organized,  of  which  he  was  also  the  rec-
ognized leader  and  in  which  he  exercised  a  con-
trolling influence  throughout  his  life.  He  was  an
earnest  and  faithful  student  of  the  writings  of
Luther  and  the  confession  of  the  Evangelical  Lu-
theran church,  a  fine  classical  scholar,  a  profound
theologian,  an  able  leader  and  organizer,  and  a
prolific  author.  In  1844  he  began  the  publication
of  "  Der  Lutheraner,"  a  semi-monthly,  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  of  which  he  was  the  editor  until  1887,  and
in  1855  he  established  there  "  Lehre  und  Wehre,"
a  monthly,  which  he  conducted  until  his  death.
He  published  a  large  number  of  sermons,  ad-
dresses, and  criticisms,  many  of  which  appeared
in  German  and  English,  and  which  are  widely  cir-
culated in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  He  has
also  issued  several  works,  among  which  are  "Dr.
M.  Luther's  kleiner  Katechismus  ausgelegt  von
Dr.  J.  C.  Dietrich,  mit  Zusatzen"  (St.  Louis,  1858):
"  Amerikanisch-Lutherische  Evangelien-Postille  "
(1871 ;  9th  ed.,  1883) ;  "  Amerikanisch-Lutherische
Epistel-Postille "  (1871);  "Amerikanisch-Luther-
ische Pastoral  Theologie"  (1872);  "Baieri,  J.  G.,
Compendium  Theologias  Positivae :  Editio  auctior
et  emendatior  "  (3  vols.,  1879).

WALTON,  George,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  b.  in  Frederick  county,  Va.,  in
1740 ;  d.  in  Augusta,  Ga.,  2  Feb.,  1804.  He  was
entirely  self-taught,  and  was  eai"ly  apprenticed  to
a  carpenter.  His  employer  would  not  permit
him  the  use  of  a
candle  to  read  at
night,  but  in  his
zeal  for  knowledge
he  found  a  substi-
tute in  pine-knots.
At  the  expiration
of  his  apprentice-
ship he  removed
to  Georgia,  studied
law  with  Henry
Young,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in
1774,  and  began
practice  at  Augus-
ta. He  was  one  of
four  persons  that
called  a  public
meeting  at  Savan-
nah, Ga.,  27  July,
1774,  for  the  con-  •

sideration  of  public  grievances,  and  was  one  of  a  com-
mittee that  was  appointed  on  that  occasion  to  insti-
tute a  correspondence  with  the  different  parishes,
inviting  them  to  co-operate  with  the  other  provinces
in  North  America  in  opposition  to  the  arbitrary
exercise  of  power  by  the  British  government.  On
12  Jan.,  1775,  another  meeting  of  the  citizens  was
convened,  but  the  majority  were  opposed  to  taking
any  decisive  measures  against  the  mother  country,
though  Mr.  Walton  eloquently  urged  such  action.
He  was  one  of  the  committee  that  prepared  a  peti-
tion to  the  king,  and  drew  up  the  patriotic  resolu-
tions that  were  adopted  on  that  occasion  ;  was  ac-
tive in  promoting  the  Revolution  in  Georgia,  and


-4^£^,


344


WALTON


WALWORTH


from  February,  1776,  till  October,  1781,  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Continental  congress,  signing  the  Dec-
laration of  Independence  in  the  former  year.  In
December,  1778,  he  was  appointed  a  colonel  of
militia,  commanded  a  battalion  on  the  right  of
Gen.  Robert  Howe's  army  when  Savannah  was
taken  by  the  British,  was  severely  wounded  in  the
thigh,  and.  having  been  taken  prisoner,  was  not
liberated  till  September,  1779.  In  October  of  the
same  year,  and  again  in  1789,  he  was  chosen  gov-
ernor of  Georgia.  He  was  appointed  chief  justice
of  the  state  in  1783,  and  in  1787  was  elected  a  dele-
gate to  the  convention  for  framing  the  constitution
of  the  United  States,  but  did  not  take  his  seat.  In
1793  he  was  again  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,
and  in  1795-'6  he  was  U.  S.  senator.  He  was  also
one  of  the  U.  S.  commissioners  to  negotiate  a  treaty
with  the  Cherokee  Indians  in  Tennessee,  and  was
several  times  a  member  of  the  legislature  of  Geor-
gia. Gen.  Mcintosh,  then  in  command  of  the
militia  in  Georgia,  accused  Mr.  Walton  of  indirect
participation  in  the  production  of  a  forged  letter,
dated  30  Nov.,  1779,  which  was  transmitted  to  the
president  of  congress,  requesting  his  removal  from
the  command  of  the  troops  in  the  state.  This  ac-
cusation was  considered  by  the  legislature  of  Geor-
gia in  January,  1783.  A  vote  of  censure  was  passed
on  Mr.  Walton,  and  the  attorney-general  was  rec-
ommended to  institute  such  proceedings  against
him  as  the  case  required.  This  action  of  the  legis-
lature seems  strangely  inconsistent  with  Mr.  Wal-
ton's appointment  by  the  same  body  as  chief  justice
of  Georgia  on  the  preceding  day. — His  son,  George,
held  the  office  of  secretary  of  state  for  West  Florida
under  the  administration  of  Andrew  Jackson.

WALTON,  George  Edward,  physician,  b.  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  25  Dec,  1839.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Bellevue  hospital  medical  college,  New
York,  in  1864,  and,  after  serving  as  acting  as-
sistant surgeon  in  the  National  army,  visited  Eu-
rope for  study  in  1865,  and,  returning  in  1866,  be-
gan practice  in  Cincinnati.  He  afterward  became
professor  of  the  principles  and  practice  of  medicine
in  Cincinnati  college,  took  the  chair  of  medicine
and  surgery  in  1880,  and  was  president  of  the  Cin-
cinnati academy  of  medicine  in  1880-'l.  In  addi-
tion to  monographs  on  European  and  American
climatic  resorts,  and  contributions  to  periodicals,
he  has  published  "  Mineral  Springs  of  the  United
States  and  Canada  "  (New  York,  1872).

WALTON,  William,  British  author,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1784;  d.  at  Oxford  in  1857.  He  was  Brit-
ish resident  at  Santo  Domingo,  and,  in  addition
to  articles  for  reviews  and  magazines,  published
"  Present  State  of  the  Spanish  Colonies  (2  vols.,
London,  1810) ;  "  Historical  Account  of  Peruvian
Sheep "(1811);  "Sketch  of  the  United  States  of
America,  1800-1810,  by  Le  C.  F.  de  Beaujour,"
translated  (1814) ;  "  Expose  of  the  Dissensions  of
Spanish  America "  (1814) :  "  Reports  on  Mines  in
Hayti"  (1825);  "Memoir  on  Slavery  in  Brazil,"
translated  (1826) ;  and  "  Spain ;  or  Who  is  the  Law-
ful Successor  to  the  Throne  ?  "  (1834).

WALTON,  William  Claiborne,  clergyman,  b.
in  Hanover  county,  Va.,  4  Nov.,  1793  ;  d.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  18  Feb.,  1834.  He  was  the  son  of  a
blacksmith,  and  received  but  few  advantages  of
early  education,  but  afterward  studied  at  Hamp-
den Sidney  college,  and  was  licensed  as  a  preacher
of  the  Presbyterian  church,  22  Oct.,  1814,  at  Fred-
ericksburg. He  afterward  preached  at  Smithfield
and  Berryville,  Va.,  at  Washington,  D.  C,  for  a
short  period  in  1821,  and  in  February,  1823,  became
,pastor  of  the  3d  Presbyterian  church,  Baltimore.
In  May,  1827,  he  was  installed  as  pastor  of  the  2d


Presbyterian  church  at  Alexandria,  which  charge
he  retained  till  1832.  In  November,  1830,  he  was
deputed  by  the  presbytery  of  the  District  of  Co-
lumbia to  attend  the  annual  meeting  of  the  synod
of  Virginia,  and  in  1832  he  was  chosen  missionary
agent  and  evangelist  for  the  presbyteries  of  East
and  West  Hanover.  Subsequently  he  became  pas-
tor of  the  Free  church,  Hartford,  Conn.  He  was
remarkably  successful  as  an  evangelist,  and  con-
tributed in  a  considerable  degree  to  the  revival  of
religion  in  the  Presbyterian,  Congregational,  and
other  churches  during  1831,  whereby  more  than
100,000  persons  were  brought  into  church  com-
munion. He  published  a  small  volume  of  sermons,
besides  separate  discourses,  and  a  sketch  of  the  life
of  his  daughter,  Margaret  Ann.  A  poem  com-
memorative of  him  was  written  by  Mrs.  Lydia  H.
Sigourney  after  his  death,  and  his  life  was  pub-
lished bv  Joshua  N.  Danforth  (New  York,  1837).

WALWORTH,  Jeannette  Ritchie  Hader-
iiiiinii.  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  22  Feb.,
1837.  She  removed  to  Natchez,  Miss.,  while  a
child,  with  her  father,  Charles  Julius  Hadermann,
a  German  baron,  who  was  afterward  president  of
Jefferson  college.  On  his  -death  the  family  re-
moved to  Louisiana,  and  when  she  was  sixteen
years  old  Miss  Hadermann  became  a  governess.
Having  married  Maj.  Douglas  Walworth,  of  Nat-
chez, she  accompanied  him  to  his  plantation  in
southern  Arkansas,  thence  removed  to  Memphis,
Tenn.,  and  finally  to  New  York  city,  where  she
now  resides.  In  addition  to  contributions  to  the
periodical  press,  the  "  Continent,"  and  other  maga-
zines, she  has  published  "  Forgiven  at  Last "  (Phila-
delphia, 1870);  "The  Silent  Witness  "(1871);  "Dead
Men's  Shoes"  (1872);  "Heavy  Yokes"  (Boston,
1874);  "Nobody's  Business"  (New  York,  1878);
"  The  Bar  Sinister  "  (1885) ;  "  Without  Blemish  "
(1885) ;  "  Alice  and  Scruples  "  (1886) ;  "  At  Bay  "
(New  York,  1887);  "The  New  Man  at  Rossmere"
(1887);  "Southern  Silhouettes"  (New  York,  1887);
"True  to  Herself"  (New  York,  1888);  'That  Girl
from  Texas  "  (New  York,  1888).

WALWORTH,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  Groton,
Conn.,  in  1765;  d.  in  Cleveland.  Ohio,  10  Sept.,
1812.  He  settled  at  Pairiesville,  Ohio,  in  1800,  and
in  1802  was  made  justice  of  the  peace  for  Trum-
bull county.  In  1803  Gov.  Tiffin  appointed  him
associate  judge  of  the  superior  court.  In  1806  he
held  simultaneously  four  distinct  offices — those  of
inspector  of  the  port  of  Cuyahoga,  collector  of  the
district  of  Erie,  associate  judge  of  Geauga  county,
and  postmaster  at  Cleveland,  to  which  place  he
had  removed  in  1805.  The  post-office  at  Cleve-
land was  kept  in  the  upper  story  of  a  small  build-
ing on  Superior  street,  and  the  total  receipts  of  the
office  for  the  first  quarter  were  only  $2.83.  The
place  had  then  a  population  of  less  than  fifty,  and  a
mail  came  to  it  only  twice  a  week.  When  it  arrived
Mr.  Walworth  delivered  the  letters  personally,
carrying  them  around  in  his  hat ;  and  that  duty
performed,  it  is  said  that  he  would  lock  up  his
office  and  "  go  a-fishing  with  the  boys."  He  held
the  offices  of  associate  judge  and  collector  of  cus-
toms till  his  death,  and  was  much  esteemed. — His
wife,  Julianna  Morgan,  b.  in  Groton,  Conn.,  31
Dec,  1769;  d.  in  Cleveland,  2  March,  1853,  was  one
of  the  three  women  that  refused  to  leave  their
homes  when  the  stampede  occurred  at  Cleveland
on  the  occasion  of  Gen.  William  Hull's  surrender.
She  was  an  accomplished  horsewoman,  and  often
took  long  horseback  journeys  with  her  husband,
once  crossing  the  Alleghames  with  him,  and  go-
ing in  this  manner  to  the  eastern  states  by  way  of
Pittsburg  and  Philadelphia


WALWORTH


WALWORTH


345


fl.M.S£eXvJ?%y


WALWORTH,  Reuben  Hyde,  jurist  and  the
last  of  the  chancellors  of  New  York  state,  b.  in
Bozrah,  Conn.,  26  Oct.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Saratoga  Springs,
N.  Y.,  27  Nov.,  1867.  He  was  the  third  son  of
Benjamin  Walworth,
who  in  the  early  part
of  the  Revolutionary
war  was  quartermas-
ter of  Col.  Nicholl's
New  York  regiment,
and  acted  as  adju-
tant at  the  battle  of
White  Plains.  The
family  was  original-
ly of  London,  Eng-
land, the  American
branch  descending
from  William  Wal-
worth, who  emigrat-
ed from  that  city  in
1671  and  settled  on
Fisher's  island,  and
afterward  in  New
London,  Conn.  His  father  removed  to  Hoosick,
N.  Y.,  during  the  son's  early  childhood,  where  the
latter  acquired  the  mere  rudiments  of  an  educa-
tion by  great  industry,  and  at  the  age  of  sixteen
taught  in  a  school.  At  seventeen  he  began  the
study  of  law  at  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1809  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  In  January,  1810,  he  settled
at  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  where  he  speedily  rose  to
eminence  in  his  profession,  and  in  1811  he  was
appointed  a  master  in  chancery,  and  one  of  the
county  judges.  At  the  invasion  of  Plattsburg
by  the  British  army  in  September,  1814,  Mr.  Wal-
worth, who  since  1812  had  held  the  post  of  adju-
tant-general of  the  New  York  militia,  was  aide  to
Gen.  Benjamin  Mooers,  and  witnessed  Com.  Mc-
Donough's  battle  and  victory  on  the  lake,  having
been  deputed  to  watch  the  contest  from  the  shore
and  report  the  result  to  his  chief.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1821-'3,  and  in  April  of  the
latter  year  was  appointed  judge  of  the  4th  judicial
district  of  New  York  state,  which  office  he  held
for  five  years.  In  October  of  the  same  year  he  re-
moved to  Saratoga  Springs.  He  presided  in  his
circuit  until  1828,  when  he  was  appointed  chan-
cellor of  the  state  of  New  York.  This  office  he
held  for  twenty  years,  when  the  new  constitution
of  1848  abolished  the  court  of  chancery.  In  1828
he  removed  to  Albany,  but  in  the  spring  of  1833
he  returned  to  Saratoga  Springs  and  to  his  resi-
dence at  Pine  Grove,  where  he  remained  until  his
death.  Pine  Grove  (seen  in  the  accompanying
illustration)  was  for  many  years  a  much-fre-
quented place,  few  residences  in  the  land  seeing
more  of  the  great  celebrities  of  the  country,  es-
pecially jurists  and  statesmen,  among  them  De
Witt  Clinton,  Martin  Van  Buren,  Silas  Wright,
Daniel  D.  Tompkins,  William  L.  Marcy,  Francis
Granger,  William  H.  Seward,  Stephen  A.  Douglas,
Millard  Fillmore,  James  Buchanan,  Chancellor
Kent,  Judge  Story,  Washington  Irving,  Fenimore
Cooper,  and  Gen.  Winfield  Scott.  Chancellor
Walworth  may  justly  be  regarded  as  the  great
artisan  of  our  equity  laws.  In  some  sense  he  was
the  Bentham  of  America,  without  the  bold  specu-
lations and  fantastical  theories  which,  to  a  certain
extent,  characterized  the  great  British  jurist.
What  Bentham  did  in  removing  defects  in  English
jurisprudence  Walworth  did  in  renovating  and
simplifying  the  equity  laws  of  the  United  States.
Justice  Story  pronounced  him  "  the  greatest  equity
jurist  living."  Before  his  day  the  court  of  chan-
cery in  New  York  state  was  a  tribunal  of  ill-de-


fined powers  and  uncertain  jurisdiction,  in  a  meas-
ure subservient  to  the  English  court  of  chancery
in  its  procedure.  Chancellor  Walworth  abolished
much  of  that  subtlety,  many  of  those  prolix  and
bewildering  formalities  which  had  their  origin  in
the  middle  ages.  He  reduced  the  practice  of  his
court  to  standard  rules,  which  he  prepared  with
great  industry.  These  rules  greatly  improved  the
old  system  of  equity  practice,  and  though  he  has
been  charged  with  thus  complicating  the  court  of
chancery  with  expensive  machinery,  it  cannot  be
gainsaid  that  with  Chancellor  Walworth  equity
was  the  soul  and  spirit  of  law,  "  creating  positive
and  defining  rational  law,  flexible  in  its  nature,
and  suited  to  the  fortunes,  cases,  and  reciprocal
obligations  of  men."  The  contents  of  fourteen
volumes  of  Paige  and  Barbour's  "  Chancery  Re-
ports," containing  the  adjudications  in  his  own
court,  and  a  large  part  of  the  matter  of  the  thirty-
eight  volumes  of  Wendell,  Hill,  and  Denio's  "Re-
ports," consisting  of  the  opinions  he  pronounced
in  the  court  of  errors,  attest  his  vast  judicial  la-
bors. All  widows  and  orphans  in  the  state  were
wards  of  the  court  of  chancery.  The  chancellor
construed  this  tutelage  in  the  most  simple  sense
and  acted  accordingly.  His  wards  had  easy  ac-
cess to  him  without  any  formalities  of  red  tape.
He  listened  to  their  stories  patiently,  instituted
inquiries  after  his  own  fashion,  and  often  made
some  prompt  order  in  their  favor  upon  such  in-
formal appli-
cation. Chan-
cellor Wal-
worth was  of
such  a  genial,
winning  man-
ner that  who-
ever came  in
contact  with
him  was  at
once  placed  at
ease.  He  was
also  very  be-
nevolent, and
was  constant-
ly looking
about  him  for

some  deserving  object  upon  whom  to  exercise  his
kindness.  He  was  for  many  years  an  elder  in  the
Presbyterian  church,  and  took  it  upon  himself  to
care  especially  for  the  poor  of  the  congregation.
He  was  an  early  and  stanch  friend  of  temperance,
and  for  a  long  period  was  president  of  the  Ameri-
can temperance  union.  He  was  also  vice-president
of  the  Bible  society  and  the  Tract  society.  Prince-
ton gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1835.  He
was  the  author  of  "  Rules  and  Orders  of  the  New
York  Court  of  Chancery  "  (Albany,  1829 ;  several
revised  eds.),  and  "  Hyde  Genealogy  "  (2  vols.,  1864).
— His  son,  Clarence  Alphonsus,  author,  b.  in
Plattsburg.  N.  Y.,  30  May,  1820,  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1838,  and  studied  law,  first  at
Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  and  afterward  at  Albany.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  July,  1841,  and  prac-
tised one  year  at  Rochester.  Afterward  he  was  a
student  at  the  General  theological  seminary  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church.  New  York  city,  for
three  years,  and  then,  uniting  with  the  Roman  Cath-
olic church,  went  to  Belgium,  spending  three  years
with  the  Redemptionists,  and  at  the  College  of
Wittemberg,  where  he  was  ordained  priest.  He
was  then  sent  to  England,  taking  charge,  while
there,  of  a  new  church  at  Upton  on  Severn,  and
acting  as  a  missionary  in  London,  Liverpool,  and
Manchester. He returned  in  March, 1850,  and


346


WALWORTH


WANTON


was  a  travelling  missionary  throughout  the  United
States  for  fifteen  years.  He  was  also  one  of  the
five  founders  of  the  order  of  Paulists  in  the  United
States.  (See  Hecker,  Isaac  T.)  In  1864  his  health
compelled  him  to  relinquish  his  work  as  a  mission-
ary and  return  to  his  home  at  Saratoga  Springs.
and  he  was  afterward  made  rector  of  St.  Mary's
parish,  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  which  post  he  has  since
remained.  Father  Walworth  has  ever  been  an  ad-
vocate of  the  cause  of  temperance,  and  has  for
several  years  been  vice-president  of  the  Law  and
order  league  of  the  state  of  New  York.  He  is  the
author  of  "  The  Gentle  Skeptic,"  a  work  on  the
authorship  and  inspiration  of  the  Old  Testament
(New  York,  1860);  "  The  Doctrine  of  Hell,  venti-
lated in  a  Discussion  between  Rev.  C.  A.  Walworth
and  William  H.  Burr,  Esq."  (1874) ;  and  "  Andia-
tarocte,  or  the  Eve  of  Lady  Day  on  Lake  George,
and  other  Poems,  Hymns,  and  Meditations  in
Verse  "  (1888).  He  has  also  contributed  to  "  Brown-
son's  Review  "  and  to  "  The  Catholic  World,"  and  is
well  known  as  a  lecturer. — Another  son,  Mansfield
Tracy,  novelist,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y,  3  Dec,  1830;
d.  in  New  York  city,  3  June,  1873,  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1849  and  at  Harvard  law-
school  in  1852,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1855.
After  practising  in  Albany  with  his  father  for  some
time,  ne  abandoned  his  profession  for  that  of  lit-
erature, began  writing  for  the  "  Home  Journal,"
and  subsequently  composed  many  sensational  ro-
mances. He  was  intentionally  shot  and  killed  by
his  son,  whose  trial  for  the  crime  is  celebrated  in
American  law  annals.  The  son  was  acquitted  on
the  ground  of  mental  aberration,  and  placed  in  an
insane  asylum.  Mr.  Walworth's  books,  which  at
one  time  had  a  large  circulation,  include  "  Mission
of  Death  "  (New  York,  1853) ;  "  Lulu  "  (1860) ;  "  Hot-
spur" (1861);  "Stormcliff"  (1865);  "Warwick"
<1868) ;  "  Delaplane,  or  the  Sacrifice  of  Irene "
(1872) ;  and  "  Beverly,  or  the  White  Mask  "  (1873).
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  engaged  on  the
"  Lives  of  the  Chancellors  of  New  York  State,"
and  had  just  completed  a  "  Life  of  Chancellor  Liv-
ingston." After  his  death  two  works  were  pub-
lished from  his  manuscripts :  "  Married  in  Mask  "
<1888),  and  "  Tahara,  a  Leaf  from  Empire  "  (1888).
—His  wife,  Ellen  Hardin,  author,  b.  in  Jackson-
ville, 111.,  20  Oct.,  1832,  is  the  daughter  of  Col.  John
J.  Hardin,  who  was  killed  at  Buena  Vista.  She
has  been  a  member  of  the  board  of  education  for
three  years  in  Saratoga  Springs,  and  principal,  for
six  years,  of  a  school  for  young  ladies.  She  is  an
active  trustee  of  the  Saratoga  monument  associa-
tion, and  through  her  instrumentality  about  twen-
ty spots  of  historic  interest  on  the  battle-fields
have  been  recently  marked  by  granite  tablets.
Mrs.  Walworth  has  published  an  account  of  the
Burgoyne  campaign,  with  several  original  maps
<New  York,  1877),  and  has  contributed  to  the
"  Magazine  of  American  History  "  an  account  of
the  battle  of  Buena  Vista — a  chapter  of  the  work
on  which  she  is  now  engaged,  "  The  Life  of  Col.
John  J.  Hardin,  and  a  History  of  the  Hardin
Family."  She  has  also  written  several  patriotic
and  other  poems,  and  has  ready  a  volume  of  essays
on  literary,  artistic,  scientific,  and  educational  top-
ics.— Their  daughter,  Ellen  Hardin,  author,  b.  in
Saratoga  Springs,  2  Oct.,  1858,  has  published  "  An
Old  World,  as  seen  through  Young  Eyes  "  (New
York,  1875),  and  has  now  ready  a  work  entitled
"  The  Lily  of  the  Mohawks,  or  the  Life  and  Times
of  Katarie  Tegokwithi,"  the  first  Iroquois  convert
to  the  Christian  faith. — Another  daughter,  Reu-
bena  Hyde,  b.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  21  Feb.,  1867,
has  published  poems  in  magazines,  and  is  the  au-


thor of  a  comediette  entitled  "Where  was  Elsie?
or  the  Saratoga  Fairies  "  (New  York,  1888).

WANAMAKER,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  1838.  He  was  educated  in  the
common  schools,  and  engaged  early  in  business.
In  1861  he  established  a  clothing-house,  to  which
he  afterward  added  other  branches  of  business,  and
he  now  has  one  of  the  largest  retail  stores  in  the
United  States.  In  1887  Mr.  Wanamaker  adopted
the  system  of  co-operation  in  his  store,  and  dur-
ing the  first  year  of  its  operation  over  $100,000
was  paid  to  employes  in  excess  of  salaries.  He
has  also  organized  a  savings-bank  for  employes,
a  building  association,  classes  for  instruction,  and
a  library.  In  1858  he  began  a  Sunday-school
in  southwest  Philadelphia,  out  of  which  has  grown
Bethany  Presbyterian  church,  and  he  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  Christian  commission,  and
president  of  the  Young  men's  Christian  asso-
ciation of  Philadelphia  in  1870-'83.  Mr.  Wana-
maker was  chairman  of  the  bureau  of  revenue  and
of  the  press  committee,  which  rendered  efficient
service  in  aid  Of  the  Centennial  exposition  in  Phila-
delphia in  1876.

WANGENHEIM,  Frederick  Adam  Julias
(vong'-en-hime),  Baron  von,  German  scientist,  b.  in
the  castle  of  Wangenheim,  near  Waltershausen,
duchy  of  Coburg-Gotha,  in  1747;  d.  in  Gumbin-
nen,  Prussia,  25  March,  1800.  He  received  his
education  at  Waltershausen,  and  in  1766  entered
the  service  of  the  duke  of  Coburg  as  lieutenant.
He  passed  afterward  to  the  Prussian  army  and  at-
tained the  rank  of  captain.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1777  in  the  Hessian  contingent  in  the
British  service,  commanded  a  squadron  of  light  cav-
alry in  New  York  and  Pennsylvania  in  1778-83,  and
won  a  reputation  for  his  successful  raids.  On  his
return  to  Germany  he  was  given  the  cross  of  the
Hessian  military  order,  and  later  re-entered  the
Prussian  service.  He  had  studied  while  in  North
America  the  natural  history  of  the  country,  and
especially  the  trees  and  shrubs,  and  in  1785,  in  a
memoir  to  the  Berlin  academy,  showed  the  im-
mense advantages  that  would  be  derived  from  the
naturalization  of  several  species  of  American  trees.
On  request  of  the  academy  he  was  then  sent  to
Gumbinnen  as  director-general  of  the  waters  and
forests  of  eastern  Prussia,  where  he  carried  on  ex-
periments on  a  large  scale  and  planted  a  great
number  of  American  trees.  His  works  include
"  Beschreibung  einiger  Arten  von  Baumen  die  in
Nordamerika  wachsen,  mit  Bezug  auf  ihren  Ge-
brauch  in  den  deutschen  Waldern,  nach  den  Be-
obachtungen  in  den  nordamerikanischen  Provinzen
von  1778-1783"  (Gottingen,  1781);  "Supplement
zur  Walder-Kultur- Wissenschaft,  mit  Anwen-
dung  auf  die  Umpflanzung  der  Baumarten  die  in
Nordamerika  wachsen  "  (1787) ;  "  Beschreibung  der
verschiedenen  Holzarten  die  in  Nordamerika
wachsen"  (1788);  " Betrachtungen  tlber  die  Tan-
nen  von  Preussisch-Litthauen  "  (1789) ;  "  Betrach-
tungen iiber  die  Weichholzer  die  in  Nordamerika
wachsen "  (1795) ;  and  several  memoirs  in  the
"  Transactions  "  of  the  Berlin  academy  of  sciences.

WANTON,  Joseph,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,
b.  in  Newport,  R.  L,  in  1705  ;  d.  there,  19  July,
1780.  His  father,  William  (1680-1737),  was  gov-
ernor of  Rhode  Island  in  W32-'4.  The  son  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1751,  acquired  wealth  as
a  merchant,  and  in  1769  was  elected  governor.  In
June,  1775,  the  assembly  of  Rhode  Island  deprived
Gov.  Wanton  of  all  power,  in  consequence  of  his
opposition  to  the  will  of  that  body  and  his  sup-
posed sympathy  with  the  royalists,  and  from  that
period  Deputy-Governor  Nicholas  Cooke  acted  as


WARBURTON


WARD


347


the  executive  authority.  Among  the  chief  causes
that  induced  the  people  to  regard  Gov.  Wanton
with  suspicion  was,  doubtless,  his  acceptance,  in
1773,  of  an  appointment,  under  the  great  seal  of
England,  to  inquire  into  the  burning  of  the  king's
ship,  the  "  Gaspee,"  by  the  Whigs.  While  New-
port was  occupied  by  the  British  he  was  superin-
tendent of  the  troops,  and  at  the  evacuation  he
followed  the  royal  army  to  New  York.  He  was  a
man  of  amiable  disposition,  elegant  manners,  and
handsome  person.

WARBURTON,  George,  British  author,  b.
near  Tullamore,  County  Galway,  Ireland,  about
1812;  d.  in  1857.  He  entered  the  British  army,
attained  the  rank  of  major,  and  resided  in  Canada
for  some  time.  After  his  return  to  England  he
was  a  member  of  parliament  for  Harwich.  He
died  by  his  own  hand.  Mr.  Warburton  published
"  Hochelaga,  or  England  in  the  New  World "  (2
vols.,  London,  1846) ;  "  The  Conquest  of  Canada  "
(2  vols.,  1849) ;  and  "  A  Memoir  of  Charles  Mor-
daunt,  Earl  of  Peterborough  "  (3  vols.,  1853).  His
books  were  edited  by  his  brother  Eliot,  who  became
distinguished  as  an  author.

WARD,  Aaron,  congressman,  b.  in  Sing  Sing,
N.  Y„  5  July,  1790 ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  2
March,  1867.  He  received  a  classical  education,
and  began  the  study  of  law,  which  he  relinquished
to  join  the  army  at  the  age  of  eighteen.  He  served
as  a  lieutenant  under  Gen.  Wade  Hampton  in  the
expedition  against  Montreal,  and  was  promoted
captain  in  1814.  After  the  close  of  the  war  with
Great  Britain  he  resumed  his  legal  studies  in
Oxford,  N.  Y.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
practice  in  Sing  Sing.  He  married  in  1820  a
daughter  of  Elkanah  Watson,  and  shortly  afterward
was  appointed  district  attorney  for  Westchester
county.  He  entered  congress  on  5  Dec,  1825,  and
served  till  3  March,  1829.  After  an  intermission
of  one  term  he  was  again  elected  for  three  consecu-
tive terms,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1831,  till  3  March,
1837,  and  four  years  later  returned  for  a  single
congress,  which  closed  its  sessions  on  3  March,
1843.  He  was  a  supporter  of  the  administrations
of  Andrew  Jackson  and  Martin  Van  Buren,  took
an  active  part  in  commercial  legislation  and  in  all
measures  that  affected  the  interests  of  New  York,
and  also  concerned  himself  with  the  framing  of
military  bills,  and  was  the  special  advocate  of  state
education  for  soldiers'  children.  In  1846  he  was
a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention,
and  in  1855  he  was  defeated  as  a  candidate  for
secretary  of  state  of  New  York.  He  was  a  major-
general  of  militia  from  1835  till  1853.  Gen.  Ward
was  the  author  of  "  Around  the  Pyramids,"  de-
scribing travels  in  Europe  and  the  East  (New
York,  1863).  He  died  at  the  home  of  his  son-in-
law,  Samuel  J.  Randall.  Another  daughter  married
John  R.  Thompson,  U.  S.  senator  from  New  Jersey.
— His  nephew,  Elijah,  congressman,  b.  in  Sing
Sing,  N.  Y.,  16  Sept.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Roslyn,  L.  I.,  7
Feb.,  1882,  received  a  classical  education,  engaged
in  commercial  pursuits  in  New  York  city,  and  was
chosen  president  of  the  Mercantile  library  associa-
tion in  1839.  Afterward  he  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1843,  and  practised  in  New  York
city.  He  was  judge-advocate-general  of  the  state  in
1853-'5,  and  was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,
serving  from  7  Dec,  1857,  till  3  March,  1859.  He
was  defeated  at  the  next  election,  but  was  successful
in  the  following  two,  serving  from  4  July,  1861,  till
3  March,  1865.  On  being  again  defeated,  he  spent
J;wo  years  in  Europe,  and  was  not  again  a  candidate
till  1874,  when  he  defeated  his  Republican  competi-
tor, but  he  was  beaten  in  the  succeeding  election


by  a  rival  Democrat.  In  congress  he  took  part  in
the  discussion  of  commercial  questions,  advocating
an  interoceanic  canal,  uniform  bankruptcy  laws,
postal  subsidies  to  steamships,  and  reciprocity  with
Canada,  and  opposing  a  paper  currency.  In  March,
1861,  he  addressed  commercial  bodies  in  New  York
city  in  favor  of  free  canals,  and  in  1871,  in  response
to  a  request  from  members  of  congress  for  an  ex-
pi-ession  of  his  views,  proposed  freedom  of  com-
mercial intercourse  betweeen  the  United  States  and
Canada,  on  which  subject  he  published  two  reports.
Besides  single  speeches  on  commercial  relations
with  Canada,  the  Geneva  award,  the  Hawaiian
treaty,  and  the  shipping  act,  there  has  been  pub-
lished a  volume  of  his  "  Speeches  on  Commercial,
Financial,  and  other  Subjects  "  (New  York,  1877). —
His  cousin,  Horatio,  banker,  b.  in  New  York  city
about  1810 :  d.  in  London,  England,  in  April,  1868,
resided  in  London  for  many  years  before  his  death.
He  bequeathed  $100,000  to  the  National  soldiers'
and  sailors'  home,  Washington,  D.  C,  and  an  equal
sum  for  the  education  of  soldiers'  orphans.

WARD,  Andrew  Henshaw,  antiquary,  b.  in
Shrewsbury,  Mass.,  26  May,  1784 ;  d.  in  Newton-
ville,  Mass.,  18  Feb.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1808,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  at  Northampton,  Mass.,  in  1811,  and  practised
till  1829  at  Shrewsbury,  where,  while  filling  the
office  of  town-clerk,  he  transcribed  all  the  records
of  births,  deaths,  and  marriages,  and  was  active  in
putting  an  end  to  the  custom  of  "  farming  out "
the  town's  poor.  For  the  period  between  1829
and  1853,  except  during  two  years,  he  was  employed
in  the  custom-house  at  Boston,  and  from  1837,
when  a  general  bankruptcy  law  went  into  force,
till  1846,  when  it  expired,  he  was  U.  S.  commis-
sioner of  insolvency  for  the  district  of  Massachu-
setts. He  was  a  delegate  from  Newton  to  the  con-
vention of  1853  for  revising  the  constitution  of
Massachusetts.  For  more  than  fifty  years  he  was
a  justice  of  the  peace,  either  in  Shrewsbury,  Bos-
ton, or  West  Newton,  where  he  settled  in  1842.
Mr.  Ward  was  an  active  member  of  the  New
England  historic-genealogical  society  almost  from
its  first  organization,  and  a  frequent  contributor
to  its  "  Register."  He  published  a  "  History  of  the
Town  of  Shrewsbury  "  (Boston,  1847),  containing
a  "  Familv  Register,"  which  was  also  issued  sepa-
rately; "Ward  Family:  Descendants  of  William
Ward  "  (1851) ;  and  "  Genealogical  History  of  the
Rice  Family  "  (1858).  See  his  "  Memoir,"  bv  Will-
iam B.  Trask  "  (Boston,  1863).

WARD,  Artenias,  soldier,  b.  in  Shrewsbury,
Mass.,  in  1727;  d.  there,  28  Oct.,  1800.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1748,  entered  public  life
at  an  early  age  as  a  representative  to  the  general
assembly,  and  was  afterward  chosen  to  the  execu-
tive council.  In  1752  he  was  a  justice  of  the  peace
in  his  native  town.  In  1755  he  served  as  major  in
Col.  Abraham  Williams's  regiment,  and  in  1758
he  was  major  in  the  one  that  was  commanded  by
William  Williams.  He  accompanied  the  expedi-
tion under  Gen.  James  Abercrombie  against  the
French  and  Indians,  attaining  the  rank  of  lieuten-
ant-colonel, and  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the
3d  regiment.  Afterward  he  represented  his  native
town  in  the  legislature,  where  he  took  an  active
part  in  the  controversies  between  the  colonial  gov-
ernors and  the  house  of  representatives  and  was
one  of  the  regularly  chosen  members  that  were  dis-
placed by  the  "mandamus  councillors"  in  1774.
On  27  Oct.,  1774,  he  was  appointed  a  brigadier-
general  by  the  Provincial  congress  of  Massachu-
setts, to  which  he  was  a  delegate,  and  on  19  May,
1775,  he  was  made  commander-in-chief  of  the


348


WARD


WARD


Massachusetts  forces.  He  was  in  nominal  com-
mand at  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  though  he  re-
mained at  headquarters  in  Cambridge  and  had  no
share  in  determining  the  events  of  that  day.  On
17  June  he  was  appointed  by  the  Continental  con-
gress first  on  the
list  of  major-gen-
erals, and  he  was
in  command  of  the
forces  besieging
Boston  until  the  ar-
rival of  Gen.  Wash-
ington, after  which
he  was  second  in
command,  being
stationed  with  the
right  wing  on  Rox-
bury  heights.  In
consequence  of  im-
paired health  he
resigned  his  com-
mission in  April,
1776,  but  at  the  re-
quest of  Gen.  Wash-
ington he  contin-
ued to  act  until  the
end  of  May.  He  was  elected  chief  justice  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  of  Worcester  county  in  1776,
was  president  of  the  Massachusetts  executive  coun-
cil in  1777,  and  a  member  of  the  legislature  for  six-
teen years,  serving  as  speaker  in  1785.  In  1779  he
was  appointed  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  con-
gress, but,  owing  to  failing  health,  did  not  take  his
seat.  Being  afterward  elected  to  congress  as  a  Fed-
eralist, he  served  from  4  Oct.,  1791,  till  3  March,
1795.  He  possessed  integrity  and  unyielding  prin-
ciples, and  his  judicial  conduct,  especially  during
Shays's  rebellion  in  1786,  was  highly  commended.—
His  son,  Artenias,  jurist,  b.  in  Shrewsbury,  Mass.,
9  Jan.,  1762 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  7  Oct.,  1847,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1783,  studied  law.  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  Shrewsbury  un-
til 1809,  when  he  removed  to  Boston.  He  served  in
the  legislature,  was  a  member  of  the  council,  and
was  elected  to  the  13th  congress  as  a  peace  candi-
date, serving  from  24  May,  1813,  till  3  March,
1817.  From  1820  till  1839  he  was  chief  justice  of
the  court  of  comnion  pleas.  Harvard  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1842.

WARD,  Christopher  Longstreet,  lawyer,  b.
in  New  Milford,  Susquehanna  co.,  Pa.,  in  1807 ;
d.  in  Towanda,  Pa.,  14  May,  1870.  His  father,
William  Ward,  emigrated  from  Litchfield  county,
Conn.  Christopher  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer,
and  from  January,  1831,  till  March,  1836,  published
the  "  Susquehanna  Register  "  at  Montrose,  Pa.  In
1832  materials  that  he  had  collected  for  a  history
of  Susquehanna  county  were  destroyed  by  fire.  In
1837  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1840  he  removed
to  Towanda,  Bradford  co.,  where  he  lent  his  aid  to
many  enterprises  of  lasting  benefit  to  the  town.
He  was  agent  for  many  of  the  large  landed  estates
in  northern  Pennsylvania,  was  president  of  the
Atlantic  and  Great  Western  railway  during  its
construction  through  the  state,  and  through  his
instrumentality  the  means  for  its  early  completion
were  obtained  in  Europe.  He  was  a  personal  friend
of  Andrew  Jackson,  and  active  in  the  counsels  of
the  Democratic  party,  but  never  held  office.  Mr.
Ward  collected  a  library  of  about  10,000  volumes,
which  contained,  it  is  said,  more  rare  works  than
any  other  private  library  in  the  state.  His  collec-
tion of  autographs  was  unusually  complete.  This
library,  with  his  pictures  and  collections  of  art.
was  presented  by  his  family  to  Lafayette  college.


WARD,  Durbin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Augusta,  Ky.,
11  Feb.,  1819 ;  d.  in  Lebanon,  Ohio,  22  May,  1886.
He  removed  with  his  family  to  Fayette  county,
Ind.,  where  he  was  brought  up  on  a  farm,  entered
Miami  university  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  remain-
ing two  years,  then  studied  law  with  Thomas  Cor-
win,  and,  on  being  admitted  to  practice  in  1842,
became  his  partner.  From  1845  till  1851  he  was
prosecuting  attorney  of  Warren  county,  Ohio.  He
was  elected  to  the  first  legislature  under  the  pres-
ent constitution  in  1851,  was  defeated  as  a  Demo-
cratic candidate  for  congress  in  1856,  also  as  nomi-
nee for  the  office  of  attorney-general  of  Ohio  in
1858,  and  in  1860  was  a  member  of  the  Democratic
national  convention  that  met  at  Charleston,  S.  C,
and  reassembled  at  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  which  he
supported  the  candidacy  of  Stephen  A.  Douglas.
He  enlisted  in  the  National  army  as  a  private,,
served  in  West  Virginia  under  Gen.  George  B„
McClellan,  and  subsequently  took  part  in  the  cam-
paigns of  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas,  being  appointed
major  of  the  17th  Ohio  infantrv  on  17  Aug.,  1861r
and  lieutenant-colonel  on  31  Dec,  1862.  He  re-
ceived a  disabling  wound  at  Chickamauga  and  was
mustered  out  without  his  knowledge ;  but  he  ob-
tained the  recall  of  the  order,  was  made  colonel  of
his  regiment  on  13  Nov.,  1863,  and  with  a  crippled
arm  served  through  the  remainder  of  the  war,  be-
ing brevetted  brigadier-general  on  18  Oct.,  1865..
In  November.  1866,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  district
attorney  for  the  southern  district  of  Ohio,  but  he
was  removed  when  Gen.  Grant  became  president.
He  entered  the  state  senate  in  1870.  The  plan  of
the  present  circuit-court  system  of  Ohio  was  drafted
by  him.  Gen.  Ward  was  a  political  orator,  and  at
the  Democratic  national  convention  of  1884  pre-
sented the  name  of  Allen  G.  Thurman  as  a  candi-
date for  the  presidency.  He  began,  but  did  not
live  to  complete,  a  work  on  constitutional  law,  to
be  entitled  "  The  Federal  Institutes."  A  volume
of  his  speeches  has  been  published  by  his  widow
(Columbus,  1888).

WARD,  Frederick  Townsend,  soldier,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  29  Nov.,  1831 ;  d.  in  Ningpo,  China,
21  Sept.,  1862.  He  was  educated  at  the  Salem  high-
school,  became  a  sailor,  served  in  the  French  army
during  the  Crimean  war,  was  in  business  for  some
time  as  a  ship-broker  in  New  York  city,  and  about
1860,  at  the  period  when  the  Taeping  rebels  were
everywhere  successful,  landed  in  Shanghai.  Rais-
ing a  band  of  various  nationalities,  he  offered  to
capture  a  certain  city  for  a  fixed  price.  His  first
victory  was  the  capture  of  the  walled  town  of
Sungkiang,  which  was  held  by  10,000  rebels,  for
which  service  he  was  made  a  mandarin  of  the  fourth
degree.  He  cleared  the  country  about  Shanghai,
receiving  his  pav  for  each  victory,  disappeared  for
a  time,  returned  at  the  head  of  three  native  regi-
ments that  he  had  armed  and  trained  like  European
soldiers,  and  routed  a  greatly  superior  force,  saving
the  city  from  capture.  The  European  officers,  who
had  shunned  him  as  an  adventurer  and  an  outlaw,
now  admitted  him  into  their  counsels  and  welcomed
his  aid  in  organizing  troops  and  guarding  a  radius
of  thirty  miles  around  Shanghai.  In  the  autumn
of  1861  he  captured  Ningpo,  an  important  strong-
hold. He  adopted  the  Chinese  nationality  and
manners,  being  called  Hwa,  married  the  daughter
of  an  influential  native,  and  was  made  a  mandarin
of  the  highest  grade  and  admiral-general  in  the
service  of  the  emperor.  He  was  mortally  wounded
while  directing  an  assault  on  Tsekie.  At  the  time  of
the  "  Trent "  affair,  when  war  between  the  United
States  and  England  was  expected,  and  the  British
in  China  laid  plans  to  seize  American  shipping  and


WARD


WARD


349


other  property,  Ward  prepared  to  take  possession
of  war-ships  and  merchant  vessels  of  Great  Britain
then  in  Chinese  waters.  He  was  anxious  to  close
up  his  affairs  in  China,  in  order  to  take  part  in  the
civil  war,  and  offered  a  contribution  of  $  10,000  to
the  National  cause,  but  was  killed  before  the  an-
swer came  from  Minister  Anson  Burlingame.  He
was  succeeded  in  his  command  by  Major  Charles
G.  Gordon,  who  gained  renown  by  the  subsequent
exploits  of  the  "  Ever- Victorious  Army,"  which  he
brought  to  a  high  state  of  discipline,  but  which
Ward  had  created  and  first  organized.  The  Chinese
paid  Ward  the  honor  of  burying  him  in  the  Con-
fucian cemetery  at  Ningpo,  where  they  have  erected
a  great  mausoleum,  besides  placing  monuments  on
the  scenes  of  his  victories.  He  had  converted  his
large  possessions  into  money  and  negotiable  securi-
ties, which  disappeared  from  his  person  when  he
was  killed.  The  English  officer  who  was  last  with
him  was  suspected  of  the  theft,  and  in  the  United
States  consular  court  at  Shanghai  there  were  pro-
tracted proceedings  in  the  Ward  estate  case.

WARD,  Genevieve,  the  stage-name  of  Lucia
Genoveva  Teresa,  Countess  Guerbel,  actress,  b.
in  New  York  city,  27  March,  1833.  She  is  a  grand-
daughter of  Gideon  Lee.  Her  childhood  and
youth  were  passed  in  France  and  Italy.  When
she  was  fifteen  years  old  her  voice  attracted  the

interest  of  Rossi-
ni, who  superin-
tended her  mu-
sical education.
After  appearing
at  La  Scala,  Mi-
lan, in  "  Lucrezia
Borgia,"  she  was
received  with
great  applause  at
Bergamo,  and
afterward  sang
in  principal  roles
of  Italian  opera
at  the  Theatre  des
Italiens,  Paris.
Her  first  perfor-
mances in  Lon-
/^  don  were  in  Eng-

^^«^Wi  De'ceX"  m
she  took  part  in
the  "  Messiah "  at  Exeter  hall.  Having  married
Count  Constantine  Guerbel,  a  Russian  officer,  be-
fore going  upon  the  operatic  stage,  she  sang  un-
der the  name  of  Madame  Guerrabella.  She  gave
Italian  operas  in  London  during  the  season  of
1862,  and  at  its  close  came  to  the  United  States,
appearing  in  New  York  city  and  Philadelphia,
and  in  the  winter  sang  in  Havana.  Exposing  her-
self injudiciously  to  diphtheria,  she  caught  the  in-
fection, and  suffered  a  severe  attack  of  the  disease
by  which  her  voice  was  ruined  for  singing.  For  sev-
eral years  she  taught  vocal  music  in  a  school  in
New  York,  and  finally  she  prepared  herself  for  the
dramatic  stage.  Being  coldly  received  by  an  audi-
ence of  New  York  critics,  she  sailed  for  England,
making  her  first  appearance  on  1  Oct.,  1873,  in
Manchester,  as  Lady  Macbeth.  She  was  success-
ful in  this  part,  and  still  more  as  Lady  Constance
in  "  King  John,"  and,  going  to  Dublin  in  the  same
year,  was  applauded  in  the  roles  of  Adrienne  Le-
couvreur,  Medea,  and  Lucrezia  Borgia.  Adelaide
Ristori,  who  had  been  her  adviser  in  dramatic
studies,  desired  Miss  Ward  to  join  her  Italian
troupe,  but  she  preferred  to  enact  English  pkys.
She  played  Unarita  in  '•  The  Prayer  in  the  Storm  "


in  London  for  six  months  in  1874,  and  was  suc-
cessful as  Julia  in  "  The  Hunchback,"  and  in  the
following  year  as  Rebecca  in  "  Ivanhoe."  After-
ward she  travelled  through  the  provinces,  pro-
ducing "  Despite  the  World,"  by  Lewis  Wingfield,
and  "  Sappho,"  bv  William  G.  Wills,  both  of  which
were  written  for  her.  In  December.  1875,  she  first
played  "  Antigone  "  at  the  Crystal  Palace,  London,
bhe  went  to  Paris  in  1877  to  study  under  Francois
Joseph  Regnier,  and  on  11  Feb.  gained  such  suc-
cess in  a  French  version  of  "  Macbeth  "  that  the
managers  of  the  Comedie  Francaise  invited  her  to
become  a  member  of  their  company.  She  returned
to  London  for  the  season  of  1878,  playing  Emilia
in  "Othello"  among  other  parts,  and  in  June
sailed  for  the  United  States,  appearing  at  Booth's
theatre,  New  York  city,  in  "  Jane  Shore."  "  Henry
VIII.,"  and  other  plays.  Returning  to  London  in
April,  1879,  she  leased  the  Lyceum  theatre,  where
she  failed  in  the  double  role  of  the  heroine  and  the
gypsy  in  "  Zillah,"  but  made  a  success  in  the  title
role  of  William  Young's  "  Lucrezia  Borgia  "  and
as  Stephanie  in  "  Forget-Me-Not,"  which  she  first
produced  on  22  Aug.  She  reappeared  in  the  same
piece  at  the  Prince  of  Wales's  theatre  on  22  Feb.,
1880,  and  on  10  May  of  that  year  performed  the
part  of  Clorinde  in  Emile  Augier's  "L'Aventuriere,"
which  was  given  in  French.  In  1881-'2  she  played
"  Forget-Me-Not "  in  the  chief  cities  of  the  United
States  and  British  America,  and,  after  reproduc-
ing the  same  play  in  London,  she  sailed  for  India
in  December,  1882,  playing  in  the  Australian  colo-
nies, and,  after  a  tour  around  the  world,  returned
to  England  in  November,  1885.  She  has  since  been
the  lessee  of  the  Lyceum  theatre,  London,  but  in
1888  finally  retired  from  the  stage.  Her  earlier
career  was  recounted  in  a  "  Memoir  of  Ginevra
Guerrabella,"  which  was  published  anonymously
by  Henry  Wikoff  (New  York,  1863).  and  her  later
in  "  Genevieve  Ward,"  bv  Zadel  Barnes  Gustafson
(Boston,  1882). .

WARD,  Sir  Henry  George,  English  diploma-
tist, b.  in  England  about  1796 ;  d.  in  Madras,  In-
dia, 2  Aug.,  1860.  He  was  a  son  of  Robert  Plumer
Ward,  juristic  writer  and  novelist,  and  entered  the
diplomatic  service  in  1816.  He  was  charge  d'af-
faires in  Mexico  and  travelled  extensively  in  that
country  in  1825-'7,  sat  in  parliament  from  1832
till  1849,  was  afterward  high  commissioner  to  the
Ionian  islands,  and  governor  of  Ceylon,  whence  he
was  transferred  to  Madras,  dying  of  cholera  a  few
days  after  his  arrival.  He  was  the  author  of
"  Mexico  in  1827 ''  (2  vols.,  London,  1828),  which
was  enlarged  and  reissued  under  the  title  of
"Travels  in  Mexico"  (1829). — His  wife,  Emily
Elizabeth,  b.  in  England  about  1805,  was  a
daughter  of  Admiral  Sir  John  Edward  Swinburne,
and  married  Sir  Henry  Ward  in  1824.  She  drew
the  illustrations  for  her  husband's  work  on  Mexico,
and  published  also  "Views  of  Towns  in  Mexico"
(2  vols..  London,  1829).

WARD,  James  Harman,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  in  1806 ;  d.  near  Matthias  point,
Potomac  river,  27  June,  1861.  He  was  appointed
as  a  midshipman  in  the  navy,  4  March,  1823,
and  was  allowed  to  remain  under  instruction  in
the  military  school  at  Norwich,  Vt,  with  several
other  midshipmen.  He  made  a  cruise  in  the
"  Constitution "  in  1824-8,  became  a  passed  mid-
shipman, 23  March,  1829,  and  was  commissioned
lieutenant,  3  March,  1831.  He  was  an  instructor
at  the  naval  academy  at  Annapolis  from  its  es-
tablishment on  its  present  basis  in  1845  till  1847.
He  commanded  the  steamer  "  Vixen  "  of  the  home
squadron  in  1849-50,  and  was  promoted  to  com-


350


WARD


WARD


raander,  9  Sept.,  1853.  He  was  appointed  to  com-
mand the  Potomac  flotilla  in  May,  1861,  and  im-
mediately essayed  to  open  that  river  and  silence
the  Confederate  batteries  on  its  banks.  His  flo-
tilla consisted  of  three  small  improvised  gun-boats,
the  steamer  "  Freeborn,"  "  Anacostia,"  and  "  Reso-
lute." He  attacked  and  silenced  the  batteries  at
Acquia  creek,  20  May,  1861,  the  first  time  the  navy
engaged  the  Confederate  batteries  during  the  war.
The  next  day  the  battle  was  renewed,  and  Ward's
flotilla  was  re-enforced  by  the  arrival  of  the  "  Paw-
nee "  under  Commander  Stephen  C.  Rowan.  Ward
conducted  a  series  of  fights  with  his  flotilla,  and
succeeded  in  clearing  the  banks  and  keeping  the
river  open.  On  27  June,  1861,  he  planned  a  land-
ing expedition  at  Matthias  point,  and  in  the  bom-
bardment of  the  batteries  he  was  killed  while
sighting  a  gun.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Ele-
mentary Course  of  Instruction  in  Naval  Ordnance
and  Gunnery  "  (Philadelphia,  1851) ;  "  Manual  of
Naval  Tactics "  (New  York,  1859) ;  and  li  Steam
for  the  Million"  (1860).  The  first  two  were  used
as  a  text-book  at  the  United  States  naval  academy
for  many  years.

WARD,  John  Elliott,  lawyer,  b.  in  Sunbury,
Liberty  co.,  Ga.,  2  Oct.,  1814.  He  entered  Amherst
in  1831,  but  left  on  account  of  the  indignation  that
was  manifested  toward  Georgians  after  the  im-

{)risonment  of  two  Cherokee  missionaries,  studied
aw  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1835.  He  attended  the  lectures  in  the  Harvard
law-school  before  beginning  practice,  and  on  his
return  to  Savannah  was  appointed,  in  January,
1836,  solicitor-general  for  the  eastern  district  of
his  state,  to  fill  an  unexpired  term,  at  the  close  of
which  the  legislature  continued  him  in  the  office.
He  was  appointed  U.  S.  district  attorney  for
Georgia  in  1838,  but  resigned  in  the  following
year  in  order  to  enter  the  state  legislature.  He
returned  to  the  house  in  1845  and  in  1853,  when
he  was  chosen  speaker,  and  in  1854  was  elected
mayor  of  Savannah.  In  1856  he  presided  over  the
Democratic  national  convention  that  met  in  Cin-
cinnati. In  1857  he  entered  the  state  senate,  and
was  chosen  its  president  and  acting  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  state,  resigning  in  1858  on  being
appointed  U.  S.  minister  to  China.  He  departed
for  his  post  in  January,  1859,  and  remained  till
April,  1861,  when  he  returned  and  resigned  in
consequence  of  the  adoption  by  Georgia  of  the
ordinance  of  secession,  although  he  was  strongly
opposed  to  that  measure.  In  January,  1866,  he
removed  from  Savannah  to  New  York  city,  where
he  has  since  practised  law.

WARD,  John  Henry  Hohart,  soldier,  b.  in
New  York  city,  17  June,  1823.  His  grandfather,
John,  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution,  and  his  father,
James,  who  fought  in  the  war  of  1812,  were  both
disabled  by  wounds  that  they  received  in  the  ser-
vice. The  son  was  educated  at  Trinity  collegiate
school,  enlisted  at  the  age  of  eighteen  in  the  7th
U.  S.  infantry,  and  in  four  years  rose  through  the
several  grades  to  that  of  sergeant-major.  In  the
Mexican  war  he  participated  in  the  siege  of  Fort
Brown,  received  wounds  at  Monterey,  and  was  at
the  capture  of  Vera  Cruz.  He  was  assistant  com-
missary-general of  the  state  of  New  York  from
1851  till  1855,  and  commissary-general  from  1855
till  1859.  In  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  re-
cruited the  38th  New  York  volunteers,  was  appoint-
ed colonel  of  the  regiment,  and  led  it  at  Bull  Run
and  in  all  the  battles  of  the  peninsula  campaign,
and  subsequently  at  the  second  Bull  Run  and  Chan-
tilly.  Being  promoted  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers on  4  Oct.,  1862,  he  commanded  a  brigade  in


the  3d  corps  at  Fredericksburg,  Chancellorsville,
Gettysburg,  the  Wilderness,  and  Spottsylvania.
On  the  third  day  at  Gettysburg,  where  he  was
wounded,  as  also  at  Kelly's  Ford  and  Wapping
Heights,  he  was  in  temporary  command  of  the  di-
vision. He  was  again  wounded  at  Spottsylvania,
and  was  frequently  commended  for  courage  and
capacity,  in  official  reports.  After  the  war  he  en-
gaged in  a  civil  employment  in  New  York  city.

WARD,  John  Quincy  Adams,  sculptor,'b.  in
Urbana,  Champaign  co.,  Ohio,  29  June,  1830.  At
the  age  of  nineteen  he  began  to  study  with  Henry
K.  Browne,  with  whom  he  remained  until  1857,
assisting  him  in  many  of  his  works.  In  1857-'8
he  was  in  Washington  modelling  busts  of  Joshua
R.  Giddings,  Alexander  H.  Stephens,  John  P.
Hale,  Hannibal  Hamlin,  and  other  public  men.
At  this  time  he  also  made  his  first  sketch  for  the
"  Indian  Hunter,"  and  he  subsequently  visited  the
Indian  country  to  make  studies  for  this  subject.
In  1861  he  opened  a  studio  in  New  York,  where  he
has  since  resided.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of
the  National  academy  the  following  year,  and  an
academician  in  1863.  During  this  period  he  made
many  designs  in  wax  for  presentation  swords,  and
executed  in  1861  a
bronze  statuette,
"  The  Freedman,"
his  first  full-length
figure.  It  attracted
much  attention  by
its  subject,  and  its
merits  as  a  work  of
art  won  for  it  the
admiration  of  crit-
ics. It  was  exhibit-
ed, together  with
the  "  Indian  Hun-
ter," at  the  Paris  ex-
position of  1867,  and
has  been  repeated
several  times  by  the  artist.  The  "  Indian  Hunter,"'
completed  in  1864  and  now  in  the  Central  park,
was  his  next  work  of  importance.  It  won  univer-
sal praise  for  its  excellence  in  design  and  execu-
tion, and  is  among  the  best  of  his  statues.  (See
illustration.)  New  York  city  possesses  several
other  of  his  most  important  works.  They  are  a
colossal  statue  of  a  citizen  soldier  for  the  7th
regiment  (1868) ;  "  Shakespeare  "  (1870-'l) ;  a  co-
lossal statue  of  Washington,  on  the  steps  of  the
Sub-Treasurv  building  in  Wall  street  (1882) ;  "  The
Pilgrim"  (1884);  and  a  statue  of  William  E.
Dodge  (1887).  His  other  notable  works  are  "  The
Good  Samaritan,"  a  group  to  commemorate  the
discovery  of  sulphuric  ether  as  an  .anaesthetic
(1865),  in  Boston ;  statues  of  Matthew  C.  Perrv,  in
Newport,  R.  I.  (1866),  Gen.  John  F.  Reynolds,  at
Gettysburg,  Pa.  (1871),  Israel  Putnam,  in  Hartford,
Conn.  (1874),  George  Washington,  in  Newburyport,
Mass.  (1876),  an  equestrian  statue  of  Gen.  George  H.
Thomas,  in  Washington,  D.  C.  (1878),  Gen.  Daniel
Morgan,  at  Spartansburg,  S.  C,  and  Gen.  Lafay-
ette, in  Burlington,  Vt.  (1880) ;  and  the  monument
to  James  A.  Garfield,  in  Washington  (1887).  He
is  engaged  on  a  large  statue  of  Henry  Ward
Beecher  for  the  city  of  Brooklyn.  He  has  also  exe-
cuted various  portrait  busts,  including,  besides
those  already  mentioned,  Valentine  Mott,  James
T.  Brady,  Dr.  Orville  Dewey,  and  Gov.  William
Dennison,  of  Ohio.  Mr.  Ward  was  vice-president
of  the  National  academv  in  1870-1  and  president
in  1872.— His  brother,  Edgar  Melville,  artist,  b.
in  Urbana,  Ohio,  24  Feb.,  1839,  studied  at  the
National  academy  in  1870-'l,  and  under  Alexandre


WARD


WARD


351


Cabanel  at  the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts,  Paris,  during
1872-'8.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  Na-
tional academy  in  1875,  and  an  academician  in
1883,  and  is  director  of  its  schools.  His  more  im-
portant works  are  "  Paternal  Pride  "  (1878);  "  Lock-
smith" ;  "  Lace-Makers  " ;  "  Motherly  Care  "  ;  "  The
Tobacco-Field"  (1881):  "Scene  in  a  Foundry";
"  The  Last  Shock  " ;  aud  "  The  Cobblers  "  and  "  The
Blessing  "  (1886).  His  "  Brittany  Washerwomen  "
was  at  the  salon  of  1876,  the  Philadelphia  exhibi-
tion of  1876,  and  at  Paris  in  1878  with  "  Venetian
Water-Carriers"  and  "The  Sabot-Maker."

WARD,  Julius  Hammond,  clergyman,  b.  in
Charlton,  Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  12  Oct.,  1837.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1860,  and  at  Berkeley
divinity-school,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1862,  and
took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.
He  was  rector  of  parishes  in  Ansonia  and  Cheshire,
Conn.,  Rockland  and  Thomaston,  Me.,  and  Mar-
blehead,  Mass.,  till  1878,  since  which  time  he  has
engaged  in  literary  work.  In  1877  he  was  an  edi-
tor of  the  "  North  American  Review."  Besides
contributions  on  religious  subjects  to  the  secular
and  religious  press,  he  is  the  author  of  "  Life  and
Letters  of  James  Gates  Percival "  (Boston,  1866) ;
and  has  ready  for  the  press  works  on  "  The  Church
in  Modern  Society,"  and  "  The  White  Mountains."

WARD,  Lester  Frank,  botanist,  b.  in  Joliet,  111.,
18  June,  1841.  He  was  educated  at  various  schools,
but  served  in  the  National  army  in  the  civil  war,
during  which  he  was  wounded.  In  1865  he  settled  in
Washington,  where  he  served  in  the  treasury  depart-
ment, principally  as  chief  of  the  division  of  naviga-
tion and  immigration,  and  as  librarian  of  the  U.  S.
bureau  of  statistics.  While  holding  office  he  was
graduated  at  Columbian  university  in  1869  and
at  its  law  department  in  1871,  and  in  1873  for
higher  studies  was  given  the  degree  of  A.  M.  He
began  the  study  of  botany  in  1872.  and  has  fol-
lowed that  science  professionally  since  1874.  In
1881  he  entered  the  service  of  the  U.  S.  geologi-
cal survey  as  assistant  geologist,  and  in  1888  at-
tained the  grade  of  geologist,  devoting  his  atten-
tion chiefly  to  the  study  of  paleo-botany.  He  also
holds  the  office  of  honorary  curator  of  botany  and
fossil  plants  in  the  U.  S.  national  museum.  Mr.
Ward  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  his
bibliography  includes  about  200  titles.  His  larger
works  are  "  Guide  to  the  Flora  of  Washington  and
Vicinity "  (Washington,  1881) ;  "  Dynamic  Soci-
ology, or  Applied  Social  Science"  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1883);  "Sketch  of  Paleo-Botany "  (Wash-
ington, 1885) ;  "  Synopsis  of  the  Flora  of  the
Laramie  Group  "  (1886) ;  "  Types  of  the  Laramie
Flora  "  (1887) :  and  "  Geographical  Distribution  of
Fossil  Plants  "  (1888).

WARD,  Levi,  physician,  b.  in  East  Guilford
(now  Madison),  Conn.,  29  July,  1771 ;  d.  in  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.,  4  Jan.,  1861.  He  was  educated  at  Yale,
leaving  college  to  pursue  the  study  of  medicine  in
East  Guilford.  After  completing  his  professional
studies  he  removed  to  Haddam,  Conn.,  and  prac-
tised there  for  seventeen  years.  In  1807  he  emi-
grated to  Bergen,  Genesee  co.,  N.  Y.,  where  he
managed  a  large  tract  of  land  as  agent  for  the  state
of  Connecticut.  He  established  mail  routes,  and
carried  on  mercantile  business  at  various  points,
besides  practising  medicine,  and  in  1817  removed
to  Rochester,  where  he  became  president  of  the
first  savings  bank,  and  also  of  the  Rochester  bank,
and  was  active  in  enterprises  for  religious  and
public  objects  and  in  commercial  affairs. — His  son,
Ferdinand  de  Wilton,  missionary,  b.  in  Bergen,
Genesee  co.,  N.  Y.,  9  July,  1812,  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1831  and  at  Princeton  theological  semi-


nary in  1834,  and  preached  at  Albion,  N.  Y.,  and
Philadelphia,  Pa.  He  was  ordained  as  an  evangel-
ist in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  on  31  Aug.,  1836,  and  de-
parted as  a  missionary  of  the  American  board  of
commissioners  for  foreign  missions  to  Madura,
whence  he  went  to  Madras.  India,  and  remained
until  1847,  laboring  with  success  as  a  teacher  of
Christianity,  publishing  several  volumes  in  Tamil,
and  editing  the  first  periodical  in  advocacy  of  ab-
stinence from  intoxicating  liquors  that  was  printed
in  a  Hindu  language.  After  returning  to  the
United  States  he  acted  for  a  year  as  agent  for  the
missionary  board  in  western  New  York,  was  stated
supply  in  Rochester  in  1849,  and  then  served  as
pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in  Geneseo,  N.  Y.,
till  1861,  when  he  went  with  the  army  as  chaplain
of  the  104th  New  York  volunteers,  and  was  at  the
second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  Chancellorsville,  and
Gettysburg.  After  the  close  of  the  civil  war  he
returned  to  his  former  church  in  Geneseo,  resign-
ing in  1871,  and  acting  during  the  succeeding  four
years  as  district  secretary  of  the  American  Bible
society.  Dr.  Ward,  who  received  his  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Washington  college  in  1861,  is  the  author  of
many  historical  and  literary  pamphlets,  and  has
published  in  book-form  "  India  and  the  Hindus  "
(New  York,  1850) ;  "  A  Christian  Gift,  or  Pastoral
Letters  "  (Rochester,  1852) ;  and  "  Summer  Vacation
Abroad  "(1854). — Levi's  grandson,  Henry  Augus-
tus, naturalist,  b.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  9  March,
1834,  was  educated  at  Williams  college  and  at
the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard,  where
he  became  assistant  to  Louis  Agassiz  in  the  Muse-
um of  comparative  zoology.  He  went  to  Europe
in  1854,  studied  zoology  in  Paris  and  mineralogy
in  Freiberg,  and  then  travelled  through  Palestine,
Egypt,  Nubia,  and  Arabia,  down  the  west  coast  of
Africa  from  Morocco  to  Guinea,  and  up  Niger
river.  He  has  visited  the  West  Indies  and  Central
America,  and  as  a  mining  engineer  in  the  cause
of  gold -mining  investigations  has  crossed  the
American  continent  ten  times  at  different  places.
From  1860  till  1875  he  was  professor  of  natural
sciences  in  the  University  of  Rochester,  and  in
1861  he  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Williams.
Meanwhile  he  established  in  Rochester  a  labora-
tory for  the  production  of  fac-similes  of  fossils
that  he  had  copied  from  the  great  museums  of  the
world.  From  this  he  has  developed  a  natural-
science  establishment,  which  makes  a  specialty  of
obtaining  and  compiling  systematic  cabinets  in
any  department  of  nature  for  institutions  of  learn-
ing and  public  museums.  For  this  purpose  he  has
travelled  extensively,  and  has  representatives  in  all
parts  of  the  globe  gathering  specimens  of  every-
thing that  is  rare  and  curious  in  natural  history.
His  aim  in  this  work  has  been  to  give  system
and  exactitude  to  scientific  teaching  in  America.
Eighty  of  his  cabinets,  having  an  average  value  of
$6,000  each,  are  distributed  through  nearly  every
state  in  the  Union.  Taxidermy  plays  an  impor-
tant part  in  his  business,  and  his  representations  of
animal'  forms  are  famous.  His  best-known  work
of  this  character  is  the  elephant  Jumbo,  whose
stuffed  effigy,  mounted  by  him,  is  now  in  Barnum's
museum  at* Tufts  college,  and  the  skeleton,  care-
fully prepared,  is  at  the  National  museum  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  The  Ward  cabinets  of  mineralogy
and  geology  collected  by  him  fill  fourteen  rooms
in  the  University  of  Rochester,  and  he  has  made
an  extensive  collection  in  modern  zoology.  In
1871  he  was  naturalist  of  the  U.  S.  expedition  to
Santo  Domingo.  Prof.  Ward  has  been  elected  a
fellow  of  the  geological  and  zoological  societies  of
London,  has  been  a  fellow  of  the  American  associ-


352


WARD


WARD


ation  for  the  advancement  of  sciences  since  1875,
and  is  a  member  of  other  scientific  societies.  In
addition  to  his  series  of  catalogues,  which  contain
valuable  notes  on  the  articles  that  are  described
therein,  he  has  published  "Notice  of  the  Mega-
therium Cuvieri  (Rochester,  1863)  and  "  Descrip-
tion of  the  most  Celebrated  Fossil  Animals  in  the
Royal  Museums  of  Europe  "  (1866).

WARD,  Marcus  Lawrence,  governor  of  New
Jersey,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  9  Nov.,  1812 :  d.  there,
25  April,  1884  He  received  a  good  education  and
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  He  was  originally
a  Whig,  aided  in  forming  the  Republican  party,
and  was  a  delegate  to  the  !N  ational  Republican  con-
ventions in  Chicago  in  1860  and  in  Baltimore  in
1864.  During  the  civil  war  he  frequently  visited
the  camps  and  battle-fields  to  alleviate  suffering,
and  for  his  many  services  was  called  the  Soldiers'
Friend.  He  devised  a  system  by  which  communi-
cation could  be  transmitted  without  cost  from  the
soldier  on  the  field  to  his  family,  and  also  estab-
lished a  free  pension  bureau,  which  he  maintained
at  his  personal  expense.  In  recognition  of  his
patriotism  the  government  gave  to  the  hospital
that  he  equipped  in  Newark  the  name  of  the  "  U.  S.
Ward  hospital,"  which  after  the  war  was  converted
into  a  home  for  disabled  soldiers.  In  1862  he  was
defeated  as  a  candidate  for  governer  of  New  Jer-
sey, but  he  held  this  office  in  1865-8.  In  1866  he
was  chosen  chairman  of  the  National  Republican
committee.  He  was  afterward  elected  to  congress
as  a  Republican,  serving  from  1  Dec,  1873,  till  3
March,  1875.  In  the  latter  year  he  declined  the
office  of  Indian  commissioner.  Gov.  Ward  was  an
early  member  of  the  New  Jersey  historical  society,
of  the  Newark  library  association,  and  the  New
Jersey  art  union,  aided  education  in  the  state,  im-
proved the  condition  of  the  state  prison,  and  was
an  active  philanthropist.

WARD,  Matt  Flournoy,  author,  b.  in  Scott
county,  Ky.,  19  May,  1826 ;  d.  in  Helena,  Ark.,  30
Sept.,  1862.  He  was  educated  at  Louisville,  Ky.,
and  Cambridge,  Mass.,  travelled  extensively,  and
engaged  in  cotton-planting  in  Arkansas  on  his  re-
turn, but  resided  much  of  the  time  in  Louisville,
Ky.  In  1854  he  shot  a  schoolmaster,  named
W.  H.  G.  Butler,  for  chastising  his  brother,  was
tried  on  an  indictment  of  murder,  and  acquitted.
He  was  killed  before  his  house  by  a  Confederate
soldier,  who  mistook  him  for  one  of  the  enemy,  as
he  wore  a  blue  blouse  like  a  National  officer.
His  publications  are  "  Letters  from  Three  Conti-
nents "  (New  York,  1850) ;  and  "  English  Items,  or
Microscopic  Views  of  England  and  Englishmen"
{1852).  A  report  of  his  trial  was  printed  (Louis-
ville, 1854),  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
writing  a  book  in  which  he  intended  to  use  some
of  the  incidents  of  the  Butler  tragedv.

WARD,  Matthias,  senator,  b.  in  Elbert  county,
Ga.,  about  1800;  d.  in  Raleigh,  N.  C,  13  Oct.,
1861.  He  was  taken  while  a  child  to  Madison
county,  Ala.,  where  he  received  a  classical  educa-
tion- After  teaching  for  two  years,  he  studied  for
the  bar.  Removing  to  Texas  in  1836,  he  became
a  citizen  of  the  new  republic,  and  was  elected  to
its  congress,  serving  for  several  years.  After  the
admission  of  Texas  to  the  Union,  he  was  a  member
of  the  state  senate.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Democratic  national  conventions  of  1852  and  1856,
and  in  the  latter  year  presided  over  the  State  con-
vention. On  the  "death  of  J.  Pinekney  Henderson
he  was  appointed  to  the  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate
that  was  thus  made  vacant,  serving  from  6  Dec.,
1858,  till  4  Jan.,  1860,  when  he  was  succeeded  bv
Louis  T.  Wigfall,  whom  the  legislature  had  elected.


WARD,  Nancy,  Indian  prophetess,  b.  about
1740;  the  time  of  her  death  is  unknown.  Her  fa-
ther was  a  British  officer  named  Ward,  her  mother
a  sister  of  the  reigning  vice-king,  Atta-culla-culla.
She  was  the  sibyl  of  the  Cherokees.  The  power  of
Oconostota  over  the  nation  was  absolute  in  time
of  war,  but  in  war  or  peace  it  had  generally  to
give  way  to  the  will  of  Nancy  Ward,  who  was  sup-
posed to  be  the  inspired  mouth-piece  of  the  Great
Spirit.  James  Robertson,  who  visited  her  at  the
Cherokee  capital,  Echota,  in  1772,  describes  her  as
a  woman  "queenly  and  commanding,"  and  her
lodge  as  furnished  in  a  style  of  barbaric  splendor.
Other  traditional  accounts  speak  of  her  as  strik-
ingly beautiful,  with  a  tall,  erect  form,  a  promi-
nent nose,  regular  and  flexible  features,  a  clear,
though  tawny,  complexion,  long,  silken  black  hair,
large,  piercing  black  eyes,  and  an  air  that  was  im-
perious and  yet  kindly.  She  must  have  possessed
remarkable  traits  of  character  to  have  retained
almost  autocratic  control  over  the  fierce  and  un-
tamable Cherokees  when  she  was  known  to  sympa-
thize with  their  enemies,  the  white  settlers.  The
first  event  recorded  of  her  is  the  saving  the  lives
of  two  pioneers — Jeremiah  Jack  and  William  Ran-
kin— who  had  ventured  down  to  buy  corn  of  the
Indians.  They  had  come  into  collision  with  a  dis-
orderly party  of  Cherokees,  and  their  lives  were
about  to  be  sacrificed,  when  Nancy  Ward  appeared
among  the  Indians  and  commanded  them  to  de-
sist. She  was  instantly  obeyed,  and  the  settlers
went  home  with  their  canoe  loaded  with  corn.  An-
other instance  of  her  kindly  spirit  was  her  saving
the  life  of  the  wife  of  William  Bean,  the  first  white
settler  beyond  the  Alleghanies.  Mrs.  Bean  had
been  captured  on  the  eve  of  the  attack  on  the  fort
at  Watauga,  and,  being  taken  to  the  Indian  towns,
was  condemned  to  be  burned  at  the  stake.  The
fagots  were  already  heaped  about  her,  and  Drag-
ging Canoe,  the  chief  of  the  Chickamaugas,  who
had  ordered  the  execution,  was  standing  by,  when
Nancy  Ward  came  upon  the  ground  and  com-
manded her  to  be  liberated.  This  was  done,  and
Mrs.  Bean  was  sent  back  with  a  strong  escort  to
her  husband.  Numerous  other  instances  are  re-
lated of  her  releasing  captives  that  were  taken  by
her  nation  in  their  many  wars  with  the  whites.
Among  others  was  that  of  a  young  woman  who  be-
came the  ancestress  of  John  M.  Lea,  of  Nashville.
She  is  reported  to  have  said :  "  The  white  men  are
our  brothers ;  the  same  house  holds  us,  the  same
sky  covers  us  all " ;  and  she  always  acted  in  ac-
cordance with  this  sentiment.  But  her  greatest
service  to  the  white  settlers  was  in  giving  them
constant  warnings,  through  a  course  of  years,  of
every  intended  raid  of  the  Cherokees.  The  light-
est hostile  whisper  spoken  in  the  Cherokee  coun-
cils was  repeated  by  her  to  Isaac  Thomas,  an  In-
dian trader,  to  be  by  him  conveyed  to  John  Sevier
and  James  Robertson  at  Watauga.  Thus  were  the
whites  always  prepared  for  the  attacks  of  the  In-
dians, and,  with  the  overpowering  numbers  against
them,  it  is  hard  to  conceive  how  in  any  other  way
they  could  have  been  saved  from  extermination.
In  doing  this  Nancy  Ward  betrayed  her  own  peo-
ple, but  she  did  so  from  .noble  motives  and  in  the
interest  of  humanity,  and  for  this  service  she  is  to
this  day  held  in  grateful  remembrance  by  the  de-
scendants of  the  early  settlers.

WARD,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  between  the
years  1578  and  1580;  d.  in  Shenfield,  England,  in
1652.  Cotton  Mather,  in  the  "Magnalia,"  gives
his  birthplace  as  Haverhill,  England,  which  is
probably  correct;  and  the  date  of  his  birth  as
•'about 1570,"  which  is  evidently  wrong. His


WARD


WARD


353


father  was  John  Ward,  a  famous  Puritan  minister,
who,  according  to  a  mural  tablet  that  was  placed
by  his  sons  in  the  chancel  of  the  church  at  Haver-
hill, England,  preached  the  gospel  in  Haverhill
and  Bury  St.  Edmunds,  Suffolk,  for  twenty-five
years.  Nathaniel  Ward  had  two  brothers,  who,
like  himself,  were  authors  and  clergymen,  and
who  also  suffered  for  non-conformity.  The  eldest,
Samuel,  town-preacher  of  Ipswich,  England,  was
author  of  "  The  Life  of  Faith,"  "  The  Wonders  of
the  Loadstone,"  and  several  other  works,  while
the  youngest,  John,  who  was  rector  of  St.  Clem-
ent's, Ipswich,  and  a  member  of  the  Westminster
assembly  of  divines,  preached  two  sermons  before
the  house  of  commons,  which  were  printed.  The
"  Sermons  and  Treatises  of  Samuel  Ward,  B.  D.,"
were  edited  by  the  present  bishop  of  Liverpool,
the  Rt,  Rev.  John  C.  Ryle,  D.  D.  (Edinburgh,  1862).
It  was  said  of  the  brothers — Samuel,  Nathaniel,  and
John — that  they  together  "  would  not  make  up  the
abilities  of  their  father.  Nor  were  they  them-
selves offended  by  this  hyperbole,  to  have  the
branches  lessened  to  greaten  their  root."  Nathan-
iel Ward  was  graduated  at  Cambridge  in  1603,
educated  for  the  law,  and  admitted  an  outer  bar-
rister. After  practising  in  England,  he  accom-
panied some  merchants  to  the  continent,  where  he
travelled  extensively.  At  Heidelberg  he  met  the
celebrated  writer  David  Pareus,  who  induced  him
to  quit  the  law  and  enter  the  ministry.  As  early
as  1618  he  was  a  clergyman  at  Elbing,  in  Prussia,
probably  acting  as  chaplain  at  the  factory  there  of
the  Eastland  merchants.  Afterward  he  returned
to  his  native  country.  At  first  he  is  said  to  have
been  a  lecturer  in  London,  but  as  early  as  1628  he
was  presented  by  Sir  Nathaniel  Rich,  a  relative  of
the  Earl  of  Warwick,  to  the  rectory  of  Stondon
Massey,  in  Essex.  Mr.  Ward  was  one  of  the  chief
Puritan  ministers  in  that  county,  and  in  1631  was
brought  before  Laud,  who  was  then  bishop  of  Lon-
don, for  non-conformity,  but  escaped  excommuni-
cation. Laud  tried  to  induce  him  to  conform,  and
had  frequent  conferences  with  him  without  avail.
Two  years  later,  in  1633,  he  was  deprived  of  the
living.  Early  in  the  next  year,  1634,  he  sailed  for
New  England.  His  first  and  only  settlement  in
this  country  was  at  Ipswich,  where  Rev.  Thomas
Parker  was  already  the  minister  of  the  church,  and
Mr.  Ward  settled  as  his  colleague.  Two  years
later,  owing  to  feeble  health,  he  resigned  his  pas-
torate. He  still  continued  to  reside  at  Ipswich,
and  while  living  here  compiled  for  the  colony  of
Massachusetts  the  "  Body  of  Liberties,"  which  was
adopted  by  the  general  court  in  December,  1641.
This  was  "  the  first  code  of  laws  established  in  New
England."  It  "  exhibits  throughout,"  says  Dr.
Francis  C.  Gray,  "  the  principles  and  securities  of
English  liberty,  and,  although  it  retains  some
strong  traces  of  the  times,  is  in  the  main  far  in
advance  of  them,  and  in  several  respects  in  ad-
vance of  the  common  law  of  England  at  this  day.
It  shows  that  our  ancestors,  instead  of  deducing
all  their  laws  from  the  books  of  Moses,  established
at  the  outset  a  code  of  fundamental  principles,
which,  taken  as  a  whole,  for  wisdom,  equity,  adapta-
tion to  the  wants  of  the  community,  and  a  liber-
ality of  sentiment  superior  to  the  age  in  which  it
was  written,  may  fearlessly  challenge  a  comparison
with  any  similar  production  from  Magna  Charta
itself  to  the  latest  bill  of  rights  that  has  been  put
forth  in  Europe  or  America."  As  early  as  1645
Mr.  Ward  began  to  write  "  The  Simple  Cobler  of
Aggawam  in  America. "  This  was  completed  in
the  autumn  of  1646,  and  sent  to  England  for  pub-
lication, where  it  was  issued  in  January,  1646-'7.
vol.  vi. — 23


It  was  published  under  the  pen-name  of  Theodore
de  la  Guard,  which  is  merely  a  slight  disguise  of
his  own  name,  Theodore  being  the  Greek  equiva-
lent of  the  Hebrew  Nathaniel,  and  de  la  Guard
the  French  of  the  English  Ward.  He  soon  after-
ward sailed  for  his  native  country,  probably  in
company  with  Edward  Winslow,  who  left  near  the
middle  of  December.  He  had  a  "'hard  winter
voyage,"  and  probaby  arrived  before  the  opening
of  spring.  A  second  edition  of  the  "  Simple  Cob-
ler "  was  issued  soon  after  Mr.  Ward's  arrival,  and
a  third  and  a  fourth  followed  the  same  year.  All
the  editions  bear  the  date  of  1647,  each  one  be-
ing corrected  by  the  author,  who  made  material
additions  to  the  several  issues.  No  later  editions
have  been  printed  in  England,  but  two  have  ap-
peared in  this  country,  both  at  Boston,  one  in  1718
and  the  other,  which  was  edited  by  David  Pulsifer,
in  1843.  Prof.  Moses  Coit  Tyler,  in  his  "  History  of
American  Literature,"  says  of  this  book :  "  It  is  a
tremendous  partisan  pamphlet,  intensely  vital  even
yet,  full  of  fire,  wit,  whim,  eloquence,  sarcasm,  in-
vective, patriotism,  bigotry."  About  a  year  after
his  arrival  in  England,  Ward  became  the  minister
of  the  church  at  Shenfield,  in  Essex,  four  or  five
miles  distant  from  Stondon  Massey,  where  he  was
formerly  settled.  He  held  this  living  till  his  death
in  the  autumn  of  1652.  Besides  the  works  that  have
been  noticed,  his  publications  were  a  "  Sermon
preached  before  the  House  of  Commons"  (1647);
"A  Religious  Retreat  sounded  to  a  Religious
Army,"  anonymous  (1647) :  "  To  the  High  and
Honorable  Parliament,  Humble  Petitions,  Serious
Suggestions,  and  Dutifull  Expostulations,"  anony-
mous (1648) ;  and  '•  Discolliminium,  or  A  Most
Obedient  Reply  to  a  Late  Book  called  '  Bounds  and
Bonds.'  By  B  "  (1650).  The  following  works  have
been  attributed  to  Mr.  Ward.  Probably  the  first
and  last  were  written  by  him :  "  A  Word  to  Mr.
Peters,  and  Two  Words  for  the  Parliament  and
Kingdom  "  (1648) ; "  The  Pulpit  Incendiary  "  (1648) ;
and  ''  Mercurius  Anti-Mechanicus,  or  The  Simple
Cobler's  Boy,  with  his  Lap-full  of  Caveats.  By
Theodore  de  la  Guarden"  (1648). — His  son,  John,
clergyman,  was  born,  according  to  Cotton  Math-
er's "  Magnalia,"  in  Haverhill,  England,  5  Nov.,
1606,  but,  if  the  age  in  his  marriage  license  be
correct,  he  was  born  at  a  later  date,  probably  in
November,  1609.  He  died  at  Haverhill,  Mass.,
27  Dec,  1693.  He  was  matriculated  in  1622  at
Emmanuel  college,  Cambridge,  where  his  father
was  educated,  and  was  graduated  in  1626.  On  16
Nov.,  1633,  he  was  instituted  rector  of  Hadleigh,
in  Essex,  but  he  resigned  in  1639  and  came  to  New
England.  For  a  short  time  he  assisted  his  father's
step-brother,  Rev.  Ezekiel  Rogers,  of  Rowley.  He
settled  in  1641  at  Pentucket  (afterward  Haverhill),
Mass.,  where  in  1645  a  church  was  formed  and  he
was  ordained  the  first  minister.  There  he  offici-
ated for  more  than  fifty  years  till  his  death.  He
was  an  able  and  influential  minister.

WARD,  Richard,  colonial  governor,  b.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  15  April,  1689;  d.  there.  21  Aug.,  1763.
His  father.  Thomas  Ward,  son  of  John  Ward,  who
was  an  officer  in  one  of  Cromwell's  cavalry  regi-
ments, came  from  Gloucester,  England,  after  the
restoration  of  Charles  II.,  as  his  father  did  also,
and  both  settled  in  Newport.  Thomas  Ward,  who
followed  the  business  of  a  merchant,  was  general
treasurer  of  the  colony,  1677-8,  a  deputy  to  the
general  assembly  in  1678-9,  an  assistant  in  1679-81,
and  then  deputy  from  1683  till  1686.  Richard  was
also  engaged  in  commerce.  He  was  attorney-gen-
eral in  1712-13,  deputy  and  clerk  of  the  assembly
in  1714,  recorder  from  1714  till  1730,  deputy  gov-


354


WARD


WARD


ernor  from  May  to  July,  1740,  when  Gov.  Wanton
died,  and  governor  from  15  July,  1740,  till  May,
1743 — three  terms.  His  able  report  to  the  Eng-
lish board  of  trade
on  paper  money,
9  Jan.,  1741,  'is
printed  in  the
"Rhode  Island  Co-
lonial Records,"
edited  by  John
R.  Bartlett.  —
His  son,  Samuel,
statesman,  b.  in
Newport,  R.  I.,  27
May,  1725 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,
26  March,  1776,
removed  in  early
life  to  Westerly,
R.  I.,  where  he
prospered  in  busi-
ness both  as  a
farmer  and  mer-
chant. After  rep-
resenting his
adopted  home  for
several  years  in  the  legislature,  he  was  appointed
in  1761  chief  justice  of  the  colony,  and  in  1762  he
was  chosen  its  governor.  He  was  active  in  the
founding  of  Rhode  Island  college  (now  Brown  uni-
versity), and  was  one  of  its  trustees  from  1764  till
1776.  In  1765  he  was  re-elected  governor.  When
the  stamp-act  was  passed  he  was  the  only  one  of
the  colonial  governors  that  refused  to  take  the  re-
quired oath  to  sustain  and  enforce  it.  For  a  third
time  he  was  chosen  governor  in  1766.  From  the
outset  he  took  a  decided  stand  against  the  oppres-
sive encroachments  of  the  British  crown.  With
Stephen  Hopkins  he  represented  Rhode  Island  in
the  Continental  congress  in  1774-'6,  and  uniformly
advocated  the  most  vigorous  patriotic  measures.
He  was  always  called  to  the  chair  when  congress
went  into  committee  of  the  whole,  was  chairman
of  the  committee  that  reported  in  favor  of  a  gen-
eral for  the  American  army,  when  Col.  George
Washington  was  unanimously  chosen.  Dying  of
small-pox  in  the  midst  of  his  arduous  duties,  he
was  buried  in  the  grounds  of  the  1st  Baptist  church
in  Philadelphia,  where  a  monument  was  erected  to
his  memory  by  order  of  the  Rhode  Island  general
assembly.  In  1860  his  remains  were  removed  to
the  cemetery  of  Newport,  R.  I. — Another  son,
Henry,  member  of  the  colonial  congress,  b.  in
Rhode  Island,  27  Dec,  1732;  d.  there,  25  Nov.,
1797,  was  secretary  of  Rhode  Island  from  1760
till  his  death,  and  took  part  in  the  congress  that
met  at  New  York  city  on  7  Oct.,  1765.  He  early
espoused  the  principle  of  national  independence,
and  during  the  Revolution  acted  as  a  member  of
the  committee  of  correspondence. — Samuel's  son,
Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Westerly.  R.  I.,  17  Nov.,  1756 ;
d.  in  New  York  city  16  Aug.,  1832,  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1771.  He  raised  a  company,  and  marched
to  the  siege  of  Boston  in  1775,  was  commissioned
captain  by  congress,  and  joined  Benedict  Arnold's
expedition  into  Canada,  being  taken  prisoner  at
the  siege  of  Quebec,  and  conveyed  to  New  York
city  bv  sea.  He  was  commissioned  as  major  of  the
1st  Rhode  Island  line  in  1777,  was  in  action  at
Red  Bank,  writing  the  official  report  of  the  battle,
and  was  with  the  army  at  Valley  Forge.  In  1778.
after  marrying  a  daughter  of  Gov.  William  Greene,
he  assisted  in  raising  a  new  regiment  in  Rhode
Island,  which  he  commanded  in  Gen.  John  Sulli-
van's campaign  .in  .that  state. He  was  promoted


lieutenant-colonel  in  1779,  and  retired  on  1  Jan.,
1781.  He  was  a  delegate  in  1786  to  the  convention
at  Annapolis,  Md.,  for  the  regulation  of  commerce
between  the  states.  He  made  a  voyage  to  China
in  1788,  and  in  1790  established  himself  in  mer-
cantile business  in  New  York  city.  After  serving
as  president  of  the  New  York  marine  insurance
company  in  1806-'8,  he  relinquished  business,  re-
tiring to  an  estate  in  Rhode  Island,  whence  he  was
sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  Hartford  convention  of
1814.  He  afterward  resided  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  and
at  the  close  of  his  life  in  New  York  city. — The  sec-
ond Samuel's  son,  Samuel,  banker,  b.  in  Rhode
Island,  1  May,  1786 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  27  Nov.,
1839,  received  a  common-school  education,  entered
a  banking-house  as  clerk,  and  in  1808  was  taken
into  partnership,  continuing  a  member  of  the  firm
of  Prime,  Ward  and  King  until  his  death.  In
1838  he  secured  through  the  Bank  of  England  a
loan  of  nearly  $5,000,000  to  enable  the  banks  to
resume  specie  payments,  and  established  the  Bank
of  commerce,  becoming  its  president.  He  was  a
founder  of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York
and  of  the  City  temperance  society,  of  which  he
was  the  first  president,  and  was  active  in  organiz-
ing mission  churches,  a  patron  of  many  charities,
and  the  giver  of  large  sums  in  aid  of  Protestant
Episcopal  churches  and  colleges  in  the  west. — The
third  Samuel's  wife,  Julia  Rush,  poet,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  5  Jan.,  1796;  d.  in  New  York  city,  9
Nov.,  1824,  was  a  sister  of  Rev.  Benjamin  Clarke
Cutler,  and,  through  her  mother,  a  grandniece  of
Francis  Marion.  She  married  Mr.  Ward  in  Oc-
tober, 1812.  One. of  her  occasional  poems  is  pre-
served in  Rufus  W.  Griswold's  "  Female  Poets  of
America"  (Philadelphia,  1848). — Their  son,  Sam-
uel, author,  b.  in  New  York  city,  27  Jan.,  1814;
d.  in  Pegli,  Italy,  19  May,  1884,  was  educated  at
Round  Hill  school,  Northampton,  Mass.,  and  at
Columbia,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1831.  He
went  abroad  to  perfect  his  studies,  received  the
degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the  University  of  Tubingen,
travelled  extensively,  and  became  proficient  in  the
modern  languages.  Returning  in  1835,  he  mar-
ried a  daughter  of  William  B.  Astor,  and  entered
his  father's  banking-house  as  a  partner.  After  his
second  marriage,  in  1843,  to  Medora,  a  daughter  of
John  R.  Grymes,  he  left  the  firm,  and  in  1848  went
to  California,  where  he  engaged  in  mining.  Dur-
ing his  stay  in  the  interior  he  acquired  several
Indian  dialects.  He  visited  Mexico  in  1854,  acted
as  secretary  of  an  expedition  sent  by  the  United
States  government  to  Paraguay  in  1858,  went  on  a
diplomatic  mission  to  Nicaragua  in  1862,  securing
the  renewal  of  transit  across  the  isthmus,  and  on
his  return  settled  in  Washington,  D.  C,  where  his
powers  of  conversation,  persuasive  manners,  and
skill  in  entertaining  his  friends,  which  extended
even  to  inventing  delicate  dishes,  enabled  him  to
exert  such  influence  over  legislators  that  he  was
spoken  of  as  "the  king  of  the  lobby."  He  was  also
known  as  "  Uncle  Sam  Ward."  His  last  years  were
spent  in  Europe,  principally  in  England,  where  he
was  a  social  favorite.  He  died  after  returning
from  a  journey  to  Malta  from  the  home  of  his
sister.  Mrs.  Terry,  of  Rome,  whose  first  husband
was  Thomas  Crawford,  the  sculptor.  Another
sister  is  Julia  Ward  Howe.  Ward  was  for  a  score
of  years  the  intimate  friend  and  correspondent  of
the  poets  Halleck  and  Longfellow.  His  nephew,
Marion  Crawford,  has  depicted  him  in  the  charac-
ter of  Mr.  Bellingham  in  "Dr.  Claudius"  (1883).
He  published  a  volume  of  verse  entitled  "Lyrical
Recreations"  (New  York,  1865). — The  second  Sam-
uel's grandson,  William  Greene,  soldier,  b.  in  New


WARD


WARD


355


York  city,  20  July,  1832,  was  graduated  at  Columbia
in  1851,  and  became  a  banker.  He  was  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  12th  regiment  of.  New  York  militia,
with  which  he  served  in  the  field  from  21  April  till
5  Aug.,  1861.  As  colonel  of  the  same  regiment  he
was  again  in  the  United  States  service  in  1862,  par-
ticipating as  acting  brigadier,  and  personally  di-
recting his  artillery  fire,  in  the  defence  of  Harper's
Ferry,  where  he  was  made  prisoner  and  paroled.
In  1863  he  served  again  as  colonel  of  the  regiment
in  the  Pennsylvania  campaign.  He  partly  invent-
ed and  greatly  improved  the  Ward-Burton  breech-
loading  rifle.  After  the  war  he  was  made  a  briga-
dier-general in  the  state  militia  service,  and  served
for  nearly  twenty  years. — William  Greene's  brother,
John,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city,  30  Nov.,  1838,
was  graduated  at  Columbia  college  in  1858  and  at
Columbia  law-school  in  1860,  then  studied  medicine
at  the  New  York  university  medical  college,  taking
his  degree  of  M.  D.  in  1864.  During  the  civil  war
he  served  with  his  brother  in  the  field  as  lieutenant,
and  afterward  captain,  in  the  12th  New  York  Na-
tional guard,  taking  part  in  September,  1862,  in
the  defence  of  Harper's  Ferry,  under  a  heavy  ar-
tillery fire  for  three  days,  when  surrounded  by  a
large  part  of  Lee's  army  under  Stonewall  Jackson,
when  he  was  made  prisoner  and  paroled.  Subse-
quently he  became  colonel  of  the  12th  New  York
regiment  for  eleven  years,  till  October,  1877,  and
for  some  time  he  acted  as  secretary  to  the  National
rifle  association.  He  is  the  author  of  many  his-
torical papers  and  of  "  The  Overland  Route  to
California,  and  other  Poems"  (New  York,  1875).

WARD,  Richard  Halsted,  microscopist,  b.  in
Bloomfield,  N.  J.,  17  June,  1837.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Williams  in  1858,  and  at  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  New  York  city,  in  1862,
was  assistant  surgeon  in  the  military  hospital  at
Nashville,  Tenn.,  for  a  few  months,  resigned  on
account  of  failing  health,  and  in  1863  established
himself  in  Troy,  N.  Y.  He  became  interested  while
in  college  in  botany,  and  in  1867  accepted  the  pro-
fessorship of  that  science  in  Rensselaer  polytech-
nic institute,  while  continuing  his  practice  as  a
physician,  and  becoming  in  1868  physician  to  the
Marshall  infirmary.  He  also  delivered  lectures  on
the  use  of  the  microscope,  and  from  1871  till  1883
conducted  a  department  in  the  "  American  Natu-
ralist "  on  microscopy,  on  which  subject  he  has
also  given  lectures  in  the  Rensselaer  institute.  On
botany  he  has  been  a  frequent  lecturer  before  sci-
entific societies  and  institutions.  He  has  invented
an  illuminating  appliance  for  binocular  micro-
scopes and  other  improvements,  and  was  active  in
organizing  the  national  committee  on  micrometry.
As  an  expert  in  microscopical  examinations,  he  was
one  of  the  first  to  discriminate  between  different
kinds  of  blood,  and  his  testimony  is  sought  in
murder  and  forgery  trials,  and  in  connection  with
the  purity  of  water-supply  and  adulterations  of
food  and  medicine.  He  has  also  been  a  cultivator
of  medical  microscopy,  and  has  published  some
original  investigations.  Dr.  Ward  is  a  mem-
ber of  microscopical  societies  of  this  country  and
Europe,  was  president  of  the  American  society
of  microscopists,  and  has  been  the  manager  of
the  American  postal  microscopical  club  since  1875.
He  has  contributed  to  the  periodicals  that  are
devoted  to  his  specialty,  and  was  joint  editor,
with  the  Rev.  Alpheus  B.  Hervey,  of  the  Ameri-
can revision  of  the  work  of  Jujius  W.  Behrens  on
"  The  Microscope  in  Botany  "  (Boston,  1885).— His
sister,  Anna  Lydia,  author,  b.  in  Bloomfield,  N.  J.,
about  1850,  was  educated  at  Ripley  female  college,
Poultney,  Vt. She  assisted  in  compiling  a  '"  Dic-


tionary of  Quotations  "  (New  York,  1881),  and  has
published  "  A  Dictionary  of  Quotations  from  the
Poets  "  (1883) ;  "  Surf  and  Wave  "  (1883) ;  and  "  Fa-
miliar Quotations  from  American  Authors"  in  a
"  Library  of  Quotations  "  (4  vols.,  1884).  She  is
at  present  engaged  on  a  "  History  of  Waterbury,
Conn.,"  in  association  with  Miss  Sarah  J.  Pritchard.

WARD,  Thomas,  poet,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  8
June,  1807;  d.  in  New  York  city,  13  April,  1873.
He  studied  at  Princeton  and  at '  Rutgers  medical
college,  New  York  city,  practised  his  profession  two
or  three  years,  and  after  travelling  some  time  in
foreign  countries  returned  to  that  city  to  follow  a
life  of  literary  leisure,  having  married  a  lady  of
fortune.  He  built  a  large  music-hall  in  his  house
in  New  York,  in  which,  between  1862  and  1872,
nearly  fifty  musical  entertainments  were  given.
Dr.  Ward  was
the  author  of
"A  Month  of
Freedom  "  (New
York,  1837)  ;
"  Passaic  :  a
Group  of  Poems
touching  that
River,  with  oth-
er Musings,"  by
"Flaccus"(New
York,  1842)  ;
"  Flora,  or  the
Gipsy's  Frolic,"
a  pastoral  opera,
for  which  he  al-
so wrote  the  mu-
sic, and  which
had  several  pub-
lic and  pri-
vate representa-
tions for  the
benefit  of  charitable  objects,  yielding  about  $40,-
000;  and  "War  Lyrics"  (printed  privately,  New
York,  1865). — His  nephew,  James  Warner,  poet,
b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  5  June,  1817,  was  educated  at
the  Boston  high-school,  became  the  pupil  and  assist-
ant of  Prof.  John  Locke  in  the  Medical  college  of
Ohio,  Cincinnati,  was  professor  of  general  literature
and  of  botany  at  the  Female  college  of  Ohio  in
1853-4,  and  afterward  edited  for  several  years  the
"  Botanical  Magazine  and  Horticultural  Review  "  at
Cincinnati,  in  association  with  Dr.  John  A.  Warder.
In  1859  he  removed  to  New  York  city.  Since  1874
he  has  been  librarian  of  the  Grosvenor  public
library,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  Mr.  Ward  has  composed
pieces  for  the  voice  and  the  organ,  and  is  a  member
of  botanical  and  microscopical  societies.  Besides
contributions  to  periodicals  he  has  published  a  vol-
ume of  '•  Home-made  Verses  and  Stories  in  Rhyme,"
that  were  usually  signed  "  Yorick  "  (Boston,  1857) ;
"  Woman,"  a  poem  (1852) ;  and  "  Higher  Water,"
a  parody  of  Henry  W.  Longfellow's  "  Hiawatha,"
descriptive  of  a  freshet  in  the  Ohio  river  (1855).

WARD,  Thomas,  A.  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Penn-
sylvania, 28  Sept.,  1823.  He  is  of  negro  parentage,
was  brought  up  on  a  farm,  went  to  Philadelphia  in
1843,  attended  a  Quaker  night-school,  united  with
the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1843,
and  was  licensed  to  exhort  in  the  same  year.  He
preached  in  Pennsylvania,  New  York,  and  New
England,  and  was  the  first  secretary  of  the  New
England  conference  of  his  church.  He  asked  to
be  sent  to  do  missionary  work  on  the  Pacific  coast,
and  arrived  there,  19  May,  1854,  but  returned  in
1860  to  meet  the  general  "conference  in  Pittsburg.
He  went  back  to  his  post  in  1861,  and  under  his
guidance  and  inspiration  societies  were  organized


Md


356


WARD


WARDER


and  churches  built  at  Stockton,  Sacramento,  Pe-
taluma,  Grass  Valley,  Coloma,  Placerville,  Los
Angeles,  Negro  Hill,  Virginia  City,  Carson  City,
Red  Bluffs,  and  Chico.  He  was  elected  bishop  in
1868.  Since  1884  he  has  had  charge  of  Arkansas,
Louisiana,  and  Indian  territory.

WARD,  William  Hayes,  Assyriologist,  b.  in
Abington,  Mass.,  25  June,  1835.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Amherst  in  1856,  and  entered  Union  theo-
logical seminary,  New  York  city,  was  a  tutor  at
Beloit  college  in  1857-8,  and  then  completed  his
theological  studies  at  Andover  seminary,  being
graduated  in  1859.  He  preached  for  one  year  at
Oskaloosa,  Kan.,  receiving  ordination  on  8  Jan.,
1860,  resumed  teaching  at  Williston  seminary,
Easthampton.  Mass.,  in  1861,  taught  natural  sci-
ence at  the  Utica  free  academy  in  1863-'5,  and
was  subsequently  professor  of  Latin  at  Ripon  col-
lege, Wis.,  till  1868,  when  he  went  to  New  York
city  as  associate  editor  of  the  "  Independent,"  of
which  he  became  superintending  editor  two  years
later.  In  September,  1884.  he  went,  in  charge  of
the  Wolfe  expedition,  to  Babylonia,  and  remained
about  a  year,  exploring  the  ruins  south  of  Bagdad.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  Univer-
sity of  the  city  of  New  York  and  from  Rutgers
college  in  1873.  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Amherst
in  1885.  Dr.  Ward,  who  still  edits  the  tf  Independ-
ent," is  the  author  of  articles  on  oriental  archae-
ology in  the  "  Proceedings  "  of  the  Palestine  ex-
ploration society,  the  American  archaeological  in-
stitute, and  the  American  oriental  society,  as  well
as  in  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra  "  and  other  periodicals.
He  wrote  a  biographical  introduction  to  the
"  Poems  "  of  Sidney  Lanier  (New  York.  1884),  and
on  his  return  from  the  East  prepared  a  report  of
the  expedition  in  pamphlet-form.

WARD,  William  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Amelia
county,  Va.,  9  Aug.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  12
Oct.,  1878.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's  college,
near  Lebanon.  Ky.,  studied  law,  and  practised  in
Greensburg.  In  1847  he  joined  a  regiment  of  Ken-
tucky volunteers,  was  commissioned  as  major,  and
served  in  Mexico  till  July,  1848.  He  was  elected
to  the  Kentucky  legislature  on  his  return,  and  was
a  representative  in  congress  from  1  Dec,  1851,  till
3  March,  1853.  He  was  appointed  a  brigadier-gen-
eral in  the  National  army  on  18  Sept.,  1861,  organ-
ized a  brigade  of  volunteers  in  Kentucky,  com-
manded all  troops  south  of  Louisville'  and  was  en-
gaged in  the  pursuit  of  Gen.  John  H.  Morgan  in
1862,  was  attached  to  the  Army  of  the  Ohio  in  No-
vember, commanded  at  Gallatin,  Tenn.,  and  served
through  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman's  campaigns,  re-
linquishing the  command  of  a  division  in  the  Cum-
berland at  the  beginning  of  the  Atlanta  campaign
to  assume  that  of  a  brigade  in  the  20th  corps.  His
men  effected  a  lodgment  in  the  enemy's  fortifica-
tions at  Resaca.  and  he  was  severely  wounded  in
the  arm  and  side,  but  would  not  leave  the  field.
He  was  also  in  the  battles  before  the  fall  of  At-
lanta, and  in  the  inarch  to  the  sea  commanded  a
division,  performing  effective  services  in  the  fights
that  preceded  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.
Johnston's  army.  He  was  brevetted  major-general
on  24  Feb.,  1865,  and  mustered  out  on  24  Aug.,
after  which  he  practised  law  in  Louisville,  Ky.

WARDEN,  David  Bailie,  author,  b.  in  Ireland
in  1778 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  9  Oct.,  1845.  He
came  to  this  country  when  young,  received  a  classi-
cal education,  and  was  graduated  at  New  York
medical  college.  He  was  appointed  secretary  of
legation  to  Gen.  John  Armstrong,  minister  to
France,  in  1804,  and  subsequently  consul  at  Paris,
which  post  he  held  forty  years. He  was  distin-


guished for  his  scientific  attainments  and  varied
learning,  was  a  member  of  the  French  academy,
and  formed  two  libraries  of  American  books,  one
of  which  was  acquired  by  Harvard  in  1823,  and
the  other  by  the  New  York  state  library  in  1840.
Pie  published  "  Inquiry  concerning  the  Intellectual
and  Moral  Faculties  and  Literature  of  the  Ne-
groes "  (Paris,  1810) ;  "  Origin  and  Nature  of  Con-
sular Establishments  " ;  "  Description  of  the  District
of  Columbia"  (1816):  "Statistical,  Political,  and
Historical  Account  of  the  United  States  of  North
America "  (3  vols.,  Edinburgh,  1819) ;  "  L'art  de
verifier  les  dates,  chronologie  de  l'Amerique  "  (10
vols.,  Paris,  1826-'44) ;  "  Bibliotheca  Americana
Septentrionalis,  etc."  (1820) ;  "  Recherches  sur  les
antiquites  de  l'Amerique  Septentrionale  "  (1827) ;
and  "  Bibliotheca  Americana (1831).

WARDEN,  Robert  Bruce,  author,  b.  in  Bards-
town,  Nelson  co.,  Ky.,  18  Jan.,  1824.  He  was  edu-
cated privately,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  April,  1845,  became  president-judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  at  Cincinnati,  afterward
reporter  of  the  supreme  court  of  Ohio,  and  then
associate  judge  of  that  court.  Since  1873  he  has
resided  in  Washington,  D.C.  Judge  Warden  has
written  much  for  the  press  and  has  published  "  A
Familiar  Forensic  View  of  Man  and  Law  "  (Colum-
bus, 1859) ;  "  A  Voter's  Version  of  the  Life  and
Character  of  Stephen  Arnold  Douglas"  (1860);
'•  An  Account  of  the  Private  Life  and  Public  Ser-
vices of  Salmon  Portland  Chase "  (Cincinnati,
1874) ;  and  vols,  ii.,  iii.,  and  iv.  of  the  "  Ohio  Re-
ports." He  is  preparing  for  publication  "  A  View
of  Land  and  Life.

WARDER,  John  Aston,  physician,  b.  near
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19  Jan.,  1812  ;  d.  in  North  Bend,
Ohio,  14  July,  1883.  In  early  life  he  was  associ-
ated with  William  Bartram  and  William  Darling-
ton, who  were  among  his  neighbors,  and  with  John
J.  Audubon,  Francois  A.  Michaux,.  and  Thomas
Nuttall,  who  were  visitors  at  his  father's  house
and  from  whom  he  acquired  a  great  fondness  for
nature  and  learned  to  use  his  powers  of  observa-
tion. In  1830  he  removed  with  his  parents  to
Springfield,  Ohio,  but,  returning  to  Philadelphia,
was  graduated  at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1836.
Settling  in  Cincinnati  in  1837,  he  followed  his
profession  there  until  1855.  Meanwhile  he  took
an  active  interest  in  everything  that  tended  to  ad-
vance education  and  science.  He  was  early  cho-
sen a  member  of  the  school-board,  and  he  trav-
elled extensively,  studying  systems  of  teaching  and
the  construction  of  school-houses  that  he  might
introduce  improved  plans  into  Cincinnati.  He
was  associated  in  the  organization  of  the  Cincin-
nati astronomical  society,  the  Western  academy  of
natural  sciences,  the  Cincinnati  horticultural  so-
ciety, the  Ohio  Medical  college,  and  the  Cincin-
nati society  of  natural  history,  of  which  he  was
president  for  five  years.  Dr.  Warder  also  served
on  the  State  board  of  agriculture  and  was  among
the  first  to  direct  public  attention  to  the  beautify-
ing of  public  and  private  parks  and  cemeteries.
He  was  associated  in  the  establishment  of  the
Spring  Grove  cemetery  and  did  much  to  develop  the

Eublic  interest  in  landscape  gardening.  In  1873
e  was  appointed  U.  S.  commissioner  to  the  World's
fair  in  Vienna,  and  prepared  the  official  report  for
the  U.  S.  government  on  "  Forests  and  Forestry."
Ho  was  connected  with  the  founding  of  the  Ameri-
can forestry  association  in  1875  and  was  active  in
the  establishment  of  the  American  forestry  con-
gress. In  1883  he  was  chosen  honorary  president
of  the  Ohio  state  forestry  association,  and  was  ap-
pointed by  the  department  of  agriculture  to  report


WARE


WARE


357


upon  the  forestry  of  the  northwestern  states.  He
described  in  1853  the  Catalpa  speciosa,  a  tree  that
had  not  been  recognized  until  that  time  as  a  dis-
tinct species,  but  which  is  now  accepted  as  one  of
the  most  valuable  of  forest-trees.  In  1850  he  be-
gan the  publication  of  the  "  Western  Horticultural
Review,"  which  continued  until  1854.  when,  with
James  W.  Ward,  he  established  the  "  Botanical
Magazine  and  Horticultural  Review,"  which  he
then  edited  for  several  years.  Besides  making  con-
tributions to  medical,  agricultural,  and  horticul-
tural periodicals,  he  translated  Trousseau  and  Bel-
loc  on  "  Laryngeal  Phthisis"  (Philadelphia,  1839),
and  published  "  Hedge  Manual :  a  Complete  Trea-
tise on  Hedges,  Evergreens,  and  all  Plants  suit-
able for  American  Hedging  "  (New  York,  1858) ;
"  American  Pomology :  Part  I.,  Apples  "  (1867) ;
and  an  edition  of  Alphonse  Du  Breuil's  "  Vine-
yard Culture  "  (1867).— His  son,  Robert  Bowne,
chemist,  b.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  28  March,  1848,
was  graduated  at  Earlham  college,  Richmond,  Ind.,
in  1866  and  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of
Harvard  in  1874.  He  has  since  that  time  been  en-
gaged in  teaching  chemistry  and  physics,  and  in
1883-'7  was  state  chemist  of  Indiana.  In  1887  he
removed  to  Washington,  D.  C.  Prof.  Warder  is  a
member  of  various  societies,  and  has  contributed  pa-
pers to  their  transactions  and  to  scientific  journals.
WARE,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sherburne,
Mass.,  1  April,  1764;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  12
July,  1845.  He  was  the  descendant  in  the  fourth
generation  of  Robert  Ware,  a  native  of  England,
who  was  one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Dedham,  Mass.,
in  1642.  Henry  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1785,  and  while  studying  theology  taught  in  Cam-
bridge. He  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  first  church
at  Hingham,  Mass.,  24  Oct.,  1787,  which  charge  he
retained  till  1805,  when  he  became  Hollis  professor
of  divinity  in  Harvard.  His  election  originated
the  discussion  that  led  to  the  separation  of  the
Unitarians — to  whom  he  adhered — from  the  ortho-
dox Congregationalists.  He  took  no  part  in  the
controversy  till  1820.  when  he  engaged  in  a  po-
lemical discussion  with  Dr.  Leonard  Woods.  He
resigned  the  professorship  of  theology  in  1810  in
consequence  of  impaired  eyesight,  but  continued
two  years  longer  in  the  chair  of  pulpit  eloquence,
which  he  had  assumed  in  1826.  Harvard  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1808.  With  Noah  Worces-
ter, William  E.  Channing,  and  Andrews  Norton
he  laid  the  foundation  of  the  conservative  school
of  Unitarianisra.  He  published  "  Letters  to  Trini-
tarians and  Calvinists,"  in  reply  to  Dr.  Leonard
Woods's  "  Letters  to  Unitarians "  (Cambridge,
1820) ;  "  Answer  to  Dr.  Woods's  Reply  "  (1822) ;
"  Postscript  to  an  Answer"  (1823);  "An  Inquiry
into  the  Foundation,  Evidences,  and  Truths  of  Re-
ligion "  (2  vols.,  Cambridge  and  London,  1842) ;  also
various  single  sermons. — His  son,  Henry,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  21  April,  1794;  d.  in
Framingham,  Mass.,  22  Sept.,  1843,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1812.  He  was  assistant  teacher  at
Phillips  Exeter  academy  in  1812-'14,  studied  the-
ology under  his  father's  direction,  and  was  or-
dained pastor  of  the  Second  church  (Unitarian)  at
Boston,  1  Jan.,  1817.  He  took  an  active  part  in
organizing  the  Unitarian  body,  and  edited  its  or-
gan, the  "Christian  Disciple,"  whose  name  was
subsequently  changed  to  the  "Christian  Exami-
ner" in  1819-22.  He  visited  Europe  in  1829-'30
for  the  benefit  of  his  health,  resigned  his  pastorate
soon  after  his  return,  and  was  appointed  Park-
man  professor  of  pulpit  eloquence  and  pastoral
care  in  the  divinity-school  of  Harvard  in  1830,
which  chair  he  resigned  in  1842. He  received  the


degree  of  D.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1834,  and  pub-
lished "  Hints  on  Extemporaneous  Preaching"
(Boston,  1824);  "Sermons  on  the  Offices  and  Char-
acter of  Jesus  Christ "  (1825) ;  "  The  Formation  of
Christian  Charac-
ter "(1831);  "The
Life  of  the  Sav-
iour "(1832);  me-
moirs of  Joseph
Priestley,  Noah
Worcester,  and
others;  and  sepa-
rate sermons,  es-
says, and  poems.
The  Rev.  Chan-
dler Robbins  pub-
lished selections
from  his  writings
(4  vols.,  Boston,
1846-7),  and  his
brother,  John,
published  his

"Memoir  "(2  vols.,
Boston,  1846).  —
The  second  Hen-
ry's second  wife,  Mary  Lovell  Pickard,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  2  Oct.,  i798;  d.  in  Milton,  Mass.,
4  April,  1849,  was  distinguished  for  charitable
traits,  and  her  life  forms  the  subject  of  a  "Me-
moir" by  the  Rev.  Edward  B.  Hall,  a  brother-
in-law  of  Dr.  Ware  (Boston,  1852). — The  second
Henry's  son,  John  Fothergill  Waterhouse,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Boston,  31  Aug.,  1818;  d.  in  Milton,
Mass.,  26  Feb.,  1881,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1838  and  at  the  divinity-school  in  1842.  He  was  first
settled  as  a  pastor  of  the  Unitarian  society  at  Fall
River,  Mass.,  afterward  was  stationed  at  Cam-
bridgeport,  and  in  1864  became  pastor  of  the  Uni-
tarian church  in  Baltimore,  Md.  During  his  resi-
dence in  Baltimore  he  gave  much  attention  to  the
religious  needs  and  other  wants  of  the  negroes,
and  before  and  during  the  civil  war  was  an  anti-
slavery  man.  Mr.  Ware  returned  to  Boston,  and
in  1872  became  pastor  of  the  Arlington  street
church.  He  organized  a  Unitarian  society  at
Swampscott,  Mass.,  of  which  he  was  pastor  at  the
time  of  his  death,  as  well  as  of  the  Boston  church.
He  was  a  favorite  with  the  members  of  the  Grand
army  of  the  republic,  having  been  a  worker  among
the  soldiers  during  the  civil  war,  and  was  a  frequent
orator  before  their  organizations.  He  published
"The  Silent  Pastor"  (Boston,  1848);  "Hymns  and
Tunes  for  Sunday-School  Worship"  (1853-'56-'60) ;
and  "  Home  Life :  What  it  Is,  and  what  it  Needs  "
(1873). — Another  son  of  the  second  Henry,  Will-
iam Robert,  architect,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  27
May,  1832,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1852,  and
at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  in  1856.  He  was
professor  of  architecture  in  the  Massachusetts  in-
stitute of  technology  from  1865  till  1881,  and  since
the  latter  year  has  held  a  similar  professorship  in
the  School  of  mines  of  Columbia  college,  where  he
has  entire  charge  of  the  department  of  architect-
ure. He  was  a  trustee  of  the  Museum  of  fine  arts,
Boston,  in  1876-'81,  and  since  1881  has  held  a  simi-
lar office  in  connection  with  the  Metropolitan  mu-
seum, New  York.  In  conjunction  with  Henry  Van
Brunt  he  designed  the  Memorial  hall  at  Harvard
college,  the  first  church  in  Boston,  the  Union  rail-
way station,  Worcester,  and  other  buildings ;  and
later  he  designed  the  American  school  of  classical
studies  at  Athens,  Greece.  Prof.  Ware  is  an  ac-
cepted authority  on  architectural  matters  and  is
largely  consulted  in  a  professional  capacity.  He
has  published  "  Modern  Perspective :  a  Treatise


358


WARE


WARING


on  Plane  and  Curvilinear  Perspective"  (Boston,
1883). — John,  brother  of  the  second  Henry,  physi-
cian, b.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  19  Dec,  1795;  d.  in
Boston,  29  April,  1864,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1813,  afterward  studied  medicine,  and  received
his  degree  in  1816.  After  practising  for  one  year
at  Duxbury,  Mass.,  he  removed  to  Boston.  Prom
1832  till  1858  he  was  professor  of  the  theory  and
practice  of  medicine  in  the  medical  department  of
Harvard.  Dr.  Ware  was  for  several  years  presi-
dent of  the  Massachusetts  medical  society,  and  also
a  member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences.  In  addition  to  lectures,  discourses,  and
essays,  he  published  "Life  of  Henry  Ware.  Jr."
(2  vols.,  Boston.  1846) ;  "  Hints  to  Young  Men  "
(1850) ;  and  M  Philosophy  of  Natural  History "
(I860). — His  second  wife,  Mary  Greene  Chan-
dler, b.  in  Petersham,  Mass.,  22  May,  1818,  is  the
author  of  "  Elements  of  Character  "  (Boston,  1854) ;
"  Thoughts  in  My  Garden "  (1862) ;  and  "  Death
and  Life  "  (1864). — William,  another  brother  of
the  second  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  3
Aug.,  1797;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  19  Feb.,  1852,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1816  and  at  the
divinitv-school  in  1819,  and  began  preaching  at
Northborough,  Mass.  From  18  Dec,  1821,  till  19
Oct.,  1836,  he  was  minister  of  the  1st  Congregational
church  in  New  York.  From  June,  1837,  till  April,
1838,  he  had  charge  of  the  2d  Congregational
church  in  Waltham,  Mass.,  and  in  December,  1843,
was  settled  at  West  Cambridge,  but  feeble  health
soon  compelled  him  to  relinquish  preaching.  Mr.
Ware  was  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Christian
Examiner"  in  1839-'44.  He  travelled  in  Europe
in  1848-'9,  and  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on
European  travel  in  1849-'51.  He  published  vivid
representations  of  ancient  life  and  manners,  en-
titled "  Letters  from  Palmyra  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,
1837),  which  had  appeared  in  the  "  Knickerbocker
Magazine"  the  previous  year,  and  were  subse-
quently republished  in  London  and  New  York
with  the  title  of  "  Zenobia.  or  the  Fall  of  Palmyra"
(new  ed.,  1868).  He  also  wrote  "  Probus"  (2  vols.,
New  York,  1838 ;  afterward  entitled  "  Aurelian  ") ;
"  Julian,  or  Scenes  in  Judea "  (2  vols.,  1841) ;
"  American  Unitarian  Biography  "  (2  vols.,  Boston.
1850-1) ;  "  Sketches  of  European  Capitals  "  (1851) ;
"  Lectures  on  the  Works  and  Genius  of  Washington
Allston  "  (1852) ;  and  a  "  Memoir  of  Nathaniel  Ba-
con," in  Sparks's  "American  Biography"  (1848). —
The  first  Henry's  nephew,  Ashur,  jurist,  b.  in
Sherburne,  Mass.,  10  Feb.,  1782;  d.  in  Portland,
Me.,  10  Sept.,  1873,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1804,  held  a  tutorship  there  from  1807  till  1811,
and  was  professor  of  Greek  from  1811  till  1815.
He  was  admitted  to  the  Boston  bar  in  1816,  re-
moved to  Portland,  Me.,  in  1817,  and  in  1820
became  the  first  secretary  of  the  state  of  Maine  on
its  separation  from  Massachusetts.  From  1822  till
1866  he  was  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  of
Maine.  He  edited  the  "Boston  Yankee"  for  a
year,  the  Portland  "Argus"  for  several  years,  con-
tributed articles  on  admiralty  jurisdiction  to  John
Bouvier's  "  Law  Dictionary,"  and  published  "  Re-
ports of  Cases,  United  States  District  Court  of
Maine  "  (Boston,  1839).

WARE,  Katharine  Augusta,  poet,  b.  in  Quin-
cy,  Mass.,  in  1797;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  in  1843.
She  was  a  daughter  of  Dr.  Rhodes,  of  Quincy,
in  1819  married  Charles  A.  Ware,  a  naval  officer,
removed  to  Europe  in  1839,  and  remained  there
till  her  death.  She  edited  the  "  Bower  of  Taste  "
in  Boston,  and,  in  addition  to  poems  for  the  news-
papers, published  "  Power  of  the  Passions,  and
other  Poems  "  (London,  1842).


WARE,  Nathaniel  A.,  author,  b.  in  Massachu-
setts about  1789 ;  d.  in  Galveston,  Tex.,  in  1854.
He  engaged  in  teaching  in  South  Carolina,  where
he  studied  and  practised  law.  Removing  to  Nat-
chez, Miss.,  he  became  major  of  militia  and  sec-
retary of  the  territorial  government,  acquiring
a  large  fortune  by  judicious  purchases  of  land.
He  travelled  extensively  and  was  known  for  his
attainments  in  botany,  geography,  and  the  natural
sciences.  He  resided  at  Philadelphia  and  Cincin-
nati during  his  later  years,  and  published  a  small
work  on  the  Pestalozzian  system  of  education ;
"  Views  of  the  Federal  Constitution  " ;  and  "  Notes
on  Political  Economv,  as  Applicable  to  the  United
States  "  (New  York,  1844).  He  was  the  father  of
Catharine  Ann  Warfield,  mentioned  below.

WARE,  Nicholas,  senator,  b.  in  Caroline  coun-
ty, Va,,  in  1769;  d.  in  New  York  city,  7  Sept.,
1824.  While  a  youth  he  accompanied  his  father,
Capt.  Robert  Ware,  to  Edgefield,  S.  C.  He  after-
ward studied  medicine  at  Augusta,  Ga.,  and  then
law,  completing  his  studies  at  the  Litchfield,  Conn.,
law-school.  He  attained  success  in  his  profession
at  Augusta,  represented  Richmond  county  in  the
Georgia  legislature,  was  mayor  of  Augusta,  after-
ward judge  of  the  city  court,  and  U.  S.  senator
from  Georgia  in  1821-'4.  He  was  president  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  Richmond  county  academy,
Augusta,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  was  also  a
trustee  of  the  University  of  Georgia  at  Athens.

WARFIELD,  Catharine  Ann,  author,  b.  in
Natchez,  Miss.,  6  June,  1816 ;  d.  in  Pewee  Val-
ley, Ky.,  21  May,  1877.  She  was  a  daughter  of
Nathaniel  A.  Ware,  and  her  maternal  grandfather
was  Capt.  Charles  Percy,  of  the  British  navy,  one  of
the  early  colonists  of  Louisiana.  She  was  educated
with  her  sister  Eleanor  in  Philadelphia,  where  the
family  then  resided,  but  afterward  went  to  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  where  in  1833  she  married  Robert  E.
Warfield,  of  Lexington,  Ky.  In  1857  they  removed
to  a  farm  near  Louisville,  Ky.  Conjointly  with  her
sister  Eleanor  she  published  "  The  Wife  of  Leon,
and  other  Poems,  by  Two  Sisters  of  the  West"
(New  York,  1844),  and  "The  Indian  Chamber,  and
other  Poems"  (1846).  Mrs.  Warfield's  own  publi-
cations were  "  The  Household  of  Bouverie "  (2
vols.,  New  York,  1860) ;  "  The  Romance  of  the
Green  Seal "  (1867) ;  "  Miriam  Monfort.  or  Mon-
fort  Hall"  (1873);  "Hester  Howard's  Tempta-
tion "  (Philadelphia,  1875) ;  "A  Double  Wedding"
(1875) ;  "  Lady  Ernestine  "  (1876) ;  "  Miriam's  Me-
moirs, or  the  Romance  of  Beauseincourt "  (1876) ;
"  Sea  and  Shore  "  (1876) ;  "  Feme  Fleming  "  (1877) ;
and  "  The  Cardinal's  Daughter  "  (1877). — Her  sis-
ter, Eleanor  Percy  Ware  Lee,  b.  in  Washington,
Miss.,  in  1820;  d.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  14  Oct.,  1849,
married  Henry  Lee,  a  native  of  Virginia,  and  with
her  sister  was  the  author  of  several  novels.

WARING,  George  E.  sanitarian,  b.  in  Pound-
ridge,  N.  Y.,  4  July,  1833.  He  was  educated  at
College  Hill,  Poughkeepsie,  and  then  studied  agri-
culture with  James  J.  Mapes.  During  the  winter  of
1854  he  made  an  agricultural  lecture  tour  through
Maine  and  Vermont,  and  in  1855  he  took  charge
of  Horace  Greeley's  farm  at  Chappaqua,  N.  Y.,
which  he  conducted  on  shares  for  two  years.  In
August,  1857,  he  was  appointed  agricultural  and
drainage  engineer  of  Central  park,  New  York  city,
where  he  remained  for  four  years,  during  which
time,  among  other  duties,  he  prepared  the  soil  of
the  Mall  and  set  out  the  four  rows  of  elms  upon  it.
He  was  appointed  in  May,  1861,  after  the  opening
of  the  civil  war,  major  of  the  Garibaldi  guard,  with
which  he  served  three  months.  In  August.  1861,
he  was  made  major  of  cavalry  by  Gen.  John  C.


WARNER


WARNER


359


Fremont  and  went  to  St.  Louis  to  join  him.  There
he  raised  six  companies  of  cavalry  under  the  name
of  the  Fremont  hussars,  which,  were  afterward  con-
solidated with  the  Benton  hussars  to  form  the  4th
Missouri  cavalry,  of  which  he  was  commissioned
colonel  in  January,  1862.  In  this  capacity  he  served
throughout  the  war,  chiefly  in  the  southwest.  He
settled  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1867,  where  he  became
the  manager  of  Ogden  farm.  Col.  Waring  then
devoted  himself  to  agriculture  and  cattle-breeding
and  to  engineering,  until  the  latter  occupation  re-
quired his  full  attention  in  1877.  Since  that  date
he  has  been  in  active  practice  as  an  engineer  of
drainage.  He  was  appointed  in  June,  1879,  expert
and  special  agent  of  the  10th  census  of  the  United
States,  with  charge  of  the  social  statistics  of  cities,
and  he  has  been  a  member  of  the  National  board  of
health  since  1882.  After  the  yellow-fever  epidemic
in  Memphis  in  1878  he  devised  the  system  of  sew-
erage that  was  accepted  for  that  city  and  since  that
time  has  been  generally  adopted.  He  has  invented
numerous  sanitary  improvements  chiefly  in  connec-
tion with  the  drainage  of  houses  and  towns.  He
has  been  connected  with  various  journals  and  edit-
ed the  "  Herd- Books  of  the  American  Jersey  Cattle
Club"  in  1868-'81,  of  which  organization  he  was
the  founder.  His  other  works  are  M  Elements  of
Agriculture  "  (New  York,  1854) ;  "  Draining  for
Profit  and  Draining  for  Health  "  (1867) ;  "  Handy
Book  of  Husbandry  "  (1870,  now  called  "  Book  of
the  Farm  ") ;  "  A  Farmer's  Vacation  "  (Boston,
1875) ;  "  Whip  and  Spur"  (1875) ;  "  Sanitary  Drain-
age of  Houses  and  Farms  "  (1876) ;  "  The  Bride  of
the  Rhine  "  (1877) ;  "  Village  Improvements  and
Farm  Villages"  (1877);  "Sanitary  Condition  of
Citv  and  Country  Dwelling-Houses"  (1877);  "Tyrol
and  the  Skirt  of  the  Alps  "  (New  York,  1879) ;  "  flow
to  Drain  a  House  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Sewerage  and  Land
Drainage  "  (1888).

WARNER,  Adoniram  Jndson,  soldier,  b.  in
Wales,  Erie  co.,  N.  Y.,  13  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Beloit,  Wis.,  and  in  New  York  central  col-
lege. Soon  after  leaving  college  he  became  princi-
pal of  the  Lewiston,  Pa.,  academy  and  superin-
tendent of  public  schools  of  Mifflin  county,  and  he
was  principal  of  the  Mercer  union  schools  from
1856  till  1862.  In  the  latter  year  he  entered  the
National  army  as  captain  in  a  Pennsylvania  regi-
ment, and  was  successively  promoted  to  lieutenant-
colonel,  colonel,  and  brevet  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  13  March,  1865.  He  participated  in
several  engagements,  and  was  severely  wounded  at
Antietam.  After  the  close  of  the  war  he  studied
law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Indianapolis,
Ind.,  but  never  practised,  and  since  1866  has  en-
gaged in  the  railroad,  coal,  and  iron  business.  He
was  elected  to  congress  from  Ohio  as  a  Democrat
in  1878,  1882,  and  1884.  He  has  published  "  Ap-
preciation of  Money"  (Philadelphia,  1877) ;  "  Source
of  Value  in  Money  "  (1882) ;  and  various  pamphlets
on  the  silver  and  other  economic  questions.

WARNER,  Charles  Dudley,  author,  b.  in
Plainfield,  Mass..  12  Sept.,  1829.  His  father,  a  man
of  culture,  died  when  Charles  was  five  years  old.
During  his  early  boyhood  he  had  access  to  few
books  except  biblical  commentaries,  biographies  of
austere  divines,  and  some  Calvinistic  treatises,  but
he  was  fond  of  study,  especially  of  the  classics,  and
in  1851  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  with  the  first
prize  for  English.  He  has  embodied  his  recollec-
tions of  his  youth  in  New  England  in  one  of  his
most  popular  works,  "  Being  a  Boy  "  (Boston,  1877),
which  is  partly  an  autobiography,  and  a  faith-
ful and  amusing  picture  of  rural  life  in  a  Calvin-
istic New  England  neighborhood  fifty  years  ago.


K^U^C^.Jht^cLaUf/T^iy^^^^'


While  in  college  he  contributed  to  the  "  Knicker-
bocker "  and  "  Putnam's  Magazine."  He  also  pre-
pared a  "  Book  of  Eloquence  "  (Cazenovia,  N.  Y.,
1853),  which  displayed  a  critical  and  appreciative
judgment.  He  joined  a  surveying  party  on  the
Missouri  frontier
in  1853,  became
familiar  with  va-
ried phases  of
frontier  life,  re-
turned to  the  east
in  1854,  and  was
graduated  at  the
law  department
of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania
in  1856.  He  then
practised  his  pro-
fession in  Chica-
go, 111.,  till  1860,
when  he  returned
to  the  east  and  be-
came assistant  edi-
tor of  the  "Press,"
an  evening  newspaper  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  of
which  he  assumed  control  in  the  following  year.
In  1867  the  "Press"  was  consolidated  with  the
"  Courant,"  of  which  he  became  a  co-editor.  He
spent  fourteen  months  abroad  in  1868-'9,  and
gained  reputation  by  a  series  of  foreign  letters  to
that  journal,  which  were  widely  copied.  He  sub-
sequently travelled  extensively  in  Europe  and  the
East,  on  his  return  resumed  the  editorship  of  the
"  Courant,"  and  in  1884  became  a  co-editor  of
"  Harper's  Magazine."  His  most  important  work
in  connection  with  that  monthly  has  been  a  series
of  papers  beginning  with  "  Studies  in  the  South,"
followed  by  "Mexican  Papers"  and  "Studies  in
the  Great  West,"  in  which  the  educational,  politi-
cal, and  social  condition  of  these  states  are  care-
fully discussed.  He  has  also  interested  himself
in  the  treatment  of  social  science  topics  in  Con-
necticut, and  was  for  several  years  a  member  of
the  State  commission  on  prisons,  and  of  the  Na-
tional prison  association.  He  has  delivered  lec-
tures before  educational  and  other  societies,  which
for  the  most  part  have  been  pleas  for  a  higher  in-
dividual and  national  culture,  for  an  enlargement
of  our  collegiate  courses,  and  an  improvement  in
their  methods.  These  include  an  address  at  Bow-
doin  on  "  Higher  Education "  (Brunswick,  Me.,
1871),  a  series  of  lectures  on  "  Literature  in  Rela-
tion to  Life,"  delivered  before  the  law  department
of  Yale  (1884),  address  at  the  unveiling  of  Paul
Gerhardt's  statue  of  Nathan  Hale  in  the  capitol  at
Hartford  (1887),  that  before  the  literary  societies
of  Washington  and  Lee  university,  Lexington,  Va.,
1888,  and  one  on  "  Shelley  "  (1888).  He  was  an  ar-
dent Abolitionist  during  the  anti-slavery  agitation,
and  has  been  a  Republican  since  the  formation  of
the  party.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in
1872,  and  Dartmouth  the  same  honor  in  1884.  His
career  as  an  author  began  in  1870.  In  the  spring
and  summer  of  that  year  he  wrote  for  the  "Courant "
a  series  of  sketches,  lightly  and  humorously  depict-
ing the  experiences  of  an  amateur  gardener,  into
which  were  woven  caustic  comments  on  some  of
the  foibles  of  social  and  political  life.  These  papers
were  published  in  book-form,  with  an  introduction
by  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  under  the  title  of  "  My
Summer  in  a  Garden,"  and  met  with  immediate
favor  (Hartford,  1870).  It  was  followed  by  "  Saun-
terings,"  reminiscences  of  the  author's  travels  on
the  European  continent  (Boston,  1870),  and  "  Back-
log Studies "  (1872),  a  collection  of  essays,  a  part


360


WARNER


WARNER


of  which  first  appeared  in  "  Scribner's  Monthly."
This  book  is  a  panegyric  of  the  kindly  influences
of  the  fireside  circle,  and  a  discussion  of  current
topics  of  social  life,  in  the  peculiar  vein  of  humor
that  characterizes  the  writer.  His  other  works  in-
clude contributions  to  the  magazines  on  social,
artistic,  and  literary  topics ;  "  Baddeck,  and  That
Sort  of  Thing"  (1874) ;  "  My  Winter  on  the  Nile"
(Hartford,  1876) ;  "  In  the  Levant "  (1877) ;  "  In  the
Wilderness  "  (Boston,  1878) ;  "  Capt.  John  Smith  "
(New  York,  1881);  "Washington  Irving,"  in  the
"  Men  of  Letters  "  series,  of  which  he  is  editor  (Bos-
ton, 1881) ;  "  Roundabout  Journey  "  (1883) ;  "  Their
Pilgrimage,"  a  serial,  depicting  the  exploits  of  an
author  and  an  artist  on  a  tour  of  the  Atlantic  coast
and  inland  northern  and  southern  watering-places
(New  York,  1886) ;  and  "  On  Horseback  "  (1888).
He  has  also  published,  with  Samuel  L.  Clemens,
"  The  Gilded  Age  "  (1873).

WARNER,  Hiram,  jurist,  b.  in  Hampshire
county,  Mass.,  29  Oct.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,
in  1881.  He  received  an  academical  education,
removed  to  Georgia  in  1819,  and  taught  there  for
three  years.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1825,
and  began  practice  in  Knoxville,  Ga.  He  was  a
member  of  the  state  house  of  representatives  in
1828-'31,  was  elected  in  1833  a  judge  of  the  su-
perior court  of  Georgia,  re-elected  in  1836,  and
served  till  1840.  He  was  appointed  in  1845  a  judge
of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state,  served  till  1853,
when  he  resigned,  and  was  elected  to  congress  in
1855.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Charleston  Demo-
cratic convention  in  1860,  and  opposed  the  seces-
sion movement  there  and  in  the  Georgia  secession
convention  of  1861.  After  the  war  he  sustained
the  reconstruction  acts  of  congress.  On  the  re-
organization of  the  judiciary  of  the  state,  he  was
appointed  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  in
1872  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of  that  court.

WARNER,  Seth,  soldier,  b.  in  Roxburv,  Conn.,
17  May,  1743 ;  d.  there.  26  Dec,  1784.  He  early
became  known  for  his  skill  in  hunting,  his  energv,
sound  judgment,  and  manly  bearing.  In  1763
he  removed  with  his  father,  Benjamin  Warner,
M.  D.,  to  Bennington,  then  in  the  "  New  Hamp-
shire Grants."  During  the  dispute  between  New
York  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  Grants,  over
whom  that  state  claimed  jurisdiction,  Ethan  Allen
and  Seth  Warner,  who  were  the  leaders  of  the  peo-

f)le,  were  outlawed.  At  the  opening  of  the  Revo-
ution,  Warner  espoused  the  patriot  cause,  and,
though  the  New  York  legislature  several  times  pro-
tested against  his  commission,  congress  refused  to
revoke  it.  As  second  in  command,  he  assisted  in
the  capture  of  Ticonderoga,  and  on  the  following
day  took  the  important  post  of  Crown  Point  with
its  garrison  and  113  cannon.  For  this  he  was
given  a  colonel's  commission  by  congress,  dated
27  July,  1775,  and  joined  Gen.  Richard  Mont-
gomery in  Canada.  He  took  part  in  the  following
September  in  the  siege  of  St.  John's,  New  Bruns-
wick, and  defeated  Sir  Guy  Carleton,  who  at-
tempted its  relief.  His  regiment  was  then  dis-
charged, and  after  the  death  of  Gen.  Montgomery,
on  the  last  day  of  the  year,  he  raised  another  body
of  troops  and  marched  to  Quebec.  On  the  night
of  4  July,  1777,  when  Ticonderoga  was  evacu-
ated, the  main  body  of  the  American  army  took
the  road  leading  through  Hubbardton  and  Castle-
ton.  At  the  former  place  the  rear-guard  was
placed  under  the  command  of  Warner,  who  was
attacked  by  Gen.  Simon  Frazer  on  7  July  and
compelled  to  retreat  after  a  severe  engagement.
At  the  battle  of  Bennington,  Warner's  regiment
arrived  in  time  to  repel  the  re-enforcement  that


had  been  sent  to  the  enemy.  He  afterward
joined  the  forces  of  Gen.  Horatio  Gates  at  Still-
water. He  remained  with  the  army  until  1782,
when  his  health  gave  way,  and  he  returned  with
his  family  to  Roxbury.  Warner  was  more  than
six  feet  in  height,  erect,  and  well  proportioned.
See  a  memoir  of  him  bv  Daniel  Chipman  (Middle-
bury,  Vt.,  1848).  In  1787  the  state  of  Vermont
granted  him  2,000  acres  of  land  in  Essex  county. —
His  great-grandnephew,  Olin  Levi,  sculptor,  b.  in
Suffield,  Conn.,  9  April,  1844,  began  life  as  a  tele-
graph-operator, but  subsequently  adopted  sculp-
ture as  a  profession,  studying  at  the  Ecole  des
beaux  arts,  Paris,  under  Francois  Jouffroy,  dur-
ing 1869-'72.  His  studio  is  in  New  York,  where
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Ameri-
can artists  in  1877,  and  an  associate  of  the  Na-
tional academy  in  1888.  His  works  include  the
statuettes  "May"  (1872)  and  "Twilight"  (1878);
a  colossal  medallion  of  Edwin  Forrest,  which  was
exhibited  at  Philadelphia  in  1876 ;  "  Dancing
Nymph  "  (1879) :  a  fountain  for  Portland,  Oregon,
completed  in  1888  ;  "  Diana "  (1888)  ;  portrait-
statues  of  Gov.  William  A.  Buckingham,  which
was  placed  in  the  capitol  in  Hartford  in  1883,  and
William  Lloyd  Garrison  (1885)  in  Boston ;  and
numerous  portrait-busts,  among  them  those  of
Rutherford  B.  Hayes,  owned  bv  the  Union  league
club,  New  York  (1876),  and  the  Rev.  William  F.
Morgan,  D.  D.  (1887).

WARNER,  Susan,  author,  b.  in  New  York  city,
11  July,  1819;  d.  in  Highland  Falls,  N.  Y„  17
March,  1885.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Henry  W.
Warner,  a  member  of  the  New  York  bar,  who  died
at  his  residence  on  Constitution  island,  opposite
West  Point,  in  1875.  She  inherited  a  talent  for
writing  from  her  father,  who  was  the  author  of
"  An  Inquiry  into  the  Moral  and  Religious  Charac-
ter of  the  American  Government,"  and  "  The  Liber-
ties of  America "  (New  York,  1853).  Under  the
pen-name  of  "Elizabeth  Wetherell"  Miss  Warner
published  her  first  novel,  "The  Wide,  Wide  World,"
when  she  was  thirty-one  years  old  (New  York,  1851).
The  publisher,  George  P.  Putnam,  was  advised  by
his  critics  to  reject  it,  and  was  about  to  do  so,
when  his  mother  read  the  manuscript  and  per-
suaded him  to  put  it  into  print.  For  months  it
seemed  to  have  fallen  dead,  then  it  suddenly  be-
gan to  be  called  for,  and  ultimately  a  quarter
of  a  million  copies  were  sold.  The  work  was  also
published  in  Europe,  where  it  enjoyed  almost  equal
popularity.  In  1852  Miss  Warner  issued  "  Queechy,"
which  had  a  large  sale,  and  has  constantly  been  re-

Erinted.  The  year  following  she  published  "  The
iaw  and  the  Testimony,"  in  which  the  texts  es-
tablishing the  great  doctrines  of  Christianity  are
brought  together  under  their  appropriate  heads.
Her  next  work,  "  The  Hills  of  the  Shatemuc "
(1856),  "containing  descriptions  of  scenery  on  Hud-
son river,  was  followed  by  "The  Old  Helmet"
(1863);  "Melbourne  House ""(1864);  "Daisy"  (1868);
"A  Story  of  Small  Beginnings"  (1872);  "The  Sav
and  Do  Series:  Stories  on  the  Lord's  Supper
(1875) ;  "  The  Broken  Walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  the
Rebuilding  of  Them  "  (1878) ;  and  "  The  Kingdom
of  Judah  "  (1878).  In  collaboration  with  her  sister
she  wrote  "  Say  and  Seal "  (New  York,  1860) ;  "  Ellen
Montgomery's  Book-Shelf"  (1863-'9);  "Books  of
Blessing  "  (1868);  and  "  Wych  Hazel "  (1876).  Some
of  Miss  Warner's  works  were  soon  translated  into
French,  German,  and  Swedish.  "  The  Wide,  Wide
World  "  was  the  most  popular  novel  ever  written
by  an  American,  with  the  single  exception  of  Mrs.
Stowe's  famous  story.  "  It  was  not,"  says  a  critic,
"  as  a  picture  of  life  that '  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  '  ap-


WARNER


WARREN


361


pealed  to  readers.  It  was  as  a  contribution  of  the
writer  to  the  discussion  of  a  burning  question,  and
its  unexampled  popularity  was  much  more  than
merely  literary.  The  success  of  '  The  Wide,  Wide
World,'  on  the  other
hand,  was  purely  ar-
tistic, so  to  speak.  It
owes  nothing  to  the
subject  and  nothing
to  incidents.  There  is
not  a  touch  of  melo-
drama in  its  treat-
ment, and  it  has  as
little  story  as  if  it  had
been  written  by  Hen-
ry James."  Taine  ex-
pressed his  astonish-
ment that  in  America
"  a  three-volume  nov-
el is  devoted  to  the
history  of  the  moral
progress  of  a  girl  of
thirteen."  Miss  War-
ner was  buried,  by
her  desire,  near  the  Cadets'  monument  in  the  West
Point  cemetery,  shown  in  the  illustration.  Her
tombstone  bears  the  inscription :  "  The  author  of
'The  Wide,  Wide  World'  was  bom  11  July,  1819,
and  passed  gently  into  the  life  that  knows  no  end-
ing, 17  March,  1885.  In  trust  for  a  few  of  the  friends
that  loved  her,  her  sister  has  placed  this  stone.
Auf  Wiedersehen." — Her  sister,  Anna  Bartlett,
b.  in  New  York  in  1820,  has  published,  under  the

f)en-name  of  "  Amy  Lothrop,  the  novels  of  "  Dol-
ars  and  Cents  "  (New  York,  1853),  and  "  My  Broth-
er's Keeper "  (1855) ;  also  "  Stories  of  Vinegar
Hill  "  (6  vols.,  1871),  '"  The  Fourth  Watch  "  (1872),
"  Gardening  by  Myself  "  (1872),  "  Miss  Tiller's  Vege-
table Garden  "  (1873),  and  "  The  other  Shore  "  (1873).
WARNER,  Willard,  senator,  b.  in  Granville,
Ohio,  4  Sept.,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at  Marietta
college  in  1845,  went  to  California  in  1849,  en-
gaged in  mercantile  business  in  Cincinnati  after
his  return  in  1852,  and  a  few  years  later  became
general  manager  of  the  Newark  machine-works.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican  national  con-
vention in  1860.  In  December,  1861,  he  joined  the
volunteer  army  as  major  of  the  76th  Ohio  infantry,
and  was  engaged  at  Fort  Donelson,  at  the  siege  of
Corinth,  and  in  the  Vicksburg  campaign.  In  1863
he  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  regiment,  which
he  led  from  Vicksburg  to  Chattanooga,  and  through
the  battles  of  Lookout  Mountain  and  Mission
Ridge,  and  at  Ringgold,  where  he  broke  through
Gen.  Patrick  Cleburne's  strongly  posted  lines.  In
the  Atlanta  campaign  he  served  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  as  inspector-general.
On  20  Oct.,  1864,  he  was  appointed  colonel  of  the
180th  Ohio  volunteers.  He  was  brevetted  briga-
dier- and  major-general  of  volunteers  in  March,
1865,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services,  and  was
mustered  out  in  July.  He  served  one  term  in  the
Ohio  state  senate  immediately  after  the  war,  re-
moved to  the  south  in  1867,  where  he  engaged  in
cotton-planting,  was  a  member  of  the  Alabama
legislature  in  the  succeeding  year,  and  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican  from  Alabama
on  the  reorganization  of  the  state  government,
serving  from  25  July,  1868,  till  3  March,  1871,  when
his  term  ended.  He  was  collector  of  customs  at
Mobile.  Ala.,  from  July,  1871,  till  February,  1872,
when  he  declined  the  appointment  of  governor  of
New  Mexico,  as  he  did  also  that  of  minister  to  the
Argentine  Republic.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Republican  national  convention  of  1868,  of  the


Cincinnati  convention  that  nominated  Rutherford
B.  Hayes  in  1876,  and  of  all  that  have  since  been
held.  In  1873  he  organized  the  Tecumseh  iron
company,  of  which  he  has  since  been  the  general
manager,  and  in  1887  he  was  elected  president  and
manager  of  the  Nashville  iron,  steel,  and  charcoal
company. He  resides  at  Tecumseh,  Ala.

WARNER,  William,  congressman,  b.  in  Wis-
consin in  1840.  He  was  educated  at  Lawrence
university,  Wis.,  and  at  the  University  of  Michi-
gan, but  was  not  graduated.  He  studied  law  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  entered  the  army  in
1862,  and  served  till  the  end  of  the  civil  war  in  the
33d  and  34th  Wisconsin  regiments.  He  then  set-
tled in  the  practice  of  his  profession  at  Kansas
City,  Mo.,  became  city  attorney  in  1867,  and  cir-
cuit attorney  in  1869,  and  in  1871  was  elected
mayor.  He  was  a  Republican  presidential  elector
in  1872,  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  western  Mis-
souri in  1882-'4,  and  twice  received  the  votes  of
the  Republican  members  of  the  legislature  for
U.  S.  senator.  In  1884  he  was  chosen  to  congress,
and  he  was  re-elected  in  1886.  He  was  the  first
department  commander  of  the  Grand  army  of  the
republic  in  Missouri,  and  was  chosen  commander-
in-chief  at  the  National  encampment  in  1888.

WARNER,  Zebedee,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pendle-
ton county,  Va.,  28  Feb.,  1833..  He  was  educated
at  Clarksburg  (Va.)  academy,  which  he  left  in  1852.
He  entered  the  ministry  of  the  United  Brethren
in  Christ  in  1854,  was  presiding  elder  in  1862-'9,
in  charge  of  a  church  at  Parkersburg,  W.  Va.,  in
1869-'80,  and  was  presiding  elder  of  the  district  in
1880-'5.  He  was  graduated  in  the  Chautauqua
Sunday-school  normal  course  in  1879.  He  was
elected  corresponding  member  of  the  General  mis-
sionary society  in  1885,  has  been  seven  times  in  the
general  conference,  and  was  for  two  years  president
of  the  Eastern  Sunday-school  assembly.  He  was  for
eight  years  teacher  of  theology  in  the  Parkersburg
conference,  and  since  1858  has  been  a  trustee  of
Otterbein  university,  which  conferred  upon  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1878.  He  published  "  Christian
Baptism  "  (Parkersburg,  1864) ;  "  Rise  and  Progress
of  the  United  Brethren  Church  "  (1865) ;  "  Life
and  Times  of  Rev.  Jacob  Bachtel "  (Dayton,  Ohio,
1867)  ;  and  "  The  Roman  Catholic  not  a  True
Christian  Church  "  (Parkersburg,  1868).

WARREN,  Cvrns  More,  chemist,  b.  in  Ded-
ham,  Mass.,  15  Jan.,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard  in  1855,
and  spent  three  years  studying  chemistry,  chiefly
at  Heidelberg  and  Berlin.  On  his  return  he  devoted
himself  to  original  research,  especially  in  connec-
tion with  the  volatile  hydrocarbons,  and  his  later
investigations  have  resulted  in  practical  applica-
tions in  the  use  of  coal-tar  and  asphaltum  for  roof-
ing and  paving  purposes,  which  have  been  intro-
duced by  the  Warren  chemical  and  manufacturing
company  and  the  Warren-Scharf  asphalt  paving
company,  of  which  corporations  he  is  president  and
treasurer.  In  1866-'8  he  held  the  chair  of  organic
chemistry  in  the  Massachusetts  institute  of  tech-
nology. He  has  obtained  patents  for  a  process  of
fractional  distillation,  for  various  improvements  in
asphalt  roofing  and  paving  materials,  and  for  a
method  for  the  distillation  of  anthracene.  Prof.
Warren  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  academy  of
arts  and  sciences  and  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science.  His  papers,  de-
scriptive of  his  original  researches,  have  been  pub-
lished in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science  "  and
in  the  "  Memoirs  of  the  American  Academy."

WARREN,  Fitz-Henrv,  soldier,  b.  in  Brim-
field,  Mass.,  11  Jan.,  1816;  d.  there,  21  June,  1878.


362


WARREX


WARREX


He  emigrated  to  Burlington,  Iowa,  in  1844,  and
became  interested  in  journalism  and  polities  in
that  locality.  He  was  appointed  second  assistant
postmaster-general  in  1849,  and  afterward  served
as  first  assistant.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  in
command  of  the  1st  Iowa  cavalry,  and  he  became
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  16  July,  1862,  and
afterward  major-general  by  brevet,  being  mustered
out  of  the  service,  24  Aug.,  1865.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Iowa  state  senate  in  1866,  minister  to
Guatemala  in  1867-'8,  and  a  presidential  elector
on  the  Democratic  ticket  in  1872.  He  was  editor
of  the  Burlington  (Iowa)  "  Hawkeye  "  for  a  time,
and  was  also,  at  a  later  period,  connected  with  the
"  Sun  "  and  the  "  Tribune  "  in  Xew  York  city.

WARREN,  George  William,  musician,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  17  Aug.,  1828.  He  displayed  mu-
sical talent  early  in  life,  but  for  seven  years  was
engaged  in  business.  During  that  time  he  began
to  study  music,  and  played  the  organ  at  St.  Peter's
church,  Albany.  He  subsequently  settled  in  Xew
York,  where  he  became  a  successful  organist.  In
1860  he  was  invited  to  take  charge  of  the  music
of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  Brooklyn,  and
ten  years  later  he  becnue  organist  of  St.  Thomas's
church.  He  has  written  much  church  music  and
several  pieces  for  the  piano,  and  has  published
"  Hymns  and  Tunes  as  sung  at  St.  Thomas's
Church,  Xew  York  "  (Xew  York,  1888).

WARREN,  Gouverneur  Kemble,  soldier,  b.  in
Cold  Spring,  X.  Y.,  8  Jan.,  1830 ;  d.  in  Xewport,
R.  I.,  8  Aug.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1850,  standing  second  in  his
class,  and  was  assigned  to  the  topographical  engi-
neers as  brevet  2d  lieutenant.  After  four  years  of
duty  in  connection  with  the  surveys  of  the  delta
of  the  Mississippi  and  other  river  surveys  under
Capt.  Andrew  A.  Humphreys,  he  engaged  in  com-

filing  reports  of  the  Pacific  railroad  exploration.
n  1855  ne  accompanied  the  Sioux  expedition  as
chief  topographical  engineer  on  Gen.  William  S.
Harney's  staff,  being  engaged  in  the  action  of  Blue
Water,  and  subsequently  until  1859  he  was  occu-
pied in  Dakota  and  Xebraska  in  making  maps  of
those  territories  for  the  exploration  of  the  routes
for  railroads  between  Mississippi  river  and  the  Pa-
cific ocean.  The  general  direction  of  this  route
was  under  Capt.  Humphreys,  and  Lieut.  Warren
was  his  principal  assistant.  He  then  served  at  the
military  academy  as  assistant  professor  of  mathe-
matics until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  when
he  entered  active  service  as  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  5th  Xew  York  volunteers,  of  which  regiment
he  became  colonel  on  31  Aug.,  1861. He  was  also

gromoted  captain  in  the  engineers  on  9  Sept.,  1861.
[is  regiment  was  ordered  to  Fortress  Monroe  and
he  took  part  in  the  action  of  Big  Bethel,  where  he
was  the  last  to  leave  the  field,  remaining  to  rescue
the  body  of  Lieut.  John  T.  Greble,  the  first  officer
in  the  regular  army  killed  in  the  civil  war.  Dur-
ing the  remainder  of  the  year  he  was  stationed  at
Baltimore,  where  he  constructed  the  fort  on  Fed-
eral Hill.  In  the  spring  of  1862  he  joined  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  serving  in  the  peninsular
campaign,  and  at  Yorktown  his  regiment  formed
part  of  the  siege-train  under  the  command  of  the
chief  of  artillery.  He  was  given  a  brigade  in  the
5th  army  corps  in  May,  with  which  he  covered  the
extreme  right  of  the  armv  and  took  part  in  the  cap-
ture of  Hanover  Court-ltouse,  the  pursuit  of  Con-
federate cavalry  under  (Jen.  James  E.  B.  Stuart,
the  battle  of  Gaines's  Mills,  the  affair  at  Malvern
Hill  and  subsequent  battle,  and  the  skirmish  jit
Harrison's  Landing.  His  brigade  was  then  sent  to
re-enforce  Gen.  John  Pope,  and  he  participated  in


the  battle  of  Manassas.  In  the  subsequent  cam-
paign he  served  with  the  5th  corps,  was  engaged
at  Antietam,  and  then  took  part  in  the  Rappahan-
nock campaign  and  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg.
On  26  Sept.,  1862,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers  for  his  services  at  Gaines's  Mills.
During  the  winter  months  of  1862-'3  he  did  much
individual  work  in  reconnoitring  and  correcting
maps,  and  on  2  Feb.,  1863,  he  was  ordered,  as  chief
of  topographical  engineers,  to  the  staff  of  Gen.
Joseph  Hooker,  then  in  command  of  the  Army  of
the  Potomac.  Soon  after  the  consolidation  of*  the
two  corps  of  engineers  on  3  March,  1863,  he  was
appointed  chief  of  engineers  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  and  during  the  Chancellorsville  cam-
paign he  took  part  in  the  action  on  Orange  Pike,
the  storming  of  Marye's  Heights,  and  the  battle  of
Salem.  He  continued  as  chief  of  engineers  under
Gen.  George  G.  Meade,  and  was  engaged  at  Gettys-
burg, where  he  seized  Little  Round  Top,  the  key
to  the  entire  Xational  position,  and,  using  Gen.
Meade's  name  as  his  staff-officer,  ordered  the  140th
Xew  York  regiment,  under  Col.  Patrick  H.  O'Rorke
(q.  v.),  to  occupy  the  hill.  This  was  accomplished
after  a  severe  hand-to-hand-  fight.  Thereafter  he
was  engaged  in  engineering  duties  connected  with
the  passage  of  the  Potomac  until  11  Aug.,  when
on  the  receipt  of  his  major-general's  commission,
bearing  date  of  3  May  previous,  he  was  assigned
to  the  temporary  command  of  the  2d  corps.  His
next  important  service  was  during  the  march  on
Centerville  in  October,  1863,  when  he  was  attacked
by  Gen.  Ambrose  P.  Hill,  and,  although  his  force
was  about  one  half  that  of  the  Confederates,  he
held  his  position  until  he  was  re-enforced  by  the
5th  corps.  In  the  official  report  it  was  said :  "  The
handling  of  the  2d  corps  in  this  operation,  and  the
promptitude,  skill,  and  spirit  with  which  the  ene-
my was  met,  were  admirable."  When  the  Army  of
the  Potomac  was  reorganized  into  three  corps  for
the  Richmond  campaign,  he  received  the  perma-
nent command  of  the  5th  corps  and  participated  in
the  battles  of  the  Wilderness,  Xorth  Anna,  Bethes-
da  Church,  Cold  Harbor,  and  those  around  Pe-
tersburg. Before  the  battle  of  Five  Forks,  Gen.
Sheridan,  having  expressed
to  Gen.  Grant  his  dissatis-
faction with  Gen.  Warren's
habit  of  criticising  the  acts
and  orders  of  his  superior
officers,  received  authority
to  remove  him,  should  there
be  satisfactory  reasons  for
so  doing.  At  Five  Forks,
when  the  5th  corps  ad-
vanced according  to  Gen.
Sheridan's  orders,  it  was
found  that  the  indicated
point  of  attack  was  too  far
to  the  right.  This  error  was
corrected  by  Gen.  Warren,
who  in  person  led  the  charge
that  closed  the  battle  and
secured  the  victory.  At  this
moment  he  received  an  or-
der relieving  him  from  the
command  of  his  corps.  The
reasons  given  by  Gen.  Sheridan  for  this  act  were :
1.  "That  Warren  failed  to  reach  me  on  the  1st
of  April,  when  I  had  reason  to  expect  him";  2.
"  That  the  tactical  handling  of  his  corps  was  un-
skilful " ;  3.  "  That  he  did  not  exert  himself  to
get  his  corps  up  to  Gravelly  run  church  "  ;  and  4.
"That  when  portions  of  his  line  gave  way  he  did
not  exert  himself to  restore  confidence to his


WARREN


WARREN


363


troops."  In  reply  to  these  charges  Gen.  Warren
answered  that  his  first  order  to  relieve  Gen.  Sheri-
dan on  31  March  was  received  from  Gen.  George
G.  Meade  at  9.17  p.  m.,  when  he  had  already  ac-
complished Gen.  Sheridan's  relief  by  sending  troops
to  his  assistance  without  orders,  on  his  own  respon-
sibility, earlier  than  5  p.  m.,  also  that  he  carried  out
his  orders  to  Gen.  Meade's  entire  satisfaction  and
joined  Gen.  Sheridan  sooner  than  Gen.  Meade  had
expected;  that  the  only  lack  of  skill  was  that  of
Gen.  Sheridan,  who  delivered  the  attack  of  the  5th
corps  at  a  point  three  quarters  of  a  mile  distant
from  the  point  intended.  A  court  of  inquiry,  con-
vened in  1879  at  Gen.  Warren's  request,  found  :  1.
That  Gen.  Warren,  after  the  receipt  of  Gen.  Meade's
first  order,  should  have  moved  his  main  force  sooner
than  he  did.  2.  It  did  not  find  that  his  handling
of  the  corps  was  unskilful.  3.  "  That  there  was  no
unnecessary  delay  in  this  march  of  the  5th  corps,
and  that  Gen.  Warren  took  the  usual  methods  of  a
corps  commander  to  prevent  delay."  4.  That  "by
continuous  exertions  of  himself  and  staff  he  sub-
stantially remedied  matters  " ;  and  the  court  thinks
"  that  this  was  for  him  the  essential  point  to  be  at-
tended to,  which  also  required  his  whole  efforts  to
accomplish."  Gen.  Warren  after  his  removal  was
assigned  by  Gen.  Grant  to  the  charge  of  the  de-
fences of  the  Petersburg  and  Southside  railroad,
and  then  had  command  of  the  Department  of  the
Mississippi.  On  27  May,  1865,  he  resigned  his  com-
mission in  the  volunteer  army  and  returned  to
duty  as  major  in  the  corps  of  engineers,  to  which
grade  he  had  been  advanced  on  25  June,  1864.  He
received  the  successive  brevets  in  the  U.  S.  army
up  to  major-general,  of  which  the  last  two  were
given  him  on  13  March,  1865.  From  May,  1865,
till  his  death  he  was  employed  in  various  parts  of
the  country  in  making  surveys  and  in  other  works
connected  with  his  department.  He  was  made
lieutenant-colonel  on  4  March,  1879.  Gen.  Warren
was  elected  a  member  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science  in  1858,  of  the
American  philosophical  society  in  1867,  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers  in  1874,  and  to
the  National  academy  of  sciences  in  1876.  A  heroic
statue  by  Paul  Gerhardt  (shown  in  the  accompany-
ing illustration)  was  unveiled  with  appropriate  cere-
monies on  Little  Round  Top,  Gettysburg,  on  8  Aug.,
1888.  His  works  include  "Explorations  in  the
Dacota  Country  "  (2  vols.,  Washington,  1855-'6) ;
"  Preliminary  Report  of  Explorations  in  Nebraska
and  Dakota  in  the  Years  1855-'7  "  (1858) ;  various
reports  to  the  government  on  military  and  engineer-
ing subjects ;  and  a  pamphlet  giving  "  An  Account
of  the  5th  Army  Corps  at  the  Battle  of  Five  Forks "
(New  York,  1866).  See  sketch  by  Gen.  Henry  L.
Abbot  in  "  Biographical  Memoirs  of  the  National
Academv  of  Sciences"  (vol.  ii.,  Washington,  1886).
WARREN,  Henry  White,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Williamsburg,  Hampshire  co.,  Mass.,  4  Jan.,  1831.
He  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  university  in  1853,
taught  natural  science  for  two  years,  and  in  1855
became  a  minister  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  the  New  England  conference.  For  fif-
teen years  he  filled  posts  in  Boston,  Worcester,
Lynn,  Westfield,  Cam  bridge  port,  and  Charlestown.
In  186l-'2  he  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
house  of  representatives.  He  was  pastor  of  the
Arch  street  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  Philadel-
phia, in  1871-4.  and  again  in  1877-80.  In  1881
he  was  elected  by  the  Philadelphia  annual  con-
ference a  delegate  to  the  general  conference  that
assembled  in  Cincinnati,  where  he  was  elected
bishop.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Dickinson  college  in  1872. Bishop  Warren  is  noted


as  a  preacher,  his  chief  characteristics  being  a  good
voice,  commanding  presence,  great  fluency,  and  fine
play  of  fancy. He
has  also  been  prolific
as  a  writer  of  books,
and  for  periodicals.
His  residence  is  at
Denver, Colorado,
but  his  duties  since
his election have
taken him over a
large part of the
United  States,  and  in
1888  he  visited  Japan
to  inspect  the  mis-
sions of  his  church.
Besides many  pam-
phlets and  sermons,
he has published
"  Sights and In-
sights, or  Knowledge ftf  n/l,  /yy
by Travel" (New *(- '"• ' * tf/vi^n.
York,  1874) ;  "  Stud-
ies of  the  Stars  "  (1878) ;  and  "  Recreations  in  As-
tronomy :  with  Directions  for  Practical  Experi-
ments and  Telescopic  Work  "  (1879).

WARREN,  Ira,  journalist,  b.  in  Hawkesbury,
Canada,  in  1806 ;  d.  in  1864.  He  was  educated  at
Brown  and  Kenyon,  and  studied  medicine.  He
contributed  to  the  Montreal  "Episcopal  Observer"
and  the  "  Christian  Witness,"  and  subsequently
edited  in  Boston,  Mass.,  the  "Christian  Alliance"
and  the  "  Family  Visitor."  Under  the  signature
of  "Laicus"  he  reviewed  the  Rev.  William  Cros-
well's  answer  to  Bishop  Manton  Eastburn  in  1845.
Dr.  Warren  contributed  to  the  same  controversy  a
volume  entitled  "  Causes  and  Cure  of  Puseyism  "
(Boston,  1847),  and  published  "The  Household
Physician  "  (1859),  of  which,  before  his  death,  more
than  30,000  copies  were  sold.

WARREN,  Israel  Perkins,  author,  b.  in  New
Bethany,  Conn.,  8  April,  1814.  He  is  a  descendant
of  Richard  Warren,  one  of  the  "  Mayflower  "  Pil-
grims. He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1838,  was
principal  of  the  Cromwell,  Conn.,  academy  in
1838-'9,  afterward  studied  at  Yale  theological
seminary,  and  became  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  at  Granby,  Conn.,  in  1842.  He  was  sta-
tioned at  Mount  Carmel,  Conn.,  in  1846,  at  Plym-
outh, Conn.,  in  1851,  was  secretary  and  editor  of
the  American  tract  society  at  Boston  in  1859,  an
editor  and  book-publisher  there  in  1870,  and  be-
came editor  and  proprietor  of  "  The  Christian
Mirror  "  in  Portland,  Me.,  in  1875,  which  post  he
has  held  ever  since.  In  addition  to  numerous
sermons,  tracts,  and  pamphlets,  he  has  published
in  book-form  "  The  Seaman's  Cause  "  (New  York,
1858) ;  "  The  Sisters,  a  Memorial  of  Elizabeth  H.,
Abbie  A.,  and  Sarah  F.  Dickerman "  (Boston,
1859);  "Sadduceeism,  a  Refutation  of  the  Doctrine
of  the  Annihilation  of  the  Wicked"  (1860);  "The
Cross-Bearer,  a  Vision"  (1861);  "The  Picture
Lesson-Book,"  designed  for  the  use  of  the  refugee
slaves  in  camp  (1861);  "A  Chapter  from  the  Book
of  Nature  "  (1863) :  "  The  Christian  Armor  "  (1864) ;
"  The  Cup-Bearer"  (1865) ;  "The  Sabbath  at  Home :
an  Illustrated  Religious  Magazine  for  the  Family"
(3  vols.,  1867-9) ;  "  The  New  Testament,  with
Notes,  etc."  (vol.  i.,  1868);  "Jerusalem,  Ancient
and  Modern  "  (1873) ;  "  The  Three  Judges,  Story
of  the  Men  who  beheaded  their  King,"  with  an
introduction  by  Rev.  Leonard  Bacon  (New  York,
1873) ;  "  Chauncey  Judd,  or  the  Stolen  Boy  of  the
Revolution"  (Boston.  1874);  "The  Parousia,  a
Critical  Study  of  the  Scripture  Doctrine  of  Christ's


364


WARREN


WARREN


Second  Coming,  etc."  (Portland,  1879 ;  2d  ed.,  re-
written and  enlarged,  1884) ;  "  Our  Father's  Book,
or  the  Divine  Authority  and  Origin  of  the  Bible  "
(Boston,  1885) ;  "  The  Book  of  Revelation,  a
Study"  (New  York,  1886):  and  "The  Stanley
Families  in  America"  (Portland,  1887).

WARREN,  James,  Revolutionary  leader,  b.  in
Plymouth,  Mass.,  28  Sept.,  1726;  d.  there,  27  Nov.,
1808.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1745,  and
became  a  prosperous  merchant  in  Plymouth.  In
1766  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  colonial  as-
sembly, where  he  served  until  its  final  dissolution
in  1774.  He  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  estab-
lishment of  the  system  of  committees  of  corre-
spondence in  1772.  After  the  death  of  Gen.  Joseph
Warren  at  Bunker  Hill,  he  was  chosen  to  succeed
him  as  president  of  the  Provincial  congress  of
Massachusetts.  The  connection  between  his  family
and  that  of  Joseph  Warren,  if  there  be  any,  is  to  be
sought  in  England  before  1600. — His  wife,  Mercy,
author,  b.  in  Barnstable,  Mass.,  25  Sept.,  1728;  d.
in  Plymouth,  19  Oct.,  1814,  was  a  sister  of  the  il-
lustrious orator  James  Otis,  and  married  James
Warren  in  1754.  She  was  one  of  the  most  highly
educated  and  brilliant  women  of  her  time,  and  her
friendship  was  much  prized  by  such  men  as  Jeffer-
son and  the  Adamses.  Throughout  her  life  she
was  an  intimate  friend  of  Abigail  Adams.  One  of
her  earliest  writings  was  "  The  Group,"  a  dramatic
piece  in  two  acts,  in  which  Gov.  Hutchinson  and
other  Tories  were  satirized.  "  The  Squabble  of  the
Sea-Nymphs"  gives  an  account  of  the  Boston  tea-
party,  somewhat
after  the  style  of
the  "  Rape  of  the
Lock."  Her  two
tragedies,  "  The
Sack  of  Rome  "  and
"  The  Ladies  of
Castile,"  were  well
thought  of  in  their
day.  These  werecol-
lected  in  "Poems,
Dramatic  and  Mis-
cellaneous "  (Bos-
ton, 1790).  A  work
of  much  greater
importance  is  her
"  History  of  the
American  Revolu-
tion "  (3  vols.,  Bos-
ton, 1805),  which  is
valuable  because  of
the  personal  ac-
quaintance of  the
writer  with  so  many  of  the  characters.  There  is  a
sketch  of  Mrs.  Warren  in  Mrs.  Elizabeth  F.  Ellet's
"  Women  of  the  Revolution  "  (New  York,  1856).

WARREN,  Joseph,  physician,  b.  in  Roxbury,
Mass.,  11  June,  1741 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  17
June,  1775.  He  was  descended  from  Peter  Warren,
whose  name  appears  on  the  town  records  of  Bos-
ton in  1659,  where  he  is  called  "  mariner."  Peter's
second  son,  Joseph,  built  a  house  in  1720  in  what
is  now  Warren  street,  Roxbury,  and  died  there  in
1729.  A  view  of  the  homestead  is  presented  on
page  365.  His  son,  Joseph,  b.  in  1696,  married,  29
May,  1740,  Mary,  daughter  of  Dr.  Samuel  Stevens,
of  Roxbury,  and  the  subject  of  this  sketch  was
their  eldest  child.  Joseph  Warren,  the  father,  was
a  thrifty  farmer,  much  respected  bv  his  townsmen,
by  whom  he  was  elected  to  several  offices  of  trust.
He  was  interested  in  fruit-raising,  and  introduced
into  that  part  of  the  country  the  apple  long  known
as  the  "Warren  russet." in  October,  1755,  while


tJuSL**J vfdASL


ti/Ll^esrX


gathering  fruit  in  his  orchard,  he  fell  from  the
ladder  and  was  instantly  killed.  His  son,  Joseph,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1759,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  was  appointed  master  of  the  Roxbury
grammar-school.  He  studied  medicine  with  Dr.
James  Lloyd,  and
began  to  practise
his  profession  in
1764.  He  married,
6  Sept.,  1764,  Miss
Elizabeth  Hooton,
a  young  lady  who
had  inherited  an
ample  fortune.
The  passage  of  the
stamp -act  in  the
following  year  led
Dr.  Warren  to  pub-
lish several  able  ar-
ticles in  the  Boston
"Gazette."  About
this  time  began  his
intimate  friend-
ship with  Samuel
Adams,  who  con-
ceived a  warm  ad-
miration for  him,
and  soon  came  to

regard  him  as  a  stanch  and  clear-headed  ally,  who
could  be  depended  upon  under  all  circumstances.
On  the  occasion  of  the  Townshend  acts,  Dr.  War-
ren's articles,  published  under  the  signature  of  "A
True  Patriot,"  aroused  the  anger  of  Gov.  Francis
Bernard,  who  brought  the  matter  before  his  coun-
cil, and  endeavored  to  prosecute  Messrs.  Edes  and
Gill,  the  publishers  of  the  "  Gazette,"  for  giving
currency  to  seditious  libels ;  but  the  grand  jury  re-
fused to  find  a  bill  against  these  gentlemen.  The
affair  created  much  excitement  in  Boston,  and  led
Gov.  Bernard  to  write  to  Lord  Hillsborough,  secre-
tary of  state  for  the  colonies,  recommending  the
arrest  of  the  publishers  on  a  charge  of  treason.  In
the  affair  of  the  sloop  "  Liberty,"  in  June,  1768,  Dr.
Warren  was  one  of  the  committee  appointed  to
wait  upon  the  governor  at  his  country-seat  at  Ja-
maica Plain,  and  protest  against  the  impressment
of  seamen  and  the  vexatious  enforcement  of  the
revenue  laws.  He  was  present  at  every  town-meet-
ing held  in  Boston,  from  the  arrival  of  the  British
troops  in  October,  1768,  to  their  removal  in  March,
1770,  and  he  was  one  of  the  committee  of  safety  ap-

fiointed  after  the  so-called  "  massacre  "  on  5  March,
n  July  he  was  appointed  on  a  committee  to  con-
sider the  condition  of  the  town,  and  send  a  report
to  England.  It  was  apparently  of  him  that  a  Tory
pamphleteer  wrote :  "  One  of  our  most  bawling
demagogues  and  voluminous  writers  is  a  crazy  doc-
tor." In  March,  1772,  he  delivered  the  anniversary
oration  upon  the  "massacre";  in  November  his  name
was  recorded  immediately  after  those  of  James  Otis
and  Samuel  Adams  in  the  list  of  the  first  committee
of  correspondence.  During  the  next  two  years  he
was  in  active  co-operation  with  Samuel  Adams,  and
when,  in  August.  1774,  that  leader  went  to  attend
the  meeting  of  the  Continental  congress  at  Phila-
delphia, the  leadership  of  the  party  in  Boston  de-
volved upon  Dr.  Warren.  On  9  Sept.,  1774,  the
towns  of  Suffolk  county  met  in  convention  at  Mil-
ton, and  Dr.  Warren  read  a  paper  drawn  up  bv  him-
self, and  since  known  as  the  "Suffolk  resolves.*'  The
resolutions,  which  were  adopted  unanimously,  de-
clared that  a  king  who  violates  the  chartered  rights
of  his  people  forfeits  their  allegiance ;  they  declared
the  regulating  act  null  and  void,  and  ordered  all  the
officers  appointed  under  it  to  resign  their  offices  at


WARREN


WARREN


365


once ;  they  directed  the  collectors  of  taxes  to  refuse
to  pay  over  money  to  Gen.  Gage's  treasurer ;  they
advised  the  towns  to  choose  their  own  militia  offi-
cers; and  they  threatened  Gage  that,  should  he
venture  to  arrest  anybody  for  political  reasons,  they
would  retaliate  by  seizing  upon  the  crown  officers
as  hostages.  A  copy  of  these  resolutions,  which
virtually  placed  Massachusetts  in  an  attitude  of  re-
bellion,"was  forwarded  to  the  Continental  congress,
which  forthwith  approved  them  and  pledged  the
faith  of  all  the  other  colonies  that  they  would  aid
Massachusetts  in  case  armed  resistance  should  be-
come inevitable.  After  the  meeting  of  the  Pro-
vincial congress  at  Concord  in  October,  Dr.  War-
ren acted  as  chairman  of  the  committee  of  safety,
charged  with  the  duty  of  organizing  the  militia
and  collecting  military  stores.  As  the  5th  of
March,  1775,  drew  near,  several  British  officers  were
heard  to  declare  that  any  one  who  should  dare  to
address  the  people  in  the  Old  South  church  on  this
occasion  would  surely  lose  his  life.  As  soon  as  he
heard  of  these  threats,  Dr.  Warren  solicited  for
himself  the  dangerous  honor,  and  at  the  usual  hour
delivered  a  stirring  oration  upon  "  the  baleful  in-
fluence of  standing  armies  in  time  of  peace." The

concourse  in
the  church
was  so  great
I  that,  when
'■  the  orator  ar-
rived, every
approach  to
the  pulpit  was
blocked  up ;
and  rather
than  elbow  his
way  through
the  crowd,
which  might
lead  to  some
disturbance,  he  procured  a  ladder  and  climbed  in
through  a  large  window  at  the  back  of  the  pulpit.
About  forty  British  officers  were  present,  some  of
whom  sat  on  the  pulpit-steps,  and  sought  to  annoy
the  speaker  with  groans  and  hisses,  but  everything
passed  off  quietly.

On  Tuesday  evening,  18  April,  observing  the
movements  of  the  British  troops,  Dr.  Warren  de-
spatched William  Dawes,  by  way  of  Roxbury,  and
Paul  Revere,  by  way  of  Charlestown,  to  give  the
alarm  to  the  people  dwelling  on  the  roads  toward
Concord.  Next  morning,  on  hearing  the  news  of
the  firing  at  Lexington,  he  left  his  patients  in
charge  of  his  pupil  and  assistant,  William  Eustis,
and  rode  off  to  the  scene  of  action.  He  seems  to
have  attended  a  meeting  of  the  committee  of  safety
that  morning  at  the  Black  Horse  tavern  in  Menot-
oniy  (now  Arlington),  and  there  to  have  consulted
with  Gen.  William  Heath.  By  the  time  Lord
Percy  reached  Menotomy  on  his  retreat.  Gen.
Heath  had  assumed  command  of  the  militia,  and
the  fighting  there  was  perhaps  the  severest  of  the
day.  Dr.  Warren  kept  his  place  near  Heath,  and
a  pin  was  struck  from  his  head  by  a  musket-ball.
During  the  next  six  weeks  he  was  indefatigable  in
urging  on  the  military  preparations  of  the  New
England  colonies.  At  the  meeting  of  the  Pro-
vincial congress  at  Watertown,  31  May,  he  was
unanimously  chosen  its  president,  and  thus  became
chief  executive  officer  of  Massachusetts  under  this
provisional  government.  On  14  June  he  was  chosen
second  major-general  of  the  Massachusetts  forces,
Artemas  Ward  being  first.  On  the  16th  he  pre-
sided over  the  Provincial  congress,  and  passed  the
night  in  the  transaction  of  public  business. The


next  morning  he  met  the  committee  of  safety  at
Gen.  Ward's  headquarters  on  Cambridge  common,
and  about  noon,  hearing  that  the  British  troops
had  landed  at  Charlestown,  he  rode  over  to  Bunker
Hill.  It  is  said  that  both  Putnam  and  Prescott
successively  signified  their  readiness  to  take  orders
from  him,  but  he  refused,  saying  that  he  had  come
as  a  volunteer  aide  to  take  a  lesson  in  warfare  under
such  well-tried  officers.  At  the  final  struggle  near
Prescott's  redoubt,  as  he  was  endeavoring  to  rally
the  militia,  Gen.  Warren  was  struck  in  the  head  by
a  musket-ball  and  instantly  killed.  His  remains
were  deposited  in  the  tomb  of  George  R.  Minot  in
the  Granary  burying-ground,  whence  they  were  re-
moved in  1825  to  the  Warren  tomb  in  St.  Paul's
church,  Boston.  In  1855  they  were  again  removed
to  Forest  Hills  cemetery,  where  they  now  repose.

Dr.  Warren's  wife  died,  28  April,  1773,  leaving
four  children.  After  the  death  of  their  father
they  were  left  in  straitened  circumstances  until  in
April,  1778,  Gen.  Benedict  Arnold,  who  had  con-
ceived a  warm  friendship  for  Dr.  Warren  while  at
Cambridge,  came  to  their  relief.  Arnold  contrib-
uted $500  for  their  education,  and  succeeded  in
obtaining  from  congress  the  amount  of  a  major-
general's  half-pay,  to  be  applied  to  their  support
from  the  date  of  the  father's  death  until  the  young-
est child  should  be  of  age.  The  best  biography  of
Dr.  Warren  is  by  Richard  Frothingham, "  Life  and
Times  of  Joseph  Warren"  (Boston,  1865).— His  -
brother,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  27
July,  1753 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  4  April,  1815,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1771,  studied  medicine
for  two  years  with  his  brother  Joseph,  and  then
began  practice  in  Salem,  where  he  attained  rapid
success.  He  attended  the  wounded  at  the  battle
of  Bunker  Hill,  where  he  received  a  bayonet-wound
in  endeavoring  to  pass  a  sentry  in  order  to  see  his
brother.  Soon  afterward  he  was  appointed  hos-
pital surgeon,  and  in  1776  he  accompanied  the
army  to  New  York  and  New  Jersey.  He  was  at
Trenton  and  Princeton,  and  from  1777  till  the
close  of  the  war  was  superintending  surgeon  of  the
military  hospitals  in  Boston.  For  nearly  forty
years  he  occupied  the  foremost  place  among  the
surgeons  of  New  England.  In  1780  he  demon-
strated anatomy  in  a  series  of  dissections  before
his  colleagues,  and  in  1783  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  anatomy  and  surgery  in  the  newly  estab-
lished medical  school  at  Harvard.  He  was  first
president  of  the  Massachusetts  medical  society,  re-
taining the  office  from  1804  till  his  death.  He  was
also  president  of  the  Agricultural  society  and  of
the  Humane  society.  He  frequently  made  public
addresses,  and  in  1783  was  the  first  Fourth-of-July
orator  in  Boston.  Besides  "Memoirs"  addressed
to  the  American  academy, "  Communications  "  pub-
lished by  the  Massachusetts  medical  society,  an
"  Address  "  to  the  Freemasons,  in  whose  lodge  he
was  a  grand-master,  and  articles  in  the  "  Journal
of  Medicine  and  Surge rv,"  he  was  the  author  of
"Mercurial  Practice  in  Febrile  Diseases."  See  his
life  by  James  Jackson  (Boston,  1815),  and  by  his
son  Edward  (1873). — John's  son,  John  Collins,
surgeon,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1778;  d.
there,  4  May,  1856,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1797,  studied  medicine  in  London,  and  formed
there  a  portion  of  the  collection  of  anatomical
preparations  which  he  subsequently  gave  to  the
Massachusetts  medical  college.  In  1800  he  went
to  Edinburgh,  where  he  studied  chemistry,  and  in
1801  attended  the  lectures  of  Vauquelin,  Cuvier,
and  Desfontaines  in  Paris.  He  then  settled  in
Boston.  In  1803  he  became  joint  editor  of  the
"  Monthly  Anthology,"  gave  public  demonstrations


366


WARREN


WARREN


in  anatomy  in  1805,  was  active  in  establishing  the
reading-room  that  was  developed  into  the  Boston
athenaeum,  and  formed  a  private  medical  society.
In  1806  he  was  chosen  adjunct  professor  in  anato-
my and  surgery  in  Harvard,  In  1810  he  assisted
in  founding  a  hospital  for  the  destitute,  and  in
1811  the  "New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  and
Surgery."  In  1815  he  was  appointed  professor  of
anatomy  and  surgery  in  Harvard.  He  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  Massachusetts  general  hospital
in  1820,  and  principal  surgeon  until  his  death.  In
1827  he  was  elected  president  of  the  Boston  tem-
perance society.  He  exercised  great  caution  in
performing  surgical  operations,  many  of  which
were  hitherto  unknown  in  the  United  States,  and
he  was  almost  invariably  successful.  He  was  the
first  to  operate  for  strangulated  hernia,  and  even-
tually his  method  was  adopted.  He  introduced
the  operation  for  aneurism,  and  performed  it  in
numerous  cases,  all  of  which  were  successful  except
two.  In  1837  he  went  to  Europe  for  further  study.
After  his  return  he  became  an  active  member  of
the  Agricultural  society  of  Massachusetts,  and  im-
proved the  breed  of  cattle  by  importation  of  for-
eign stock.  He  was  also  chosen  president  of  the
Society  of  natural  history.  In  1845  he  obtained
the  most  perfect  skeleton  of  the  mastodon  that  ex-
ists. In  1846  he  gave  a  new  impulse  to  operative
surgery  by  the  introduction  of  ether,  and  his  ad-
vocacy of  its  use  in  certain  cases  led  to  its  general
adoption  by  the  profession.  Besides  frequent  con-
tributions to  scientific  journals,  Dr.  Warren  pub-
lished "  Cases  of  Organic  Diseases  of  the  Heart "
(Boston,  1809) ;  "  Description  of  an  Egyptian  Mum-
my "(1821);  "  Comparative  View  of  the  Sensorial
and  Nervous  Systems  in  Man  and  Animals  "  (1822) ;
"  Some  Account  of  the  Medical  School  in  Boston,
and  of  the  Massachusetts  General  Hospital "  (1824) ;
"  Letter  to  Hon.  I.  Parker  on  the  Dislocation  of  the
Hip-Joint,  etc."  (Cambridge,  1826) ;  "  Description
of  the  Siamese  Twins"  (Boston,  1829);  "Surgical
Observations  on  Tumors :  with  Cases  and  Observa-
tions "  (1837) ;  "  Physical  Education  and  the  Pres-
ervation of  Health"  (Boston,  1846);  "Etheriza-
tion :  with  Surgical  Remarks  "  (1848) :  "  Effects  of
Chloroform  and  of  Strong  Chloric  Ether  as  Nar-
cotic Agents"  (1849);  "Description  of  a  Skeleton
of  the  Mastodon  Giganteus  of  North  America "
(1852) ;  "  Remarks  on  Some  Fossil  Impressions  in
the  Sandstone  Rocks  of  Connecticut  River  "  (1854) ;
"  Genealogy  of  Warren,  with  Some  Historical
Sketches  "  (1854) ;  and  "  The  Great  Tree  on  Boston
Common  "  (1855).  See  "  The  Life  of  John  Collins
Warren,  M.  D.,  compiled  chiefly  from  his  Auto-
biography and  Journals,"  by  his  brother  Edward
(2  vols.,  Boston,  I860).— John's  son.  Edward,  phy-
sician, b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  19  Dec,  1804,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1826,  and  at  the  medical
school  in  1829,  began  practice  in  Boston,  removed
in  1840  to  Newton  Falls,  and  while  continuing
to  practise  his  profession  engaged  in  agriculture.
Among  his  medical  writings  are  a  "Sketch  of  the
Progress  of  Cholera  in  America  in  1832";  three
Boytston  prize  essays  on  "  Scrofula,"  "  Rheuma-
tism," and  "  Erysipelatous  Inflammation."  which
were  published  together  (Philadelphia,  1840). — A
son  of  John  Collins,  Jonathan  Mason,  surgeon,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass..  in  1811 ;  d.  there,  19  Aug.,
1867,  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of
Harvard  in  1832,  and  afterward  studied  in  London
and  Paris.  He  established  himself  in  Boston,
where  for  twenty  years  he  was  attending  physician
to  the  Massachusetts  general  hospital.  lie  per-
formed a  great  variety  of  operations,  and  was  a
voluminous  contributor  to  medical  literature. His


chief  work  was  "Surgical  Observations,  with  Cases
and  Operations "  (Boston,  1867).  His  wife  was  a
daughter  of  Gov.  John  Collins. — Jonathan  Mason's
son,  John  Collins,  physician,  b.  in  Boston,  4  May,
1842,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1863  and  at
Harvard  medical  school  in  1866,  studied  two  years
at  the  Imperial  hospital  in  Vienna,  and  afterward
with  several  eminent  surgeons  in  Berlin,  Paris,  and
London,  and  began  the  practice  of  his  profession  in
Boston  in  1869.  He  is  now  surgeon  in  the  Massa-
chusetts general  hospital,  and  since  1887  has  been
associate  professor  of  surgery  in  the  Harvard  medi-
cal school.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Boston  Medical
and  Surgical  Journal "  in  1873-'81,  and  is  author  of
"Anatomy  of  Keloid,"  in  "Archives  of  the  Impe-
rial Academy  of  Sciences  "  (Vienna,  1869) ;  "  Anato-
my and  Development  of  Rodent  Ulcer"  (Boston,
1872) ;  "  Pathology  of  Carbuncle  and  Column®  Adi-
posae  "  (1879) ;  and  "  Healing  of  Arteries  after  Liga-
ture in  Men  and  Animals  "  (New  York,  1886).

WARREN,  Joseph,  journalist,  b.  in  Water-
bury,  Vt.,  24  July,  1829 ;  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  30
Sept.,  1876.  He  studied  at  the  University  of  Ver-
mont, and  soon  afterward  went  to  Albany,  N.  Y.,
where  he  was  made  assistant  editor  of  the  "  Coun-
try Gentleman  "  in  1849,  and  also  teacher  of  Latin
and  Greek  at  the  Albany  academy.  He  became
associate  editor  of  the  Buffalo  "  Courier  "  in  1853
and  editor-in-chief  in  1858,  and  was  chosen  presi-
dent of  the  New  York  press  association  in  1870.
He  was  a  member  at  large  of  the  Democratic  state
central  committee,  and  a  leader  of  his  party  in
western  New  York.  He  was  elected  superintend-
ent of  public  schools  in  Buffalo  in  1857,  advocated
a  public  park  system  for  that  city,  and  served
on  the  park  commission  from  its  formation  in
1871  till  his  death.  He  was  instrumental  in  secur-
ing the  establishment  of  the  State  insane  asylum
and  the  State  normal  school  in  Buffalo,  took  an
active  part  in  the  organization  of  the  Fine-arts
academy,  and  was  interested  in  the  project  of  the
Buffalo,  New  York,  and  Philadelphia  railroad.  He
was  at  one  time  president  of  the  Young  men's
Christian  association,  and  was  a  member  of  the
council  of  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Buffalo.

WARREN,  Josiah,  reformer,  b.  in  1799  :  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  14  April,  1874.  He  took  an  active
part  in  Robert  Owen's  communistic  experiment
at  New  Harmony,  Ind.,  in  1825-'6,  and  was  so  dis-
couraged by  its  failure  that  he  was  on  the  point
of  abandoning  any  further  attempt  in  that  direc-
tion when,  as  he  said,  "  a  new  train  of  thought
seemed  to  throw  a  sudden  flash  of  light  upon  our
past  errors,  and  to  show  plainly  the  path  to  be
pursued."  He  forthwith  gave  up  the  idea  of  main-
taining a  communal  system  of  society,  and  sought
to  attain  the  same  ends  through  individual  sover-
eignty. He  held  that  the  proper  reward  of  labor
was  a  like  amount  of  labor,  and  elucidated  his
theory  by  a  supposition.  "  If  I  am  a  bricklayer,
and  need  the  services  of  a  physician,  an  hour  of
my  work  in  bricklaying  is  the  proper  recompense
to  be  given  the  physician  for  an  hour  of  his  ser-
vices." He  proved  the  sincerity  of  his  belief  in  this
idea  by  establishing. what  was  known  as  the  "  time
store"  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  which  he  conducted
with  fair  success  for  two  years,  giving  and  receiv-
ing labor-notes  in  transactions  with  his  customers.
He  propounded  his  theories  in  a  work  entitled  the
"  True  Civilization,"  and  some  of  his  views  elicited
the  commendation  of  John  Stuart  Mill.

WARREN,  Lott,  jurist,  b.  in  Burke  countv,
Ga.,  30  Oct.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Albany.  Ga.,  17  June,  1861.
He  received  a  public-school  education,  was  clerk  in  a


WARREN


WARREN


367


store,  and  served  in  1818  as  2d  lieutenant  of  volun-
teers against  the  Seminoles.  Afterward  he  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1821,  and  practised
in  various  places,  finally  establishing  his  residence
in  Albany.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature
in  1824  and  1831,  state  senator  in  1830,  solicitor-
general,  and  judge  of  the  southern  circuit  in
1831-'4.  He  was  twice  elected  to  represent  his
district  in  congress  as  a  Whig,  serving  in  1839-'43,
and  subsequently  was  made  judge  of  the  superior
court,  where  he  served  in  1843-'52.  Judge  War-
ren was  also  an  ordained  Baptist  minister,  though
he  preached  only  occasionally.  He  was  active  in
promoting  temperance,  Sunday-school  work,  and
all  philanthropic  enterprises.

WARREN,  Minnie,  dwarf,  b.  in  Middlebor-
ough,  Mass.,  2  June,  1849;  d.  there,  23  July,  1878.
She  was  the  younger  sister  of  Lavinia  Warren,
who  married  Charles  S.  Stratton  (Tom  Thumb),
her  real  name  being  Huldah  Peirce  Bump.  In
1863  she  was  engaged  by  Phineas  T.  Barnum,  and
assumed  the  name  of  Wan-en.  Under  his  manage-
ment she  travelled  extensively  with  Gen.  Tom
Thumb,  Commodore  Nutt,  and  her  sister.  She
was  bridesmaid  at  the  celebrated  wedding  of  the
latter  in  Grace  church,  New  York,  on  10  Feb.,  1863.
Subsequently  she  married  Maj.  Edward  Newall,  a
dwarf,  and  died  in  childbirth.

WARREN,  Nathan  Boughton,  author,  b.  in
Troy,  N.  Y.,  4  July,  1805.  His  grandfather  and
father  removed  from  Norwalk,  Conn.,  to  Troy  in
1798,  and  were  successful  merchants,  and  from
them  he  inherited  an  independent  fortune.  He
was  educated  privately,  visited  England  with  Bish-
op Doane,  of  New  Jersey,  in  1841,  and  made  a  tour
of  the  cathedrals,  which  suggested  to  him  the  idea
of  adapting  the  cathedral  or  choral  service  of  the
English  church  to  the  American  Book  of  Common
Prayer.  These  services  were  first  introduced  in
1844  into  a  mission  church  that  was  founded  by
his  mother.  He  had  a  fine  taste  for  music,  com-
posed some  anthems,  and  received  the  degree  of
Mus.  Doc.  from  Trinity  college.  He  was  also  skilled
in  architecture,  and  designed  his  villa  residence  at
Mount  Ida,  which  is  built  in  a  chastely  ornamented
Gothic  style.  He  published  "  The  Order  of  Daily
Service,  with  the  Musical  Notation  as  used  in  Eng-
lish Cathedral  and  Collegiate  Churches,  etc.  "  (New
York,  1846);  "The  Ancient  Plain  Song  of  the
Church"  (1855);  "The  Holidays:  Christmas,  Eas-
ter, and  Whitsuntide,  their  Social  Festivities,  Cus-
toms, and  Carols"  (1868) ;  and  "  Hidden  Treasure,
or  the  Good  St.  Nicholas:  a  Goblin  Story  for
Christmas  "  (1872).

WARREN,  Sir  Peter,  British  naval  officer,  b.
in  Ireland  before  1703  ;  d.  there,  29  July,  1752.  He
entered  the  navy  in  1727,  and  had  attained  the  rank
of  commodore  in  1745,  when  he  was  appointed  to
command  an  armament  that  was  intended  for  an
attack  on  Louisburg.  He  joined  the  fleet  of  trans-
ports with  the  land  forces  under  Sir  William  Pep-
perrell  from  Boston,  in  Casco  bay,  on  25  April,
with  four  ships,  carrying  180  guns.  On  30  April
the  combined  forces  appeared  before  Louisburg,
and  on  1  May  the  siege  was  begun.  (See  Pepper-
rell,  William.)  On  18  May,  Capt.  Edward  Tyng,
in  the  "  Massachusetts  "  frigate,  captured  a  French
man-of-war  of  64  guns,  with  more  than  500  men
and  a  large  quantity  of  stores  for  the  garrison,  and
this  success  greatly  raised  the  spirits  of  the  be-
siegers. Warren's  fleet  was  re-enforced  by  the  ar-
rival of  three  large  ships  from  England  and  three
from  Newfoundland,  and,  serious  breaches  having
been  made  in  the  walls,  it  was  determined  to  order
a  general  assault ;  but  the  French  commander,  see-


ing that  further  resistance  would  be  useless,  sur-
rendered the  fortress  on  16  June.  By  the  capitu-
lation, 650  veteran  troops,  more  than  1,300  militia,
and  other  persons— in  all  about  4,000 — agreed  not
to  bear  arms  against  Great  Britain  during  the  war.
Seventy-six  cannon  and  mortars,  and  a  great  quan-
tity of  military  stores,  were  also  taken.  The  French
loss  in  killed  was  300;  the  English  was  130,  but
the  latter  suffered  heavily  from  disease.  Pepper-
rell  was  made  a  baronet  for  his  share  in  the  victory,
and  Warren  was  promoted  to  rear-admiral,  8  Aug.,
1745.  He  aided  in  defeating  a  French  squadron  off
Cape  Finisterre  in  1747,  capturing  the  greater  part
of  it,  and  in  the  same  year  was  elected  to  parliament
for  Westminster.  Sir  Peter  married  Susan,  eldest
daughter  of  Stephen  De  Lancey,  of  New  York,  and
was  the  owner  of  a  valuable  estate  in  the  Mohawk
valley,  which  he  placed  in  charge  of  his  nephew,
William,  afterward  Sir  William  Johnson.

WARREN,  Samuel  Edward,  educator,  b.  in
West  Newton,  Mass.,  29  Oct.,  1831.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute
in  1851,  where,  during  the  same  year,  he  became
assistant  in  charge  of  descriptive  geometry  and
drawing.  In  1854  he  was  appointed  professor,  and
remained  until  1872,  when  he  accepted  a  similar
chair  in  the  Massachusetts  institute  of  technology.
In  1875  he  resigned  the  latter  post,  and  also  that
of  lecturer  in  the  Massachusetts  normal  art-school,
which  he  had  held  from  1872.  He  then  devoted
his  attention  to  the  revision  of  his  series  of  text-
books and  to  conducting  a  school  of  private  in-
struction in  Newton,  Mass.,  his  present  residence.
Prof.  Warren  made  an  exhibit  of  his  works  and  of
drawings  by  his  pupils,  illustrating  their  use,  at
the  World's  fair  in  Philadelphia  in  1876,  which
was  complimented  in  the  official  reports,  and  a
similar  one  at  the  fair  in  Paris  in  1878,  for  which
he  received  a  diploma.  He  is  a  member  of  various
scientific  and  educational  societies,  and,  in  addition
to  numerous  contributions  on  educational  subjects
to  current  reviews  and  periodicals,  he  has  published
a  series  of  text-books,  including  "  General  Problems
from  the  Orthographic  Projections  of  Descriptive
Geometry"  (New  York,  1860);  "Students',  Drafts-
men's, and  Artisans'  Manual "  (1861 ;  afterward
issued  as  "ElementaryvProjection  Drawing,"  1867) ;
"  Elementary  Linear  Perspective  "  (1863) ;  "  Draft-
ing Instruments  and  Operations"  (1865);  "Ele-
mentary Plane  Problems  "  (1867) ;  "  General  Prob-
lems of  Shades  and  Shadows "  (1867) ;  "  General
Problems  in  the  Linear  Perspective  of  Form,
Shadow,  and  Reflection"  (1868);  "Elements  of
Machine  Construction  and  Drawing  "  (2  vols.,  1870) ;
"  Elementary  Free-hand  Geometrical  Drawing "
(1873) ;  "  Elements  of  Descriptive  Geometry :  Part
I.,  Surfaces  of  Revolution,"  afterward  issued  as
"  Problems,  Theorems,  and  Examples  in  Descrip-
tive Geometry  "  (1874) ;  "  Problems  in  Stone-Cut-
ting "  (1875) ;  "  Elements  of  Descriptive  Geometry,
Shadows  and  Perspective"  (1877);  "Elements  of
Plane  and  Solid  Free-hand  Geometrical  Drawing  "
(1878) ;  and  "  A  Primary  Geometry  "  (1887).

WARREN,  Samuel  Prowse,  organist,  b.  in
Montreal.  Canada,  18  Feb.,  1841.  He  is  the  son  of
Samuel  Russell  Warren  (1809-82),  a  well-known
organ-builder  of  that  city.  He  went  to  Berlin  in
1861,  and  studied  for  four  years,  giving  his  atten-
tion especially  to  the  organ.  In  1864  he  returned  to
Montreal,  and  in  the  following  year  he  removed  to
New  York,  where  he  still  resides.  For  two  years  he
played  the  organ  at  Dr.  Henry  W.  Bellows's  church,
after  which  he  became  organist  of  Grace  church.
He  then  played  for  some  time  at  Trinity  church,
after  which  he  returned  to  his  old  post  at  Grace


368


WARREN


WARRINGTON


church.  He  has  given  several  series  of  organ  re-
citals, in  which  he  covered  the  whole  field  of  organ
music,  giving  interpretation  to  all  its  schools.

WARREN,  William,  actor,  b.  in  Bath,  Eng-
land, 10  May,  1767;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  19
Oct.,  1832.  His  first  appearance  was  as  Young
Norval  in  Home's  tragedy  of  "  Douglas."  Soon
afterward  Warren  came  to  this  country,  making
his  debut  at  Baltimore,  Md.,  as  Friar  Lawrence  in
"  Romeo  and  Juliet."  In  1805  he  went  to  England,
as  agent  for  the  Philadelphia  theatre,  to  collect  a
company  of  comedians,  and  on  his  return  in  1806
he  married  the  actress,  Mrs.  Ann  Merry  (q.  v.).
Later,  Warren  became  manager  of  the  Chestnut
street  theatre  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  made  his
last  appearance  on  25  Nov.,  1829,  as  Robert  Bram-
ble in  the  "  Poor  Gentleman." — His  son,  William,
actor,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  17  Nov.,  1812;  d.  in  Bos-
ton, 12  Sept.,  1888,  was  educated. at  the  Franklin
institute,  Philadelphia.  He  also  made  his  first
appearance  as  Young  Norval  at  the  Arch  street
theatre  in  that  city,  27  Oct.,  1832.  After  con-
tinuing for  some  time  in  his  native  place,  he  ap-
peared in  New  York,  Boston,  and  other  cities,
playing  in  various  characters,  from  broad  and  ec-
centric comedy  to  juvenile  tragedy,  with  general
acceptance.  In  1845  Warren  appeared  at  the
Strand  theatre  in  London,  and  a  year  later,  for  the
extraordinary  term  of  thirty-five  years,  he  was  per-
manently connected  with  the  Howard  athenaeum
in  Boston.  There  he  was  held  in  special  esteem,
both  as  a  man  and  artist,  and  retired  from  that
theatre  and  his  profession  on  7  Nov.,  1882,  with  a
complimentary  benefit.  Toward  the  last  Warren
was  particularly  successful  in  rendering  the  roles
of  fine  old  English  gentlemen.  He  was  a  cousin  of
Joseph  Jefferson,  and  one  of  the  few  recent  actors
who,  in  their  own  persons,  represented  the  early
age  of  the  American  drama.  Sir  Peter  Teazle  in
"The  School  for  Scandal,"  Dr.  Pangloss  in  " The
Heir  at  Law,"  and  Touchstone  in  "  As  You  Like
It,"  were  among  his  noted  characters.

WARREN,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Water-
ford,  Me.,  21  Oct.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Gorham,  Me.,  28
Jan.,  1879.  He  entered  Bowdoin,  but  left  without
being  graduated,  passed  through  the  theological
course  at  Andover  seminary,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1839,  was  ordained  as  a  Congregational
minister  on  14  Feb.,  1840,  and  was  pastor  of  the
church  and  teacher  of  a  private  school  at  Wind-
ham, Me.,  for  nine  years.  He  had  charge  of  a
congregation  at  Upton,  Mass.,  from  1849  till  1856,
acted  as  agent  for  the  American  colonization  so-
ciety for  a  few  months,  in  1857  was  appointed  dis-
trict secretary  for  northern  New  England  of  the
American  board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  mis-
sions, and  retained  that  office  till  his  death,  mak-
ing Gorham  his  home.  Bowdoin  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1870.  He  published,  besides
school-books,  "  Household  Consecration  and  Bap-
tism"; "The  Spirit's  Sword";  "Twelve  Years
among  Children ;  and  "  These  for  Those."

WARREN,  William  Fairfield,  educator,  b.
in  Williamsburg,  Mass.,  13  March,  1833.  He  was
graduated  at  Wesleyan  university  in  1853,  became
a  Methodist  minister  in  the  New  England  confer-
ence in  1855,  and  afterward  studied  theology  at
Andover,  Berlin,  and  Halle.  In  1857  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  world's  convention  of  the  Evan-
gelical alliance  at  Berlin,  and  he  afterward  made
a  tour  through  the  East. In  1861  he  was  appointed

grofessor  of  systematic  theology  in  the  Methodist
Ipiscopal  mission  theological  institute  at  Bremen,
Germany,  which  subsequently  became  the  Martin
institute  at  Frankfort,  and  in  1866  in  Boston  theo-


logical seminary,  subsequently  a  department  of
Boston  university,  of  which  institution  he  has  been
president  since  1873,  and  also  professor  of  the  com-
parative history  of  religions,  comparative  theology,
and  philosophy  of  religion.  He  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  American  committee  for  the  revis-
ion of  the  New  Testament,  but  did  not  attend  its
meetings.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Ohio  Wesleyan  university  in  1862,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  Wesleyan  university,  Middletown,
Conn.,  in  1874.  He  published  "  Anfangsgriinde  der
Logik  "  (Bremen,  1864) ;  "  Einleitung  in  die  sys-
tematische  Theologie  "  (part  i.,  1865) ;  and  "  Para-
dise Found :  the  Cradle  of  the  Human  Race  at  the
North  Pole  "  (Boston,  1885).

WARRINER,  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Springfield,  Mass.,  24  Nov.,  1805;  d.  in  Chester,
Mass.,  22  April,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Am-
herst in  1830,  and  in  1831-'4  was  chaplain  and
teacher  of  mathematics  and  navigation  to. midship-
men on  the  frigate  "  Potomac,"  which  was  one  of  a
squadron  that  was  sent  to  protect  American  sea-
men in  the  Indian  archipelago.  On  his  return  he
studied  theology  in  New  Haven  and  New  York,  was
pastor  over  the  Congregational  church  in  Chester
in  1841-'8,  and  again  in  1859-65,  when  he  resigned
on  account  of  failing  health.  He  was  the  author  of
"The  Cruise  of  the  Potomac"  (New  York,  1835).

WARRINGTON,  Lewis,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Williamsburg,  near  Norfolk,  Va.,  3  Nov.,  1782 ;  d.
in  Washington,  D.  C,  12  Oct.,  1851.  He  was  edu-
cated at  William  and  Mary  college,  and  entered
the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  6  Jan.,  1800.  He  made
his  first  cruise  in  the  frigate  "  Chesapeake  "  in  the
West  Indies  to  suppress  piracy,  and  in  1803  he
joined  the  schooner  "  Vixen,"  of  Preble's  squadron,
during  the  Tripolitan  war,  where  he  served  with
credit,  and  was  included  in  the  vote  of  thanks  by
congress  to  Preble  and  his  officers.  He  was  pro-
moted to  acting  lieutenant  on  the  station,  and
transferred  to  the  brig  "  Siren  "  in  1805,  and  to  the
"Enterprise"  in  1806-'7,  in  which  he  returned
home.  He  was  commissioned  a  lieutenant,  7  Feb.,
1807,  and  served  as  executive  of  the  brig  "  Siren,"
bearing  despatches  to  France  in  1809-'ll.  He
served  in  the  "  Essex  "  and  frigate  "  Congress "  in
1811— '13,  and  as  1st  lieutenant  of  the  frigate
"United  States"  from  March  till  July,  1813.  He
was  promoted  to  master-commandant,  24  July,


1813,  had  charge  of  the  sloop  "  Peacock,"  and  cap-
tured the  British  sloop  "  Epervier  "  after  an  engage-
ment of  forty-two  minutes.  For  this  victory,  in
which  the  two  vessels  were  of  the  same  armament,
he  was  promoted  to  captain,  22  Nov.,  1814,  and
received  a  gold  medal  and  the  thanks  of  congress.
(See  illustration.)  He  commanded  the  frigate
"  Macedonian,"  in  the  Mediterranean,  in  1816-'18,
and  the  frigate  "Java,"  on  the  same  station,  in
1818— '19,  returning  home  in  the  frigate  "Guer-
riere"  in  1820.  He  was  commandant  of  the  navy-
yard  at  Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1821-'4,  and  first  com-
mandant of  that  at  Pensacola  in  1826. He  com-


WARROCK


WASHBURN


369


raanded  the  West  India  squadron  in  1824-'6,  was
a  member  of  the  board  of  navy  commissioners  in
1827-'31,  again  commandant  of  the  Norfolk  navy-
yard  in  1832-'9,  member  of  the  board  of  commis-
sioners a  second  time  in  1840,  and  president  of  the
board  in  1841.  After  the  new  organization  of  the
navy  department  he  was  chief  of  the  bureau  of
yards  and  docks  in  1842 -'6,  and  of  the  bureau  of
ordnance  in  1847-'51.  The  town  that  was  built
near  the  Pensacola  navy-yard  was  named  Warring-
ton in  his  honor.  Being  on  the  government  res-
ervation, it  was  subject  to  the  naval  jurisdiction
of  the  commandant,  whose  duties  included  those
of  a  magistrate.

WARROCK,  John,  printer,  b.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  4  Nov.,  1774 ;  d.  there,  8  March,  1858.  He
received  a  common-school  education,  became  a
printer,  and  for  forty  years  issued  annually  "  War-
rock's  Almanac."  He  was  chosen  to  the  office  of
printer  to  the  Virginia  senate,  and  held  that  place
for  more  than  forty  years.

WASHBURN,  Edward  Abiel,  clergyman,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  16  April,  1819 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  2  Feb.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1838,  studied  theology  in  Andover  seminary
and  in  New  Haven,  was  licensed  as  a  Congre-
gational minister  in  1842,  and  officiated  accept-
ably in  several  churches.  Having  resolved,  through
the  influence  of  Bishop  Clark  and  others,  to  enter
the  ministry  of  the  Episcopal  church,  he  made  due
preparation  and  was  ordained  deacon,  in  Trinity
church,  Boston,  12  July,  1844,  by  Bishop  Eastburn,
and  priest,  in  Grace  church,  Boston,  9  Oct.,  1845,
by  the  same  bishop.  He  was  rector  of  St.  Paul's,
Newburyport,  Mass.,  in  1844-'51,  travelled  in  Egypt,
Syria,  India,  and  China,  in  1851-'3,  on  returning
home  was  rector  of  St.  John's,  Hartford,  Conn.,
1853-'62,  and  lectured  on  ecclesiastical  polity  in
Berkeley  divinity-school,  Middletown,  Conn.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Trinity  in  1860.
Dr.  Washburn  was  rector  of  St.  Mark's  church,
Philadelphia,  in  1862-'o,  and  of  Calvary  church,
New  York,  in  1866-'81.  He  was  a  contributor  to
theological  literature,  and  an  active  supporter  of
the  Evangelical  alliance  in  1871,  1873,  and  1879,
before  which  he  read  papers  on  "  Reason  and
Faith,"  and  on  "  Socialism."  He  was  also  a  mem-
ber of  the  New  Testament  company  of  revisers,  an
acknowledged  leader  among  the  "  broad  church  "
clergy  of  the  Episcopal  church,  a  true  lover  of
scholarship  in  its  highest  sense,  and  an  eloquent
and  effective  preacher  of  the  gospel.  He  pub-
lished "  Relation  of  the  Episcopal  Church  to  the
other  Christian  Bodies  "  (1874) ;  "  The  Social  Law
of  God,  Sermons  on  the  Ten  Commandments "
(New  York,  6th  ed.,  1884) ;  and  "  Voices  from  a
Busy  Life,"  a  volume  of  poems  (1883).

WASHBURN,  Emory,  jurist,  b.  in  Leicester,
Mass.,  14  Feb.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Cambridge.  Mass.,  18
March,  1877.  His  grandfather,  Seth  Washburn,
grandson  of  John  Washburn,  who  was  the  first
secretary  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  company,  was
born  in  Bridge  water,  Mass.,  in  1723,  and  married
the  granddaughter  of  Mary  Chilton,  the  first  white

Eerson  that  stepped  upon  Plymouth  Rock.  He
eld  various  town  offices  in  Leicester,  and  served
at  different  times  in  each  branch  of  the  legislature.
He  was  in  the  campaign  against  the  Indians  in
New  Hampshire  in  1749,  and  in  the  battle  of  Bunk-
er Hill  as  a  captain.  His  son,  Joseph  (1755-1807),
the  father  of  Emory,  was  lieutenant  in  the  15th
Massachusetts  regiment,  was  on  duty  at  the  cap-
ture of  Burgoyne  at  Saratoga,  served  afterward
under  Washington  in  New  Jersey,  and  after  the
war  held,  among  other  offices,  that  of  deputy
vol  vi. — 24


sheriff  of  Worcester  county  till  his  death.  Emory
studied  for  two  years  at  Dartmouth,  and  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1817,  studied  law  at
Harvard,  was  admitted  in  1821  to  the  bar  in  Lenox,
and  practised  in
his  native  town
till  1828,  when
he  removed  to
Worcester,  where
he  was  eminent
in  his  profession
for  nearly  thirty
years,  and  became
the  partner  of
Gov.  John  Davis.
He  was  in  the  low-
er house  of  the  leg-
islature in  1826-7
and  1838,  and  made  during  his  first  term  the  first
report  that  suggested  the  feasibility  of  a  railroad
between  Boston  and  Albany.  He  served  in  the  state
senate  in  1841-'2,  being  chairman  of  the  judiciary
committee,  and  from  1844  till  1848  was  judge  of
the  court  of  common  pleas.  He  was  elected  gov-
ernor in  1853,  and  re-elected  for  the  succeeding
term,  being  the  last  Whig  governor  in  Massachu-
setts, and  in  1856  he  was  appointed  Bussy  professor
of  law  in  Harvard.  Resigning  his  professorship
in  1876,  he  opened  a  law-office  in  Cambridge,  and
represented  that  city  in  the  legislature  until  his
death.  The  illustration  is  a  view  of  the  state-
house  in  Boston,  which  is  on  Beacon  hill,  oppo-
site the  common.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  con-
ferred upon  him  by  Harvard  and  Williams  in
1854.  He  was  a  member  of  the  board  of  education,
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  establishment  of  the
Worcester  county  free  institute  of  industrial  sci-
ence, was  a  trustee  of  Williams  college,  a  member  of
the  International  code  committee,  a  fellow  of  the
American  antiquarian  society,  and  a  member  of
the  Massachusetts  historical  society,  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  other  learned  so-
cieties, before  which  he  frequently  delivered  public
addresses  on  timely  topics.  Gov.  Washburn's  writ-
ings, many  of  them  on  genealogical  and  historical
subjects,  exhibit  scholarship  and  research,  while
his  legal  works  are  standard  authorities  in  the  law-
schools  and  courts  of  this  country.  His  most  im-
portant works  are  a  "  Judicial  History  of  Massa-
chusetts, 1630-'75  "  (Boston,  1840) ;  "History  of  Lei-
cester "  (I860) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  American  Law  of
Real  Property"  (2  vols.,  1860-'2;  3d  ed.,  1868);
"  Treatise  on  the  American  Law  of  Easements  and
Servitudes  "  (Philadelphia,  1863:  Boston,  1867);  a
pamphlet  on  the  "Testimony  of  Experts"  (1866);
and  "  Lectures  on  the  Study  and  Practice  of  the
Law"  (1871).  He  also  contributed  an  introduction
to  Rev.  Calvin  Durfee's  "  History  of  Williams  Col-
lege, Williamstown,  Mass."  (Boston,  1860).

WASHBURN,  George,  educator,  b.  in  Middle-
boro'.  Mass.,  1  March,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
Amherst  in  1855,  studied  in  the  following  year  at
Andover  theological  seminary,  was  sent  by  the
American  board  as  a  missionary  to  Turkey  in
1858,  and  licensed  to  preach  in  Constantinople  in
1860.  On  29  July,  1863,  he  was  ordained  at  Mid-
dleboro'  while  on  a  visit  to  the  United  States,  but
he  returned  the  same  year  to  Turkey  and  was  re-
leased from  the  service  of  the  board  in  1868.  He
was  professor  of  philosophy  and  political  economy
and  acting  president  in  Robert  college,  Constanti-
nople, in  1869-76,  and  since  the  latter  year  he  has
been  president.  Amherst  conferred  upon  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1874.  'He  was  drawn  into  inti-
mate relations  with  the  political  events  that  were


370


WASHBURN


WASHBURN


brought  about  by  the  Russo-Turkish  war,  in  which
his  policy  secured  him  the  esteem  of  several  Eng-
lish statesmen.  His  efforts  also  in  behalf  of  Bul-
garian liberty  and  for  the  elevation  of  the  people
were  recognized  by  the  first  Bulgarian  parliament
in  a  vote  of  thanks,  and  in  1884  he  was  made  a
commander  of  the  Order  of  St.  Alexander.  He
has  regularly  contributed  to  English  and  American
periodicals  and  papers,  and  in  1868  published  in
pamphlet-form  a  series  of  articles  on  "  Woman's
Work  in  the  Church."

WASHBURN,  Henry  Stevenson,  editor,  b.
in  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1813.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1836,  and  while  president  of
the  Union  mutual  life  insurance  company,  of  Bos-
ton, spent  three  years  abroad.  Besides  holding
many  other  important  offices,  he  represented  the
city  of  Boston  for  two  years  in  the  legislature,
and  served  one  term  in  the  state  senate,  where  he
was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  education.  He
originated  the  •'  Young  Reaper,"  of  which  he  was
editor  for  seven  years,  and  has  written  many
hymns  and  lyrics  that  have  been  widely  circulated.
He  has  been  active  in  the  various  public  enter-
prises of  the  Baptist  denomination.

WASHBURN,  Israel,  governor  of  Maine,  b.
in Livermore,  Me.,  6  June,  1813 ;  d.  in  Philadel-

Jhia.  Pa.,  12  May,  1883.  He  was  descended  from
ohn  Washburn,  who  was  secretary  of  Plymouth
colony  in  England  and  who  came  to  this  country
in  1631  and  settled  in  Duxbury,  Mass.  His  grand-
father, Israel,  served  in  the  Revolutionary  war
and  attained  the  rank  of  captain. He  was  re-

Eeatedly  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  was  a  mem-
er  from  Massachusetts  of  the  convention  which
ratified  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  In
1806  Israel,  son  of  the  foregoing,  removed  to
Maine,  where  he  taught  at  first,  but  in  1808  settled
at  White's  Landing  (now  Richmond),  on  Kennebec
river,  where  he  engaged  in  ship-building.  He  es-
tablished a  trading-post  at  Livermore,  Me.,  in  1809,
at  what  is  now  called  The  Norlands,  and  soon  after-
ward settled  there.  Israel,  the  subject  of  this
sketch,  was  educated  at  public  schools  and  by  pri-
vate tutors,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Octo-
ber, 1834.  Settling  in  Orono,  Me.,  he  soon  acquired
a  large  practice,  and  in  1842-'3  was  a  member  of
the  legislature.  In  1850  he  was  sent  to  congress,
serving  as  a  Whig  from  1  Dec,  1851,  to  1  Jan.,
1861,  when  he  resigned,  having  been  chosen  gov-
ernor of  Maine.  Declining  a  re-election,  he  was
appointed  in  1863  by  President  Lincoln  collector
of  customs  at  Portland,  Me.,  which  office  he  held
until  1877.  He  was  president  of  the  board  of
trustees  of  Tufts  college,  and  was  elected  to  the
presidency  of  that  institution  in  1875,  but  declined.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Tufts  college  in  1872.  Gov.  Washburn  was  a  mem-
ber of  historical  and  genealogical  societies,  and,
in  addition  to  many  of  his  addresses  and  speeches,
which  have  had  a  wide  circulation,  published
"Notes,  Historical,  Descriptive,  and  Personal,  of
Livermore,  Me."  (1874). — Israel's  brother,  Elihll
Benjamin,  statesman,  b.  in  Livermore,  Me.,  23
Sept.,  1816;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  22  Oct.,  1887,
wrote  his  family  name  with  a  final  "e."  He  was
educated  at  public  schools,  and.  after  working
on  his  father's  farm,  entered  the  office  of  the
"Christian  Intelligencer"  in  Gardiner  in  1833  as
a  printer's  apprentice.  The  paper  was  discon-
tinued a  year  later,  and  he  was  chosen  to  teach  in
the  district  school.  In  May,  1835,  he  entered  the
office  of  the  "  Kennebec  Journal,"  at  Augusta,
where  he  continued  for  a  year,  during  which  time
he  rose  gradually  until  he  became  an  assistant  of


|  the  editor,  and  acquired  his  first  knowledge  of
political  life  during  the  sessions  of  the  state
legislature.  He  then  decided  to  study  law,  and
entered  Kent's  Hill  seminary  in  1836.  After  a
year  in  that  institution  he  began  his  professional
studies  in  the  office  of  John  Otis  in  Hallowed,
who,  impressed  by  his
diligence  and  ambi-
tion, aided  him  finan-
cially and  took  him
into  his  own  home  to
board.  In  March,  1839,
he  entered  the  law-
school  at  Harvard,
where  among  his  class-
mates were  Richard
H.  Dana,  Charles  Dev-
ens,  and  William  M.
Evarts.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in
1840,  and  at  once  de-
termined to  establish
himself  in  the  west.
Settling  m  Galena,  111.,
he  there  entered  into
law-partnership  with  Charles  S.  Hempstead,  and,
being  a  strong  Whig,  made  speeches  in  behalf  of
that  party,  which  had  nominated  William  H.  Har-
rison for  the  presidency.  In  1844  he  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Whig  national  convention  in  Balti-
more that  selected  Henry  Clay  as  its  candidate,
and  on  his  return  he  visited  that  statesman  in
Washington.  Meanwhile  his  business  increased,
and  he  was  frequently  called  upon  to  practise  in
the  supreme  court  of  the  state.  In  1848  he  was
nominated  for  congress  in  the  Galena  district,  but
was  defeated  by  Col.  Edward  D.  Baker.  In  1852,
as  a  delegate  to  the  National  Whig  convention,  he
advocated  the  nomination  of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,
and  in  the  same  year  he  was  elected  to  congress,
serving  thereafter  from  5  Dec,  1853,  till  6  March,
1869.  He  soon  gained  an  excellent  reputation,
and,  on  the  election  of  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  as
speaker  in  1855,  was  given  the  chairmanship  of  the
committee  on  commerce,  which  he  held  for  ten
years.  He  was  selected  by  the  house  to  accompany
William  H.  Seward,  representing  the  senate,  to
receive  Abraham  Lincoln  when  he  arrived  in
Washington  after  his  election.  From  the  length
of  his  continuous  service  he  became  recognized  as
the  "  Father  of  the  House,"  and  in  that  capacity
administered  the  oath  as  speaker  to  Schuyler  Col-
fax three  times,  and  to  James  G.  Blaine  once.
From  his  continual  habit  of  closely  scrutinizing  all
demands  that  were  made  upon  the  treasury  and
persistently  demanding  that  the  finances  of  the
government  should  be  administered  with  the
strictest  economy,  he  acquired  the  name  of  the
"Watch-dog  of  the  Treasury."  He  was  a  stead-
fast friend  of  Ulysses  S.  Grant  during  the  civil
war,  and  every  promotion  that  the  latter  received
was  given  either  solelv  or  in  part  upon  the  recom-
mendation of  Mr.  Washburne.  Subsequently  he
originated  the  bills  that  made  Gen.  Grant  lieuten-
ant-general and  general.  Mr.  Washburne  was  a
member  of  the  joint  committee  on  reconstruction
and  chairman  of  the  committee  of  the  whole  house
in  the  matter  of  the  impeachment  of  Andrew
Johnson.  He  opposed  all  grants  of  the  public
lands  and  all  subsidies  to  railroad  companies,  and
resisted  with  all  his  power  what  he  called  "  the
greatest  legislative  crime  in  history " — the  bill
that  subordinated  the  first  mortgage  of  the  gov-
ernment on  the  Pacific  railroad  to  the  mortgage
of  the  railroad  companies. He  also  opposed  "  log-


WASHBURN


WASHBURN


371


rolling  "  river  and  harbor  bills,  all  extravagant  ap-
propriations for  public  buildings,  all  subsidies  for
steamship  lines,  and  all  undue- renewals  of  patents.
Among  the  important  bills  that  he  introduced  was
the  one  that  provided  for  the  establishment  of
national  cemeteries.  At  the  beginning  of  his  ad-
ministration President  Grant  appointed  Mr.  Wash-
burne  secretary  of  state,  which  office  he  resigned
soon  -afterward  to  become  minister  to  Prance.
This  place  he  held  during  the  Franco-Prussian
war,  and  on  the  withdrawal  of  the  German  am-
bassador, the  latter  was  ordered  by  Count  Bis-
marck to  turn  over  his  archives  to  the  American
legation.  At  the  request  of  Bismarck,  and  with
the  permission  of  the  French  minister  of  foreign
affairs,  he  exercised  his  official  influence  with  re-
markable tact  and  skill  for  the  protection  of  the
Germans  in  Paris  and  acted  as  the  representative
of  the  various  German  states  and  other  foreign
governments.  When  the  empire  was  overthrown,
Mr.  Washburne  was  the  first  foreign  representa-
tive to  recognize  the  new  republic.  He  remained
in  Paris  during  the  siege,  and  was  at  his  post
when  the  Commune  ruled  the  city.  He  visited
the  venerable  archbishop  Darboy  of  Paris  when  he
was  hurried  to  prison,  and  succeeded  in  having  the
prelate  removed  to  more  comfortable  quarters,  but
failed  to  prevent  his  murder.  He  retained  the
respect  and  good-will  of  the  French  during  all  the
changes  of  government,  and  the  emperor  of  Ger-
many recognized  his  services  by  conferring  upon
him  the  Order  of  the  Red  Eagle.  This  he  declined,
owing  to  the  provision  of  the  U.  S.  constitution
that  prevented  its  acceptance,  but  on  his  resigna-
tion in  1877  the  emperor  sent  him  his  life-size  por-
trait, and  he  was  similarly  honored  by  Bismarck,
Thiers,  and  Gambetta.  On  his  return  to  this  coun-
try he  settled  in  Chicago,  and  in  1880  his  name  was
brought  forward  as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency,
but  he  refused  to  have  it  presented  to  the  conven-
tion. He  was  president  of  the  Chicago  historical
society  from  November,  1884,  till  his  death,  and
was  frequently  invited  to  lecture  on  his  foreign
experiences.  He  wrote  a  series  of  articles  on  that
subject  for  "  Scribner's  Magazine,"  which  were  ex-
panded into  "  Recollections  of  a  Minister  to  France,
1869-1877  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1887).  His  collec-
tion of  pictures,  documents,  and  autographs  he  de-
sired to  be  given  to  the  city  of  Chicago,  provided
they  should  be  exhibited  free  to  the  general  public.
Efforts  are  being  made  to  secure  the  erection  of
a  suitable  building  in  Lincoln  park  for  their  exhi-
bition. Mr.  Washburne  edited  "History  of  the
English  Settlement  in  Edwards  County,  Illinois  "
(Chicago,  1882^;  and  "  The  Edwards  Papers  "  (1884).
— Another  brother,  Cadwallader  Colden,  lawyer,
b.  in  Livermore,  Me.,  22  April,  1818 ;  d.  in  Eureka
Springs,  Ark.,  14  May,  1882,  worked  on  his  father's
farm  in  summer  and  attended  the  town  school  in
winter  until  about  1835,  when  he  went  to  Hallowed
and  was  employed  in  a  store.  He  also  served  in  the
post-office,  and  during  the  winter  of  1838-'9  taught
m  Wiscasset.  In  the  spring  of  1839  he  set  out  for
the  west  and  settled  at  Davenport,  Iowa,  where  he
joined  the  geological  survey  of  that  state  under
David  Dale  Owen.  Toward  the  close  of  the  year
he  entered  the  law-office  of  Joseph  B.  Wells,  having
previously  studied  under  his  uncle,  Reuel  Wash-
burn, in  Livermore,  Me.,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  on  29  March,  1842.  In  1840  he  was  elected  sur-
veyor of  the  county  of  Rock  Island,  111.,  the  duties
of  which  he  performed  while  preparing  for  his  pro-
fession. He  removed  to  Mineral  Point,  Wis.,  in  1842,
and  in  1844  entered  into  partnership  with  Cyrus
Woodman,  agent  of  the  New  England  land  com-


pany, but  their  law-practice  gradually  diminished
as  they  paid  greater  attention  to  financial  matters.
They  dealt  largely  in  the  entry  of  public  lands  for
settlers  and  the  location  of  Mexican  land-warrants.
In  1852  the  firm  established  the  Mineral  Point
bank,  which  never  suspended  specie  payments  and
during  its  existence  had  a  high  reputation.  On
the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise,  Washburn
was  chosen  as  a  Whig  to  congress,  and  served  with
re-elections  from  3  Dec,  1855,  till  3  March,  1861.
He  then  declined  a  renomination,  but  was  sent  as
a  delegate  from  Wisconsin  to  the  Peace  congress
that  was  held  in  Philadelphia  in  1861.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  the  2d  Wis-
consin cavalry,  and  was  commissioned  its  colonel,
10  Oct.,  1861.  His  first  service  was  under  Gen.
Samuel  R.  Curtis  in  Arkansas.  Among  his  acts
at  this  period  were  the  dislodging  of  a  Confeder-
ate force  that  was  preparing  to  obstruct  the  prog-
ress of  the  National  army  at  the  crossing  of  the
Tallahatchie,  and  the  opening  of  the  Yazoo  pass ;
and  he  was  conspicuous  in  the  battle  of  Grand
Coteau,  where  he  saved  the  4th  division,  under  Gen.
Stephen  G.  Burbridge,  from  annihilation  by  an
overwhelming  force  of  the  enemy.  He  was  com-
missioned brigadier  on  16  July,  1862,  and  on  29
Nov.,  1862,  major-general  of  volunteers.  He  took
part  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  and  on  its  surren-
der was  given  command  of  the  13th  corps  and
sent  to  the  Department  of  the  Gulf. On  29  Nov.,

1863,  he  landed  on  the  coast  of  Texas  with  2,800
men  and  compelled  the  evacuation  of  Fort  Esper-
anza,  a  bomb-proof  work,  which  was  cased  with
railroad  iron,  surrounded  by  a  deep  moat  filled
with  water,  manned  by  1,000  men,  and  mounted
ten  guns.  This  fort  was  at  Pass  Cavallo,  and
guarded  the  entrance  to  Matagorda  bay. In  April,

1864,  he  was  ordered  to  relieve  Gen.  Stephen  A.
Hurlburt,  in  command  at  Memphis,  of  the  district
of  west  Tennessee.  This  post  he  held  almost  con-
tinuously until  his
resignation  on  25
May,  1865.  Gen.
Washburn  was
sent  as  a  Republi-
can from  the  6th
district  of  Wis-
consin to  con-
gress, and  served
with  re  -  election
from  4  March,
1867,  till  3  March,
1871.  In  the  au-
tumn of  1871  he
was  elected  gov-
ernor of  Wiscon-
sin, and  he  held
that  office  for  two
years,  beginning  1

Jan.,  1872.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for
the  office  in  1873,  and  afterward  for  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate. On  retiring  from  office,  he  directed  his  atten-
tion to  the  care  of  his  property.  The  timber  lands
that  he  had  purchased  soon  after  he  settled  in  the
state  had  become  very  valuable,  and  he  operated
extensively  in  lumber.  In  1876  he  erected  an  im-
mense flouring-mill  in  Minneapolis,  where  first  in
this  country  was  introduced  the  "  patent  process  "
and  the  Hungarian  system.  It  was  destroyed  by
an  explosion  in  1878,  but  he  at  once  replaced  it
with  one  more  capacious.  He  was  also  one  of
the  largest  owners  of  the  water-power  at  St.  An-
thony Falls,  and  a  heavy  stock-holder  in  the  Min-
neapolis and  St.  Louis  railroad.  Gen.  Washburn
was  actively  interested  in  the  Wisconsin  historical


C^:  ^./^ — .


372


WASHBURN


WASHINGTON


society,  and  was  its  president  for  several  years.
He  founded,  in  connection  with  the  State  university
of  Wisconsin,  the  Washburn  observatory,  which,
with  its  instruments,  cost  more  than  $50,000.  The
legislature  of  the  state  made  him  a  life  regent  of
the  university,  which  in  1873  conferred  upon  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  His  country-house  of  Edge-
wood,  near  Madison,  worth  $20,000,  he  presented
to  the  Dominican  Sisters  for  use  as  a  school  for
girls.  In  his  will  he  bequeathed  $50,000  to  found
a  public  library  at  La  Crosse,  and  $375,000  for  the
establishment  of  an  orphans'  home  in  Minneapolis.
— Another  brother,  Charles  Ames,  editor,  b.  in
Livermore,  Me.,  16  March,  1822,  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1848,  and  after  studying  law  was  ad-
mitted to  practice  in  Mineral  Point,  Wis.  In  1850
he  went  to  California  and  connected  himself  with
the  press,  settling  in  San  Francisco  in  1853,  where
he  became  editor  and  then  proprietor  of  the  "  Alta
California."  Mr.  Washburn  took  an  active  part
in  the  foundation  of  the  Republican  party,  and  his
journal  was  the  first  on  the  Pacific  coast  to  advo-
cate the  distinctive  principles  of  that  organization.
Prom  1858  till  1860  he  edited  and  owned  the  San
Francisco  "  Daily  Times."  In  1860  he  was  an
eleetor-at-large  from  California,  and  in  1861  he
was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln  commissioner
to  Paraguay,  where  he  was  afterward  minister-resi-
dent from  1863  till  1868.  His  term  of  office  in-
cluded the  period  of  the  war  between  Paraguay
and  Brazil,  and  in  1868,  when  the  foreign  residents
were  accused  of  conspiring  against  President  Fran-
cisco S.  Lopez,  Mr.  Washburn  escaped  through  the
opportune  arrival  of  the  U.  S.  war-steamer  "  Wasp,"
while  two  of  his  subordinates,  unable  to  escape,
were  seized  and  tortured.  (See  Lopez.)  His  action
in  trying  to  save  the  lives  of  those  that  were  sup-

Eosed  to  be  connected  with  the  conspiracy  brought
im  into  collision  with  officers  of  the  U.  S.  navy,
but  a  congressional  committee  exonerated  him.
On  his  return  to  this  country  he  settled  at  first  in
Oakland,  Cal.,  but  ultimately  made  Morristown,
N.  J.,  his  home.  He  has  devoted  his  attention  to
the  invention  of  several  ingenious  machines,  nota-
bly the  typograph,  a  form  of  type-writer.  In  ad-
dition to  various  contributions  to  periodicals,  he
has  published  two  works  of  fiction,  "  Philip  Thax-
ter  "  (New  York,  1861)  and  "  Gomery  of  Montgom-
ery "  (1865) ;  a  "  Historv  of  Paraguay "  (2  vols.,
Boston,  1870) ;  " Political  Evolution " (Philadelphia,
1887),  and  "  From  Poverty  to  Competence  "  (1887).
— Another  brother,  William  Drew,  b.  in  Liver-
more,  Me.,  14  Jan.,  1831,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin
in  1854,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1857,  and  began
practice  in  Minnesota.  In  1861-'5  he  was  surveyor-
general  of  that  state.  Subsequently  he  settled  in
Minneapolis  and  engaged  in  manufacturing.  He
became  president  of  the  Minneapolis  and  St.  Louis
railroad,  and  in  1878  was  elected  to  congress,  where
he  served  for-three  terms,  ending  on  3  March,  1885.
WASHBURN,  Peter  Thacher,  lawyer,  b.  in
Lynn,  Mass.,  7  Sept.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Woodstock,  Vt.,
7  Feb.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1835,  studied  law  at  Harvard,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1838,  and  practised  in  Ludlow,  Vt.,  till  1844.
Removing  then  to  Woodstock,  he  was  reporter  of
the  state  supreme  court  for  eight  vears.  and  for
several  terms  a  member  of  the  legislature,  serving
as  chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee.  In  1861
he  was  a  member  of  the  Chicago  convention,  and
was  the  first  to  give  the  vote  of  his  state  to  Lin-
coln. He  was  adjutant-  and  inspector-general  of
the  state  in  1861-6,  and  his  records  show  only  75
men  unaccounted  for  out  of  more  than  34,000.
He  served  in  the  field  as  a  lieutenant,  and  after-


ward as  acting  colonel  of  the  1st  Vermont  volun-
teers, which,  with  the  Massachusetts  troops,  he
commanded  at  the  battle  of  Big  Bethel.  In  1869
he  was  elected  governor  by  the  Republicans,  and
died  in  office.  He  was  trustee  of  the  University  of
Vermont,  and  president  of  the  Woodstock  railroad.
He  was  the  author  of  "  Digest  of  all  Cases  in  the
Supreme  Court  of  Vermont,  including  the  First
Fifteen  Volumes  of  Vermont  Reports"  (Woodstock,
1845);  supplement  to  "  Aiken's  Forms  "  (Claremont,
N.  H.,  1847) ;  "  Digest  of  Cases  in  the  Supreme
Court  of  Vermont,"  vols,  xvi.-xxii.  (1852) ;  and
"  Reports  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Vermont,"
vols,  xvi.-xxiii.  (1845-52).

WASHBURN,  William  Barrett,  senator,  b.
in  Winchendon,  Mass.,  31  Jan.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Spring-
field, Mass.,  5  Oct.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1844,  and  became  a  manufacturer  at  Green-
field, Mass.,  where  he  was  for  many  years  president
of  the  National  bank,  and  which  he  represented  in
both  branches  of  the  legislature  in  1850-'4.  He
was  identified  with  the  Republican  party  from  its
organization  in  1856.  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  contributed  liberally  to  the  National
cause.  In  1862  he  was  sent  to  congress  as  a  Re-
publican, and  he  was  returned  biennially  till  on  1
Jan.,  1872,  he  resigned  his  seat  to  become  governor
of  Massachusetts.  This  office  he  resigned  also
during  his  third  term  to  fill  the  vacancy  that  was
made  in  the  U.  S.  senate  by  the  death  of  Charles
Sumner,  serving  from  1  May,  1874,  till  3  March,
1875,  when  he  withdrew  from  public  affairs.  Be-
sides holding  many  offices  of  trust  under  corporate
societies,  he  was  a  trustee  of  Yale,  of  the  Massa-
chusetts agricultural  college,  and  of  Smith  college,
of  which  he  was  also  a  benefactor,  and  a  member
of  the  board  of  overseers  of  Amherst  from  1864
till  1877.  Harvard  conferred  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
upon  him  in  1872.  By  his  will  he  made  the  Ameri-
can board,  the  American  home  missionary  society,
and  the  American  missionary  association  residuary
legatees,  leaving  to  each  society  about  $50,000.  He
was  also  a  great  benefactor  of  the  Greenfield  public
library.  He  died  suddenly  while  attending  a  ses-
sion of  the  American  board  of  commissioners  for
foreign  missions,  of  which  he  was  a  member.

WASHINGTON,  Booker  Taliaferro,  educa-
tor, b.  in  Hale's  Ford,  Franklin  co.,  Va.,  18  April,
1856.  He  is  of  African  descent,  and  early  removed
to  West  Virginia.  He  was  graduated  at  Hampton
institute  in  1875,  and  in  the  same  year  entered
Wayland  seminary,  whence  he  was  called  to  fill
the  chair  of  a  teacher  at  Hampton.  There  he
was  elected  by  the  Alabama  state  authorities  to  the
presidency  of
Tuskegee  in-
stitute, which
he  organized
in  1881.  Un-
der his  man-
agement it
has  grown
from  an  insti-
tution with
one  teacher
and  thirty
students  to
one  with
twenty  teach-
ers and  300  students.  The  property  consists  of  540
acres,  a  blacksmith's  shop,  saw-mill,  carpenter's
shop,  brick-yard,  printing-office,  and  several  large
school-buildings,  one  of  which,  shown  in  the  vig-
nette, was  built  bv  the  students.  It  is  valued  at
$68,000,  and  is  out  of  debt.


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


373


WASHINGTON,  George,  first  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  at  Pope's  Creek,  near  Bridge's
Creek,  Westmoreland  co.,  Va.,  22  Feb.,  1732 ;  d.
at  Mount  Vernon,  14  Dec,  1799. Of  his  English

ancestry  vari-
ous details  are
given  in  more
than  one  form-
al biography  of
him,  but  none
of  them  can  be
safely  followed
while  several
questions  of
genealogy  re-
main unsolved.
His  earliest  an-
cestor in  this
country  was
John  Washing-
ton, who  had
resided  for  some
years  at  South
Cave,  near  the
r\  />')  Humber,  in  the

*  land,  and who

came  over  to  Virginia,  with  his  brother  Andrew,
in  1657.  Purchasing  lands  in  Westmoreland  coun-
ty and  establishing  his  residence  at  Pope's  Creek,
not  far  from  the  Potomac,  he  became,  in  due
course,  an  extensive  planter,  a  county  magistrate,
and  a  member  of  the  house  of  burgesses.  He
distinguished  himself,  also,  as  colonel  of  the  Vir-
ginia forces  in  driving  off  a  band  of  Seneca  In-
dians who  were  ravaging  the  neighboring  settle-
ments. In  honor  of  his  public  and  private  char-
acter, the  parish  in  which  he  resided  was  called
Washington.  In  this  parish  his  grandson,  Augus-
tine, the  second  son  of  Lawrence  Washington,  was
born  in  1694.  By  his  first  wife  Augustine  had
four  children.  Two  of  them  died  young,  but  two
sons,  Lawrence  and  Augustine,  survived  their
mother,  who  died  in  1728.  On  6  March,  1730,
the  father  was  again  married.  His  second  wife
was  Mary  Ball,  and  George  was  her  first  child.  If
tradition  is  to  be  trusted,  few  sons  ever  had  a  more
lovely  and  devoted  mother,  and  no  mother  a  more
dutiful  and  affectionate  son.  Bereaved  of  her
husband,  who  died  after  a  short  illness  in  1743,
when  George  was  but  eleven  years  of  age,  and  with
four  younger  children  to  be  cared  for,  she  dis-
charged the  responsibilities  thus  sadly  devolved
upon  her  with  scrupulous  fidelity  and  firmness.
To  her  we  owe  the  precepts  and  example  that  gov-
erned George's  life.  The  excellent  maxims,  moral
and  reHgious,  which  she  found  in  her  favorite
manual — "  Sir  Matthew  Hale's  Contemplations  " —
were  impressed  on  his  memory  and  on  his  heart,  as
she  read  them  aloud  to  her  children ;  and  that  little
volume,  with  the  autograph  inscription  of  Mary
Washington,  was  among  the  cherished  treasures
of  his  library  as  long  as  he  lived.  To  her,  too,
under  God,  we  owe  especially  the  restraining  in-
fluence and  authority,  that  held  him  back,  at  the
last  moment,  as  we  shall  see,  from  embarking  on
a  line  of  life  that  would  have  cut  him  off  from
the  great  career  that  has  rendered  his  name  im-
mortal. Well  did  Dr.  Sparks,  in  his  careful  and
excellent  biography,  speak  of  •'  the  debt  owed  by
mankind  to  the  mother  of  Washington."  Unhap-
pily no  authentic  portrait  of  her  is  extant,  though
a  pleasing  conjectural  picture,  not  without  some
weight  of  testimony,  has  been  adopted  by  Mr.  Loss-


ing  in  his  "  Mary  and  Martha."  (See  vignette.)
She  delighted  in  saying  simply  that  "  George  had
always  been  a  good  son " ;  and  her  own  life  was
fortunately  prolonged  until  she  had  seen  him  more
than  fulfil  every  hope  of  her  heart.  On  his  way  to
his  first  inauguration  as  president  of  the  United
States  Washington  came  to  bid  his  mother  a  last
farewell,  just  before  her  death.  That  parting  scene,
however,  was  not  at  his  birthplace.  The  primitive
Virginia  farm-house  in  which  he  was  born  had  long
ceased  to  be  the  family  residence,  and  had  gradual-
ly fallen  into  ruin.  The  remains  of  a  large  kitchen-
chimney  were  all  that  could  be  identified  of  it  in
1878,  by  a  party  of  which  Sec.  Evarts,  Gen.  Sher-
man, and  Charles  C.  Perkins,  of  Boston,  were  three,
who  visited  the  spot  with  a  view  to  the  erection
of  a  memorial  under  the  authority  of  congress.
Not  long  after  the  birth  that  has  rendered  this
spot  forever  memorable,  Augustine  Washington
removed  to  an  estate  in  Stafford  county,  on  the
east  side  of  the  Rappahannock,  opposite  Fredericks-
burg, and  resided  there  with  his  family  during  the
remaining  years  of  his  life.  That  was  the  scene  of
George's  early  childhood.  There  he  first  went  to
school,  in  an  "  old-field  "  school -house,  with  Hob-
by, the  sexton
of  the  parish,
for  his  first
master.  After
his  father's
death,  how-
ever, he  was
sent  back  to
the  old  home-
stead at  Pope's
Creek,  to  live
for  a  while
with  his  elder
half  -  brother,
Augustine, to

whom  the  Westmoreland  estate  had  been  left,  and
who,  on  his  marriage,  had  taken  it  for  his  resi-
dence. There  George  had  the  advantage  of  at
least  a  better  school  than  Hobby's,  kept  by  a  Mr.
Williams.  But  it  taught  him  nothing  except  read-
ing, writing,  and  arithmetic,  with  a  little  geometry
and  surveying.  For  this  last  study  he  evinced  a
marked  preference.  Many  of  his  copy-books  of
that  period  have  been  preserved,  and  they  show  no
inconsiderable  proficiency  in  the  surveyor's  art,
even  before  he  finally  left  school,  toward  the  close
of  his  sixteenth  year.  One  of  those  manuscript
books,  however,  is  of  a  miscellaneous  and  peculiar-
ly interesting  character,  containing  carefully  pre-
pared forms  for  business  papers ;  a  few  selections
or,  it  may  be,  original  compositions  in  rhyme ;  and
a  series  of  "  Rules  of  Behavior  in  Company  and  Con-
versation," fifty-seven  in  all,  compiled  or  copied,
doubtless,  from  some  still  untraced  original,  em-
bracing many  moral  and  religious  maxims,  of  which
the  last  and  most  noteworthy  one  niust  never  be
omitted  from  the  story  of  Washington's  boyhood  :
"  Labor  to  keep  alive  in  your  breast  that  little  spark
of  celestial  fire,  Conscience."  All  these  school-boy
manuscripts  bear  witness  alike  to  his  extreme  care
in  cultivating  a  neat,  clear,  and  elegant  handwrit-
ing, and  his  name  is  sometimes  written  almost  as
if  in  contemplation  of  the  great  instruments  and
state  papers  to  which  it  was  destined  to  be  the  at-
testing signature.

Meantime  he  was  training  himself  for  vigorous
manhood  by  all  sorts  of  robust  exercises  and  ath-
letic sports.  He  played  soldier,  sometimes,  with
his  school-mates,  always  asserting  the  authority  of
captain,  and  subjecting  the  little  company  to  a


374


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


'hr.s.1


rigid  discipline.  Running,  leaping,  and  wrestling
were  among  his  favorite  pastimes.  He  became  a
fearless  rider,  too,  and  no  horse  is  said  to  have  been
too  fiery  for  him.  "  Above  all,"  as  Irving  well  says,
"  his  inherent  probity,  and  the  principles  of  justice
on  which  he  regulated  his  conduct,  even  at  this
early  period  of  his  life,  were  soon  appreciated  by

his  school-mates ;
he  was  referred  to
as  an  umpire  in
their  disputes,  and
his  decisions  were
never  reversed."
A  crisis  in  Wash-
ington's life  oc-
curred before  he
left  school.  His
eldest  half-broth-
er, Lawrence,  had
already  been  an
officer  in  the  Eng-
lish service,  and
was  at  the  siege  of
Carthagena  under
Admiral  Vernon,
for  whom  he
formed  a  great  re-
gard, and  whose
name  he  afterward
gave  to  his  estate
on  the  Potomac.
Observing  George's  military  propensities,  and  think-
ing that  the  English  navy  would  afford  him  the
most  promising  field  for  future  distinction,  Law-
rence obtained  a  midshipman's  warrant  for  him  in
1746,  when  he  was  just  fourteen  years  old,  and
George  is  said  to  have  been  on  the  point  of  em-
barking on  this  English  naval  service.  The  earnest
remonstrance  of  his  mother  was  interposed,  and
the  project  reluctantly  abandoned.  He  thereupon
resumed  his  studies,  and  did  not  leave  school  till
the  autumn  before  his  sixteenth  year.  Soon  after-
ward he  went  to  reside  with  his  brother  Lawrence,
who  had  married  a  Fairfax  of  Belvoir,  and  had  es-
tablished himself  at  Mount  Vernon.

Washington's  education  was  now  finished,  so  far
as  schools  and  school- masters  were  concerned,  and
he  never  enjoyed  or  sought  the  advantages  of  a  col-
lege. Indeed,  only  a  month  after  he  was  sixteen  he
entered  on  the  active  career  of  a  surveyor  of  lands,
in  the  employment  of  William  Fairfax,  the  father
of  his  brother's  wife,  and  the  manager  of  the  great
estate  of  his  cousin,  Lord  Fairfax.  In  this  work
he  voluntarily  subjected  himself  to  every  variety  of
hardship  and  personal  danger.  Those  Alleghany
valleys  and  hills  were  then  a  wilderness,  where  dif-
ficult obstructions  were  to  be  overcome,  severe  ex-
posures to  be  endured,  and  savage  tribes  to  be  con-
ciliated or  encountered.  For  three  successive  years
he  persevered  undauntedly  in  this  occupation,"hav-
ing  obtained  a  commission  from  the  president  and
master  of  William  and  Mary  college  as  a  public
surveyor  for  Culpeper  county,  which  entitled  his
surveys  to  a  place  in  the  county  office,  where  they
were  held  in  high  esteem  for  completeness  and  accu-
racy. During  these  three  years  he  allowed  himself
but  little  relaxation,  yet  found  time  in  the  winter
months  for  an  occasional  visit  to  his  mother,  and
for  aiding  her  in  the  management  of  her  affairs.

And  now,  at  nineteen  years  of  age,  he  received
an  appointment  as  adjutant-general,  with  the  rank
of  major,  to  inspect  and  exercise  the  militia  in
one  of  the  districts  into  which  Virginia  was  di-
vided in  view  of  the  French  encroachments  and
the  Indian  depredations  with  which  the  frontiers


were  menaced.  Before  he  had  fairly  entered  on
this  service,  however,  he  was  called  to  accompany
his  brother  Lawrence  to  the  West  Indies,  on  a  voy-
age for  his  brother's  health,  and  was  absent  from
home  for  more  than  four  months,  during  which  he
had  a  severe  attack  of  small-pox.  His  brother  re-
mained longer,  and  returned  at  last  only  to  die,
leaving  George  as  one  of  his  executors,  and  involv-
ing him  in  large  responsibilities  as  well  as  in  much
personal  affliction.  Meantime  his  appointment,  as
adjutant-general  was  renewed  by  Gov.  Dinwiddie,
and  he  was  assigned  to  the  charge  of  one  of  the
grand  military  divisions  of  the  colony.  A  wider
field  of  service  was  thus  opened  to  Washington,  on
which  he  entered  with  alacrity.  War  between
France  and  England  was  now  rapidly  approach-
ing, involving  a  conflict  for  the  possession  of  a
large  part  of  the  American  continent.  French
posts  were  already  established  on  the  banks  of  the
Ohio,  with  a  view  of  confining  the  English  colonies
within  the  Alleghany  mountains.  Gov.  Dinwiddie,
under  instructions  from  the  British  ministry,  re-
solved upon  sending  a  commissioner  to  the  officei
commanding  the  French  forces  to  inquire  by  what
authority  he  was  invading  the  king  s  dominions,
and  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  his  further  designs.
Washington  was  selected  for  this  delicate  and  dan-
gerous mission,  after  several  others  had  declined
to  undertake  it.  He  accepted  it  at  once,  and  to-
ward the  end  of  November,  1753.  he  set  out  from
Williamsburg,  without  any  military  escort,  on
a  journey  of  nearly  600  miles — a  great  part  of
it  over  "  lofty  and  rugged  mountains  and  through
the  heart  of  a  wilderness."  The  perilous  inci-
dents of  this  expedition  cannot  be  recounted  here.
They  would  occupy  a  whole  article  by  themselves.
His  marvellous  and  providential  escapes,  at  one
time  from  the  violence  of  the  savages,  at  another
from  assassination  by  a  treacherous  guide,  at  a
third  from  being  drowned  in  crossing  the  Alle-
ghany river  on  a  raft,  have  been  described  in  all
the  accounts  of  his  early  manhood,  substantially
from  his  own  journal,  published  in  London  at  the
time.  He  reached  Williamsburg  on  his  return  on
16  Jan.,  1754,  and  delivered  to  Gov.  Dinwiddie  the
reply  of  the  French  commander  to  his  message  of
inquiry.  No  more  signal  test  could  have  been  af-
forded of  Washington's  various  talents  and  char-
acteristics, which  this  expedition  served  at  once  to
display  and  to  develop.  "From  that  moment,"
says  Irving,  "  he  was  the  rising  hope  of  Virginia."
He  was  then  but  just  finishing  his  twenty-first
year,  and  immediately  after  his  return  he  was  ap-
pointed to  the  chief  command  of  a  little  body
of  troops  raised  for  meeting  immediate  exigen-
cies ;  but  the  military  establishment  was  increased
as  soon  as  the  governor  could  convene  the  legisla-
ture of  Virginia,  and  Washington  was  appointed
lieutenant-colonel  of  a  regiment,  with  Joshua  Fry,
an  accomplished  Oxford  scholar,  as  his  colonel
Upon  Washington  at  once  devolved  the  duty  of
going  forward  with  such  companies  as  were  en-
listed, and  the  sudden  death  of  Col.  Fry  soon  left
him  in  full  command  of  the  expedition.  The
much-misrepresented  skirmish  with  the  French
troops,  resulting  in  the  death  of  Jumonville,  was
followed,  on  3  July,  1754,  by  the  battle  of  the
Great  Meadows,  where  Washington  held  his  ground,
in  Fort  Necessity,  from  eleven  in  the  morning  to
eight  at  night,  against  a  great  superiority  of  num-
bers, until  the  French  requested  a  parley.  A
capitulation  ensued,,  in  every  way  honorable  to
Washington  as  it  was  translated  and  read  to  him,
but  which  proved,  when  printed,  to  contain  terms
in  the  French  language  which  he  never  would


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


375


have  signed  or  admitted  had  they  not  been  sup-
pressed or  softened  by  the  interpreter.  (See  note
at  end  of  chapter  xii.,  vol.  i.t  of  Irving's  "  Life
of  Washington.")  The  course  now  adopted  by
Gov.  Dinwiddie  in  the  reorganization  of  the  Vir-
ginia troops,  against  which  Washington  remon-
strated, and  which  would  have  reduced  him  to  an
inferior  grade,  led  at  once  to  his  resignation,  and,
after  a  brief  visit  to  his  mother,  he  retired  to
Mount  Vernon.  He  was  soon  solicited  by  Gov.
Sharpe,  of  Maryland,  then  the  commander-in-chief
of  the  English  forces,  to  resume  his  station,  but  un-
der circumstances  and  upon  conditions  incompati-
ble with  his  self-respect.  In  declining  the  invita-
tion he  used  this  memorable  language :  "  I  shall
have  the  consolation  of  knowing  that  I  have
opened  the  way,  when  the  smallness  of  our  num-
bers exposed  us  to  the  attacks  of  a  superior  enemy ;
and  that  I  have  had  the  thanks  of  my  country  for
the  services  I  have  rendered."  But  now  Gen.
Braddock  was  sent  over  from  England  with  two
regiments  of  regulars,  and  Washington  did  not
hesitate  to  accept  an  appointment  on  his  staff
as  a  volunteer  aide-de-camp.  The  prudent  coun-
sels that  he  gave  Braddock  before  he  set  out  on
his  ill-fated  expedition,  and  often  repeated  along
the  road,  were  not  followed ;  but  Washington,
notwithstanding  a  violent  attack  of  fever,  was
with  him  on  the  bloody  field  of  the  Monongahela,
behaving,  as  his  fellow  aide-de-camp,  Col.  Orme,
testified,  "  with  the  greatest  courage  and  resolu-
tion," witnessing  at  last  Braddock's  defeat  and
death,  and  being  the  only  mounted  officer  not
killed  or  disabled.  "  By  the  all-powerful  dispensa-
tions of  Providence,"  wrote  he  to  his  brother,  "  I
have  been  protected  beyond  all  human  probability
or  expectation ;  for  I  had  four  bullets  through  my
coat,  and  two  horses  shot  under  me,  yet  I  escaped
unhurt,  although  death  was  levelling  my  compan-
ions on  every  side."  It  fell  to  him  by  a  striking
coincidence — the  chaplain  being  wounded — to  read
the  funeral  service  at  the  burial  of  Braddock  at
the  Great  Meadows,  the  scene  of  his  own  capitu-
lation the  year  before.  In  a  sermon  to  one  of  the
companies  organized  under  the  impulse  of  Brad-
dock's  defeat,  and
in  view  of  the  im-
pending dangers
of  the  country,  the
Rev.  Samuel  Da-
vies,  an  eloquent
and  accomplished
preacher,  who,  in
1759,  succeeded
Jonathan  Edwards
as  president  of
Princeton  college,
after  praising  the
zeal  and  courage
of  the  Virginia
troops,  added  these
prophetic  words :
"  As  a  remarkable
instance  of  this,  I
may  point  out  to
the  public  that
heroic  youth,  Col.


Washington,  whom  I  cannot  but  hope  Providence
has  hitherto  preserved  in  so  signal  a  manner  for
some  important  service  to  his  country."

A  force  of  2,000  men  having  now  been  ordered
to  be  raised  by  the  Virginia  assembly,  Washington
was  appointed  to  the  chief  command,  and  estab-
lished his  headquarters  at  Winchester.  He  broke
a,way  from  the  perplexing  cares  of  this  place  in


February,  1756,  to  make  a  hurried  visit  to  Gov.
Shirley  in  Boston,  where  he  settled  successfully
with  him,  then  the  commander-in-chief  of  the
English  forces  on  this  continent,  a  vexatious  ques-
tion of  precedence  between  the  provincial  officers
and  those  appointed  by  the  crown.  On  his  return
he  devoted  himself  to  measures  for  the  security
of  the  frontier.  In  the  course  of  the  following
year  he  was  again  the  subject  of  a  violent  fever,
which  prostrated  him  for  several  months.  "My
constitution,"  he  wrote  to  a  friend,  "  is  much  im-
paired, and  nothing  can  retrieve  it  but  the  greatest
care  and  the  most  circumspect  course  of  life."  Un-
der these  circumstances  he  seriously  contemplated
again  resigning  his  command  and  retiring  from  all
further  public  business.  But  his  favorite  measure,
the  reduction  of  Fort  Duquesne,  was  at  length  to
be  undertaken,  and,  after  much  disappointment
and  delay,  Washington,  on  25  Nov.,  1758,  was
privileged  to  "  march  in  and  plant  the  British  flag
on  the  yet  smoking  ruins  "  of  that  fort — henceforth
to  be  known  as  Fort  Pitt,  in  honor  of  the  great
minister  of  England,  afterward  Lord  Chatham.

Meantime  Washington  had  chanced  to  meet  on
his  way  to  Williamsburg,  at  the  house  of  a  hos-
pitable Virginian  with  whom  he  dined,  a  charming
widow,  who  at  once  won  his  heart.  Most  happily
he  soon  succeeded  in  winning  hers  also,  and  on
6  Jan.,  1759,  she  became  his  wife.  Martha  Cus-
tis,  daughter  of  John  Dandridge  and  widow  of
John  Parke  Custis,  was  henceforth  to  be  known
in  history  as  Martha  Washington.  He  had  now
finally  resigned  his  commission  as  a  colonial  offi-
cer, and  was  preparing  to  enjoy  something  of
the  retirement  of  private  life.  But  while  he  was
still  absent  on  his  last  campaign  he  had  been
chosen  a  delegate  to  the  Virginia  house  of  bur-
gesses, and  he  had  hardly  established  himself  at
Mount  Vernon,  a  few  months  after  his  marriage,
when  he  was  summoned  to  attend  a  session  of  that
body  at  Williamsburg.  He  was  not  allowed,  how-
ever, to  enter  unobserved  on  his  civil  career.  No
sooner  did  he  make  his  appearance  than  the  speaker,
agreeably  to  a  previous  vote  of  the  house,  present-
ed their  thanks  to  him,  in  the  name  of  the  colony,
for  the  distinguished  military  service  he  had  ren-
dered to  his  country,  accompanying  the  vote  of
thanks  with  expressions  of  compliment  and  praise
which  greatly  embarrassed  him.  He  attempted  to
make  his  acknowledgments,  but  stammered  and
trembled  and  "  could  not  give  distinct  utterance
to  a  single  syllable."  "Sit  down,  Mr.  Washing-
ton," said  the  speaker,  with  infinite  address;  "your
modesty  equals  your  valor,  and  that  surpasses  the
power  of  any  language  I  possess."

Fourteen  or  fifteen  years  more  elapsed  before
the  great  struggle  for  American  independence
began,  and  during  all  this  time  he  continued  to
be  a  member  of  the  house  of  burgesses.  He  was
punctual  in  his  attendance  at  all  their  sessions,
which  were  commonly  at  least  two  in  a  year,  and
took  an  earnest  interest  in  all  that  was  said  and
done,  but  "  it  is  not  known,"  says  Sparks,  "  that  he
ever  made  a  set  speech  or  entered  into  a  stormy
debate."  He  had  a  passion  for  agricultural  pur-
suits. He  delighted  in  his  quiet  rural  life  at
Mount  Vernon  with  his  wife  and  her  children —
he  had  none  of  his  own — finding  abundant  occu-
pation in  the  management  of  his  farms,  and  abun-
dant enjoyment  in  hunting  and  fishing  with  the
genial  friends  and  relatives  in  his  neighborhood.
He  was  vestryman  of  two  parishes,  regular  in  his
attendance  at  one  or  the  other  of  the  parochial
churches,  at  Alexandria  or  at  Pohick,  and  both  he
and  his  wife  were  communicants. Meantime  he


376


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


was  always  at  the  service  of  his  friends  or  the  com-
munity for  any  aid  or  counsel  that  he  could  render
them.  He  was  often  called  on  to  be  an  arbitra-
tor, and  his  judgment  and  impartiality  were  never
questioned.  As  a  commissioner  for  settling  the
military  accounts  of  the  colony,  after  the  treaty  of
peace  of  1763,  he  spared  himself  no  labor  in  the
execution  of  a  most  arduous  and  complicated  task.
In  a  word,  he  was  a  good  citizen,  an  exemplary
Christian,  a  devoted  father,  a  kind  master  to  the
slaves  who  had  come  to  him  by  inheritance  or  mar-
riage, and  was  respected  and  beloved  by  all.

At  length,  at  forty-three  years  of  age.  he  was
called  upon  to  begin  a  career  that  closed  only  with
his  life,  during  which  he  held  the  highest  and  most
responsible  positions  in  war  and  in  peace,  and  ren-
dered inestimable  services  to  his  country  and  to
mankind.  To  follow  that  career  in  detail  would
require  nothing  less  than  a  history  of  the  United
States  for  the  next  five-and-twenty  years.  Wash-
ington was  naturally  of  a  cautious  and  conserva-
tive cast,  and  by  no  means  disposed  for  a  rupture
with  the  mother  country,  if  it  could  be  avoided
without  the  sacrifice  of  rights  and  principles.  But
as  the  various  stages  of  British  aggression  succeed-
ed each  other,  beginning  with  the  stamp-act,  the
repeal  of  which  he  hailed  with  delight,  and  fol-
lowed by  the  tea  tax  and  the  Boston  port  bill,  he
became  keenly  alive  to  the  danger  of  submission,
and  was  ready  to  unite  in  measures  of  remon-
strance, opposition,  and  ultimately  of  resistance.
When  he  heard  at  Williamsburg,  in  August,  1773,
of  the  sufferings  resulting  from  the  port  bill,  he  is
said  to  have  exclaimed,  impulsively :  "  I  will  raise  a
thousand  men,  subsist  them  at  my  own  expense,
and  march  with  them,  at  their  head,  for  the  relief
of  Boston."  He  little  dreamed  at  that  moment
that  within  two  years  he  was  destined  to  be  hailed
as  the  deliverer  of  Boston  from  British  occu-
pation. He  accepted  an  election  as  a  delegate  to
the  1st  Continental  congress  in  1774,  and  went
to  the  meeting  at  Philadelphia  in  September  of
that  year,  in  company  with  Patrick  Henry  and  Ed-
mund Pendleton,  who  called  for  him  at  Mount
Vernon  on  horseback.  That  congress  sat  in  Car-
penter's Hall  with  closed  doors,  but  the  great  pa-
pers that  it  prepared  and  issued  form  a  proud
part  of  American  history.  Those  were  the  papers
and  that  the  congress  of  which  Chatham  in  the
house  of  lords,  in  his  memorable  speech  on  the  re-
moval of  troops  from  Boston,  20  Jan.,  1775,  said:
"  When  your  lordships  look  at  the  papers  trans-
mitted to  us  from  America,  when  you  consider
their  decency,  firmness,  and  wisdom,  you  cannot
but  respect  their  cause,  and  wish  to  make  it  your

own.  For  my-
self, I  must  de-
clare and  avow
that  in  all  my
reading  and
observation  —
and  it  has  been
my  favorite
study — I  have
read  Thucydi-
des,  and  have
studied  and
admired  the
master  states
of  the  world —
that  for  solidity  of  reasoning,  force  of  sagacity,
and  wisdom  of  "conclusion,  under  such  a  complica-
tion of  difficult  circumstances,  no  nation  or  body
of  men  can  stand  in  preference  to  the  general  con-
gress at  Philadelphia." The  precise  part  taken  by


Washington  within  the  closed  doors  of  Carpenter's
Hall  is  nowhere  recorded,  but  the  testimony  of  one
of  its  most  distinguished  members  cannot  be  for-
gotten. When  Patrick  Henry  returned  home  from
the  meeting,  and  was  asked  whom  he  considered  the
greatest  man  in  that  congress,  he  replied :  "  If  you
speak  of  eloquence,  Mr.  Rutledge,  of  South  Caro-
lina, is  by  far  the  greatest  orator ;  but  if  you  speak
of  solid  information  and  sound  judgment,  CoL
Washington  is  unquestionably  the  greatest  man
on  that  floor."  It  is  an  interesting  tradition  that,
during  the  prayers  with  which  Dr.  Duche  opened
that  meeting  at  Carpenter's  Hall  on  5  Sept.,  1774,
while  most  of  the  other  members  were  standing,
Washington  was  kneeling.

He  was  again  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  con-
gress (the  2d)  that  assembled  at  Philadelphia  on  10
May,  1775,  bv  which,  on  the  15th  of  June,  on  the
motion  of  Thomas  Johnson,  a  delegate  of  Mary-
land, at  the  earnest  instigation  of  John  Adams,
of  Massachusetts,  he  was  unanimously  elected
commander-in-chief  of  all  the  Continental  forces  «
raised,  or  to  be  raised,  for  the  defence  of  American
liberty.  On  the  next  morning  he  accepted  the  ap-
pointment and  expressed  his  deep  and  grateful
sense  of  the  high  honor  conferred  upon  him,  "  but,"
added  he,  "  lest  some  unlucky  event  should  happen,
unfavorable  to  my  reputation,  I  beg  it  may  be  re-
membered by  every  gentleman  in  the  room  that  I
this  day  declare,  with  the  utmost  sincerity,  that  I
do  not  think  myself  equal  to  the  command  1  am
honored  with."  "  As  to  pay,"  he  continued, "  I  beg
leave  to  assure  the  congress  that,  as  no  pecuniary
consideration  could  have  tempted  me  to  accept
this  arduous  employment,  at  the  expense  of  my
domestic  ease  and  happiness,  1  do  not  wish  to  make
any  profit  of  it.  I  will  keep  an  exact  account  of
my  expenses.  Those  I  doubt  not  they  will  dis-
charge, and  that  is  all  I  desire."  "  You  may  be-
lieve me,"  he  wrote  to  his  wife  at  once,  "  when  I
assure  you,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  that  so  far
from  seeking  this  appointment,  I  have  used  every
endeavor  in  my  power  to  avoid  it,  not  only  from
my  unwillingness  to  part  with  you  and  the  family,
but  from  a  consciousness  of  its  being  a  trust  too
great  for  my  capacity."  Washington's  commission
was  agreed  to  by  congress  on  17  June,  and  on  the  21st
he  set  out  from  Philadelphia  on  horseback  to  take
command  of  the  American  army  encamped  around
Boston,  of  which  place  the  British  forces  were  in
possession.  The  tidings  of  the  battle  of  Bunker
Hill  reached  him  at  New  York  on  the  25th,  and
the  next  day  he  was  in  the  saddle  again  on  his  way
to  Cambridge.  He  arrived  there  on  2  July,  and  es-
tablished his  headquarters  in  the  old  Vassall  (after-
ward Craigie)  mansion,  which  has  recently  been
known  as  the  residence  of  the  poet  Longfellow.
On  3  July  he  took  formal  command  of  the  arm  v.
drawing  his  sword  under  an  ancient  elm.  which
has  of  late  years  been  suitably  inscribed.  The
American  army  numbered  about  17.000  men,  but
only  14.500  were  fit  for  duty.  Coming  hastily
from  different  colonies,  they  were  without  supplies
of  tents  or  clothing,  and  there  was  not  ammunition
enough  for  nine  cartridges  to  a  man.  Washington's
work  in  combining  and  organizing  this  mass  of
raw  troops  was  most  embarrassing  and  arduous.
But  he  persevered  untiringly,  and,  after  a  siege  of
eight  months,  succeeded  in  driving  the  British
from  Boston  on  17  March,  1775.  For  this  grand
exploit  congress  awarded  him  a  splendid  gold
medal,  which  bore  an  admirable  likeness  of  him  on
one  side,  and  on  the  other  side  the  inscription
"  Hostibus  primo  fugatis  Bostonium  recuperatum."
Copies  of  this  medal  in  silver  and  bronze  have


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


377


been  multiplied,  but  the  original  gold  medal  has
found  a  fit  place,  within  a  few  years  past,  in  the
Boston  public  library.

The  way  was  now  opened,  and  the  scene  of  the
war  was  soon  transferred  to  other  parts  of  the  coun-
try. The  day  after  the  evacuation  of  Boston,  five
regiments,  with  a  battalion  of  riflemen  and  two

companies  of  ar-
tiilery,weresent
to  New  York.
But,  as  the  Brit-
ish fleetwas  still
in  Nantasket
road,  Washing-
ton did  not  ven-
ture to  move
more  of  his
army,  or  to  go
away  -  himself,
until  the  risk  of
a  return  was
over.  On  13
April  he  reached
New  York,  and
was  soon  sum-
moned to  Phil-
adelphia for  a
conference  with
congress.  On  his  return  to  New  York,  while  he  was
anxiously  awaiting  an  attack  by  the  British  forces,
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  signed  on  4  July,
was  transmitted  to  him.  The  regiments  were  forth-
with paraded,  and  the  Declaration  was  read  at  the
head  of  the  army.  "  The  general  hopes,"  said  he  in
the  orders  of  the  day,  "  that  this  important  event
will  serve  as  a  fresh  incentive  to  every  officer  and
soldier  to  act  with  fidelity  and  courage,  as  knowing
that  now  the  peace  and  safety  of  his  country  de-
pend, under  God,  solely  on  the  success  of  our  arms/'
He  hailed  the  Declaration  with  delight,  and  had
written  to  his  brother,  from  Philadelphia,  that  he
was  rejoiced  at  "  the  noble  act "  of  the  Virginia
convention,  recommending  that  such  a  declaration
should  be  adopted.  But  his  little  army,  according
to  the  returns  of  5  Aug.  following,  hardly  num-
bered more  than  20,000  men,  of  whom  six  or  seven
thousand  were  sick  or  on  furlough  or  otherwise  ab-
sent, while  the  British  forces  were  at  least  24,000,
supported  by  a  large  and  thoroughly  equipped
fleet.  The  battle  of  Long  Island  soon  followed,
with  disastrous  results  to  the  Americans,  and  the
British  took  possession  of  New  York.  Other  re-
verses were  not  long  delayed,  and  the  strategy  of
Washington  found  its  exhibition  only  in  his  skilful
retreat  from  Long  Island  and  through  the  Jerseys.
But  he  was  not  disheartened,  nor  his  confidence  jn
ultimate  success  impaired.  When  asked  what  was
to  be  done  if  Philadelphia  were  taken,  he  replied  :
"We  will  retreat  beyond  the  Susquehanna,  and
thence,  if  necessary,  to  the  Alleghany  mountains."
His  masterly  movements  on  the  Delaware  were
now  witnessed,  which  Frederick  the  Great  is  said
to  have  declared  "the  most  brilliant  achievements
recorded  in  military  annals."  "  Many  years  later,"
Mr.  Lossing  informs  us  in  his  interesting  volume
on  Mount  Vernon  and  its  associations,  "the  great
Frederick  sent  him  a  portrait  of  himself,  accompa-
nied by  the  remarkable  words :  '  From  the  oldest
general  in  Europe  to  the  greatest  general  in  the
world ! ' "  Meantime  he  had  a  vast  work  to  ac-
complish with  entirely  inadequate  means.  But  he
went  along  with  heroic  fortitude,  unswerving  con-
stancy, and  unsparing  self-devotion,  through  all
the  trials  and  sufferings  of  Monmouth  and  Brandy-
wine  and  Germantown  and  Valley  Forge,  until  the


grand  consummation  was  at  last  reached  at  York-
town,  on  19  Oct.,  1781.  There,  with  the  aid  of  our
generous  and  gallant  allies,  he  achieved  the  crown-
ing victory  of  independence  on  the  soil  of  his  be-
loved Virginia.

The  details  of  this  protracted  contest  must  be
left  to  history,  as  well  as  the  infamous  cabal  for
impeaching  his  ability  and  depriving  him  of  his
command  (see  Conway,  Thomas),  and  the  still
more  infamous  treason  of  Arnold,  in  September,
1780  (see  Arnold,  Benedict).  Standing  on  the
field  of  Yorktown,  to  receive  the  surrender  of
Lord  Cornwallis  and  the  British  army,  Washing-
ton was  at  length  rewarded  for  all  the  labors  and
sacrifices  and  disappointments  he  had  so  bravely
endured  since  his  first  great  victory  in  expelling
the  British  from  Boston  nearly  seven  years  before.
Massachusetts  and  Virginia  were  thus  the  scenes  of
his  proudest  successes,  as  they  had  been  foremost
in  bringing  to  a  test  the  great  issue  of  American
independence  and  American  liberty.  The  glori-
ous consummation  was  at  l^st  accomplished.  But
two  years  more  were  to  elapse  before  the  treaty  of
peace  was  signed  and  the  war  with  England  ended ;
and  during  that  period  Washington  was  to  give
most  signal  illustration  of  his  disinterested  patriot-
ism and  of  his  political  wisdom  and  foresight.

Discontents  had  for  some  time  been  manifested
by  officers  and  soldiers  alike,  owing  to  arrearages
of  pay,  and  they  were  naturally  increased  by  the
apprehension  that  the  army  would  now  be  disbanded
without  proper  provision  being  made  by  congress
for  meeting  the  just  claims  of  the  troops.  Not  a
few  of  the  officers  began  to  distrust  the  efficiency
of  the  government  and  of  all  republican  institu-
tions. One  of  them,  "  a  colonel  of  the  army,  of  a
highly  respectable  character  andsomewhat  advanced
in  life,"  whose  name  is  given  by  Irving  as  Lewis
Nicola,  was  put  forward  to  communicate  these
sentiments  to  Washington,  and  he  even  dared  to
suggest  for  him  the  title  of  king.  Washington's
reply,  dated  Newburg,  22  May,  1782,  expressed  the
indignation  and  "abhorrence"  with  which  he  had
received  such  a  suggestion,  and  rebuked  the  writer
with  severity.  "  I  am  at  a  loss  to  conceive,"  wrote
he,  "  what  part  of  my  conduct  could  have  given
encouragement  to  an  address  which  to  me  seems
big  with  the  greatest  mischiefs  that  can  befall  my
country.  If  I  am  not  deceived  in  the  knowledge
of  myself,  you  could  not  have  found  a  person  to
whom  your  schemes  are  more  disagreeable.  .  .  .
Let  me  conjure  you,  then,  if  you  have  any  regard
for  your  country,  concern  for  yourself  or  posterity,
or  respect  for  me,  to  banish  these  thoughts  from
your  mind,  and  never  communicate,  from  yourself
or  any  one  else,  a  sentiment  of  the  like  nature."
Nothing  more  was  ever  heard  of  making  Washing-
ton a  king.  He  had  sufficiently  shown  his  scorn
for  such  an  overture.

The  apprehensions  of  the  army,  however,  were  by
no  means  quieted.  A  memorial  on  the  subject  of
their  pay  was  prepared  and  transmitted  to  congress
in  December,  1782,  but  the  resolutions  that  con-
gress adopted  did  not  satisfy  their  expectations.
A  meeting  of  officers  was  arranged,  and  anonymous
addresses,  commonly  known  as  the  Newburg  ad-
dresses, were  issued,  to  rouse  the  army  to  resent-
ment. Washington  insisted  on  attending  the  meet-
ing, and  delivered  an  impressive  address.  Gen.
Gates  was  in  the  chair,  and  Washington  began  by
apologizing  for  having  come.  After  reading  the
first  paragraph  of  what  he  had  prepared,  he  begged
the  indulgence  of  those  present  while  he  paused  to
put  on  his  spectacles,  saying,  casually,  but  most
touchinglv,  that  "  he  had  grown  gray  in  the  service


378


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


of  his  country,  and  now  found  himself  growing
blind."  He  then  proceeded  to  read  a  most  forcible
and  noble  paper,  in  which,  after  acknowledging  the
just  claims  of  the  army  on  the  government,  and  as-
suring them  that  those  claims  would  not  be  disre-
garded, he  conjured  them  "  to  express  their  utmost
horror  and  detestation  of  the  man  who  wishes,
under  any  specious  pretences,  to  overturn  the  liber-
ties of  our  country,  and  who  wickedly  attempts  to
open  the  floodgates  of  civil  discord  and  deluge
our  rising  empire  in  blood."  The  original  auto-
graph of  this  ever-memorable  address,  just  as  it
came  from  Washington's  own  pen,  is  in  the  archives
of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society,  and  a  litho-
graphed copy  was  published  by  them,  together
with  the  letters  of  eye-witnesses  to  the  scene,  as  a
contribution  to  the  centennial  papers  of  1876.
Washington  retired  at  once  from  the  meeting,  but
resolutions  were  forthwith  unanimously  adopted,
on  motion  of  Gen.  Knox,  seconded  by  Gen.  Put-
nam, reciprocating  all  his  affectionate  expressions,
and  concurring  entirely  in  the  policy  he  had  pro-
posed. "Every  doubt  was  dispelled,"  says  Maj.
Shaw  in  his  journal,  "and  the  tide  of  patriot-
ism rolled  again  in  its  wonted  course."  The
treaty  of  peace  was  signed  in  Paris  on  20  Jan.,
1783.  On  17  April  following,  a  proclamation  by
congress  was  received  by  Washington  for  the  cessa-
tion of  hostilities. On  19  April,  the  anniversary

of  the  shed-
ding of  the
first  blood
at  Lexington,
which  com-
pleted the
eighth  year  of
the  war,  the
cessation  was
proclaimed  at
the  head  of
every  regi-
ment of  the
army,  after
which,  said
Washington's  general  orders,  "the  chaplains  of
the  several  brigades  will  render  thanks  to  Almighty
God  for  all  his  mercies,  particularly  for  his  over-
ruling the  wrath  of  man  to  his  own  glory,  and  caus-
ing the  rage  of  war  to  cease  among  the  nations."

On  the  following  8th  of  June,  in  view  of  the  disso-
lution of  the  army,  Washington  addressed  a  letter  to
the  governors  of  the  several  states — a  letter  full  of
golden  maxims  and  consummate  wisdom.  "The
great  object,"  he  began,  "for  which  I  had  the
honor  to  hold  an  appointment  in  the  service  of  my
country  being  accomplished,  I  am  now  preparing
to  return  to  that  domestic  retirement  which,  it  is
well  known,  I  left  with  the  greatest  reluctance — a
retirement  for  which  I  have  never  ceased  to  sigh
through  a  long  and  painful  absence,  and  in  which,
remote  from  the  noise  and  trouble  of  the  world,  I
meditate  to  pass  the  remainder  of  my  life  in  a  state
of  undisturbed  repose."  Then,  after  remarking
that  "  this  is  the  favorable  moment  for  giving  such
a  tone  to  the  Federal  government  as  will  enable  it
to  answer  the  ends  of  its  institution,"  he  proceeded
to  set  forth  and  enlarge  upon  the  four  things
that  he  conceived  to  be  essential  to  the  well-bejng,
or  even  the  existence,  of  the  United  States  as  an
independent  power :  "First,  an  indissoluble  union
of  the  states  under  one  federal  head ;  second,  a
sacred  regard  to  public  justice ;  third,  the  adoption
of  a  proper  peace  establishment ;  and,  fourth,  the
prevalence  of  that  pacific  and  friendly  disposition
among  the  people  of  the  United  States  which  will


induce  them  to  forget  their  local  prejudices  and
policies,  to  make  those  mutual  concessions  which
are  requisite  to  the  general  prosperity,  and,  in  some
instances,  to  sacrifice  their  individual  advantages  to
the  interest  of  the  community.  These  are  the  pil-
lars," said  he,  "  on  which  the  glorious  fabric  of  our
independency  and  national  character  must  rest."

Washington  took  final  leave  of  the  army  in
general  orders  of  2  Nov.,  in  accordance  with  a
proclamation  by  congress  of  18  Oct.  He  accom-
panied Gov.  Clinton  in  a  formal  entry  into  New
York,  after  its  evacuation  by  the  British,  on  25
Nov.  On  4  Dec,  after  taking  affectionate  leave
of  his  principal  officers  at  Fraunce's  tavern,  he  set
off  for  Annapolis,  and  there,  on  23  Dec,  1783,  he
presented  himself  to  "  the  United  States  in  congress
assembled,"  and  resigned  the  commission  that  he
had  received  on  17  June,  1775.  "  Having  now  fin-
ished," said  he,  "  the  work  assigned  me,  I  retire
from  the  great  theatre  of  action,  and,  bidding  an
affectionate  farewell  to  this  august  body,  under
whose  orders  I  have  long  acted,  I  here  offer  my
commission,  and  take  my  leave  of  all  the  employ-
ments of  public  life."  "You  retire,"  replied  the
president  of  congress,  "  from  the  theatre  of  action
with  the  blessings  of  your  fellow-citizens;  but  the
glory  of"  your  virtues  will  not  terminate  with  your
military  command :  it  will  continue  to  animate  re-
motest ages."  The  very  next  morning,  Irving  tells
us,  Washington  left  Annapolis,  and  "  hastened  to
his  beloved  Mount  Vernon,  where  he  arrived  the
same  day,  on  Christmas  eve,  in  a  frame  of  mind
suited  to  enjoy  the  sacred  and  genial  festival."
Once  more,  at  the  close  of  the  fifty-second  year
of  his  age,  Washington  was  permitted  to  resume
his  favorite  occupations  of  a  farmer  and  planter,
and  to  devote  himself  personally  to  his  crops  and
cattle.  Indeed,  throughout  his  whole  military
campaign,  he  had  kept  himself  informed  of  what
was  going  on  in  the  way  of  agriculture  at  Mount
Vernon,  and  had  given  careful  directions  as  to
the  cultivation  of  his  lands.  His  correspondence
now  engrossed  not  a  little  of  his  time,  and  he  was
frequently  cheered  by  the  visits  of  his  friends.
Lafayette  was  among  his  most  welcome  guests,  and
passed  a  fortnight  with  him,  to  his  great  delight.
Afterward  Washington  made  a  visit  to  his  lands
on  the  Kanawha  and  Ohio  rivers,  travelling  on
horseback,  with  his  friend  and  physician,  Dr.  Craik,
nearly  seven  hundred  miles,  through  a  wild,  moun-
tainous country,  and  devising  schemes  of  internal
navigation  for  the  advantage  of  Virginia  and
Maryland.  His  passion  for  hunting,  also,  was  re-
vived, and  Lafayette  and  others  of  the  French  offi-
cers sent  him  out  fine  hounds  from  their  kennels.

But  the  condition  of  his  country  was  never  ab-
sent from  his  thoughts,  and  the  insufficiency  of
the  existing  confederation  weighed  heavily  on  his
mind.  In  one  of  his  letters  he  writes:  "The  con-
federation appears  to  me  little  more  than  a  shadow
without  the  substance,  and  congress  a  migratory
body."  In  another  letter  he  says :  "  I  have  ever
been  a  friend  to  adequate  powers  in  congress,  with-
out which  it  is  evident  to  me  we  shall  never  estab-
lish a  national  character.  .  .  .  We  are  either  a
united  people  under  one  head  and  for  federal  pur-
poses, or  we  are  thirteen  independent  sovereignties,
eternally  counteracting  each  other."  In  another
letter,  to  John  Jay,  he  uses  still  more  emphatic
language :  "  I  do  not  conceive  we  can  exist  long  as
a  nation  without  lodging  somewhere  a  power  which
will  pervade  the  whole  Union  in  as  energetic  a
manner  as  the  authority  of  the  state  governments
extends  over  the  several  states.  .  .  .  Ketired  as  I
am  from  the  world,  I  frankly  acknowledge  1  can-


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


379


not  feel  myself  an  unconcerned  spectator.  Yet,
having  happily  assisted  in  bringing  the-ship  into
port,  and  having  been  fairly  discharged,  it  is  not
my  business  to  embark  again  on  the  sea  of  troubles."
Meantime  the  insurrection  in  Massachusetts,  com-
monly known  as  "Shays's  rebellion,"  added  greatly
to  his  anxiety  and  even  anguish  of  mind.  In  a
letter  to  Madison  of  6  Nov.,  1786,  he  exclaimed :
"  No  morn  ever  dawned  more  favorably  than  ours
did,  and  no  day  was  ever  more  clouded  than  the
present.  .  .  .  We  are  fast  verging  to  anarchy  and
confusion."  Soon  afterward  he  poured  out  the
bitterness  of  his  soul  to  his  old  aide-de-camp,  Gen.
Humphreys,  in  still  stronger  terms  :  "  What,  gra-
cious God!  is  man,  that  there  should  be  such  in-
consistency and  perfidiousness  in  his  conduct?  It
was  but  the  other  day  that  we  were  shedding  our
blood  to  obtain  the  constitutions  under  which  we
now  live — constitutions  of  our  own  choice  and
making — and  now  we  are  unsheathing  the  sword
to  overturn  them."  He  was  thus  in  full  sympathy
with  the  efforts  of  his  friends  to  confer  new  and
greater  powers  on  the  Federal  government,  and  he
yielded  to  their  earnest  solicitations  in  consenting  to
be  named  at  the  head  of  the  Virginia  delegates  to  the
convention  in  Philadelphia  on  14  May,  1787.  Of  that
ever-memorable  convention  he  was  unanimously
elected  president,  and  on  the  following  17th  of  Sep-
tember he  had  the  supreme  satisfaction  of  address-
ing a  letter  to  congress  announcing  the  adoption  of
the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  which  had
been  signed  on  that  day.  "In  all  our  delibera-
tions on  this  subject,"  he  said  in  that  letter,
"  we  kept  steadily  in  our  view  that  which  appears
to  us  the  greatest  interest  of  every  true  Ameri-
can— the  consolidation  of  our  Union — in  which
is  involved  our  prosperity,  felicity,  safety,  and
perhaps  our  national  existence."  This  constitu-
tion having  passed  the  ordeal  of  congress  and
been  ratified  and  adopted  by  the  people,  through
the  conventions  of  the  states,  nothing  remained
but  to  organize  the  government  in  conformity  with
its  provisions.  As  early  as  2  July,  1788,  congress
had  been  notified  that  the  necessary  approval  of
nine  states  had  been  obtained,  but  not  until  13
Sept.  was  a  day  appointed  for  the  choice  of  electors
of  president.  That  day  was  the  first  Wednesday
of  the  following  January,  while  the  beginning
of  proceedings  under  the  new  constitution  was
postponed  until  the  first  Wednesday  of  March,
which  chanced  in  that  year  to  be  the  4th  of  March.
Not.  however,  until  1  April  was  there  a  quorum
for  business  in  the  house  of  representatives,  and
not  until  6  April  was  the  senate  organized.  On
that  day,  in  the  presence  of  the  two  houses,  the
votes  for  president  and  vice-president  were  opened
and  counted,  when  Washington,  having  received
every  vote  from  the  ten  states  that  took  part  in
the  election,  was  declared  president  of  the  United
States.  On  14  April  he  received  at  Mount  Vernon
the  official  announcement  of  his  election,  and  on
the  morning  of  the  16th  he  set  out  for  New  York.
"  Reluctant,"  as  he  said,  "  in  the  evening  of  life  to
exchange  a  peaceful  abode  for  an  ocean  of  difficul-
ties," he  bravely  added :  "  Be  the  voyage  long  or
short,  although  I  may  be  deserted  by  all  men,
integrity  and  firmness  shall  never  forsake  me."
Well  does  Bancroft  exclaim,  after  recounting  these
details  in  his  "  History  of  the  Constitution  " :  "  But
for  him  the  country  could  not  have  achieved  its
independence;  but  for  him  it  could  not  have
formed  its  Union ;  and  now  but  for  him  it  could
not  set  the  government  in  successful  motion."

Reaching  New  York  on  the  23d,  after  a  continu-
ous triumphal  journey  through  Alexandria,  Balti-


more, Wilmington,  Philadelphia,  and  Trenton,  he
was  welcomed  by  the  two  houses  of  congress,  by
the  governor  of  the  state,  the  magistrates  of  the
city,  and  by  great  masses  of  the  people.  The  city
was  illuminated  in  his  honor.  But  he  proceeded
on  foot  from  the  barge  that  had  brought  him
across  the  bay  to  the  house  of  the  president  of  the
late  confederation,  which  had  been  appointed  for
his  residence.  John  Adams  had  been  installed  in
the  chair  of  the  senate,  as  vice-president  of  the
United  States,  on  21  April,  but  congress  could  not
get  ready  for  the  inauguration  of  the  president
until  the  30th.  On  that  day  the  oath  of  office  was
administered  to  Washington  by  Robert  R.  Living-
ston, chancellor  of  the  state  of  New  York,  in  the
presence  of  the  two  houses  of  congress,  on  a  bal-
cony in  front  of  the  hall  in  which  congress  held  its
sittings,  where  a  statue  has  recently  been  placed!
Washington  then  retired  to  the  senate-chamber
and  delivered  his  inaugural  address.  "  It  would
be  peculiarly  improper  to  omit,"  said  he,  "  in  this
first  official  act.  my  fervent  supplications  to  that
Almighty  Being  who  rules  over  the  universe,  who
presides  in  the  councils  of  nations,  and  whose  provi-
dential aids  can  supply  every  human  defect — that
his  benediction  may  consecrate  to  the  liberties  and
happiness  of  the  people  of  the  United  States  a  gov-
ernment instituted  by  themselves.  .  .  .  No  people
can  be  bound  to  acknowledge  the  invisible  hand
which  conducts  the  affairs  of  man  more  than  the
people  of  the  United  States.  Every  step  by  which
they  have  advanced  to  the  character  of  an  inde-
pendent nation  seems  to  have  been  distinguished
by  some  token  of  providential  agency.  .  .  .  These
reflections,  arising  out  of  the  present  crisis,  have
forced  themselves  too  strongly  on  my  mind  to  be
suppressed.  You  will  join  with  me,  I  trust,  in
thinking  that  there  are  none  under  the  influence
of  which  the  proceedings  of  a  new  and  free  gov-
ernment can  more  auspiciously  commence."  In
accordance  with  those  sentiments,  at  the  close  of
the  ceremony,  Washington  and  both  branches  of
congress  were  escorted  to  St.  Paul's  chapel,  at  the
corner  of  Broadway  and  Fulton  street,  where  the
chaplain  of  the  senate  read  prayers  suited  to  the
occasion,  after  which  they  all  attended  the  presi-
dent to  his  mansion  near  Franklin  square.

Thus  began  the  administration  of  Washington,
as  first  president  of  the  United  States,  on  30
April,  1789.  This  is  a
date  never  to  be  for-
gotten in  American
history,  and  it  would
be  most  happy  if  the
30th  of  April  could  be
substituted  for  the  4th
of  March  as  the  in-
auguration-day of  the
second  century  of  our
constitutional  exist-
ence. It  would  add
two  months  to  the  too
short  second  session
of  congress,  give  a
probability  of  propi-
tious weather  for  the
ceremony,  and  be  a
perpetual  commemo-
ration of  the  day  on
which  Washington  en-
tered upon  his  great
office,  and  our  nation-
al government  was  practically  organized.  An
amendment  to  the  constitution  making  this  change
has  twice  been  formally  proposed  and  has  passed  the


380


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


*sr:


U.  S.  senate,  but  has  failed  of  adoption  in  the  house
of  representatives.  From  first  to  last,  Washington's
influence  in  conciliating  all  differences  of  opinion  in

regard  to  the
rightful  inter-
pretation and
execution  of
the  new  con-
stitution was
most  effective.
The  recently
printed  jour-
nal of  Wiiliam
Maclay,  a  sena-
tor from  Penn-
sylvania in  the
1st  congress,
says,  in  allu-
sion to  some
early  contro-
versies :  "  The
president'sam-
lable  deport-
ment, however,
smoothes  and
sweetens  everything."  Count  Moustier,  the  French
minister,  in  writing  home  to  his  government,  five
weeks  after  the  inauguration,  says :  "  The  opinion
of  Gen.  Washington  was  of  such  weight  that  it
alone  contributed  more  than  any  other  measure  to
cause  the  present  constitution  to  be  adopted.  The
extreme  confidence  in  his  patriotism,  his  integrity,
and  his  intelligence,  forms  to-day  its  principal
support.  .  .  .  All  is  hushed  in  presence  of  the  trust
of  the  people  in  the  saviour  of  the  country."  Wash-
ington had  to  confront  not  a  few  of  the  same  per-
plexities that  all  his  successors  have  experienced
in  a  still  greater  degree  in  regard  to  appoint-
ments to  office.  But  at  the  earliest  moment  he
adopted  rules  and  principles  on  this  subject  which
might  well  be  commended  to  presidents  and  gov-
ernors in  later  days.  In  a  letter  to  his  friend,
James  Bowdoin,  of  Massachusetts,  bearing  date  9
May,  1789,  less  than  six  weeks  after  his  inaugura-
tion, he  used  language  that  might  fitly  serve  as
an  introduction  to  the  civil-service  reform  manual
of  the  present  hour.  "  No  part  of  my  duty,"  he
says,  "  will  be  more  delicate,  and  in  many  instances
more  unpleasing,  than  that  of  nominating  or  ap-
pointing persons  to  office.  It  will  undoubtedly
often  happen  that  there  will  be  several  candidates
for  the  same  office,  whose  pretensions,  ability,  and
integrity  may  be  nearly  equal,  and  who  will  come
forward  so  equally  supported  in  every  respect  as
almost  to  require  the  aid  of  supernatural  intuition
to  fix  upon  the  right.  I  shall,  however,  in  all
events,  have  the  satisfaction  to  reflect  that  1  en-
tered upon  my  administration  unconfined  by  a
single  engagement,  uninfluenced  by  any  ties  of
blood  or  friendship,  and  with  the  best  intentions
and  fullest  determination  to  nominate  to  office
those  persons  only  who,  upon  every  consideration,
were  the  most  deserving,  and  who  would  probably
execute  their  several  functions  to  the  interest  and
credit  of  the  American  Union,  if  such  characters
could  be  found  by  my  exploring  every  avenue  of
information  respecting  their  merits  and  pretensions
that  it  was  in  my  power  to  obtain."  Appointing
Thomas  Jefferson,  of  Virginia,  as  his  secretary  of
state ;  Alexander  Hamilton,  of  New  York,  as  his
secretary  of  the  treasury :  and  Henry  Knox,  of
Massachusetts,  as  his  secretary  of  war,  lie  gave
clear  indication  at  the  outset  that  no  sectional  in-
terests or  prejudices  were  to  control  or  shape  his
policy. Under  Jefferson,  the  foreign  affairs  of  the


country  were  administered  with  great  discretion
and  ability.  Under  Hamilton,  the  financial  af-
fairs of  the  country  were  extricated  from  the  con-
fusion and  chaos  into  which  they  had  fallen,  and
the  national  credit  established  on  a  firm  basis.
The  preamble  of  the  very  first  revenue  bill,  signed
by  Washington  on  4  July,  1789,  was  a  notable  ex-
pression of  the  views  entertained  in  regard  to  the
powers  and  duties  of  the  new  government  in  the
regulation  of  trade  and  the  laying  and  collect-
ing of  taxes :  "  Whereas,  it  is  necessary  for  the
support  of  government,  for  the  discharge  of  the
debts  of  the  United  States,  and  the  encouragement
and  protection  of  manufacturers,  that  duties  be
laid  on  goods,  wares,  and  merchandise  imported,
Be  it  enacted,  etc."  The  incorporation  of  a  na-
tional bank  and  kindred  measures  of  the  highest
interest  soon  followed.  The  supreme  court  of  the
United  States  was  organized  with  John  Jay  as  its
first  chief  justice.  Important  amendments  to  the
constitution  were  framed  and  recommended  to  the
states  for  adoption,  and  congress  continued  in  ses-
sion till  the  close  of  September.

But  in  the  course  of  the  summer  Washington
had  a  severe  illness,  and  for  some  days  his  life
was  thought  to  be  in  danger.  Confined  to  his
bed  for  six  weeks,  it  was  more  than  twelve  weeks
before  he  was  restored.  With  a  view  to  the  re-
establishment  of  his  health,  as  well  as  for  seeing
the  country,  he  then  set  off  on  a  tour  to  the  east-
ern states,  and  visited  Boston,  Portsmouth,  New
Haven,  and  other  places.  He  was  welcomed  every-
where with  unbounded  enthusiasm.  No  "  royal
progress "  in  any  country  ever  equalled  this  tour
in  its  demonstrations  of  veneration  and  affection.
A  similar  tour  with  the  same  manifestations  was
made  by  him  in  the  southern  states  the  next
year.  As  the  four  years  of  his  first  term  drew
to  an  end,  he  was  seriously  inclined  to  withdraw
from  further  public  service,  but  Jefferson  and
Hamilton  alike,  with  all  their  respective  follow-
ers, while  they  differed  widely  on  so  many  other
matters,  were  of  one  mind  in  earnestly  remon-
strating against  Washington's  retirement.  "  The
confidence  of  the  whole  country,"  wrote  Jeffer-
son, "is  centred  in  you.  .  .  .  North  and  south
will  hang  together  if  they  have  you  to  hang  on."
"  It  is  clear,  wrote  Hamilton,  "  that  if  you  con-
tinue in  office  nothing  materially  mischievous  is
to  be  apprehended ;  if  you  quit,  much  is  to  be
dreaded.  ...  I  trust,  and  I  pray  God,  that  you
will  determine  to  make  a  further  sacrifice  of  your
tranquillity  and  happiness  to  the  public  good."
Washington  could  not  find  it  in  his  heart  to  resist
such  appeals,  and  allowed  himself  to  be  again  a
candidate.  He  was  chosen  unanimously  by  the
electors,  and  took  the  oath  of  office  again  on  4
March,  1793.  He  had  but  just  entered  on  this  sec-
ond term  of  the  presidency  when  the  news  reached
him  that  France  had  declared  war  against  England
and  Holland.  He  lost  no  time  in  announcing  his
purpose  to  maintain  a  strict  neutrality  toward  t  lie
belligerent  powers,  and  this  policy  was  unani-
mously sustained  by  his  cabinet.  His  famous
proclamation  of  neutrality  was  accordingly  issued
on  22  April,  and  soon  became  the  subject  of  violent
partisan  controversy  throughout  the  Union.  It
gave  occasion  to  the  masterly  essays  of  Hamilton
and  Madison,  under  the  signatures  of  "  Pacificus  "
and  "Helvidius,"  and  contributed  more  than  any-
thing else,  perhaps,  to  the  original  formation  of
the  Federal  and  Republican  parties.  The  wisdom
of  Washington  was  abundantly  justified  by  the
progress  of  events,  but  he  did  not  escape  the  as-
saults of  partisan  bitterness. Mr.  Jay,  still  chief


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


381


justice,  was  sent  to  England  as  minister  early  in
1794,  and  his  memorable  treaty  added  fuel  to  the
flame.  Meantime  a  tax  on  distilled  spirits  had
encountered  much  opposition  in  various  parts  of
the  country,  and  in  August,  1794,  was  forcibly  re-
sisted and  defied  by  a  large  body  of  armed  insur-
gents in  the  western  counties  of  Pennsylvania.
Washington  issued  a  proclamation  calling  out  the
militia  of  the  neighboring  states,  and  left  home  to
cross  the  mountains  and  lead  the  troops  in  person.
But  the  insurrection  happily  succumbed  at  his
approach,  and  his  presence  became  unnecessary.
The  arrogant  and  offensive  conduct  of  the  French
minister,  M.  Genet,  irreconcilable  dissensions  in
the  cabinet,  and  renewed  agitations  and  popular
discontents  growing  out  of  the  Jay  treaty,  gave
Washington  no  little  trouble  in  these  latter  years  of
his  administration,  and  he  looked  forward  with
eagerness  to  a  release  from  official  cares.  Having
made  up  his  mind  unchangeably  to  decline  another
election  as  president,  he  thought  it  fit  to  announce
that  decision  in  the  most  formal  manner.  He  had
consulted  Madison  at  the  close  of  his  first  term  in
regard  to  an  address  declining  a  second  election.
He  now  sought  the  advice  and  counsel  of  Alexan-
der Hamilton,  no  longer  a  member  of  the  cabinet,
and  the  farewell  address  was  prepared  and  pub-
lished nearly  six  months  before  his  official  term
had  expired.  That  immortal  paper  has  often  been
printed  with  the  date  of  17  Sept.,  1796,  and  special
interest  has  been  expressed  in  the  coincidence  of
the  date  of  the  address  with  the  date  of  the  adop-
tion of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  But,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  address  bears  date  19  Sept.,
1796,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  autograph  original
now  in  the  Lenox  library,  New  York.  Mr.  James
Lenox  purchased  that  precious  original  from  the
family  of  the  printer  Olaypoole,  by  whom-  it  was
published  in  Philadelphia,  and  to  whom  the  manu-
script, wholly  in  Washington's  handwriting,  with
all  its  interlineations,  corrections,  and  erasures,
was  given  by  Washington  himself.

On  the  following  4th  of  March,  Washington  was
present  at  the  inauguration  of  his  successor,  John
Adams,  and  soon  afterward  went  with  his  family
to  Mount  Vernon,  to  resume  his  agricultural  oc-
cupations. Serious  difficulties  with  France,  were
soon  developed,  and  war  became  imminent.  A
provisional  army  was  authorized  by  congress  to
meet  the  exigency,  and  all  eyes  were  again  turned
toward  Washington  as  its  leader.  President  Adams
wrote  to  him :  "  We  must  have  your  name,  if  you
will  permit  us  to  use
it.  1  here  will  be  more
efficacy  in  it  than  in
many  an  army."  Ham-
ilton urged  him  to
make  "  this  further,
this  very  great  sacri-
fice." And  thus,  on  3
July,  1798,  Washing-
ton, yielding  to  the
entreaty  of  friends
and  a  sense  of  duty  to
his  country,  was  once
more  commissioned  as
"  Lieutenant  -  General
and  Commander-in-
chief  of  all  the  armies
raised,  or  to  be  raised,
in  the  United  States."  The  organization  and  ar-
rangement of  this  new  army  now  engrossed  his  at-
tention. Deeply  impressed  with  the  great  responsi-
bility that  had  been  thrust  upon  him,  and  having
selected  Alexander  Hamilton  as  his  chief  of  staff,  to


the  serious  disappointment  of  his  old  friend.  Gen.
Knox,  he  entered  at  once  into  the  minutest  details
of  the  preparation  for  war,  with  all  the  energy  and
zeal  of  his  earlier  days.  Most  happily  this  war  with
our  late  gallant  ally  was  averted.  Washington,
however,  did  not  live  to  receive  the  assurance  of  a
result  that  he  so  earnestly  desired.  Riding  over  his
farms,  on  12  Dec,  to  give  directions  to  the  mana-
gers of  his  estate,  he  was  overtaken  by  showers  of
rain  and  sleet,  and  returned  home  wet  and  chilled.
The  next  day  he  suffered  from  a  hoarse,  sore  throat,
followed  by  an  ague  at  night.  His  old  physician
and  surgeon,  Dr.  Craik,  who  had  been  with  him  in
peace  and  in  war,  was  summoned  from  Alexandria
the  next  morning,  and  two  other  physicians  were
called  into  consultation  during  the  day.  At  four
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  he  requested  his  wife,  who
was  constantly  at  his  bedside,  to  bring  him  two
papers  from  his  study,  one  of  which  he  gave  back
to  her  as  his  will.  At  six  o'clock  he  said  to  the
three  physicians  around  him :  "  I  feel  myself  go-
ing; I  thank  you  for  your  attentions,  but  I  pray
you  to  take  no  more  trouble  about  me."  He  had
previously  said  to  Dr.  Craik :  "  I  die  hard,  but  I
am  not  afraid
to  go."  About
ten  o'clock
he  succeeded
with  difficul-
ty in  giving
some  direc-
tions about
his  funeral
to  Mr.  Lear,
his  secretary,
and  on  Mr.
Lear's  assur-
ing him  that
he  was  under-
stood, he  uttered  his  last  words :  "  It  is  well."  And
thus,  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock  on  Saturday
night,  14  Dec,  1799,  the  end  came,  and  his  spirit
returned  to  God  who  gave  it.  The  funeral  took
place  on  the  18th.  Such  troops  as  were  in  the
neighborhood  formed  the  escort  of  the  little  proces-
sion ;  the  general's  favorite  horse  was  led  behind  the
bier,  the  Freemasons  performed  their  ceremonies,
the  Rev.  Thomas  Davis  read  the  service  and  made
a  brief  address,  a  schooner  lying  in  the  Potomac
fired  minute-guns,  the  relatives  and  friends  within
reach,  including  Lord  Fairfax  and  the  corporation
of  Alexandria,  were  in  attendance,  and  the  body
was  deposited  in  the  vault  at  Mount  Vernon.  At
Mount  Vernon  it  has  remained  to  this  day.  Vir-
ginia would  never  consent  to  its  removal  to  the
stately  vault  prepared  for  it  beneath  the  capitol  at
Washington.  Congress  was  in  session  at  Philadel-
phia, and  the  startling  news  of  Washington's  death
only  reached  there  on  the  day  of  his  funeral.  The
next  morning  John  Marshall,  then  a  representative
from  Virginia,  afterward  for  thirty-four  years  chief
justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States,
announced  the  death  in  the  house  of  representa-
tives, concluding  a  short  but  admirable  tribute  to
his  illustrious  friend  with  resolutions  prepared  by
Richard  Henry  Lee,  which  contained  the  grand
words  that  have  ever  since  been  associated  with
Washington  :  "  First  in  war,  first  in  peace,  and  first
in  the  hearts  of  his  fellow-citizens."  Gen.  Lee  pro-
nounced a  eulogy,  by  order  of  both  houses  of  con-
gress, on  26  Dec,  in  which  he  changed  the  last  word
of  his  own  famous  phrase  to  "countrymen,"  and  it
is  so  given  in  the  eulogy  as  published  by  congress.
Meantime  congress  adopted  a  resolution  recom-
mending to  the  people  of  the  United  States  to  as-


382


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


semble  on  the  following  22d  of  February,  in  such
manner  as  should  be  convenient,  to  testify  publicly
by  eulogies,  orations,  and  discourses,  or  by  public
prayers,  their  grief  for  the  death  of  George  Wash-
ington. In  conformity  with  this  recommendation,
eulogies  or  sermons  were  delivered,  or  exercises  of
some  sort  held,  in  almost  every  city,  town,  village,
or  hamlet  throughout  the  land.  Such  was  the  first
observance  of  Washington's  birthday ; — thence-
forth to  be  a  national  holiday.  But  not  in  our
own  land  only  was  his  death  commemorated.  Na-
poleon Bonaparte,  then  first  consul,  announced  it
to  the  army  of  Prance,  and  ordered  all  the  stand-
ards and  flags  throughout  the  republic  to  be  bound
with  crape  for  ten  days,  during  which  a  funeral
oration  was  pronounced  in  presence  of  the  first
consul  and  all  the  civil  and  military  authorities,
in  what  is  now  the  Hotel  des  Invalides.  More  strik-
ing still  is  the  fact,  mentioned  by  Jared  Sparks,
that  the  British  fleet,  consisting  of  nearly  sixty
ships  of  the  line,  which  was  lying  at  Torbay,  Eng-
land, under  the  command  of  Lord  Bridport,  low-
ered their  flags  half-mast  on  hearing  the  intelli-
gence of  Washington's  death.

In  later  years  the  tributes  to  the  memory  of
Washington  have  been  such  as  no  other  man  of
modern  or  even  of  ancient  history  has  command-
ed. He  has  sometimes  been  compared,  after  the
manner  of  Plutarch,  with  Epaminondas,  or  Timo-
leon,  or  Alfred  the  Great  of  England.  But  an
eminent  living  English  historian  has  recently  and
justly  said  that  the  place  of  Washington  in  the  his-
tory of  mankind  "  is
well-nigh  without
a  fellow."  Indeed,
the  general  judg-
ment of  the  world
has  given  ready  as-
sent to  the  careful-
ly weighed,  twice  re-
peated declaration
of  Lord  Brougham :
"It  will  be  the  duty
of  the  historian  and
sage  in  all  ages  to
let  no  occasion  pass
of  commemorat-
ing this  illustrious
man ;  and,  until
time  shall  be  no
more,  will  a  test  of
the  progress  which
our  race  has  made
in  wisdom  and  vir-
tue be  derived  from
the  veneration  paid
to  the  immortal  name  of  Washington  ! "  Modest,
disinterested,  generous,  just,  of  clean  hands  and  a
pure  heart,  self-denying  and  self-sacrificing,  seek-
ing nothing  for  himself,  declining  all  remuneration
beyond  the  reimbursement  of  his  outlays,  scrupu-
lous to  a  farthing  in  keeping  his  accounts,  of  spot-
less integrity,  scorning  gifts,  charitable  to  the  needy,
forgiving  injuries  and  injustice,  fearless,  heroic,
with  a  prudence  ever  governing  his  impulses  and  a
wisdom  ever  guiding  his  valor,  true  to  his  friends,
true  to  his  whole  country,  true  to  himself,  fearing
God,  believing  in  Christ,  no  stranger  to  private  de-
votion or  public  worship,  or  to  the  holiest  offices  of
the  church  to  which  he  belonged,  but  ever  grate-
fully recognizing  a  divine  aid  and  direction  in  all
that  he  attempted  and  in  all  that  he  accomplished —
what  epithet,  what  attribute,  could  be  added  to  that
consummate  character  to  commend  it  as  an  example
above  all  other  characters  in  merel  v  human  history  ?


Washington's  most  important  original  papers
were  bequeathed  to  his  favorite  nephew,  Bush  rod
Washington,  and  were  committed  by  him  to  Chief-
Justice  John  Marshall,  by  whom  an  elaborate  life,
in  five  volumes,  was  published  in  1804.  Abridged
editions  of  this  great  work  have  been  published
more  recently.  "The  Writings  of  Washington,"
with  a  life,  were  published  by  Jared  Sparks  (12
vols.,  Boston,  1834-'7).  A  new  edition  of  Washing-
ton's complete  works  in  14  vols.,  edited  by  Worth-
ington  C.  Ford,  containing  many  letters  and  papers
now  published  for  the  first  time,  is  in  course  of
publication  (vol.  i.,  New  York,  November,  1888).
Biographies  have  also  been  published  by  Mason  L.
Weems,  David  Ramsay,  James  K.  Paulding,  Charles
W.  Upham,  Joel  T.  Headley,  Caroline  M.  Kirkland,
and  others.  Benson  J.  Lossing  made  an  interest-
ing and  important  contribution  to  the  illustration
of  the  same  theme  by  his  "  Mount  Vernon  and  its
Associations"  in  1859.  Meanwhile  the  genius  of
Washington  Irving  has  illuminated  the  whole  story
of  Washington's  life,  public  and  private,  and  thrown
around  it  the  charms  of  exquisite  style  and  lucid
narrative  (5  vols.,  New  York,  1855-'9).  An  abridg-
ment and  revision  of  Irving's  work,  by  John  Fiske
(New  York,  1888),  and  a  "  Life  of  George  Washing-
ton," by  Edward  E.  Hale  (1887),  have  recently  ap-
peared. A  sketch  was  prepared  by  Edward  Everett,
at  the  request  of  Lord  Macaulay,  for  the  eighth
edition  of  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  "  (1853—
1860),  which  was  afterward  published  in  a  separate
volume.  To  Edward  Everett,  too,  belongs  the  prin-
cipal credit  of  having  saved  Mount  Vernon  from
the  auctioneer's  hammer,  and  secured  its  preserva-
tion, under  the  auspices  of  the  Ladies'  Mount  Ver-
non association,  as  a  place  of  pilgrimage.  He  wrote
52  articles  for  the  New  York  "  Ledger,"  and  deliv-
ered his  lecture  on  Washington  many  times,  con-
tributing the  proceeds  to  the  Mount  Vernon  fund.

The  marble  statue  in  the  capitol  at  Richmond,
Va.  (for  bust  of  this,  see  page  379),  by  the  French
sculptor  Houdon,  from  life,  must  be  named  first
among  the  standard  likenesses  of  Washington.
Excellent  portraits  of  him  by  John  Trumbull,  by
both  the  Peales,  and  by  Gilbert  Stuart,  are  to  be
seen  in  many  public  galleries.  Stuart's  head  leaves
nothing  to  be  desired  in  the  way  of  dignity  and
grandeur.  Among  the  numerous  monuments  that
have  been  erected  to  his  memory  may  be  men-
tioned the  noble  column  in  Baltimore;  the  colossal
statue  in  the  Capitol  grounds  at  Washington,  by
Horatio  Greenough ;  the  splendid  group  in  Rich-
mond, surmounted  by  an  equestrian  statue,  by
Thomas  Crawford :  the  marble  statue  in  the  Mas-
sachusetts state-house,  by  Sir  Francis  Chantrey;
the  equestrian  statue  in  the  Boston  public  garden,
by  Thomas  Ball ;  the  equestrian  statue  in  Union
square.  New  York,  by  Henry  K.  Brown ;  and.  last-
ly, the  matchless  obelisk  at  Washington,  of  which
the  corner-stone  was  laid  in  1848,  upon  which  the
capstone  was  placed,  at  the  height  of  555  feet,  in
1884,  and  which  was  dedicated  by  congress  on  21
Feb.,  1885,  as  Washington's  birthday  that  year  fell
on  Sunday.  See  vignette,  and  also  illustrations  of
his  birthplace  by  Charles  C.  Perkins;  a  drawing  of
the  locality  by  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  the  church
at  Pohick  (page  376),  the  Newburg  headquarters
(page  378),  Mount  Vernon  (page  383),  Washington's
tomb,  a  portrait  of  him  in  youth  (page  374) ;  also  .
the  pictures  by  Trumbull  (page  377),  Wertmuller
(page  380),  and  Du  Simitiere  (page  381).  The  steel
engraving,  which  appears  as  a  frontispiece  to  this
volume,  is  from  Stuart's  original  in  the  Boston
athoim'iim.  The  vignette  of  Mrs.  Washington  is
from  the  portrait  by  the  same  artist. — His  wife,


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


383


lOt. fo^TLoOyP/^


Martha,  b.  in  New  Kent  county,  Va.,  in  May,  1732 ;
d.  at  Mount  Vernon,  Va.,  22  May,  1802,  was  the
daughter  of  Col.  John  Dandridge,  a  planter  in  New
Kent  county.  Martha  was  fairly  educated  by  pri-
vate tutors,  and  became  an  expert  performer  on
the  spinet.  She  was  introduced  to  the  vice-regal
court,  during  the  administration  of  Sir  William

Gooch,  at  fifteen
years  of  age,  and
in  June,  1749.
married  Daniel
Parke  Custis,  a
wealthy  planter,
with  whom  she  re-
moved to  his  resi-
dence, the  White
House,  on  Pamun-
key  river.  They
had  four  children,
two  of  whom  died
in  infancy,  and  in
1757  Mr.  Custis
also  died,  leaving
his  widow  one  of
the  wealthiest  wo-
men in  Virginia.
About  a  year  after
her  husband's  death  she  met  Col.  Washington,  who
was  visiting  at  the  house  of  Maj.  William  Cham-
be  rlayne,  where  she  too  was  a  guest.  In  May,  1758,
they  became  engaged,  but  the  marriage  was  delayed
by  Col.  Washington's  northern  campaign,  and  it
was  not  till  January,  1759,  that  it  was  solemnized,
at  St.  Peter's  church,  New  Kent  county,  the  Rev.
John  Mossum  performing  the  ceremony.  The  wed-
ding was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  that  had  ever
been  seen  in  a  church  in  Virginia.  The  bridegroom
wore  a  suit  of  blue  cloth,  the  coat  lined  with  red
silk,  and  ornamented  with  silver  trimmings ;  his
waistcoat  was  embroidered  white  satin,  his  knee-
buckles  were  of  gold,  and  his  hair  was  powdered.
The  bride  was  attired  in  a  white  satin  quilted
petticoat,  a  heavily  corded  white  silk  over-dress,
diamond  buckles,  and  pearl  ornaments.  The  gov-
ernor, many  members  of  the  legislature,  British
officers,  and  the  neighboring  gentry  were  present
in  full  court  dress.  Washington's  body-servant,
Bishop,  a  tall  negro,  to  whom  he  was  much  at-
tached and  who  had  accompanied  him  on  all  his
military  campaigns,  stood  in  the  porch,  clothed  in
the  scarlet  uniform  of  a  soldier  of  the  royal  army
in  the  time  of  George  II.  The  bride  and  her  three
attendants  drove  back  to  White  House  in  a  coach
drawn  by  six  horses  led  by  liveried  postilions,  Col.
Washington  and  an  escort  of  cavaliers  riding  by
its  side.  Mrs.  Washington's  life  at  Mount  Ver-
non for  the  subsequent  seventeen  years  partook
much  of  the  style  of  the  English  aristocracy.  She
was  a  thorough  housekeeper,  and  entertained  con-
stantly. Her  daughter,  Martha  Parke  Custis,  who
died  in  the  seventeenth  year  of  her  age,  was  known
as  the  "  dark  lady,"  on  account  of  her  brunette  com-
plexion, and  was  greatly  loved  by  the  neighboring
poor,  to  whom  she  frequently  ministered.  On  her
portrait,  painted  by  Charles  Willson  Peale,  is  in-
scribed "  A  Virginia  Beauty."  Mrs.  Washington
ardently  sympathized  with  her  husband  in  his
patriotic  measures.  To  a  kinswoman,  who  depre-
cated what,  she  called  "  his  folly,"  Mrs.  Washing-
ton wrote  in  1774:  "  Yes,  I  foresee  consequences —
dark  days,  domestic  happiness  suspended,  social
enjoyments  abandoned,  and  eternal  separations  on
earth  possible.  But  my  mind  is  made  up,  my
heart  is  in  the  cause.  George  is  right ;  he  is  al-
ways  right. God  has promised to protect the


righteous,  and  I  will  trust  him."  Patrick  Henry
and  Edmund  Pendleton  spent  a  day  and  night
at  Mount  Vernon  in  August,  1774,  on  their  way
to  congress.  Pendleton  afterward  wrote  to  a
friend :  "  Mrs.  Washington  talked  like  a  Spar-
tan to  her  son  on  his  going  to  battle.  '  I  hope
you  will  all  stand  firm,'  she  said ;  '  I  know  George
will.'"  After  her  husband  became  commander-
in-chief  she  was  burdened  with  many  cares.  He
visited  Mount  Vernon  only  twice  during  the  war.
She  joined  him  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1775,  oc-
cupying the  mansion,  an  illustration  of  which  is
shown  in  the  article  on  Longfellow,  Henry  W.
She  subsequently  accompanied  Gen.  Washington
to  New  York  and  Philadelphia,  and  whenever  it
was  possible  joined  him  in  camp.  During  the
winter  at  Valley  Forge  she  suffered  every  priva-
tion in  common  with  the  officers,  and  "  was  busy
from  morning  till  night  providing  comforts  for
the  sick  soldiers."  Although  previous  to  the  war
she  had  paid  much  attention  to  her  attire,  as
became  her  wealth  and  station,  while  it  con-
tinued she  dressed  only  in  garments  that  were
spun  and  woven  by  her  servants  at  Mount  Vernon.
At  a  ball  in  New  Jersey  that  was  given  in  her
honor  she  wore  one  of  these  simple  gowns  and  a
white  kerchief,  "  as  an  example  of  economy  to  the
women  of  the  Revolution."  Her  last  surviving
child,  John  Parke  Custis,  died  in  November,  1781,
leaving  four  children.  The  two  younger,  Eleanor
Parke  Custis  and  George  Washington  Parke  Cus-
tis, Gen.  Washington  at  once  adopted.  After  Mrs.
Washington  left  headquarters  at  Newburg  in  1782,
she  did  not  again  return  to  camp  life.  She  was
residing  quietly  at  Mount  Vernon  (see  illustration)
when  Washington  was  chosen  president  of  the  Unit-
ed States.  When  she  assumed  the  duties  of  mistress
of  the  executive  mansion  in  New  York  she  was  fifty-
seven  years  old,  but  still  retained  traces  of  beauty,
and  bore  herself  with  great  personal  dignity.  She
instituted  levees,  that  she  ever  afterward  continued,
on  Friday  evening  of  each  week  from  eight  to  nine
o'clock.  "  None  were  admitted  but  those  who  had
a  right  of  entrance  by  official  station  or  established
character,"  and  full  dress  was  required.  During
the  second  term  of  the  president  they  resided  in
Philadelphia,  where  their  public  receptions  were
conducted  as  those  in  New  York  had  been.  An
English  gentleman,  describing  her  at  her  own
table  in  1794,  says  :  "  Mrs.  Washington  struck  me
as  being  older  than  the  president.  She  was  ex-
tremely simple  in  dress,  and  wore  her  gray  hair
turned  up  under  a  very  plain  cap."  She  greatly
disliked  official  life,  and  rejoiced  when  her  hus-
band refused  a  third  term  in  1796. She  resided  at


Mount  Vernon  during  the  remainder  of  her  life,
occupied  with  her  domestic  duties,  of  which  she
was  fond,  and  in  entertaining  the  numerous  guests
that  visited  her  husband.  She  survived  him  two
and  a  half  years. Before  her  death  she  destroyed


384


WASHINGTON


WASHINGTON


her  entire  correspondence  with  Gen.  Washington.
"  Thus,"  says  her  grandson  and  biographer,  George
Washington  Parke  Custis,  "  proving  her  love  for
him,  for  she  would  not  permit  that  the  confidence
they  had  shared  together  should  be  made  public."
See  "  Memoirs  of  the  Mother  and  Wife  of  Wash-
ington," by  Margaret  C.  Conkling  (Auburn,  N.  Y.,
1851),  and  "  Mary  and  Martha,"  by  Benson  J.  Loss-
ing  (New  York,  1887). — George  Washington's  kins-
man, William,  soldier,  b.  in  Stafford  county,  Va.,
28  Feb.,  1752 ;  d.  near  Charleston,  S.  C,  6  March,
1810,  was  the  son  of  Bailey  Washington.  But  lit-
tle is  known  of  his  life  before  the  opening  of  the

Revolution.  He
waseducatedfor
the  church,  but,
espousing  the
patriot  cause,
received  a  com-
mission early  in
the  war  as  cap-
tain of  infantry
in  the  3d  regi-
ment of  the  Vir-
ginia line,  and
in  this  post  ac-
quitted himself
with  great  cred-
it in  the  opera-
tions about  New
York,  being  se-
verely wounded
in  the  battle  of
Long  Island.  At
the  engagement
at Trenton, 26


/ffr#Z./l*


Dec,  177G,  he  led  a  charge  upon  one  of  the  enemy's
batteries,  capturing  the  guns.  On  this  occasion  he
was  again  wounded.  In  1778  he  was  transferred  to
the  dragoons  and  assigned  to  the  regiment  of  Lieut.-
Col.  George  Baylor.  In  1779  he  joined  the  army  of
Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln  in  the  south.  After  being
promoted  to  the  command  of  the  regiment,  with  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  on  23  March,  1780,  he  en-
countered and  defeated  Lieut.-Col.  Banastre  Tarle-
ton  at  Rantowles.  Col.  White  and  Col.  Washing-
ton were  surprised  by  Tarleton  at  Monk's  Corner
and  Lenude's  Ferry  a  few  weeks  afterward.  In
December,  1780,  Washington,  then  attached  to  the
command  of  Gen.  Daniel  Morgan,  by  means  of  the
stratagem  of  a  painted  log  or  "  Quaker  gun,"  re-
duced the  post  at  Rudgely's,  receiving  the  sur-
render of  Col.  Rudgely  and  one  hundred  men  with-
out resistance.  In  the  battle  of  the  Cowpens,  Wash-
ington made  a  successful  charge  upon  the  enemy
at  a  critical  moment,  and  congress  voted  medals
to  him  and  to  Gen.  Morgan  and  Lieut.-Col.  How-
ard. In  this  battle  he  had  a  personal  encounter
with  Col.  Tarleton,  in  which  both  were  wounded.
The  wound  that  Tarleton  received  from  Washing-
ton was  the  subject  of  the  sallies  of  wit  of  several
American  ladies.  A  Mrs.  Ashe,  daughter  of  Col.
Joseph  Montford,  of  North  Carolina,  heard  Tarle-
ton say,  with  a  sarcastic  sneer :  "  I  would  be  happy
to  see  this  Col.  Washington,"  whereupon  she  in-
stantly replied :  "  If  you  had  looked  behind  you,
Col.  Tarleton,  at  the  battle  of  Cowpens,  you  would
have  had  that  pleasure."  Almost  immediately  after
this  battle  Morgan  effected  a  junction  with  Gen.
Greene,  who,  requiring  a  light  corps  to  act  as  a  cov-
ering party  during  his  retreat  and  to  harass  the
enemy,  selected  for  this  purpose  the  troops  of  Lieut.-
Cols.  Howard,  Washington,  and  Lee.  Washington
also  took  an  active  part  in  the  operations  about
Guilford  Court-House,  N.  C,  and  in  the  battle  of


Hobkirk's  Hill,  on  25  April,  he  charged  the  enemy
with  great  vigor,  secured  many  prisoners,  and  saved
the  artillery  from  capture.  At  the  close  of  the
engagement  he  succeeded  in  drawing  Maj.  Coffin,
the  commander  of  the  British  cavalry,  into  am-
bush and  dispersing  or  capturing  his  squadron.
At  Eutaw  Springs,  S.  C,  8  Sept.,  1781,  after  the
most  heroic  efforts,  he  was  unhorsed,  and  while
attempting  to  disengage  himself  received  a  bayo-
net wound  and  was  taken  prisoner.  In  1782  Col.
Washington  married  Miss  Elliot,  of  Charleston,
S.  C,  to  a  place  near  which  city  he  soon  afterward
removed.  He  was  subsequently  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  of  that  state,  and  solicited  to
become  a  candidate  for  governor,  but  declined  "  be-
cause he  could  not  make  a  speech."  In  1798,  when
the  United  States  was  threatened  with  war  by
France,  Gen.  Washington  recommended  the  ap-
pointment of  his  kinsman  as  brigadier-general,
which  was  done  19  July,  1798,  and  in  a  letter  to  the
secretary  of  war  suggested  that  he  be  given  the
direction  of  affairs  in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.
His  wife,  a  son,  and  a  daughter  survived  him.
On  the  occasion  of  his  death  the  American  Revolu-
tion society  of  South  Carolina  adopted  resolutions,
in  which  he  was  spoken  of  as :  "  Modest  without
timidity,  generous  without  extravagance,  brave
without  rashness,  and  disinterested  without  aus-
terity ;  which  imparted  firmness  to  his  conduct  and
mildness  to  his  manners;  solidity  to  his  judgment
and  boldness  to  his  achievements ;  which  armed  him
with  an  equanimity  unalterable  by  the  frowns  of
adversity  or  the  smiles  of  fortune,  and  steadiness
of  soul  not  to  be  subdued  by  the  disasters  of  defeat
or  elated  by  the  triumphs  of  victory." — George
Washington's  nephew,  Bushrod,  jurist,  b.  in  West-
moreland county,  Va.,  5  June,  1762 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  26  Nov.,  1829,  was  the  son  of  John  Augus-
tine, a  younger  brother  of  the  general.  He  was
graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1778,  studied
law  with  James  Wilson,  of  Philadelphia,  and  began
practice  in  his  native  county.  His  professional  du-
ties were  interrupted  by  his  entrance  into  the  pa-
triot army,  and  he  served  as  a  private  in  the  Revo-
lution. He  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  house  of
delegates  in  1787,  and  the  next  year  of  that  to  ratify
the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  He  sub-
sequently removed  to  Alexandria,  and  thence  to
Richmond,  Va.  He  was  appointed  an  associate
justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court  in  1798,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death.  Judge  Washing-
ton was  the  first  president  of  the  Colonization
society,  and  a  learned  jurist.  He  was  the  favor-
ite nephew  of  Gen.  Washington.  At  the  death
of  Mrs.  Washington  he  inherited  the  mansion
and  400  acres  of  the  Mount  Vernon  estate.  He
died  without  issue.  Judge  Washington's  publica-
tions include  "  Reports  of  Cases  argued  and  deter-
mined in  the  Court  of  Appeals  of  Virginia  "  (2  vols.,
Richmond,  Va.,  1798-'9),  and  "Reports  of  Cases
determined  in  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United
States,  for  the  3d  Circuit,  from  1803  till  1827,"
edited  by  Richard  Peters  (4  vols.,  1826-'9).  Of
these  Horace  Binney  says  in  his  "  Life  of  Bush-
rod  Washington  "  (printed  privately,  Philadelphia,
1858) :  "  I  have  never  thought  that  his  reports  of
his  own  decisions  did  him  entire  justice,  while  they
in  no  inadequate  manner  at  all  fully  represent  his
judicial  powers,  nor  the  ready  command  he  held  of
his  learning  in  the  law."  See  also  a  sketch  of
Judge  Washington  in  Mr.  Justice  Story's  "Mis-
cellaneous Writings"  (Philadelphia,  1852).  — A
grand-nephew  of  George,  George  Corbin,  con-
gressman, b.  in  Westmoreland  countv,  Va.,  20  Aug.,
1789  ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  17  July,  1854,  was


WASHINGTON


WATERBURY


385


the  son  of  William  Augustine  Washington,  the
son  of  George  Washington's  brother,  John  Augus-
tine. His  mother,  Jane,  was  the  daughter  of  Au-
gustine, the  elder  half-brother  of  the  general.
George  Corbin  was  educated  at  Harvard  and
studied  law,  but  devoted  himself  to  agricultural
pursuits,  which  he  followed  at  his  plantation  in
Maryland,  but  resided  for  the  most  part  on  Dum-
barton heights,  Georgetown,  D.  C.  He  represent-
ed the  Rockville  district,  Md.,  in  congress  in
1827-'33,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Whig,  and  was
again  a  member  of  that  body  in  1835-'7.  He  was
subsequently  president  of  the  Chesapeake  and
Ohio  canal  company,  and  commissioner  of  Indian
affairs.  He  was  widely  spoken  of  as  a  candidate
for  the  vice-presidency  when  Gen.  Winfield  Scott
was  nominated  for  the  presidency.  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  was  the  oldest  and  nearest  surviv-
ing male  relative  of  his  grand-uncle,  George  Wash-
ington.— George  Corbin's  son,  Lewis  William,  b.
in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  about  1825 ;  d.  at  Harper's
Ferry,  W.  Va.,  1  Oct.,  1871,  was  carefully  educated,
became  a  planter,  and  settled  in  Jefferson  county,
Va.  He  was  conspicuously  connected  with  the  in-
cidents of  the  John  Brown  raid  on  Harper's  Ferry
in  1859,  serving  at  that  time  as  aide  on  the  staff  of
Gov.  Henry  A.  Wise.  Brown  captured  and  held
him  as  one  of  his  hostages.  Mr.  Washington  took
no  active  part  in  the  civil  war,  passing  most  of
that  time  in  Europe,  but  his  estate  was  confiscated,
although  the  government  subsequently  released  it.
He  possessed  a  valuable  collection  of  Gen.  Wash-
ington's relics,  including  the  sword  that  was  sent
him  by  Frederick  the  Great,  on  which  was  in-
scribed "  From  the  oldest  general  in  the  world
to  the  greatest." — Lewis  William's  son,  William
d'Hertburne,  engineer,  b.  in  Hanover  county,  Va.,
29  June,  1863,  was  educated  at  Charlestown,  W.
Va.,  and  at  Maryland  college,  became  a  civil  engi-
neer, and  in  1886  was  appointed  consul  at  London,
England. — John  Augustine,  soldier,  great-great-
grandson  of  Gen.  Washington's  brother,  John  Au-
gustine, b.  in  Blakely,  Jefferson  co.,  Va.,  3  May,
1821 ;  d.  near  Rich  Mountain,  Va.,  13  Sept.,  1861,
was  the  son  of  John  A.  Washington,  and  on  his
mother's  side  the  grandson  of  Gen.  Richard  Henry
Lee.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia in  1840.  He  served  as  aide-de-camp,  with
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
Robert  E.  Lee,  and  was  killed  with  a  reconnoitring

Sarty  near  Rich  Mountain,  Va.  He  inherited  the
lount  Vernon  property,  but,  being  unable  to  keep
it  in  proper  preservation,  he  sold  it  to  the  associa-
tion of  ladies  that  now  has  possession  of  it.

WASHINGTON,  John  Marshall,  soldier,  b.  in
Virginia  in  October,  1797 ;  d.  at  sea,  24  Dec,  1853.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1814,  and  promoted  3d  lieutenant  of  artillery,  17
July,  1817,  2d  lieutenant,  20  March,  1818,  and  1st
lieutenant,  23  May,  1820.  On  the  reorganization
of  the  army  in  1821  he  was  transferred  to  the  4th
regiment  of  artillery,  and  during  1824-'5  he  served
as  instructor  of  mathematics  in  the  artillery-school
of  practice  at  Fort  Monroe.  On  23  May,  1830,  he
received  the  brevet  of  captain  for  faithful  service
for  ten  years  in  one  grade,  and  on  30  May,  1832,
he  was  promoted  to  the  full  rank.  In  1833-'4  and
in  1836  he  was  engaged  in  operations  in  the  Creek
nation,  in  1836-8  and  1839  in  the  Florida  war
against  the  Seminole  Indians,  and  on  the  northern
frontier  during  the  Canada  troubles  of  1839-'40.
In  the  summer  of  1846  Capt.  Washington,  then  in
command  of  a  light  battery  of  eight  guns,  joined
Gen.  John  E.  Wool's  division,  and,  after  a  most  ardu-
ous march  through  a  barren  country,  took  part
vol.  vi. — 25


with  it  in  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista.  On  the  first  day
of  the  battle  he  was  placed  by  Gen.  Wool  to  guard
the  pass  of  La  Angostura,  near  the  right  of  the
line,  the  loss  of  which  would  have  brought  inevita-
ble defeat,  and  he  held  it  against  the  most  vigorous
attacks  of  overwhelming  numbers.  On  the  second
day,  when  three  regiments  of  Illinois  and  Ken-
tucky troops  were  overpowered  by  a  greatly  supe-
rior force,  he  repelled  the  enemy,  and  by  judicious
management  covered  the  retreat  of  these  confused
masses,  thereby  saving  the  lives  of  hundreds  who
would  inevitably  have  been  cut  to  pieces.  Holding
as  he  did  the  key-point  of  the  American  position
during  the  entire  action,  his  battery  was  the  con-
stant object  of  attack  from  the  enemy,  and  each
of  these  attacks  was  repelled  with  promptness  and
gallantry.  On  16  Feb.,  just  six  days  before  the
battle,  Capt.  Washington  had  been  promoted  major
of  the  3d  regiment  of  artillery,  and  he  was  subse-
quently brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  "  gallant
and  meritorious  conduct  in  the  battle  of  Buena
Vista."  He  was  acting  governor  of  Saltillo,  Mexi-
co, from  24  June  till  14  Dec,  1847,  chief  of  artil-
lery of  Gen.  Wool's  division  from  12  March  till  9
Dec,  1847,  and  of  the  Army  of  Occupation  from  9
Dec,  1847,  till  30  May,  1848,  and  in  command  of
an  expedition  to  Santa  Fe,  N.  M.,  in  1848.  From
October,  1848,  till  October,  1849,  Col.  Washington
was  in  command  of  the  9th  military  department  and
civil  and  military  governor  of  New  Mexico.  He
was  with  his  regiment,  the  3d  artillery,  on  board
the  steamer  "  San  Francisco  "  when  she  was
wrecked  off  the  Capes  of  the  Delaware  in  Decem-
ber, 1853.  With  numerous  other  officers  and  180
soldiers  he  was  drowned.

WASSON,  David  Atwood,  author,  b.  in  West
Brooksville,  Me.,  14  May,  1823 ;  d.  in  West  Med-
ford,  Mass.,  21  Jan.,  1887.  He  entered  Bowdoin  in
1845,  but  remained  only  one  year,  owing  to  feeble
health.  He  then  went  to  sea  and  afterward  studied
law,  but  in  1849  entered  Bangor  theological  semi-
nary. In  1851  he  settled  in  Groveland,  Mass.,  as
a  pastor ;  but  his  liberal  opinions  led  to  a  rupture
in  the  society.  An  independent  church  was  then
established,  to  which  Mr.  Wasson  ministered  for
several  years,  but  retired  in  1857.  owing  to  impaired
health.  In  1865-'6  he  was  minister  of  the  society
that  had  been  formed  by  Theodore  Parker.  Sub-
sequently he  served  in  the  custom-house  of  Boston,
resided  in  Germany,  and  then  retired  to  West  Med-
ford,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  literary  work.
He  was  a  contributor  to  various  periodicals.  His
poems  include  "  Bugle  Notes,"  "  Seen  and  Unseen,"
and  "  Ideals." — His  son,  George  Savary,  artist,  b.
in  Groveland,  Mass.,  27  Aug.,  1855,  was  educated  in
Boston  and  in  Stuttgart.  His  works  are  "  Great
Misery  Island  "  (1880) ;  "  The  Constitution  and  the
Guerriere"  (1881);  "A  Wreck  at  Isle  au  Haut"
(1885);  "Moore's  Head,  Isle  au  Haut"  (1886);
"  Going  to  Pieces "  (1887) ;  and  "  Running  for  a
Harbor  "  (1888).

WATERBURY,  David,  soldier,  b.  in  Stamford,
Conn.,  12  Feb.,  1722 :  d.  there,  29  June,  1801.  He
took  part  in  the  French  and  Indian  war,  served
under  Sir  William  Johnson  at  the  battle  of  Lake
George  in  1755,  and  was  present  at  Gen.  James
Abercrombie's  attack  on  Ticonderoga  in  1758.  He
was  also  with  Gen.  Richard  Montgomery  in  his  cam-
paign against  Quebec  in  1775  as  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  9th  Connecticut  regiment,  and  at  the  siege
of  St.  John's  and  the  surrender  of  Montreal.  On  3
June,  1776,  he  was  appointed  by  the  general  assem-
bly of  Connecticut  a  brigadier  for  the  northern  de-
partment, and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  post
at  Skeensborough  (now  Whitehall,  N.  Y.),  where  a


386


WATERBURY


WATERMAN


fleet  was  building  for  Lake  Champlain.  He  re-
mained here  during  the  summer  of  1776,  actively
engaged  in  pushing  the  flotilla  to  completion.  At
the  battle  of  Valcour  Bay,  11  Oct.,  1776,  between
the  Americans  and  the  British,  he  was  second  in
command  to  Benedict  Arnold,  and  was  captured
with  his  vessel,  the  "  Washington."  The  state-
ment of  Gen.  James  Wilkinson,  who  was  not  pres-
ent during  the  action,  that  Waterbury  struck  his
colors  without  firing  a  shot,  is  contradicted  by  Ar-
nold, who,  in  his  report  of  the  engagement  to  Gen.
Horatio  Gates,  says  that  Waterbury  fought  with
distinguished  gallantry,  his  vessel  being  hulled
several  times.  Gen.  Carleton  was  greatly  elated
over  the  capture  of  Waterbury  and  made  haste  to
report  it  to  Lord  Germaine.  He  was  soon  ex-
changed, and  in  the  summer  of  1781  commanded  a
brigade  under  Washington,  rendering  more  or  less
active  service  during  the  remainder  of  the  war.
After  the  Revolution  he  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in
cultivating  a  farm  in  his  native  town  and  in  rep-
resenting his  fellow-townsmen  in  the  general  as-
sembly during  the  years  1783,  1794,  and  1795.  His
uncompromising  patriotism  rendered  him  at  times
harsh  and  severe  toward  those  who  did  not  support
the  cause  of  the  colonies.  The  historian  of  Stam-
ford writes  that  "he  seems  to  have  shown  them
no  mercy;  one  of  the  reasons  given  by  citizens
going  over  to  the  enemy  being  the  excessive  rigor
of  Col.  Waterbury."  See  Elijah  B.  Huntington's
"  History  of  Stamford "  and  the  "  Journal "  of
Lieut.  James  M.  Hadden  (Albany,  1884).

WATERBURY,  Jared  Bell,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  11  Aug.,  1799 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  31  Dec,  1876.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1822,  studied  two  years  in  Princeton  theological
seminary,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1825.  In
that  year  he  was  an  agent  for  the  American  Bible
society,  and  in  1826-'9  he  was  pastor  of  the  Con-
gregational church  in  Hatfield,  Mass.  He  was  pas-
tor of  Presbyterian  churches  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
from  1829  till  1832,  and  in  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  in  1833,
of  the  Bowdoin  street  Congregational  church  in
Boston,  Mass.,  from  1846  till  1857,  and  of  the  Cen-
tral church  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1859.  Subse-
quently he  served  as  city  missionary  there  until  his
death.  Union  gave  him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  in
1841.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Advice  to  a  Young
Christian  "  (New  York,  1827) ;  "  The  Brighter  Age,"
a  poem  (Boston,  1830J;  "  Child  of  the  Covenant "
(1853);  "Voyage  of  Life"  (1853);  "The  Soldier
from  Home"  (New  York,  1862):  "The  Soldier  on
Guard"  (1863);  "Sketches  of  Eloquent  Preach-
ers" (1864);  "Southern  Planters  and  Preedmen  "
(1865) ;  and  a  life  of  Rev.  John  Scudder  (1870).

WATERHOUSE,  Benjamin,  physician,  b.  in
Newport,  R.  I.,  4  March,  1754;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  2  Oct.,  1846.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  began
the  study  of  medicine  with  Dr.  John  Halliburton  in
Newport,  and  he  subsequently  continued  it  under
Dr.  John  Fothergill  in  London,  in  Edinburgh,  and
at  Leyden,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1780.  He
began  to  practise  in  Newport,  and  in  1783  aided  in
establishing  the  medical  school  at  Harvard,  where
he  was  professor  of  medicine  from  1783  till  1812.
He  was  also  professor  of  natural  history  at  Brown
from  1784  till  1791,  and  delivered  in  the  state-
house  of  Providence  the  first  course  of  lectures  on
that  science  in  this  country.  He  obtained  from
Dr.  John  C.  Lettsom,  of  Leyden,  a  valuable  col-
lection of  minerals,  introduced  their  study  into
Harvard,  and  procured  the  establishment  of  a  bo-
tanic garden  there.  In  1812  he  retired  from  his  pro-
fession and  became  medical  supervisor  of  military
posts  in  New  England,  holding  this  office  until


1825.  In  1799  he  subjected  his  family  to  the  ex-
periment of  vaccination,  which  he  vindicated
against  the  ridicule  of  the  profession  and  the  pub-
lic. Dr.  Waterhouse  supported  the  measures  of
Thomas  Jefferson  in  his  political  writings.  His
works  include  "  Lectures  on  the  Theory  and  Prac-
tice of  Medicine"  (Cambridge,  1780);  "On  the
Principles  of  Vitality"  (Boston,  1790);  "Rise,
Progress,  and  Present  State  of  Medicine  "  (1792) ;
"  Prospect  of  exterminating  the  Small  -  Pox  "
(1800) ;  "  Heads  of  a  Course  of  Lectures  on  Natu-
ral History  "  (1810) ;  "  The  Botanist "  (1811) ;  "  The
Journal  of  a  Young  Man  of  Massachusetts,"  a
novel  (1816);  and  an  essay  on  the  "Junius"  let-
ters, in  which  he  supports  the  claim  of  Lord  Chat-
ham to  their  authorship  (Boston,  1831).

WATERMAN,  Elijah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boz-
rah,  New  London  co.,  Conn.,  28  Nov..  1769  ;  d.  in
Springfield,  Mass.,  11  Oct.,  1825.  His  father  was
a  magistrate  and  an  active  patriot  during  the  Revo-
lutionary war.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1791, taught  in  Hartford  in  1791-2,  studied  theol-
ogy under  Timothy  Dwight  in  Greenfield  Hill,  and
under  Jonathan  Edwards,  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1793,  and  in  1794  was  installed  pastor  of  a  Con-
gregational church  in  Windham,  Conn.,  where  he
remained  until  1804.  After  supplying  the  pulpit
in  New  Milford,  Conn.,  he  became  pastor  of  the
church  in  Bridgeport,  of  which  he  held  charge  until
his  death.  He  contributed  prose  and  verse  to  peri-
odicals, and  his  other  publications  include  "An
Oration  before  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati"
(Hartford,  1794) ;  "  A  Century  Sermon  at  Wind-
ham "  (Windham,  1800) ;  and  "  Life  and  Writings
of  John  Calvin  "  (Hartford.  1813).

WATERMAN,  Marcus,  artist,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  1  Sept.,  1834.  He  was  graduated"  at
Brown  in  1855,  and  during  1857-70  worked  in
New  York,  where  he  was  elected  an  associate  of
the  National  academy  in  1861.  In  1874  he  opened
a  studio  in  Boston,  where  an  exhibition  of  his
works  was  held  in  1878,  previous  to  his  departure
for  Europe.  He  visited  Algeria  in  1879  and  1883,
and  Spain  in  1882,  and  went  abroad  again  in  1884.
His  landscapes  include  "Gulliver  in  Lilliput."
which  was  at  the  Centennial  exhibition,  Phila-
delphia, in  1876 ;  "  The  Roc's  Egg  "  (1886) ;  "  The
Journey  to  the  City  of  Brass  "  (1888) ;  and  numer-
ous American  forest  scenes  and  Arabian  subjects.

WATERMAN,  Robert  Whitney,  governor  of
California,  b.  in  Fairfield,  Herkimer  co.,  N.  Y.,
15  Dec,  1826.  His  father  was  a  merchant,  and
died  while  the  son  was  quite  young.  Two  years
afterward  Robert  removed  to  Svcamore,  111.,  where
three  elder  brothers  had  preceded  him.  Until  his
twentieth  year  he  was  a  clerk  in  a  country  store,
and  in  1846  he  engaged  in  business  for  himself  in
Belvidere,  111.  In  1849  he  was  postmaster  at  Ge-
noa, 111.  In  1850  he  went  to  California  and  en-
gaged in  mining  on  Feather  river,  but  two  years
later  he  returned  to  Wilmington,  111.,  where  in
1853  he  published  the  Wilmington  "  Independ-
ent," at  the  same  time  carrying  on  other  business
enterprises.  In  1854  he  was  a  delegate  to  the
convention  at  Bloomington.  111.,  that  gave  a  name
to  the  Republican  party,  and  he  was  an  associate
of  Abraham  Lincoln,  Lyman  Trumbull,  Richard
Yates,  David  Davis,  and  Owen  Lovejoy.  In  1856
he  took  an  active  part  in  the  Fremont  cam-
paign, and  in  1858  he  was  engaged  in  the  senato-
rial contest  between  Lincoln  and  Douglas.  In
1873  he  returned  to  California,  and  he  established
his  home  at  San  Bernardino  in  that  state  the  fol-
lowing year.  He  was  successful  in  discovering
and  developing  silver-mines  in  what has  since


WATERMAN


WATERSTON


387


come  to  be  known  as  the  Calico  mining  district  in
San  Bernardino  county.  In  1886  he  was  elected
lieutenant-governor  as  a  Republican.  Upon  the
death  of  Gov.  Washington  Bartlett,  12  Sept.,  1887,
Mr.  Waterman  was  called  to  the  duties  of  chief
executive.  During  recent  years  Gov.  Waterman
has  engaged  in  numerous  business  enterprises  in
various  parts  of  California.  He  is  the  owner  of
the  famous  Stonewall  gold-mine  in  San  Diego
county,  and  has  extensive  ranch  properties  in
southern  California.  He  is  president  of  the  San
Diego,  Cuyamaca  and  Eastern  railway,  and  is  con-
nected with  many  other  public  enterprises.

WATERMAN,  Sigismund,  physician,  b.  in
Bruck,  Bavaria,  22  Feb.,  1819.  He  was  educated
in  Erlangen,  Bavaria,  and  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine at  Yale  in  1848.  His  professional  life  has
been  passed  chiefly  in  New  York,  where  he  has  en-
gaged in  general  practice.  In  1857  he  was  ap-
pointed police  surgeon,  which  place  he  filled  for
nearly  thirty  years,  and  during  the  civil  war  he
was  made  one  of  the  draft  surgeons.  Dr.  Water-
man became  consulting  physician  in  1875  to  the
Home  for  aged  and  infirm  Hebrews,  .and  is  now
medical  director  of  that  institution.  He  has  de-
voted special  attention  to  the  use  of  the  spectroscope
in  the  practice  of  medicine,  and  has  been  success-
ful in  its  application.  During  1868  he  lectured
on  that  subject  before  the  medical  societies  of  New
York,  and  he  has  since  spoken  elsewhere  on  the
same  topic.  He  is  a  member  of  various  medical
societies  and  has  contributed  to  the  literature  of
his  profession.  Among  his  papers  are  "  Practical
Remarks  on  Scarlatina  "  (1859) ;  "  Therapeutic  Em-
ployment of  Oxide  of  Zinc"  (1861);  "Spectral
Analysis  as  an  Aid  in  the  Diagnosis  of  Disease  "
(1869) ;  "  The  Blood-Crystals  and  their  Physiologi-
cal Importance  "  (1872) ;  "  Spectral  Analysis  of
Blood-Stains "  (1873) ;  "  The  Importance  of  the
Spectroscope  in  Forensic  Cases  "  (1874) ;  and  "  Re-
vivification "  (1884).

WATERMAN,  Thomas  Glasby,  lawyer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  23  Jan.,  1788  ;  d.  in  Binghamton,
N.  Y.,  7  Jan.,  1862.  At  an  early  age  he  removed
with  his  parents  to  Salisbury,  Conn.,  where  his
father,  David,  established  extensive  iron-works.
The  son  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1806  in  the
class  with  James  Fenimore  Cooper,  studied  in  the
Litchfield  law-school,  and  afterward  with  Samuel
Sherwood  in  Delhi,  N.  Y.,  and  after  admission  to
the  bar  in  1809  remained  with  the  latter  until
1812,  when  he  went  to  Owego.  N.  Y.,  for  a  few
months,  but  settled  finally  in  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,
where  he  practised  until  about  1830.  He  served  in
the  lower  house  of  the  legislature  in  1826,  and  from
1827  till  1831  in  the  state  senate,  where  he  was  one
of  a  committee  that  made  a  thorough  revision  of
the  statutes  of  the  state.  By  appointment  of  the
governor  he  discharged  the  duties  of  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  for  the  state.  He  prepared
and  published  "  The  Justice's  Manual,  or  a  Sum-
mary of  the  Powers  and  Duties  of  Justices  of  the
Peace  in  New  York  State"  (Albany,  1828). — His
son,  Thomas  Whitney,  lawyer,  b.  in  Binghamton,
N.  Y.,  28  June,  1821,  entered  Yale  in  1838,  but  was
not  graduated.  He  travelled  in  Europe  in  1842-4,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  New
York  in  1848.  Until  1870  he  practised  in  New
York  city,  and  he  then  removed  to  Binghamton.
He  has  edited  many  law-books,  including  American
editions  of  J.  H.  Dart's  "  Vendors  and  Purchasers
of  Real  Estate,"  with  notes  (New  York,  1851) ;  J.
F.  Archbold's  "  New  System  of  Criminal  Proced-
ure "  (3  vols.,  New  York,  1852) ;  Robert  Henley
Eden's  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Injunctions  "  (2


vols.,  New  York,  1852) ;  vols.  viii.  and  ix.  of  Alonzo
C.  Paige's  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the  Court  of  Chan-
cery of  the  State  of  New  York "  (1852) ;  Murray
Hoffman's  "  Chancerv  Reports "  (1853) ;  George
Caines's  "New  York  Reports"  (3d  ed.,  3  vols.,
1854) ;  vol.  ii.  of  Elijah  Paine's  "  Reports  of  Cases
argued  and  determined  in  the  Circuit  Court  of  the
United  States  for  the  Second  Circuit,  1816-26"
(1856);  the  4th  American  edition  of  William  Pa-
ley's  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Principal  and  Agent
Chiefly  in  Reference  to  Mercantile  Translations  "
(1856) ;  and  vols  xviii.,  xix.,  and  xx.  of  John  L.
Wendell's  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the  Supreme  Court
of  Judicature  and  in  the  Court  for  Trial  of  Im-
peachments and  the  Correction  of  Errors  of  the
State  of  New  York,  1828-'41 "  (1857).  He  is  the
author  of  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Civil  Jurisdiction  of
Justices  of  the  Peace,  to  which  are  added  Outlines
of  the  Powers  and  Duties  of  Country  and  Town
Officers  in  the  State  of  New  York  "  (New  York,
1849) ;  the  3d  edition  of  the  "  American  Chancery
Digest,"  with  notes  and  a  copious  index  (3  vols.,
1851) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Civil  and  Criminal  Juris-
diction of  Justices  of  the  Peace  for  the  States  of
Wisconsin  and  Iowa :  containing  Practical  Forms  "
(1853) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Principles  of  Law  and
Equity  which  govern  Courts  in  the  granting  of
New  Trials  in  Cases  Civil  and  Criminal "  (2  vols.,
1855) ;  "  Digest  of  the  Reported  Decisions  of  the
Superior  Court  and  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Er-
rors of  the  State  of  Connecticut  from  the  Organi-
zation of  said  Courts  to  the  Present  Time  "  (1858) ;
and  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Set-Off,  Recoup-
ment, and  Counter-Claim  "  (1869).

WATERS,  Henry  Fitz-Gilbert,  genealogist,
b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  29  March,  1833.  After  gradu-
ation at  Harvard  in  1855  he  engaged  in  teaching,
and  was  a  member  of  the  school  committee  of  Sa-
lem in  1881-2,  and  its  secretary  in  1882-'3.  He
received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Har-
vard in  1885  for  tracing  the  family  of  John  Harvard,
when  other  genealogists  had  failed.  He  has  spent
several  years  in  England  pursuing  genealogical  in-
quiries, on  which  he  is  still  engaged.

WATERS,  Nicholas  Baker,  physician,  b.  in
Maryland  in  1764;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1796.
He  received  a  classical  education,  was  graduated
in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1786,  and  practised  in  Philadelphia  until  his  death.
In  1790  he  married  Hester,  daughter  of  David
Rittenhouse,  the  astronomer.  He  published  an
abridged  edition  of  "A  System  of  Surgery,"  by
Benjamin  Bell,  of  Edinburgh,  to  which  notes  were
added  by  Dr.  John  Jones  (Philadelphia,  1791).

WATERS,  Robert,  educator,  b.'  in  Thurso,
Caithness-shire,  Scotland,  9  May,  1835.  He  came
to  Canada  in  1842,  and  was  taught  to  read  and
write  by  his  mother.  At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  was
employed  at  setting  type,  and  in  1851  came  to  this
country.  In  this  manner  he  acquired  an  educa-
tion, and  in  1862  he  went  to  France,  where,  after
working  in  a  printing-office  for  a  time,  he  began  to
teach.  Subsequently  he  went  to  Germany  to  study,
and  gave  instruction  there  in  English  and  French
for  four  years.  In  1868  he  accepted  an  appoint-
ment in  the  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  academy,  where  he
remained  until  1883,  when  he  became  principal  of
the  West  Hoboken  public  school,  which  place  he
still  holds.  Mr.  Waters  has  published  a  "  Life  of
William  Cobbett "  (New  York,  1883) ;  "  Shakespeare
portrayed  by  Himself"  (1888);  "How  Genius
works  its  Wonders  "  (1889) ;  and  edited  and  anno-
tated "Cobbett's  English  Grammar"  (1883).

WATERSTON,  Robert  Cassie,  clergyman,  b.
in  Kennebunk,  Me.,  in  1812. He  studied three


388


WATERTON


WATKINS


years  in  Cambridge,  was  ordained  in  1839,  and  was
pastor  of  various  churches  in  Boston.  For  five
years  he  had  charge  of  a  sailors'  Sunday-school.
He  has  been  engaged  in  various  benevolent,  educa-
tional, and  literary  associations.  He  has  published
"Thoughts  on  Moral  and  Spiritual  Culture"  (Bos-
ton, 1842) ;  "  Arthur  Lee  and  Tom  Palmer  "  (1845) ;
and  addresses  on  Thomas  Sherwin  and  William
Cullen  Bryant. — His  wife,  Anna  C.  Quincy,  the
daughter  of  Josiah  Quincv,  has  published  "  Verses
by  A.  C.  Q.  W."  (Boston.  1863).

WATERTON,  Charles,  English  naturalist,  b.  at
Walton  Hall,  near  Wakefield,  Yorkshire.  England,
3  June,  1782 ;  d.  there,  27  May,  1865.  He  was  of
an  old  Roman  Catholic  family,  from  Lincolnshire,
and  through  his  grandmother  was  descended  from
Sir  Thomas  More.  He  was  educated  first  at  a
school  at  Tudhoe,  near  Durham,  and  then  at  the
Jesuit  college  at  Stonyhurst,  in  Lancashire.  In
boyhood  he  displayed  greater  fondness  for  open-
air  observations  of  natural  history  than  for  books.
Shortly  after  attaining  his  majority  he  visited
Spain,  where  some  of  the  Waterton  family  were  in
business.  In  1804  he  went  to  Uemerara  to  super-
intend the  estates  of  an  uncle,  and  travelled  through
the  interior  of  the  country,  noting  its  fauna,  flora,
and  scenery.  On  the  death  of  his  father  he  gave
up  the  management  of  these  estates  and  returned
to  England,  but  only  for  a  short  time;  so  that,  for
twenty  years  from  his  first  going  to  Demerara  in
1804  till  1824,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  visits  to  his
ancestral  home,  he  rambled  about  in  South  America,
having  no  other  object  than  the  pursuit  of  natural
history.  Although  not  distinguished  as  a  scientific
man,  he  is  well  known  as  a  good  and  enthusiastic
field-naturalist,  while  his  vivid  and  spirited  style
of  writing  has  rendered  his  narratives  popular.
Waterton  was  eccentric  and  abstemious.  He  was
noted  as  a  skilful  taxidermist,  and  his  ornitho-
logical collection  at  Walton  Hall  was  almost  un-
rivalled. During  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  settling
in  his  ancestral  home,  which  was  on  a  small  island
in  the  midst  of  fine  scenery,  he  surrounded  him-
self with  the  creatures  and  pets  he  loved.  He  for-
bade the  use  of  fire-arms  on  his  grounds,  so  that
they  became  the  chosen  haunt  of  many  rare  and
shy  birds  and  animals,  and,  to  discourage  poachers,
he  placed  ingenious  wooden  images  of  game-birds
in  his  trees.  His  adventures  in  South  America,
often  daring,  are  graphically  described  in  his
"Wanderings  in  South  America,  the  Northwest  of
the  United  States,  and  the  Antilles,  in  1812,  1816,
1820,  and  1824;  with  Original  Instructions  for  the
Preservation  of  Birds,  etc.,  for  Cabinets  of  Natural
History"  (London,  1825).  The  frequent  journeys
that  he  afterward  made  to  Belgium  and  Italy,  with
his  home-life  at  Walton  Hall,  are  described  in  the
autobiography  prefixed  to  his  "  Essays  on  Natural
History,  chiefly  Ornithology"  (3  vols.,  1838-'44;
new  ed.,  with  a  continuation  of  the  life,  by  Norman
Moore,  based  entirely  upon  autobiographical  notes,
1871).  See  also  a  life  of  him  entitled  "  Charles
Waterton,  his  Home,  Habits,  and  Handiwork,"  by
Richard  Hobson,  M.  D.  (1866).

WATIE,  Stand,  soldier,  b.  in  Cherokee,  Ga.
(the  site  of  the  present  city  of  Rome),  in  1815 ;  d.
in  August,  1877.  He  was  a  full-blooded  Cherokee
Indian,  was  educated  at  the  mission  schools  in  the
Indian  country,  served  as  a  member  of  the  Chero-
kee legislative  council,  and  was  speaker  of  the
lower  house  from  1862  till  1865.  He  became
colonel  of  the  1st  Cherokee  Confederate  infantry
regiment  in  October,  1861,  and  was  promoted  briga-
dier-general in  the  Confederate  army  on  10  May,
1864. His  brigade  was  composed  of  the  1st  and  2d


Cherokee  regiments  of  infantry,  a  Cherokee  bat-
talion of  infantry,  and  a  battalion  each  of  Seminole
and  Osage  Indians.  He  was  a  younger  brother  of
Elias  Boudinot  and  nephew  of  Maj.  Ridge,  who
were  assassinated  in  the  Cherokee  nation  in  1839.

WATKINS,  Louis  Douglas,  soldier,  b.  in  Flori-
da about  1835 ;  d.  in  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  29  March,
1868.  He  joined  the  U.  S.  army  as  1st  lieutenant,
14th  infantry.  14  May,  1861,  was  transferred  to  the
5th  cavalry,  22  June,  1861,  and  became  captain,  17
July,  1862,  and  colonel  of  the  20th  infantry,  28
July,  1866.  He  received  the  brevets  of  major,  8
Jan.,  1863,  for  gallant  service  in  the  expedition  to
east  Tennessee  under  Gen.  Samuel  P.  Carter,  lieu-
tenant-colonel, 24  June,  1864.  for  service  at  La-
fayette, and  that  of  brigadier-general,  13  March,
1865. He  was  mustered  out  on  1  Sept.,  1866.

WATKINS,  Samuel,  donor,  b.  in  Campbell
county,  Va.,  in  1794;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  16
Oct.,  1880.  His  parents  died  in  his  infancy,  and
he  was  bound  to  a  Scotch  family,  whose  cruelty  to
him  attracted  attention,  and,  owing  to  this,  the
county  court  placed  him  with  the  family  of  James
Robertson,  upon  whose  plantation  he  labored  for
several  years.  He  then  joined  the  U.  S.  army,
served  in  the  war  against  the  Creek  nation  under
Gen.  Andrew  Jackson,  and  was  also  at  the  battle
of  New  Orleans.  When  peace  was  declared  he  re-
turned to  Nashville  and  became  a  brick-mason,
pursuing  this  craft  until  1827,  when  he  began  to
erect  houses  and  churches,  among  which  were  the
1st  Baptist  church  and  the  2d  Presbyterian  church
in  Nashville.  During  the  civil  war  his  farm  of  600
acres  was  the  battle-field  of  Nashville,  his  city
buildings  were  destroyed,  and  his  mansion  was
sacked  and  robbed,  his  loss  amounting  to  $300,000.
After  the  civil  war  he  engaged  in  banking,  manu-
facturing, and  building,  and  dealt  in  real  estate,
was  president  of  the  Nashville  gas-light  company,
and  acquired  a  fortune.  He  bequeathed  $130,000
for  the  establishment  of  a  polytechnic  institution
in  Nashville,  which  was  erected  there  in  1882.  Mr.
Watkins  made  liberal  provision  for  courses  of  free
public  lectures,  and  also  classes  in  mathematics  for
those  who  could  not  attend  colleges  and  schools.

WATKINS,  Tobias,  physician,  b.  in  Maryland
in  1780;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  G,  14  Nov.,  1855.
He  was  graduated  at  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,
in  1798,  and  at  the  Philadelphia  medical  college  in
1802,  and  began  practice  in  Havre  de  Grace,  Md.
Afterward  he  removed  to  Baltimore,  where  he
edited  the  "Medical  and  Physical  Recorder"  in
1809.  He  was  surgeon  in  the  army  during  the  war
of  1812— '15,  and  was  assistant  surgeon-general  of
the  United  States  in  1818-'21,  and  fourth  auditor
of  the  U.  S.  treasury  in  1824-'9.  With  his  brother-
in-law,  Stephen  Simpson,  Dr.  Watkins  edited  in
Philadelphia  the  "  Portico  "  (4  vols.,  1816-'20).  He
contributed  to  periodicals,  and  translated  from  the
French  Xavier  Bichat's  "  Physiological  Researches
upon  Life  and  Death  "  (Philadelphia,  1809),  and
Louis  de  Onis's  "Memoir  upon  the  Negotiations
between  Spain  and  the  United  States  which  led  to
the  Treaty  of  1819  "  (Baltimore,  1822).

WATKINS,  William  Brown,  philologist,  b.
in  Bridgeport,  Belmont  co.,  Ohio,  2  May,  1834.  At
an  early  age  he  removed  to  Wheeling,  Va.,  where
he  received  a  public-school  education  and  began
the  study  of  law,  but  abandoned  it  to  enter  the
Pittsburg  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church.  From  1868  till  1872  he  was  presiding
elder  at  Steubenville,  Ohio,  after  which  he  was
stationed  in  Pittsburg  for  nine  years.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  general  conference  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church  in  1888,  and  has  delivered  many


WATKINSON


WATSON


389


lectures  on  philology  and  educational  subjects.
The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Mount  Union  college,  Ohio,  and  Alleghany  college,
Meadville,  Pa.,  in  1861,  and  that  of  D.  D.  by  Mount
Union  in  1868.  Besides  contributing  to  reviews
and  magazines,  chiefly  on  subjects  pertaining  to
the  English  and  Indian  languages,  he  has  prepared
several  school-books.  Dr.  Watkins  is  a  reader  of
the  historical  dictionary  of  the  Philological  society
now  in  course  of  publication  in  London,  and  for
many  years  has  been  preparing  an  "  Etymological
Dictionarv  of  American  Geographical  Names.'

WATKINSON,  David,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Lavenham,  Suffolk,  England,  17  Jan.,  1778 ;  d.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  13  Dec,  1857.  His  education  was
partly  conducted  by  Mrs.  Anna  Letitia  Barbauld,
and  he  came  to  this  country  with  his  parents  in
1795,  settling  in  Middletown,  Conn.  He  was  em-
ployed in  a  counting-house  in  New  York  city,  and
in  1800  began  business  with  his  brother,  William,
in  Hartford.  In  1841  he  retired  with  a  fortune.
By  his  will  he  gave  $40,000  to  the  Hartford  hos-
pital, $20,000  to  the  orphan  asylum,  $40,000  for
the  foundation  of  a  juvenile  asylum  and  farm
school  for  neglected  and  abandoned  children,  and
$100,000  for  a  library  of  reference  in  connection
with  the  Connecticut  historical  society,  also  mak-
ing the  trustees  of  the  library  of  reference  residu-
ary legatees  of  his  estate.

WATMOUGH,  John  Goddard,  soldier,  b.  in
Wilmington,  Del.,  6  Dec,  1793;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa..  27  Nov.,  1861.  He  entered  the  army
as  3d  lieutenant  in  the  2d  artillery,  22  Sept.,  1813,
and  was  promoted  2d  lieutenant,  19  April,  1814.
He  was  present  in  the  Niagara  campaign  of  that
year,  and  served  under  Capt.  Alexander  J.  Williams
at  Fort  Erie,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  The
effects  of  this  wound  he  carried  with  him  to  the
end  of  his  life.  For  "  gallant  and  meritorious  con-
duct in  defence  of  Fort  Erie  "  Lieut.  Watmough
received  the  brevet  of  1st  lieutenant,  15  Aug.,  1814.
The  same  year  Gen.  Gaines,  who  has  left  on  record
the  most  exalted  idea  of  his  gallantry,  intrepidity,
and  perseverance  in  battle,  appointed  him  his  aide-
de-camp.  On  1  Oct.,  1816,  he  resigned  his  com-
mission in  the  army,  and  from  1831  till  1835  he
represented  in  congress  one  of  the  districts  of
Philadelphia  county.  From  1835  till  1838  he  was
high  sheriff  of  that  county,  and  in  1841  he  was
appointed  surveyor  of  the  port  of  Philadelphia.
When  the  civil  war  opened,  mortal  disease  alone
prevented  him,  in  spite  of  his  advanced  age,  from
pressing  on  the  government  his  services  for  active
command  in  the  field. — His  son,  James  Horatio,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Whitemarsh,  Montgomery  co.,
Pa.,  30  July,  1822,  was  an  acting  midshipman  in
the  navy  from  24  Nov.,  1843,  till  October,  1844,
and  on  12  Dec,  1844,  became  paymaster.  During
the  Mexican  war  he  was  in  most  of  the  operations
in  California,  including  the  bombardment  of  Guay-
mas.  From  1849  till  1855  he  was  on  the  brig
"Perry"  and  the  frigate  "Constitution,"  on  the
coast  of  Africa :  in  1857-'8  on  the  steamer  "  Michi-
gan," on  the  lakes ;  in  1859-'60  on  the  sloop  "  Sara-
toga "  and  in  action  with  two  Spanish  steamers,
which  were  taken.  In  1864-'5  he  was  fleet  pay-
master of  the  South  Atlantic  squadron  and  was  in
most  of  the  operations  of  that  squadron,  including
those  on  Stono  river  and  on  James  and  John  isl-
ands previous  to  the  evacuation  of  Charleston,  S.  C.
He  was  subsequently  general  inspector,  and  from
July,  1873,  till  November,  1877,  paymaster-general.
In  1884  he  was  retired. — Another  son,  Pendleton
Gaines,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Whitemarsh,  Montgom-
ery co.,  Pa.,  3  May,  1828,  entered  the  navy  in  1841,


served  on  the  Brazil  station,  the  Mediterranean,
and  the  Pacific,  and  shared  in  the  capture  and  oc-
cupation of  California  during  the  Mexican  war.
He  returned  home  in  1847,  the  following  year  was
graduated  at  the  naval  academy,  served  in  the
Mediterranean  and  Pacific  and  on  the  coast  of
China,  and  resigned  in  1858.  In  April,  1861,  he
volunteered  for  the  civil  war  and  was  reappointed
in  the  navy.  The  same  month  he  was  sent  to  plant
a  battery  at  Perryville,  Md.,  to  cover  the  transpor-
tation thence  to  Annapolis,  and  for  a  short  time
was  in  command  of  a  steamer  on  Chesapeake  bay,
keeping  open  communications,  and  subsequently
on  other  active  duty  afloat.  In  October,  1861,  he
commanded  the  "Curlew,"  of  Admiral  Dupont's
fleet,  and  shared  in  the  capture  of  Port  Royal.
Later  he  was  in  command  of  the  "  Potomska "  in
the  capture  of  Fernandina  and  occupation  of  the
inland  waters  of  the  South  Atlantic  In  1863  he
was  ordered  to  the  "  Kansas,"  was  in  the  two  at-
tacks on  Fort  Fisher,  and  in  James  river  partici-
pated in  the  final  operations  against  Richmond.
He  resigned  as  lieutenant-commander  in  July,  1865,
and  in  1869  was  appointed  by  President  Grant  col-
lector of  the  port  of  Cleveland,  Ohio,  which  post
he  held  for  eight  years.

WATSON,  Alfred  Augustin,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  New  York  city,  21  Aug.,  1818.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  New  York  in  1837,  stud-
ied law,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  the  su-
preme court  of  the  state  of  New  York  in  1841.  He
followed  his  profession  for  little  more  than  a  year
and  then  began  his  studies  for  holy  orders.  He  was
ordered  deacon  in  St.  Ann's  church,  Brooklyn,  by
Bishop  Onderdonk,3  Nov.,  1844,  and  ordained  priest
in  St.  John's  church,  Fayetteville,  N.  C,  by  Bishop
Ives,  25  May,  1845.  He  was  rector  of  Grace
church,  Plymouth,  and  St.  Luke's,  Washington
county,  N.  C,  soon  afterward,  and  remained  there
fourteen  years.  In  1858  he  became  rector  of
Christ  church,  New  Berne,  N.  C.  He  served  as
chaplain  to  the  2d  regiment  of  North  Carolina
state  troops  from  1861  till  1863,  when  he  was  elect-
ed assistant  to  Bishop  Atkinson,  in  charge  of  St.
James's  church,  Wilmington,  N.  C,  of  which  he
became  rector  in  1864,  and  served  there  until  his
consecration  to  the  episcopate.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  North
Carolina  in  June.  1868.  Dr.  Watson  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  diocesan  standing  committee,  and  for
many  years  a  deputy  from  the  diocese  of  North
Carolina  to  the  general  convention.  He  was  con-
secrated bishop  of  east  Carolina  in  St.  James's
church,  Wilmington,  17  April,  1884.

WATSON,  I  Jen  jam  in  Frank,  lawyer,  b.  in
Warner,  N.  H.,  30  April,  1826.  He  lived  in  Lowell,
Mass.,  from  1835  until  1848,  studied  law  there  and  in
Lawrence  and  Boston,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1850.  He  was  editor  and  proprietor  of  the
Lawrence  "  Sentinel,"  postmaster  of  the  city  under
Presidents  Pierce,  Buchanan,  and  Lincoln,  was
nominated  for  mayor,  and  subsequently  elected
city  solicitor.  He  was  major  of  the  6th  regiment
of  Massachusetts  militia,  and  on  19  Jan.,  1861,  at
a  meeting  of  its  field  and  company  officers,  Col.
Edward  F.  Jones  presiding,  offered  a  resolution
tendering  the  services  of  the  regiment  to  the  presi-
dent of  the  United  States,  which  was  the  first  offer  of
any  military  organization.  In  April,  1861,  the  6th
Massachusetts  regiment  was  the  first  to  respond  to
the  president's  call  for  volunteers.  The  colonel
with  eight  companies  passed  through  Baltimore,
on  their  way  to  Washington,  with  no  interruption
except  insulting  demonstrations,  but  as  the  car
that  contained  Maj.  Watson  and  part  of  his  com-


390


WATSON


WATSON


raand  was  turning  into  Pratt  street,  it  was  de-
railed by  the  mob.  He  superintended  its  righting,
and  kept  the  driver  of  the  horses  to  his  duties  at
the  muzzle  of  his  revolver.  The  mob  fired  into
the  car  repeatedly,  and  after  one  of  his  men  had
been  wounded  severely  the  order  to  fire  was  given
by  Maj.  Watson.  Afterward  the  detachment  left
the  shattered  car  and  marched  to  the  depot,
where  the  main  body  under  the  colonel  had  ar-
rived in  safety.  Several  soldiers  were  injured
by  stones  and  pistol-shots  during  the  transit,
and  this  was  undoubtedly  the  first  blood  shed  in
the  war.  Shortly  after  this  Maj.  Watson  was
elected  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  regiment,  and  its
command  devolved  upon  him.  In  1867  he  removed
to  New  York,  where  ne  has  since  practised  law.

WATSON,  Beriah  Andre\  phvsician,  b.  in
Lake  George,  N.  Y.,  26  March,  1836.  He  ob-
tained his  education  through  his  own  exertion  and
was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  New  York  in  1861,  and  settled  at
White  House,  N.  J.  In  1862  he  entered  the  U.  S.
service  as  contract  surgeon,  and  he  was  engaged  in
hospital  and  field  service  until  the  end  of  the  war.
At  his  retirement,  on  10  July,  1865,  he  was  surgeon
in  charge  of  the  1st  division  6th  army  corps  hos-
pital, and  also  acting  medical  purveyor.  He  then
settled  in  Jersey  City,  where  he  still  practises  his
profession.  He  was  appointed  attending  surgeon
to  the  Jersey  City  charity  hospital  at  the  time  of
its  organization  in  1869,  and  since  1873  has  been
attending  surgeon  to  St.  Francis  hospital,  and
Christ's  hospital  since  1885.  The  passage  of  the
act  that  legalized  the  dissection  of  the  human  cada-
ver in  New  Jersey  was  secured  principally  through
his  efforts  and  those  of  Dr.  John  D.  McGill.  Dr.
Watson  has  been  president  of  the  New  Jersey
academy  of  medicine,  of  which  he  was  a  founder.
Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1882.
He  has  contributed  essays  and  reports  of  cases  to
medical  journals,  including  "  A  Case  of  Neuralgia
treated  by  Extirpation  of  the  Superior  Maxillary
Nerve"  (1871);  ."Pathology  and  Treatment  of
Chronic  Ulcers "  (1875) ;  "Cases  of  Rabies  Canina
treated  with  Strychina  and  Woorara"  (1876);
"  Disease  Germs :  their  Origin,  Nature,  and  Rela-
tion to  Wounds  "  (1878) ;  "  Woorara :  its  Medical
Properties  and  Availability  for  the  Treatment  of
Diseases  "  (1882) ;  and  an  "  Experimental  Study  of
Anaesthetics,"  read  before  the  American  surgical
association  in  Washington,  D.  C,  30  April,  1884.
Dr.  Watson  has  also  translated  medical  essays
from  the  French  and  German,  and  has  published
two  books,  "  Amputations  and  their  Complica-
tions "  (Philadelphia,  1885)  and  "  The  Sportsman's
Paradise,  on  the  Lake  Lands  of  Canada  "  (1888),
and  contributed  the  chapter  on  "  Pyasmia  and  Sep-
ticaemia "  to  "  Practical  Medicine,"  edited  by  Dr.
William  Pepper  (Philadelphia,  1885).

WATSON,  Sir  Brook,  bart,  English  soldier,
b.  in  Plymouth,  England,  7  Feb.,  1735 ;  d.  2  Oct.,
1807.  At  an  early  age  he  entered  the  British
navy,  but  he  was  forced  to  abandon  his  profes-
sion, for,  while  he  was  bathing  in  the  harbor  of
Havana,  in  1749,  his  right  leg  was  bitten  off  by  a
shark.  He  then  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits
and  came  to  this  country.  In  1755  he  was  com-
missary with  Col.  Robert  Monckton  at  the  siege  of
Beausejour,  and  in  1758  he  served  in  the  same  ca-
pacity at  Louisburg  with  Gen.  James  Wolfe's  di-
vision, and  was  known  as  the  "wooden-legged
commissary."  In  1759  he  became  a  merchant  in
London,  and  he  subsequently  engaged  in  business
in  Montreal,  Canada,  and  afterward  in  Boston.
In  1763,  with  others,  he  obtained  a  grant  from  the


government  of  Nova  Scotia  of  the  township  of
Cumberland.  Before  the  Revolution  he  visited
Massachusetts,  New  York,  and  other  colonies,  pro-
fessing to  be  a  Whig,  but  intercepted  letters  to
Gen.  Thomas  Gage  proved  him  to  be  a  spy.  In
1774  he  went  from  Boston  to  England  in  the  same
ship  with  John  Singleton  Copley,  who,  in  1778,
painted  a  picture  of  Brook  Watson's  rescue  from
the  shark.  When  Lord  North's  bill  to  cut  off  the
fisheries  of  New  England  was  before  parliament  in

1775,  he  was  examined  by  the  house  of  commons.
In  1782  he  was  made  commissary-general  to  his
friend,  Sir  Guy  Carleton,  in  this  country.  From
1784  till  1793  he  was  a  member  of  parliament  from
London,  and  he  was  sheriff  of  London  and  Middle-
sex in  1785,  and  lord  mayor  in  1796.  In  reward
for  his  services  in  America,  parliament  voted  his
wife  an  annuity  of  £500  for  life.  He  was  agent  in
London  for  New  Brunswick  from  1786  till  1794,
commissary-general  to  the  Duke  of  York  in  1793-5,
and  of  England  from  1798  till  1806.  He  was  made
a  baronet  on  5  Dec,  1803.

WATSON,  Ebenezer,  editor,  b.  in  Bethlehem,
Conn.,  in  1744 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  16  Sept.,  1777.
His  ancestor,  John  Watson,  came  from  England
and  settled  in  Hartford  in  1644.  For  several  years
Ebenezer  was  the  editor  and  publisher  of  "  The
Courant."  It  had  been  established  in  1764  by
Thomas  Green,  who  took  Watson  into  partnership,
and,  removing  to  New  Haven  about  1768,  left  him
to  be  manager  and  editor  of  this  journal.  After
his  death  his  second  wife,  Hannah  Bunce,  conduct-
ed the  paper  and  was  probably  the  first  woman  to
edit  a  journal  in  this  country. — His  brother,  James,
senator,  b.  in  New  York  city,  6  April,  1750 ;  d.
there,  15  May,  1806,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in

1776,  engaged  in  mercantile  business  in  New  York,
and  acquired  a  large  estate.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati,  and  served  in  the
assembly  in  1791-'6,  and  in  the  state  senate  in
1798.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  as  a  Democrat,
in  place  of  John  Sloss  Hobart,  and  served  from  11
Dec,  1798,  till  19  March,  1801,  when  he  resigned
to  become  U.  S.  navy  agent  for  New  York  city.

WATSON,  Elkanah,  agriculturist,  b.  in  Plym-
outh, Mass.,  22  Jan.,  1758 ;  d.  in  Port  Kent,  N.  Y.,
5  Dec,  1842.
In  September,
1773,  he  was
apprenticed  to
John  Brown,
the  Providence
merchant,  by
whom  he  was
sent  in  1775
to  Cambridge
with  a  ton  and  a
half  of  powder
for  Gen.  Wash-
ington's army.
He  afterward
went  to  the  res-
cue of  John
Brown,  who  had
been  captured
by  the  British.
In  1777  he  went
to Charleston

and  other  southern  ports  with  more  than  $50,000
to  be  invested  in  cargoes  for  the  European  markets.
The  description  of  this  journey  that  he  subse-
quently published  is  the  best  extant  account  of
tne  principal  towns  and  villages  of  the  colonies  at
the  time  of  the  Revolution.  In  August,  1779,  he
was  the  bearer  of  despatches  from  the  American


(X^yXja^r^as^.  'Z&Gt^t^m*


WATSON


WATSON


391


government  to  Dr.  Benjamin  Franklin  at  Paris,
who  gave  him  letters  of  introduction  to  eminent
English  statesmen.  He  engaged  in  mercantile
pursuits  in  Nantes,  but  after  three  years  of  pros-

{)erity  lost  his  property.  He  then  visited  Eng-
and,  where  he  contributed  to  the  relief  of  Com.
Silas  Talbot,  who  was  confined  in  the  Mills  prison,
near  Plymouth,  went  to  Holland  and  Flanders  in
1784,  and  returned  to  Newport  in  December  of
that  year,  bringing  with  him  a  present  of  books
from  Dr.  Sharp,  a  brother  of  Granville  Sharp,  to
Gen.  Washington,  whom  he  visited  at  "  Mt.  Ver-
non." Mr.  Watson  says:  "I  remained  alone  in
the  society  of  Washington  for  two  days,  the  rich-
est of  my  life."  Much  of  the  conversation  of
Washington  was  in  regard  to  his  plans  for  improv-
ing the  navigation  of  the  Potomac,  and  Mr.  Wat-
son thus  became  interested  in  schemes  of  internal
improvement.  He  went  to  South  Carolina,  where
he  engaged  in  trade  between  that  state  and  Hayti.
In  1789  he  removed  from  Providence,  R.  I.,  to  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  where  for  eighteen  years  he  was  an
active  promoter  of  public  enterprises,  including
the  improvement  of  the  navigation  of  Hudson
river,  the  projection  of  an  interior  canal  for  New
York  state,  the  establishment  of  the  Albany
bank,  the  paving  of  the  city,  the  organization  of
stage  routes  to  the  west,  and  the  advancement  of
agriculture  and  education.  In  1791,  with  Jere-
miah Van  Rensselaer,  Gen.  Philip  Van  Cortlandt,
and  Stephen  Bayard,  he  made  a  tour  through  the
state  to  examine  into  the  practicability  of  the
schemes  for  inland  navigation.  After  travelling
several  years  in  Europe,  he  published  in  London
an  account  of  his  pioneer  trip  in  western  New
York.  In  1807  he  removed  to  Pittsfield,  Mass.,
where  he  engaged  in  farming,  introduced  merino
sheep  into  Berkshire  county,  and  founded  there
the  Berkshire  agricultural  society.  In  1816  he  re-
turned to  Albany,  and  in  that  year  organized  the
first  agricultural  society  in  New  York.  He  visited
Michigan,  examined  the  lake  region,  and  explored
the  route  to  Montreal  with  a  view  to  its  improve-
ment and  to  connect  the  lake  region  with  the  sea-
board. He  again  visited  Europe,  and  in  1828  set-
tled in  Port  Kent,  on  Lake  Champlain.  Besides
frequent  contributions  to  periodicals,  he  published
many  pamphlets  on  agriculture  and  economical
topics,  and  was  the  author  of  a  "  Tour  in  Holland
in  MDCCLXXXIV,  by  an  American  "  (Worcester,
1790) ;  "  History  of  the  Rise,  Progress,  and  Exist-
ing Condition  of  the  Western  Canals  in  the  State
of  New  York,  1788-1819,"  etc.  (Albany,  1820);
"  Rise,  Progress,  and  Existing  State  of  Modern
Agricultural  Societies"  (1820);  and  "History  of
Agricultural  Societies  on  the  Modern  Berkshire
System"  (1820).  A  pamphlet  was  published  by
Col.  Robert  Troup  entitled  "  A  Vindication  of  the
Claim  of  Elkanah  Watson  to  the  Merit  of  project-
ing the  Lake  Canal  Policy "  (Geneva,  1831) ;  and
his  son,  Winslow  C.  Watson,  edited  a  valuable
autobiographical  work  entitled  "  Men  and  Times
of  the  Revolution,  or  Memoirs  of  Elkanah  Wat-
son ;  including  Journals  of  Travels  in  Europe  and
America  from  1777  to  1842 ;  with  his  Correspond-
ence with  Public  Men,  and  Reminiscences  and  In-
cidents of  the  Revolution  "  (New  York  and  Lon-
don, 1855 ;  2d  ed.,  with  illustrations,  185G). — His
son,  Winslow  Cossoul.  author,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
22  Dec,  1803,  published  a  "  Treatise  on  Practical
Husbandry  "  (2  parts,  Albany,  1854-'5) :  "  Eulogy
on  Lieut.-Col.  G.  T.  Thomas"  (Burlington,  N.  J.,
18G2) ;  "  Pioneer  History  of  the  Champlain  Valley,
being  an  Account  of  the  Settlement  of  the  Town
of  Willsborough,  by  William  Gilliland,  together


with  his  Journal  and  other  Papers  and  a  Memoir  "
(Albany,  1863);  "The  History  of  Essex  County,
New  York,  and  Military  Annals  of  Ticonderoga
and  Crown  Point,  etc."  (1870) ;  and  addresses,  pam-
phlets, and  religious,  political,  and  agricultural
papers  in  periodicals.

WATSON,  Henry  Clay,  author,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  in  1831 ;  d.  in  Sacramento,  Cal.,  10  July,
1869.  He  removed  to  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  at  an  early
age,  adopted  the  profession  of  journalism,  and  was
editorially  connected  with  the  "  North  American,"
the  "  Evening  Journal,"  and  other  papers.  He  sub-
sequently removed  to  California,  and  at  the  time
of  his  death  edited  the  Sacramento  "  Times."  He
was  the  author  of  several  volumes  of  hunting  ad-
venture, besides  which  his  publications  include
"  Camp-Fires  of  the  Revolution "  (Philadelphia,
1851);  "Nights  in  a  Block-House"  (1852);  "Old
Bell  of  Independence  "  (1852) ;  "  The  Yankee  Tea-
pot" (1853);  "Lives  of  the  Presidents  of  the
United  States"  (Boston,  1853);  "Heroic  Women
of  History"  (Philadelphia,  1853);  "The  Ladies'
Glee-Book"  (New  York,  1854);  "The  Masonic
Musical  Manual "  (1855) ;  and  "  Camp-Fires  of  Na-
poleon "  (Philadelphia,  1856).

WATSON,  Henry  Cood,  musical  critic,  b.  in
London,  England,  in  1816;  d.  in  New  York  city,  2
Dec,  1875.  His  father  was  conductor  of  the  or-
chestra at  Covent  Garden  theatre,  and  his  sisters
were  well-known  oratorio-singers.  He  had  a  fine
voice,  and  made  his  debut  in  the  first  performance
of  Weber's  opera  "  Oberon  "  at  Covent  Garden,  in
November,  1829.  Subsequently  he  achieved  suc-
cess in  London  as  a  composer  and  musical  critic,
came  to  this  country  in  1840,  and  was  art-critic  for
the  New  York  "  World,"  in  which  he  published
several  poems.  He  became  connected  with  the
"  Musical  Chronicle  "  in  1843,  and  contributed  to
various  periodicals.  In  1844  he  was  art  and  musi-
cal critic  for  the  New  York  "  Albion,"  and  in  1845
was  associated  with  Charles  F.  Briggs  and  Edgar
Allan  Poe  in  founding  the  "  Broadway  Journal."
He  founded  the  "  Musical  Guest,"  a  monthly  maga-
zine, separate  editions  of  which  were  devoted  to
sacred  and  operatic  music,  and  published  in  it
many  of  his  own  compositions. For  several  years

Erevious  to  1861  he  was  editor-in-chief  of  Frank
ieslie's  "  Illustrated  Newspaper  and  Ladies'  Maga-
zine." In  1862  he  founded  the  "  Art  Journal,"  and
in  1863  became  musical  critic  of  the  New  York
"  Tribune."  He  was  a  founder  of  the  New  York
Philharmonic  society,  of  the  American  Musical
fund  association,  and  of  the  Vocal  society  (after-
ward called  the  Mendelssohn  union),  and  was  asso-
ciated with  William  Vincent  Wallace  and  Carlos
D.  Stuart  in  organizing  the  famous  Mendelssohn
concert  at  Castle  Garden.  Mr.  Watson  wrote  the
libretto  for  Wallace's  opera  "  Lurline  "  (1854).

WATSON,  James  Craig,  astronomer,  b.  in
Fingal,  Ontario,  Canada,  28  Jan.,  1838;  d.  in
Madison,  Wis.,  23  Nov.,  1880.  He  was  of  Ameri-
can ancestry,  and  was  born  during  a  visit  of  his
parents  to  Canada.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Michigan  in  1857,  and  in  his  junior  year
performed  the  phenomenal  task  of  reading  La-
place's "Mecanique  celeste"  from  beginning  to
end.  During  his  final  year  he  was  the  sole  pupil
in  the  observatory,  where  he  spent  part  of  his  time
in  grinding  lenses  and  in  the  construction  of  a
telescope.  On  his  graduation  he  became  assistant
to  the  chair  of  astronomy,  and  in  his  work  he  dis-
played such  aptitude  as  an  observer  and  such  ra-
pidity in  his  computations  that  in  1859  he  was
appointed  professor  of  astronomy.  In  1860  he  was
given  the  department  of  physics,  but  in  1863  re-


392


WATSON


WATSON


sumed  charge  of  the  department  of  astronomy,  and
was  made  director  of  the  observatory.  In  1879  he
was  called  to  the  chair  of  astronomy  and  the  di-
rectorship of  Washburn  observatory  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Wisconsin.  He  discovered  a  comet  on  29
April,  1856,  while  he  was  still  an  undergraduate,
and  on  20  Oct.,  1857,  he  discovered  independently
an  asteroid  that  had  been  found  a  few  days  pre-
viously. In  1858  he  devoted  his  attention  to  Do-
nati's  comet,  and  his  computation  of  its  orbit  is
accepted  as  authoritative.  His  first  independent
planetary  discovery  was  on  14  Sept.,  1863,  of  the
asteroid  Eurynome,  and  on  9  Jan.,  1864,  the  comet
known  as  1,863,  vi.,  which  had  previously  been
noted,  was  found  by  him.  He  discovered  on  7  Oct.,
1865,  the  asteroid  that  has  since  been  named  Io,
and  on  24  Aug.,  1867,  he  discovered  Minerva,  and
on  6  Sept.,  1867,  Aurora.  During  1868  he  added
six  minor  planets  to  the  solar  system.  He  was  a
member  of  the  government  expedition  to  observe
the  solar  eclipse  at  Mount  Pleasant,  Iowa,  in  1869,
and  was  sent  on  a  similar  mission  in  1870  to  Car-
lentini,  Sicily.  In  1874  he  was  appointed  to  the
charge  of  the  American  party  that  observed  the
transit  of  Venus  from  Peking,  China.  On  this  ex-
pedition he  made  his  eighteenth  planetary  discov-
ery, to  which  he  gave  the  name  Juewa.  Prof.
Watson  was  one  of  the  judges  of  award  at  the
World's  fair  in  Philadelphia  in  1876,  and  wrote  a
"  Report  on  Horological  Instruments."  In  1878
he  had  charge  of  the  government  expedition  to
Wyoming  to  observe  the  total  solar  eclipse,  and  on
that  occasion  he  paid  special  attention  to  the  ex-
istence of  an  intra-Mercurial  planet  as  well  as  that
of  an  extra-Neptunian  one,  in  both  of  which  he
believed.  On  29  July,  1878,  he  determined  the
exact  locality  of  what  he  believed  to  be  "  Vulcan,"
and  he  further  satisfied  himself  of  the  existence  of
a  second  intra-Mercurial  planet.  Subsequent  to
his  removal  to  Madison  he  devoted  his  energies  to
remodelling  the  observatory  structure,  and  intro-
ducing original  features  of  his  own  devising.  For
many  years  he  was  actuary  of  the  Michigan  mu-
tual life  insurance  company,  and  by  commercial
enterprises  he  acquired  a  moderate  fortune,  of
which  he  bequeathed  $16,000  to  the  National
academy  of  sciences,  the  income  of  which  is  used
partly  as  a  research  fund  and  partly  for  the  Wat-
son medal.  The  total  number  of  asteroids  that
he  discovered  was  twenty-three,  and  in  1870  he
received  the  Lalande  gold  medal  from  the  French
academy  of  sciences  for  the  discovery  of  six  aster-
oids in  one  year.  In  1875  the  khedive  of  Egypt
made  him  knight  commander  of  the  Imperial  order
of  the  Medjidieh.  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  him  by  the  University  of  Leipsic  in  1870,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Columbia  in  1877.  In  1867
he  was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sci-
ences. His  contributions  to  astronomical  journals
were  frequent,  besides  which  he  published  a  "  Popu-
lar Treatise  on  Comets "  (Philadelphia,  1860)  ;
"  Theoretical  Astronomy  "  (1868) ;  and  "  Tables  for
Calculation  of  Simple  and  Compound  Interest  and
Discount"  (Ann  Arbor,  1879).

WATSON,  James  Madison,  author,  b.  in
Onondaga  county,  N.  Y.,  8  Feb.,  1827.  He  was
educated  in  the  public  schools,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  in
1853.  He  then  connected  himself  with  the  pub-
lishing-house of  A.  S.  Barnes  and  Co.,  New  York
city,  and,  aided  by  Richard  G.  Parker,  prepared  a
series  of  "National  Readers  and  Spellers  (New
York,  1853-'5).  For  the  subsequent  twelve  years
he  devoted  himself  to  teaching  in  New  York  and
adjacent  states. He  settled  in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  in


1871,  became  president  of  the  city  board  of  educa-
tion, was  president  of  the  New  Jersey  sanitary
association  in  1871  and  1882,  and  of  the  Temper-
ance reform  and  order  club.  He  has  given  much
time  and  study  to  temperance  and  sanitary  re-
forms, and  to  physical  training.  He  has  published
"  Hand- Book  of  Gymnastics  and  Calisthenics "
(New  York,  1864);  "  Manual  of  Calisthenics  "  (1864) ;
a  series  of  u  Independent  Readers  "  (1868-'71) ;  and
one  of  "Independent  Spellers"  (1871-8).

WATSON,  James  Muir,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia, 15  July.  1808 ;  d.  in  Vallejo,  Cal.,  17  April,
1873.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  1  Feb.,
1823,  and  became  a  lieutenant,  30  Dec,  1831.  On
14  March,  1847,  he  took  command  of  the  store-
ship  "  Erie,"  in  which  he  served  during  the  Mexi-
can war.  On  11  Nov.,  1847,  under  direction  of
Com.  Shubrick,  he  commanded  the  naval  force  of
600  men  in  the  boats  of  the  "  Independence."
"  Congress,"  "  Cyane,"  and  "  Erie,"  with  which  he
captured  the  city  of  Mazatlan  without  resistance
from  the  Mexicans,  who  retreated  to  the  interior.
He  returned  from  this  cruise  in  command  of  the
"  Erie,"  24  June,  1848,  was  placed  on  the  reserved
list,  13  Sept.,  1855,  and  was  unemployed,  waiting
orders,  the  rest  of  his  life,  except  in  1863-'6,  when
he  served  as  light-house  inspector.  He  was  com-
missioned a  commander  on  the  reserved  list,  1  Feb.,
1861,  retired  21  Dec,  1861,  and  was  promoted  to
commodore  on  the  retired  list,  16  July,  1862.  Ho
resided  in  California  after  he  was  put  on  the  re-
served list  until  his  death.

WATSON,  James  V.,  author,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  1814;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  17  Oct.,  1856.
He  came  to  this  country  at  the  age  of  six  years,
and  in  1832  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church,  afterward  receiving  the  degree
of  D.  D.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Michigan  Chris-
tian Advocate  "  and  of  the  "  Northwestern  Chris-
tian Advocate  "  in  Chicago  in  1852-'6,  and  was  the
author  of  "  Helps  to  the  Promotion  of  Revivals  "
(New  York,  1856)  and  "  Tales  and  Takings,  Sketches
and  Incidents  from  the  Itinerant  and  Editorial
Budget  of  the  Rev.  J.  V.  Watson  "  (1857).

WATSON,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Londonderry,
Ireland,  16  April,  1807;  d.  in  New  York  city,  3
June,  1863.  He  came  to  this  country  with  his
parents  in  1810,  settled  in  New  York  city  in  1818,
was  graduated  at  the  New  York  college  of  phy-
sicians and  surgeons  in  1832,  and  was  on  the  surgi-
cal staff  of  the  New  York  hospital  in  1832-3.  In
1833-'5  he  was  physician  of  the  New  York  dispen-
sary, and  from  1839  till  1862  he  was  an  attending
surgeon  of  the  New  York  hospital,  where  he  intro-
duced many  reforms  and  improvements.  In  con-
nection with  Dr.  Henry  D.  Bulkley,  he  established
an  infirmary  for  cutaneous  diseases,  which  was  or-
ganized soon  afterward  as  the  Broome  street  school
of  medicine,  where  Dr.  Watson  held  the  chair  of
surgical  pathology.  He  was  instrumental  in  or-
ganizing the  New  York  medical  and  surgical  so-
ciety, the  American  medical  association,  and  the
New  York  academy  of  medicine,  of  which  latter
institution  he  was  president  in  1859-'60.  With
Dr.  John  A.  Swett  he  established  the  "  New  York
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal."  Dr.  Watson  was
the  author  of  numerous  reports,  essays,  and  re-
views in  professional  journals,  and  published  a
"  Lecture  on  Practical  Education  in  Medicine  and
on  the  Course  of  Instruction  at  the  New  York
Hospital"  (New  York,  1846);  "Thermal  Ventila-
tion and  other  Sanitary  Improvements  applicable
to  Public  Buildings  and  recently  adopted  at  the
New  York  Hospital "  (1851) ;  "  The  Medical  Pro-
fession in  Ancient  Times"  (1856); "The  Parish


WATSON


WATSON


393


Will  Case  Critically  Examined  in  Reference  to  the
Mental  Competency  of  Mr.  Henry  Parish  to  exe-
cute the  Codicils  appended  to  his  Will ;  and  Notes
in  Reply  to  an  Article  entitled  '  The  Parish  Will ' "
(1857);  "The  True  Physician"  (1860);  "Obscuri-
ties of  Disease  " ;  "  Clinical  Acumen,  or  the  Sources
of  Misjudgment  in  the  Study  of  Disease  " ;  and  a
"  History  of  Medicine  "  (1862).

WATSON,  John  Tad  well,  British  soldier,  b.  in
London,  England,  in  1748;  d.  in  Calais,  Prance,
11  June,  1826.  He  entered  the  3d  foot-guards  in
April,  1767,  and  became  captain  and  lieutenant-
colonel  in  November,  1778.  In  the  spring  of  1781,
with  500  picked  men,  he  undertook  the  destruction
of  Gen.  Francis  Marion's  brigade.  After  several
skirmishes,  and  being  constantly  annoyed  by  the
wary  partisan,  whom  he  could  not  bring  to  a  con-
flict except  on  his  own  terms,  he  fled  to  George-
town, complaining  that  Marion  "  would  not  fight
like  a  gentleman  or  a  Christian."  He  became
colonel  in  1783,  and  general  in  April,  1808.

WATSON,  John  Whitaker,  poet,  b.  in  New
York  city,  14  Oct.,  1824.  Pie  was  educated  at  the
University  of  the  city  of  New  York,  and  studied
medicine,  but  became  a  journalist  and  engraver.
He  has  written  forty-eight  serials  for  a  weekly  pa-
per, some  of  which  have  been  dramatized,  notably
the  story  of  "  Thirty  Millions,"  under  the  title  of
"  The  World."  He  has  published  "  Beautiful  Snow,
and  other  Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1869).

WATSON,  Paul  Barron,  author,  b.  in  Morris-
town,  N.  J.,  25  March,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1881,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1885,  and  practises  in  Boston.  He  has  pub-
lished a  "  Bibliography  of  the  Pre-Columbian  Dis-
coveries of  America  "  in  the  "  Library  Journal "
(1881),  which  was  reprinted  in  Rasmus  B.  Ander-
son's "  America  not  Discovered  by  Columbus  "
(Chicago,  1884),  and  is  the  author  of  a  "  Life  of
Marcus  Aurelius  "  (New  York,  1884).

WATSON,  Sereno,  botanist,  b.  in  East  Wind-
sor Hill,  Conn.,  1  Dec,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1847.  From  1867  till  1871  he  was  botanist
to  the  U.  S.  geological  exploration  of  the  40th  par-
allel under  Clarence  King.  In  1874  he  became
curator  of  the  herbarium  of  Harvard,  which  place
he  still  holds.  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  by  Iowa  college  in  1878.  He  is  a  fellow  of
the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  of
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science.  Besides  numerous  contributions  to  scien-
tific journals  on  American  botany,  he  is  the  author
of  vol.  v.  on  "  Botany  "  in  the  series  of  "  Reports  of
the  Geological  Exploration  of  the  40th  Parallel"
(Washington,  1871) ;  "  Bibliographical  Index  to
North  American  Botany,  Part  I.,  Polypetalae "
(1878);  and,  in  connection  with  William  II.  Brewer
and  Asa  Gray,  "  Botany  of  California "  (2  vols.,
Cambridge,  1876-80).

WATSON,  William,  educator,  b.  in  Nantucket,
Mass.,  19  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard  in  1857,
where  he  was  then  instructor  in  differential  and
integral  calculus  until  1859,  meanwhile  taking  a
second  degree  in  1858.  From  1859  till  1863  he
was  in  Europe  collecting  information  on  technical
education,  which  he  communicated  to  William  B.
Rogers,  who  made  it  the  basis  of  the  scheme  of  or-
ganization of  the  Massachusetts  institute  of  technol-
ogy in  Boston.  He  also  took  a  partial  course  at
the  Ecole  des  ponts  et  chaussees  in  Paris,  and  re-
ceived in  1862  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the  Uni-
versity of  Jena,  Germany.  In  1865  he  became  pro-
fessor of  mechanical  engineering  and  descriptive
geometry  in  the  Institute  of  technology,  which


chair  he  held  until  1873.  He  was  a  commissioner
to  the  World's  fair  in  Vienna  in  1873,  and  served
on  the  international  jury  of  that  in  Paris  in  1878,
during  which  year  he  was  honorary  vice-president
of  the  Paris  congress  of  hygiene,  and  honorary
president  of  the  Paris  congress  of  architects.  He
held  the  same  relation  to  the  French  association
for  the  advancement  of  science  in  1878,  1881,  and
1883.  Prof.  Watson  is  a  member  of  engineering
societies  in  this  country  and  abroad,  and  was
elected  secretary  of  the  American  academy  of  arts
and  sciences  in  1884.  In  addition  to  papers  that
he  has  read  before  learned  societies,  he  has  pub-
lished "Technical  Education"  (printed  privately,
Boston,  1872);  "Course  in  Descriptive  Geometry
for  the  Use  of  Colleges  and  Scientific  Schools
(1873) ;  "  Report  on  the  Civil  Engineering,  Public
Works,  and  Architecture  of  the  Vienna  Exhibi-
tion" (Washington,  1876);  and  "Course  in  Shades
and  Shadows  "  (Boston,  1885).

WATSON,  William  Robinson,  politician,  b.
in  South  Kingston,  R.  I.,  14  Dec,  1799;  d.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  29  Aug..  1864.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1823,  studied  law  in  Providence,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  engaged  little  in
the  practice  of  his  profession,  devoting  his  life
chiefly  to  politics.  From  1827  till  1833,  and  again
in  1835,  he  was  clerk  of  the  court  of  common  pleas
for  the  county  of  Providence.  In  1841-'5,  and
1849-54.  he  was  collector  of  the  port  of  Providence.
In  1854  he  was  chosen  secretary  of  state  of  Rhode
Island,  but  he  lost  his  election  the  following  year,
when  the  Native  American  party  carried  the  state.
In  1856  he  was  appointed  by  the  general  assembly
state  auditor,  serving  until  May,  1863.  He  fre-
quently edited  political  journals,  and  wrote  for
the  press,  vindicating  and  explaining  the  doctrines
of  the  Whig  party  with  great  vigor.  The  most
elaborate  of  his  writings  was  a  series  of  papers  that
was  first  published  in  1844  in  the  Providence  "Jour-
nal," under  the  signature  of  "  Hamilton,"  and  which
were  afterward  printed  in  pamphlet-form. — His
son,  William  Henry,  physician,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  8  Nov.,  1829,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1852,
studied  medicine  in  Providence,  and,  after  receiv-
ing his  degree  in  1854,  settled  in  Utica,  N.  Y.  He
also  received  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  from
the  University  of  the  state  of  New  York  in  1878.
He  travelled  extensively  in  Europe  to  study  the
various  systems  of  medical  education,  and  on  his
return  delivered  an  address  at  the  23d  convocation
of  the  University  of  the  state  of  New  York  on  9
July,  1885,  in  which  he  insisted  that  it  is  the  pre-
rogative of  the  state  to  determine  the  educational
qualifications  of  physicians,  and  that  there  must
be  an  entire  separation  of  the  teaching  from  the
licensing  interests.  This  address  received  the
unanimous  approval  of  the  convocation,  and  widely
attracted  public  attention.  He  was  examiner  in
diagnosis  and  pathology  in  the  State  board  of
medical  examination  from  1872  till  1881,  U.  S.
examining  pension  surgeon  from  1875  till  1881,
surgeon  -  general  of  New  York  state  from  1880
till  1883,  and  since  1882  has  been  regent  of  the
University  of  the  state  of  New  York.  Dr.  Watson
has  been  active  in  establishing  homoeopathic  soci-
eties and  institutions,  was  a  founder  of  the  Homoe-
opathic medical  society  of  Oneida  county,  N.  Y.,
and  was  its  president  in  1860— '1,  and  in  1868  be-
came president  of  the  Homoeopathic  medical  soci-
ety of  New  York  state.  He  was  a  founder  of  the
New  York  state  homoeopathic  asylum  for  the  in-
sane at  Middletown,  and  was  a  trustee  in  1873-'6.
He  was  appointed  a  commissioner  of  the  state
reservation  at  Niagara  in  1888. In  addition  to


394


WATTEAU


WATTERSON


addresses,  he  is  the  author  of  several  monographs
and  papers,  including  "  The  Past  and  Present  Posi-
tion of  Homoeopathy  and  the  Duties  of  its  Prac-
titioners "  (1861) ;  "  Cerebro-Spinal  Meningitis  "
(1863) ;  "  Nosological  Classification  of  Disease,"
with  Dr.  Horace  M.  Paine  (1863);  "The  Medical
Profession,  its  Duties  and  Responsibilities,  and  the
Relation  of  the  Homoeopathic  to  its  Allopathic
Branch  "  (1869) ;  "  No  Sectarian  Tests  for  Office,
and  No  Sectarian  Monopoly  of  National  Institu-
tions "  (1871) ;  "  The  Homoeopathic  School "  (1872) ;
and  "The  Advanced  Medical  Act"  (1872).

WATTEAU,  Boudoin  Louis  (vat-to),  French
explorer,  b.  in  Douai  in  1570 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  1627.
He  traded  with  the  West  Indies  and  South  Ameri-
ca, visited  also  Brazil,  and,  lured  by  accounts  of
riches  in  the  fabulous  Eldorado,  induced  mer-
chants of  Douai  and  Dunkirk  to  arm  an  expedition
to  explore  Guiana.  The  scheme  failed,  as  the  com-
pany of  the  twelve  lords  refused  permission  to  en-
ter the  country,  and  Watteau  sailed  for  the  Indies,
where  he  took  a  cargo  for  the  western  coast  of
Peru,  returning  by  way  of  the  Strait  of  Magellan
in  1624-'6. He  went  afterward  to  Paris  to  solicit

Eermission  to  establish  a  colony  in  Patagonia,  but
e  died  without  obtaining  the  grant.  He  wrote
"  Voyage  des  Francais  aux  Indes  Orientales,  Peru,
detroit  de  Magellan.  Patagonie  et  au  Bresil,  fait
pendant  les  annees  1624-'6"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1627).
This  is  a  curious  work,  which  contains  interesting
details  on  the  manner  of  trading  in  India  and  Peru
at  the  beginning  of  the  17th  century.  It  was  never
reprinted,  and  only  a  few  copies  are  known  to
exist. One  of  them  was  sold  in  1829  for  $280.

WATTERS,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Michi-
gan, 5  Jan.,  1831 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  22  Jan..
1874.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  12
Feb.,  1846,  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  16  Sept.,
1855,  and  was  on  duty  as  an  instructor  at  the  naval
academy  in  1857-9.  While  he  was  attached  to
the  "Minnesota"  the  civil  war  began,  and  he  was
actively  employed  in  engagements  and  captures  at
Hatteras  inlet  and  in  the  sounds  of  North  Caro-
lina. He  served  in  command  of  boat  expeditions
by  which  he  captured  several  blockade-runners  in
the  vicinity  of  Fort  Monroe,  and  he  also  partici-
pated in  the  engagements  with  the  "  Merrimac  "
and  the  batteries  at  Sewell's  point.  He  was  pro-
moted to  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,
was  executive  officer  of  the  steamer  "  Mononga-
hela "  in  Farragut's  squadron,  and  during  the
operations  against  Port  Hudson  and  Vicksburg
commanded  the  gun-boat  "  Kineo."  He  was  as-
signed to  patrol  Mississippi  river  in  this  vessel  in
1863-'5,  and  convoyed  army  transports  by  the  Con-
federate batteries  along  the  banks  of  the  river.
He  was  promoted  to  commander,  14  April,  1867,
and  was  attached  to  the  naval  academy  in  1866-'8.
He  was  assigned  the  sloop  "  Cyane,"  in  the  Pacific
squadron,  in  1868-'9,  and  was  stationed  at  the  New
York  navy-yard,  in  1870-'3,  on  the  receiving-ship.
In  1873  he  had  of  charge  the  "Ossipee"  on  the
North  Atlantic  station,  from  which  he  was  de-
tached just,  before  his  death.

WATTERS,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  16  Oct.,  1751 ;  d.  in  Fairfax  county,
Va.,  29  March,  1829.  His  parents  were  Episco-
palians, but  he  became  a  convert  to  Methodism  in
1771,  and  in  the  following  year  began  to  preach.
In  1773  he  was  received  on  trial  bv  the  Philadel-
phia conference,  thus  becoming  the  first  native
Methodist  itinerant  in  this  country.  He  preached
in  New  Jersey,  Maryland,  and  Virginia  till  1805,
when  he  retired  to  his  farm  on  Potomac  river.
His  seven  brothers  were  among  the  first  in  that


region  to  open  their  house  to  Methodist  preachers,
and  his  home  was  looked  upon  as  the  headquarters
of  Methodism  in  that  region.

WATTERSON,  Harvey  McGee,  journalist,  b.
in  Bedford  county,  Tenn.,  23  Nov.,  1811.  He  was
educated  at  Cumberland  college,  Princeton,  Ky.,
and  established  a  newspaper  at  Shelbyville,  Tenn.,
the  capital  of  his  native  county,  in  1831.  He  was
elected  to  the  legislature  in  1835,  served  in  con-
gress in  1839-'43,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Demo-
crat, declined  a  re-election  in  the  latter  year,  and
was  sent  by  the  president  on  a  diplomatic  mission
to  Buenos  Ayres.  On  his  return  in  1845  he  was
elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  chosen  president
of  that  body.  He  was  owner  and  editor  of  the
Nashville  "  Union  "  from  1850  till  the  close  of  1851,
was  connected  with  the  editorial  department  of
the  Washington  "  Union  "  in  1853-'4,  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  National  Democratic  convention  of
1860,  where  he  voted  for  the  nomination  of  Stephen
A.  Douglas,  was  an  elector  for  the  state  at  large
on  the  Douglas  ticket  the  same  year,  and  chosen
to  the  State  convention  in  February,  1861,  as  a
Unionist.  He  practised  law  in  Washington  for
fourteen  years  after  the  war,  and  since  1878  has
been  a  member  of  the  editorial  staff  of  the  Louis-
ville "  Courier-Journal." — His  son,  Henry,  jour-
nalist, b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  16  Feb.,  1840,  in
consequence  of  defective  eyesight,  was  educated
chiefly  by  private  tutors.  He  entered  the  profes-
sion of  journalism
in  Washington  in
1858,  and  in  1861,
returning  to  Ten-
nessee, he  edited
the  "  Republican
Banner"  in  Nash-
ville. He  served
on  the  Confeder-
ate side  during  the
civil  war  in  vari-
ous capacities,  be-
ing a  staff-officer
in  1861-'3,  and
chief  of  scouts  in
Gen.  Joseph  E.
Johnstous  army
in  1864.  After  the
war  he  revived  the
"  Banner,"  but
soon  afterward
went  to  Louisville,  Ky.,  to  reside,  and  in  1867
succeeded  George  D.  Prentice  as  editor  of  the
"Journal."  In  the  year  following  he  united  the
"  Courier  "  and  the  "  Times  "  with  it,  and  in  con-
nection with  Walter  N.  Haldeman  founded  the
"  Courier-Journal,"  of  which  he  has  since  been  the
editor.  He  was  a  member  of  congress  from  12
Aug.,  1876,  till  3  March,  1877,  being  chosen  to  fill
a  vacancy,  but,  with  this  exception,  has  always  de-
clined public  office.  He  has  sat  for  Kentucky  as
delegate-at-large  in  four  National  Democratic  con-
ventions, presiding  over  the  St.  Louis  convention
in  1876,  and  serving  as  chairman  of  the  platform
committees  in  the  Cincinnati  convention  in  1880
and  in  the  one  at  St.  Louis  in  1888.  He  is  identi-
fied with  the  revenue-reform  movement  of  the
Democratic  party  as  an  aggressive  advocate  of  free-
trade  ideas.  He  was  a  personal  friend  and  a  reso-
lute follower  of  Samuel  J.  Tilden.  Mr.  Watterson
has  often  appeared  as  a  public  speaker,  notably  on
political  occasions,  and  his  advice  is  sought  by
the  leaders  of  his  party.  He  has  also  contributed
freely  to  periodicals,  and  edited  "  Oddities  of  South-
ern Life  and  Character  "  (Boston,  1882).


CN^h/U  ^Sl^UbuULa^v


WATTERSON


WATTS


WATTERSON,  John  Ambrose,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Blairsville,  Indiana  co.,  Pa.,  27  May,  1844.
After  being  graduated  at  Mount  St.  Mary's  col-
lege, Emmitsburg,  in  1865,  he  studied  for  the
priesthood  and  was  ordained  on  8  Aug.,  1868.  He
was  then  appointed  professor  in  Mount  St.  Mary's,
and  in  1877  he  was  made  president.  In  1880  he
was  nominated  bishop  of  Columbus,  and  was  con-
secrated on  8  Aug.  of  that  year.  He  devoted  him-
self specially  to  the  work  of  education,  and  in  1884
founded  a  college  in  Columbus.  The  diocese  con-
tains 92  churches,  37  chapels  and  stations,  80
priests,  and  17  ecclesiastical  students.

WATTERSTON,  George,  librarian,  b.  in  New
York  city,  23  Oct.,  1783 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
4  Feb.,  1854.  He  was  educated  at  Charlotte  Hall
college,  St.  Mary's  county,  Md.,  studied  law,  and
followed  his  profession  in  Maryland  and  in  the
District  of  Columbia.  In  1814  he  served  in  the
defence  of  Washington  against  the  British,  and  in
March,  1815,  was  appointed  the  first  librarian  of
congress,  which  place  he  held  until  1829.  He  was
also  secretary  to  the  National  Washington  monu-
ment association  from  its  inception.  He  was  the
author  of  numerous  books,  including  "Letters
from  Washington"  (Washington,  1818);  "Course
of  Study  preparatory  to  the  Bar  or  the  Senate "
(1823) ;  and  "  The  Wanderer  in  Washington  "  (1827).

WATTS,  Frederick,  soldier,  b.  in  Wales,  1
June,  1719 ;  d.  on  his  farm  on  Juniata  river,  3  Oct.,
1795.  He  received  a  fair  English  education,  came
to  this  country  with  his  wife  and  family  about
1760,  and  settled  in  Cumberland  county,  Pa.  When
the  Revolutionary  war  began  he  became  a  member
of  the  Cumberland  county  committee,  and  was
commissioned  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  one  of  the
associated  battalions.  When  the  Flying  camp  was
organized  by  direction  of  congress  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  battalion  that  was  assigned  to  Cum-
berland county,  which  was  captured  at  the  surren-
der of  Fort  Washington,  16  Nov.,  1776.  After  his
exchange  he  served  in  various  capacities.  He  was
commissioned  justice  of  the  peace,  1  April,  1778,
chosen  representative  to  the  assembly  in  1779,  and
appointed  a  sub-lieutenant  of  Cumberland  county
in  1780.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of
Pennsylvania  militia,  27  May,  1782,  in  which  capa-
city he  did  excellent  service  in  protecting  the
frontier  counties  of  the  state  from  the  wild  savages
and  marauding  Tories.  He  was  a  member  of  the
supreme  executive  council  from  October,  1787,  un-
til its  abolition  by  the  state  constitution  of  1790.
At  the  close  of  his  official  life  he  returned  to  his
farm  on  the  Juniata. — His  son,  David,  lawyer,  b.
in  Cumberland  county,  Pa.,  29.  Oct.,  1764;  d.  in
Carlisle,  Pa.,  25  Sept.,  1819,  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  college  in  1787,  read  law  in  Philadel-
phia under  William  Lewis,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  October,  1790.  For  a  long  period  he
was  the  leader  at  the  bar  in  the  interior  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  his  practice  extended  over  two  thirds
of  the  state.  He  was  an  impassioned,  forcible,  and
fluent  speaker. — David's  son,  Frederick,  jurist,  b.
in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  9  May,  1801,  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  college  in  1819,  entered  the  office  of
Andrew  Carothers  as  a  law-student  in  1821,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  August,  1824.  In  1845
he  became  president  of  the  Cumberland  Valley
railroad,  and  through  his  energy  that  corporation
was  brought  to  a  high  state  of  prosperity.  He  was
commissioned,  9  March,  1849,  president-judge  of
the  9th  judicial  district  of  Pennsylvania,  which
office  he  filled  until  1852,  when  the  elective  judi-
ciary began.  He  then  resumed  hi.';  practice  at  the
bar  at  Carlisle,  which  has  been  one  of  great  activi-


ty and  success.  In  1871  he  was  tendered  the  ap-
pointment of  commissioner  of  agriculture,  which
he  at  first  declined ;  but,  the  offer  being  renewed,
he  accepted  the  appointment,  and  entered  upon  his
duties  on  1  Aug.  of  that  year,  serving  till  1877,
when  he  retired  to  Carlisle.  As  state  reporter  he
edited  the  reports  of  the  supreme  court  from  1832
till  1840  (10  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1834-'41),  and  sub-
sequently he  edited  the  reports  from  1841  till  1845
(9  vols.,  1842-'6). — Another  son  of  David,  Henry
Miller,  lawyer,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Pa..  10  Oct.,  1805,
was  graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in  1824,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1827,  and  began
practice  at  Pittsburg.  He  served  as  deputy  attor-
ney-general in  1828-'9,  sat  in  the  legislature  in
1835-8,  and  in  1841  was  appointed  U.  S.  attorney
for  the  eastern  district  of  Pennsylvania.  He  visited
Europe  in  1857,  in  1861  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Union  league  of  Philadelphia,  and  in  1868-'9
was  U.  S.  minister  to  Austria.  After  leaving  Vi-
enna, Mr.  Watts  visited  several  countries  in  Eu-
rope, and  on  his  return  engaged  in  the  develop-
ment of  the  iron  and  coal  interests  of  his  state.

WATTS,  John,  lovalist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
16  April,  1715 ;  d.  in  Wales  in  August,  1789.  He
married  Ann,  daughter  of  Stephen  De  Lancey,  in
July,  1742,  represented  New  York  city  in  the  as-
sembly for  many  years,  and  was  a  member  of  the
council  in  1757-'75.  He  was  one  of  the  wealthiest
land-proprietors  of  the  colony,  one  of  the  original
founders  and  trustees  of  the  New  York  society  li-
brary in  1754,  presented  its  first  clock  to  the  New
York  exchange  in  1760,  and  the  same  year  was
elected  the  first  president  of  the  New  York  city
hospital.  He  was  opposed  to  the  Revolution,  and
in  1775  removed  to  England.  His  estate  was  con-
fiscated, but  part  of  it  was  repurchased  and  re-
conveyed  on  1  July,  1784,  to  his  sons,  Robert  and
John.  His  wife,  Ann  De  Lancey,  died  two  months
after  leaving  New  York.  His  daughter,  Ann  (died
in  1793)  married  Capt.  Archibald  Kennedy,  of  the
royal  navy,  who  became  eleventh  Earl  of  Cassilis.
Their  son,  the  twelfth  earl,  was  born  in  this  coun-
try.— John's  son,  John,  b.  in  NewYorkcity,27Aug.,
1749 ;  d.  there,  3  Sept.,  1836,  was  the  last  royal  re-
corder of  the  city  of  New  York.  He  served  three
times  as  speaker  of  the  New  York  assembly,  was  a
member  of  congress  in  1793-'6,  and  from  1802  till
1808  was  judge  of  Westchester  county.  John  G.
Leake,  a  wealthy  resident  of  New  York  city,  dying
childless,  left  his  extensive  properties  to  his  rela-
tive, Robert  J.  Watts,  on  condition  that  Mr.  Watts
should  assume  the  name  of  Leake.  The  gentle-
man, the  only  living  son  of  John  Watts,  Jr.,  ac-
cepted the  property  on  the  terms  mentioned,  but
very  soon  died.  Mr.  Leake's  will  being  defective
as  to  the  real  estate,  that  escheated  to  the  state  of
New  York,  and  the  personal  property  went  to  his
father,  who,  being  grieved  that  his  only  male  rep-
resentative should  have  consented  to  change  his
name,  and  deeply  afflicted  by  the  loss  of  his  son,
determined  that  he  would  not  benefit  personally
by  the  money  thus  acquired,  but  apply  it  to  the
purpose  designed  by  Mr.  Leake  in  case  Robert  J.
Watts  had  not  assumed  his  name.  John  Watts
then  founded  and  endowed  the  charity  entitled  the
Leake  and  Watts  orphan-house.  In  1887  the  insti-
tution was  removed  to  Westchester  county,  N.  Y.,
the  property  having  been  purchased  as  a  site  for
the  Protestant  Episcopal  cathedral.  Mr.  Watts
married  his  cousin,  Jane  De  Lancey,  and  they  were
considered  the  handsomest  couple  of  the  day.

WATTS,  Robert,  educator,  b.  in  Fordham,
N.  Y.,  in  1812 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  8  Sept.,  1867.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1831  and  at  the


396


WATTS


WAY


College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1835.  While
an  undergraduate  he  was  appointed  lecturer  on  an-
atomy in  Vermont  medical  college,  and  in  1838  he
was  professor  of  anatomy  there  and  at  the  Berk-
shire medical  institution  at  Pittsfield,  Mass.  From
1839  till  his  death  he  was  professor  of  anatomy  in
the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  New  York
city,  and  from  1859  he  was  one  of  the  attending

Ehysicians  of  the  Nursery  and  child's  hospital,
•uring  all  this  period  he  was  extensively  engaged
in  private  practice.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  New  York  pathological  society  and  for  several
years  its  presiding  officer.  Dr.  Watts  contributed
many  articles  to  medical  periodicals  and  revised  and
edited,  with  notes,  several  manuals  of  anatomy.

WATTS,  Robert,  author,  b.  in  Moneylane,
County  Down,  Ireland,  10  July,  1820.  He  re-
moved to  this  country  and  was  graduated  at  Wash-
ington college,  Lexington,  Va.,  in  1849,  and  at
Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1852.  He  en-
tered the  ministry  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  es-
tablished the  Westminster  church  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1852,  and  became  its  pastor  in  1853.  Re-
turning to  Ireland,  he  was  installed  as  pastor  in
Dublin  in  1863,  and  in  1866  was  appointed  profes-
sor of  systematic  theology  in  the  Assembly's  col-
lege at  Belfast.  He  has  published  "Calvin  and
Calvinism  "  (Edinburgh,  1866) ;  "  Utilitarianism  "
(Belfast,  1868);  "  What  is  Presbyterianismf  "  (1870) :
"  Prelatic  Departures  from  Reformation  Princi-
ples" (Edinburgh,  1871);  "Arminian  Departures
from  Reformation  Principles"  (1871) ;  "  Atomism  "
(Belfast,  1874);  "  Herbert  Spencer's  Biological  Hy-
pothesis "  (1875) ;  "  The  Doctrine  of  Eternal  Pun-
ishment" (1877);  "The  New  Apologetic"  (Edin-
burgh, 1879) ;  "  The  Newer  Criticism  "  (1881) ;  and
"  The  Rule  of  Faith  and  the  Doctrine  of  Inspira-
tion "  (London,  1885).

WATTS,  Stephen,  lawyer,  b.  about  1743  ;  d.  in
Louisiana  in  1788.  He  was  the  son  of  Stephen
Watts,  of  Southampton,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  and  was
graduated  at  the  College  of  Philadelphia  (now  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania)  in  1762,  becoming  a  tutor
while  still  a  student.  In  1766  John  Sargent,  a
member  of  the  British  parliament,  offered  to  the
college  a  gold  medal  for  the  best  English  essay  on
the  "  Reciprocal  Advantage  of  a  Perpetual  Union
between  Great  Britain  and  her  American  Colonies."
Young  Watts  competed  for  the  medal,  and  his  es-
say on  the  subject  was  published  (Philadelphia,
1766).  The  medal  was  won  by  John  Morgan,  who
shortly  afterward  became  the  founder  of  the  first
medical  school  in  America.  Watts  was  elected  on
8  March,  1768,  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society.  He  studied  law,  and  in  1769  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia.  In  1774  he
settled  in  Louisiana,  and  afterward  became  re-
corder of  deeds  of  the  English  settlement  on  the
Mississippi.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Ralph
Assheton,  a  provincial  councillor  of  Pennsylvania,
and  his  daughter,  Margaret  Cyrilla,  became  the
wife  of  Don  Manuel  Gagoso  de  Lemos,  who  was
brigadier-general  and  governor  of  the  Spanish  colo-
ny at  Natchez  until  1797,  when  he  succeeded  the
Baron  de  Carondelet  as  governor  of  Louisiana.
Mr.  Watts  contributed  to  John  Beveridge's  "  Epis-
tolaeFamiliares"(1765).

WATTS,  Thomas  Hill,  statesman,  b.  in  Butler
county,  Ala.,  3  Jan.,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Virginia  in  1840,  and  began  the
practice  of  law  at  Greenville,  in  his  native  county,
in  1841.  In  1842  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,
and  he  was  returned  in  1844  and  1845.  He  removed
to  Montgomery  county  in  1847,  and  was  in  1849
sent  to  the  legislature  from  that  district  and  in


1853  to  the  state  senate.  In  1861.  with  William  L,
Yancey,  he  represented  Montgomery  county  in  the
Secession  convention.  In  the  same  year  he  went
to  the  seat  of  war  as  colonel  of  the  17th  Alabama
regiment,  remaining  there  until  April,  1862,  when
he  was  called  by  Jefferson  Davis  to  act  as  attorney-
general  in  his  cabinet.  In  1863  he  was  elected
governor  of  Alabama,  and  he  held  this  post  until
the  close  of  the  civil  war.  He  is  active  in  the  re-
ligious enterprises  of  the  Baptist  denomination,  to
which  he  belongs.

WAUGH,  Beverly,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Fairfax
county,  Va.,  28  Oct.,  1789  ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md..  9
Feb.,  1858.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  Methodist  church  at  Alexandria,  Va.  It
is  supposed  that  he  was  employed  in  one  of  the
government  offices  for  three  or  four  years,  for
through  life  he  was  noted  for  his  excellent  pen-
manship and  accuracy  in  accounts.  From  the
time  he  was  eighteen  years  old  until  a  short  time
before  his  death  he  kept  a  journal  which  amounted
to  several  manuscript  volumes.  In  1808  he  entered
the  ministry,  and  at  the  end  of  three  years  he  was
stationed  in  the  city  of  Washington.  He  was
elected  by  the  Baltimore  conferences  to  the  general
conferences  of  1816  and  1820.  In  1824.  on  account
of  his  favoring  the  election  of  presiding  elders,
which  the  majority  of  his  conference  did  not  ap-
prove, he  was  not  a  representative.  In  1828  he  was
again  elected  a  member,  and  he  was  at  that  time
chosen  assistant  editor  and  book-agent  and  removed
to  the  city  of  New  York.  In  1832  he  was  made
principal  agent,  though  not  a  member  of  the  gen-
eral conference,  and  in  1836  he  was  made  bishop.
In  this  post  he  continued,  travelling  almost  con-
stantly until  1852,  when  he  became  senior  bishop
of  the  church.  After  that  time  his  health  gradii-
ally  failed  until  he  died.  He  is  buried  in  Mount
Olivet  cemetery,  Baltimore,  near  the  graves  of
Bishops  Asbury  and  Emory.

WAUL,  Thomas  N.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Sumter  dis-
trict, S.  C,  8  Jan.,  1815.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  South  Carolina,  studied  law  in  Vicks-
burg,  Miss.,  under  Sargeant  S.  Prentiss,  and  began
to  practise  in  1835.  While  residing  in  Mississippi  he
was  chosen  judge  of  the  circuit  court.  Having  re-
moved to  Texas,  he  was  elected  one  of  her  repre-
sentatives in  the  1st  Confederate  congress.  He  was
a  brigadier-general  in  the  Confederate  army,  hav-
ing raised  a  command  that  was  known  as  "  Waul's
legion,"  and  he  was  severely  wounded  during  an
engagement  in  Louisiana.  Both  in  Mississippi
and  Texas  he  has  been  active  in  the  affairs  of  the
Baptist  denomination,  with  which  he  is  associated.

WAY,  Andrew  John  Henry,  artist,  b.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  27  April,  1826;  d.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  7  Feb.,  1888.  He  studied  first  with
John  P.  Frankenstein  in  Cincinnati,  then  with
Alfred  J.  Milller  in  Baltimore,  and  in  1850  went
to  Paris.  After  a  stay  in  Europe  of  four  years  he
returned  to  his  native  country,  settling  in  Balti-
more. For  some  time  his  attention  was  given
mainly  to  portraiture,  but  a  fruit-piece  that  he
painted  about  1859  attracted  the  attention  of
Emanuel  Leutze,  on  whose  advice  he  devoted  him-
self thenceforth  to  the  painting  of  still-life  sub-
jects. In  this  branch  he  had  great  success,  ex-
celling especially  in  the  representation  of  grapes.
At  the  Philadelphia  exhibition  of  1876  he  received
a  medal  for  two  panels.  His  numerous  works  in-
clude "A  Christmas  Memory"  (1870);  "Prince
Albert  Grapes  "  and  "  Flora  and  Pomona  "  (1874) ;
"  Wild  Fowl "  (1882)  :  "  A  Sportsman's  Luck  '"
(1883);  and  "Tomv  Sweetheart"  and  "Prepara-
tion for  Apple  Toddy"  (1887). Several  of  his


WAYLAND


WAYLAND


397


C7 '/fr&UCf6z^J^


Saintings  have  been  lithographed. — His  son.  George
.revitt,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  29  Oct.,  1854,  was
educated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy,  studied  art
in  Paris,  and  has  followed  it  as  a  profession.
Among  his  works  are  "Sunset"  (1883)  and  "Twi-
light on  the  Susquehanna,"  "  Village  Scene  in
Brownsville,"  and  "  On  the  Upper  Potomac  "  (1884).
WAYLAND,  Francis,  educator,  b.  in  New  York
city,  11  March,  1796;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  30
Sept.,  1865.  He  was  the  son  of  Francis  Wayland,
a  Baptist  minister,  who  emigrated  from  England,
and  was  the  pastor  of  churches  in  Poughkeepsie,
Troy,  Albany,  and  Saratoga  Springs. The  son

was  graduated  in
1813  at  Union
college,  then  un-
der the  presiden-
cy of  Dr.  Elipha-
let  Nott,  whose
spirit  and  meth-
ods influenced
largely  his  own
future  course  as
a  college  presi-
dent. Immedi-
ately upon  his
graduation  he
spent  three  years
in  the  study  ox
medicine.  Hav-
ing meanwhile
united  with  a
Baptist  church,
and  feeling  that
duty  called  him  to  the  Christian  ministry,  he  en-
tered in  1816  the  Andover  theological  seminary,
but  at  the  end  of  a  year  he  left  to  become  a  tutor  in
Union  college,  which  office  he  held  for  four  years.
He  was  called  in  1821  to  the  pastorate  of  the  1st
Baptist  church  in  Boston,  and  soon  became  recog-
nized as  a  man  of  rich  and  varied  gifts.  His  preach-
ing, though  unaided  by  an  attractive  delivery,  was
greatly  admired  for  its  broad  and  deep  thoughtful-
ness  and  its  fine  grace  of  expression.  His  sermons
on  "  The  Moral  Dignity  of  the  Missionary  Enter-
prise "  (1823)  and  "  The  Duties  of  an  American  Citi-
zen" (1825)  placed  him  in  the  front  rank  of  Ameri-
can preachers.  The  former,  in  particular,  has  ob-
tained wide  celebrity.  In  1826  he  accepted  a  pro-
fessorship in  Union  college,  but  he  left  it  in  Feb-
ruary, 1827,  to  take  the  presidency  of  Brown  uni-
versity, which  office  he  filled  for  twenty-eight  years
with  distinguished  honor  to  himself  and  the  highest
advantage  to  the  university.  It  felt  at  once  in  all
its  departments  the  inspiration  of  a  new  life,  and
speedily  enjoyed  a  greatly  enlarged  prosperity.
Dr.  Wayland's  instructions  in  psychology,  political
economy,  and  ethics,  especially  the  last,  were  in
a  high  degree  stimulating  to  his  pupils,  while  his
strong  personality  was  felt  by  the  students  of
every  class  as  an  educating  and  elevating  force.
Not  satisfied  with  the  old  text-books,  he  prepared
lectures  on  all  the  subjects  that  he  taught.  He
delivered  weekly  sermons  to  the  students  in  the
chapel,  often  attended  their  prayer-meetings,  and
gathered  them  for  Bible  instruction.  In  all  these
services  he  was  singularly  effective.  Though  he
was  naturally  conservative,  his  clear  perceptions
and  sound  judgment  made  him,a  pioneer  reformer
in  educational  methods.  In  1850  his  views  led  to
a  reorganization  of  Brown  university,  so  as  to  give
a  place  to  the  more  modern  branches  of  learning,
and  to  allow  a  larger  liberty  in  the  election  of
studies,  changes  that  since  his  day  have  almost  uni-
versally been  adopted. After  his  retirement  from


the  presidency  in  1855  he  served  for  a  year  and  a
half  as  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Provi-
dence. Subsequently  he  gave  his  strength  to  re-
ligious and  humane  work,  devoting  much  time  to
the  inmates  of  the  Rhode  Island  state  prison  and
reform  school.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Union  in  1827  and  Harvard  in  1829,  and  that
of  LL.  D.  from  the  latter  in  1852.  Dr.  Wayland
was  a  prolific  author.  Besides  about  fifty  sermons
and  addresses,  his  published  works  are  "  Occasional
Discourses"  (Boston,  1833);  "Elements  of  Moral
Science  "  (New  York,  1835 ;  abridged  ed.  for
schools,  Boston,  1836 ;  with  notes  and  analysis  by
Joseph  Angus,  D.  D.,  London,  1857;  with  analysis
by  Rev.  George  B.  Wheeler,  1863 ;  translated  into
several  foreign  languages) ;  "  Elements  of  Political
Economy"  (New  York,  1837;  abridged  ed.,  Bos-
ton, 1840) ;  "  Moral  Law  of  Accumulation  "  (Bos-
ton, 1837) ;  "  The  Limitations  of  Human  Respon-
sibility" (1838);  "Thoughts  on  the  Present  Colle-
giate System  in  the  United  States  "  (1842) ;  "  Do-
mestic Slavery  considered  as  a  Scriptural  Institu-
tion," a  correspondence  between  Dr.  Wayland  and
Rev.  Richard  Fuller,  of  Beaufort,  S.  C.  (1845);
"  Sermons  delivered  in  the  Chapel  of  Brown  Uni-
versity" (1849);  "Report  to  the  Corporation  of
Brown  University  on  the  Changes  in  the  System
of  Collegiate  Education  "  (Providence,  1850);  me-
moirs of  Harriet  Ware  (1850)  and  Adoniram  Judson
(2  vols.,  Boston,  1853) ;  "  Elements  of  Intellectual
Philosophy  "  (1854) ;  "  Notes  on  the  Principles  and
Practices  of  Baptist  Churches  "  (1857) ;  "  Sermons
to  the  Churches"  (1858);  "Salvation  by  Christ"
(1859) ;  "  Letters  on  the  Ministry  of  the  Gospel,"
addressed  to  Hem  an  Lincoln  (1863);  and  "Memoir
of  Thomas  Chalmers,  D.  D."  (1864).  See  a  memoir,
with  selections  from  his  personal  reminiscences  and
correspondence,  by  his  sons,  Francis  and  Heman
Lincoln  Wayland  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1867),  and
his  funeral  sermon  by  Prof.  George  I.  Chace  (1866).
— His  son,  Francis,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
23  Aug.,  1826,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1846,
studied  at  Harvard  law-school  and  in  Springfield,
Mass.,  and  began  practice  in  Worcester  in  1850.  In
1858  he  removed  to  New  Haven,  Conn.,  and  in
1864  he  was  elected  judge  of  probate  for  that  city.
In  1869  he  was  elected  lieutenant-governor  of  Con-
necticut. In  1872  he  was  appointed  to  a  profes-
sorship in  the  law-school  of  Yale,  and  in  the  next
year  he  was  made  dean  of  that  school.  Dr.  Way-
land  is  president  of  the  boards  of  directors  of  the
Connecticut  state  prison,  the  Connecticut  prison
association,  the  National  prison  association,  the
Organized  charities  of  New  Haven,  and  the  Con-
necticut general  hospital  in  that  city.  He  was
president  of  the  American  Baptist  education  so-
ciety, and  is  vice-president  of  the  American  Baptist
missionary  union.  In  1874  he  was  president  of  the
board  of  visitors  to  the  U.  S.  military  academy  at
West  Point,  and  in  1880  he  was  vice-president  of
the  board  of  visitors  to  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  at
Annapolis.  He  was  for  several  years  chairman  of
the  jurisprudence  department  of  the  American  so-
cial science  association,  and  was  chosen  in  1880
president  of  that  body.  He  is  active  in  the  edu-
cational and  benevolent  enterprises  of  the  Baptist
denomination,  to  which  he  belongs.  He  received
in  1879  from  Rochester  university  the  degree  of
LL.  D.,  and  the  same  from  Brown  in  1881.  Be-
sides articles  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"  he  pub-
lished papers  on  "  Tramps  "  and  "  Out-Door  Relief,"
prepared  for  the  American  social  science  asso-
ciation.— Another  son,  Heman  Lincoln,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  23  April,  1830,  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1849,  and,  after  spending  a


398


WAYMAN


WAYNE


year  (1849-'50)  in  studying  theology  at  Newton,
taught  for  a  short  time  at  the  academy  in  Town-
shend,  Vt.,  and  spent  the  years  1852-'4  as  tutor  in
the  University  of  Rochester.  From  1854  till  1861
he  was  pastor  of  the  Main  street  Baptist  church  in
Worcester,  Mass.,  and  during  the  civil  war  he
served  as  chaplain  of  the  7th  Connecticut  volun-
teers. After  the  war  he  spent  a  year  in  mission-
ary work  among  the  colored  people  in  Nashville,
Tenn.,  and  from  1865  till  1870  he  was  professor  of
rhetoric  and  logic  in  Kalamazoo  college,  Mich.
He  was  president  of  Franklin  college,  Ind.,  for
two  years,  and  then  became  editor  of  the  "  National
Baptist  "  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  which  office  he
still  holds.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Brown  in  1869.  Dr.  Wayland  has  contributed
articles  to  the  "  New  Englander  "  and  the  "  Baptist
Quarterly,"  and  has  published  numerous  sermons
and  addresses  on  education.

WAYMAN,  Alexander  Washington,  A.  M.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Caroline  county,  Md.,  in  September,
1821.  He  is  of  African  descent  and  was  brought  up
on  a  farm.  In  1843  he  was  admitted  into  the  Phila-
delphia conference  of  the  African  Methodist  Epis-
copal church,  and  he  was  elected  the  secretary  of
three  successive  general  conferences  of  his  church
—those  of  1856,  1860,  and  1864.  He  was  made
bishop  in  1864,  and  received  from  Howard  uni-
versity the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1877.  He  has  visited
almost  every  county  of  the  Union,  and  has  written
"  My  Recollections,"  "  Cyclopaedia  of  African  Meth-
odism," and  "  Wayman  on  the  Discipline."

WAYNE,  Anthony,  soldier,  b.  in  Easttown,
Chester  co.,  Pa.,  1  Jan.,  1745 :  d.  in  Presque  Isle
(now  Erie),  Pa.,  15  Dec,  1796.  His  grandfather
was  a  native  of  Yorkshire,  England,  and  settled  in

County  Wick-
low,  Ireland.  Al-
though a  farmer
by  occupation,  he
saw  military  ser-
vice, and  com-
manded a  body
of  dragoons  at
the  battle  of  the
Boyne,  under
William  III.  He
sold  out  in  Ire-
land, and,  coming
to  Chester  coun-
ty, Pa.,  purchased
property  there.
His  youngest  son
was  Isaac,  who
was  a  farmer  and
legislator,  and
held  a  commis-
sion in  part  of
the  forces  operat-
ing against  the
Indians.  Anthony  was  Isaac's  only  son,  and  was
educated  at  the  Philadelphia  academy.  He  became
a  land-surveyor,  and  in  1765  was  sent  to  Nova  Sco-
tia as  financial  agent  and  surveyor  in  the  service  of
a  wealthy  association,  on  the  recommendation  of
Benjamin  Franklin.  In  1767  he  married  and  set-
tled on  a  farm  in  his  native  county,  but  he  con-
tinued to  follow  the  practice  of  his  profession,  and
filled  several  local  offices.  He  was  chosen  in  1774
one  of  the  provincial  deputies  to  consider  the  dis-
turbing relations  between  the  colonies  and  Great
Britain,  and  also  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania
convention  that  was  held  in  Philadelphia  to  dis-
cuss similar  questions.  During  1774-'5  he  was
representative  from  his  native  county  to  the  Penn-


G^^hS^u,


sylvania  colonial  legislature,  and  in  1775  he  was  a
member  of  the  committee  of  safety.  Meanwhile,
his  fondness  for  military  affairs  led  to  his  study-
ing works  on  the  art  of  war,  and  to  his  drilling
such  of  his  neighbors  as  he  could  inspire  with  his
own  feelings.  He  raised  the  4th  regiment  of
Pennsylvania  troops,  and  was  commissioned  colonel
on  3  Jan.,  1776.  With  the  Pennsylvania  regiments
he  was  sent  to  re-enforce  the  northern  army,  and
in  June,  1776,  was  assigned  to  Gen.  John  Thomas's
brigade.  At  Three  Rivers  his  command  attacked
the  British,  and,  although  wounded  and  defeated,
he  withdrew  his  troops  creditably  and  concen-
trated the  force  at  Ticonderoga.  where  he  was
ordered  to  assume  charge.  On  21  Feb.,  1777,  he
was  commissioned  brigadier-general,  and  joined
the  army  under  Gen.  George  Washington  in  New
Jersey.  During  the  summer  of  that  year  he  was
constantly  on  the  alert,  engaged  in  driving  the
enemy  from  the  state,  and  his  "  bravery  and  good
conduct "  were  publicly  testified  to  by  Gen.  Wash-
ington. At  the  Brandywine  he  commanded  a
division,  and  was  charged  with  the  defence  of
Chadd's  Ford,  where  he  opposed  the  passage  of  the
river  by  Baron  von  Knyphausen  with  the  Hessians.
He  fought  all  day,  and  at  sunset  effected  a  success-
ful retreat.  Wayne  led  the  attack  at  Warren
Tavern  a  few  days  later,  and  then  had  command
of  a  flying  detachment  of  1,500  men.  for  the  pur-
pose of  harassing  the  British  rear ;  but  he  was  at-
tacked near  Paoli  by  superior  numbers  on  the  night
of  20  Sept.  Gen.  Wayne  quickly  formed  his  di-
vision, and,  while  his  right  sustained  a  fierce  at-
tack, a  retreat  was  directed  by  the  left,  and  the
whole  formed  again  not  far  from  the  ground  on
which  they  were  attacked.  Charges  by  Col.  Rich-
ard Humpton  led  to  Wayne's  demand  of  a  court  of
inquiry,  which  unanimously  acquitted  him  "  with
the  highest  honor."  He  was  with  the  right  wing
at  Germantown,  and  carried  the  position  that  was
assigned  to  him  to  take,  driving  the  enemy  back
more  than  two  miles,  when  the  Americans,  having
failed  in  their  purpose,  retreated.  During  the
winter  of  1777-'8  he  did  much  to  supply  the  Ameri-
can camp  at  Valley  Forge  with  supplies,  and  in
March,  1778,  made  a  successful  raid  into  the  Brit-
ish lines,  capturing  horses,  cattle,  and  other  mate-
rial. After  Sir  Henry  Clinton  abandoned  Phila-
delphia, Wayne  hung  on  the  rear  of  the  English,
realizing  the  truth  of  what  had  been  said  of  him
early  in  the  war,  that  "  where  Wayne  went  there
was  a  fight  always ;  that  was  his  business."  At
Monmouth  Wayne  was  the  first  to  attack,  but  was
ordered  to  retreat  by  Gen.  Charles  Lee.  After
Washington  had  assumed  command,Wayne  came  up
with  his  troops  and  gave  victory  to  the  Americans.
Col.  Henry  Monckton,  perceiving  that  the  fate  of  the
conflict  depended  upon  driving  Wayne  away  or
capturing  him,  led  his  troops  in  a  bayonet  charge,
in  which  almost  every  British  officer  was  killed,  in-
cluding the  leader.  After  this  the  British  fell
back,  and  in  the  night  silently  retreated.  During
the  summer  of  1779  Washington  organized  a  corps
of  light  infantry,  the  command  of  which  he  gave
to  Gen.  Wayne.  His  best-known  achievement  was
the  capture  of  Stony  Point,  a  post  on  the  Hudson
river  that  commanded  King's  Ferry,  the  crossing-
place  between  the  New  England  colonies  and  those
to  the  southward.  It  was  strongly  fortified,  and  was
connected  with  the  main-land  by  a  tide-submerged
causeway  across  a  narrow  marsh,  making  it  an  isl-
and at  high  tide.  The  garrison  of  600  infantry
was  commanded  bv  Col.  Johnson.  Wayne  de-
termined to  carry  the  place  by  storm,  and  on  15
July,  1779,  marched  toward  the  fort,  reaching  a


WAYNE


WAYNE


399


point  within  a  mile  and  a  half  of  the  works  at  8
o'clock  in  the  evening.  At  midnight  the  Ameri-
cans advanced  in  two  columns,  with  unloaded
muskets  and  fixed  bayonets,  and.  surprising  the
pickets,  forced  their  way  through  every  obstacle  to
the  centre  of  the  fort.  Wayne' received  a  wound
in  the  head,  but,  determining  to  die  in  the  fort  if
the  wound  was  mortal,  entered  the  works  with  his
troops,  supported  by  his  aides.  The  garrison  soon
surrendered,  and  not  a  life  was  taken  after  the  flag
was  hauled  down.  The  ordnance  and  stores  were
conveyed  to  West  Point,  and  the  works  were  de-
stroyed. Congress  voted  a  gold  medal  to  Wayne,
and'silver  ones  to  his  two  subordinate  command-
ers. He  also  received  thanks  from  congress  "  for
his  brave,  prudent,  and  soldier-like  conduct  in  the
well-conducted  attack  on  Stony  Point/'  and  a  simi-
lar testimonial  was  given  him  by  the  general  as-
sembly of  his  native  state  of  Pennsylvania.  A  year
later  he  was  sent  to  capture  Fort  Lee,  but  it  was
too  strongly  fortified.  He  was,  however,  success-
ful in  sweeping  the  country  of  cattle,  horses,  and
of  everything  available  for  the  use  of  the  enemy's
army,  and  thwarted  Gen.  Clinton's  plans.  This
raid  gave  rise  to  Maj.  John  Andre's  poem  of  "  The
Cow  Chase,"  which  ended  with  the  stanza :
"  And  now  I've  closed  my  epic  strain,
I  tremble  as  I  show  it,
Lest  this  same  warrio-drover  Wayne
Should  ever  catch  the  poet."
As  if  by  poetic  justice,  Wayne  had  command  of
the  troops  from  whom  the  guard  was  drawn  that
attended  Andre's  execution.  On  1  Jan.,  1781,
1,300  men  of  the  Pennsylvania  line  mutinied;  but
Wayne,  by  his  tact,  arranged  the  matter  peaceably
to  the  advantage  of  the  government  and  the  satis-
faction of  the  troops.  Soon  afterward  he  was  sent
by  Washington  to  join  Lafayette,  who  was  then
operating  against  Lord  Cornwallis  in  Virginia.  At
Jamestown  Ford  the  British  appeared  to  be  falling
back  to  avoid  Lafayette,  and  Wayne  attacked,  by
the  latter's  orders,  but  found  himself  confronted  by
the  entire  British  force.  Unable  to  retreat,  he  at
once  charged  the  enemy  and  fell  back  after  discon-
certing a  projected  manoeuvre  against  Lafayette.
This  action  at  Green  Springs  on  6  July,  1781,  dem-
onstrated Wayne's  great  ability  as  a  general,  in
that  he  turned  an  almost  positive  defeat  into  a
success.  Wayne  was  actively  engaged  in  the  in-
vestment and  capture  of  Yorktown.  The  first
parallel  was  opened  by  him  and  Gen.  James  Clin-
ton with  six  regiments  on  6  Oct.,  1781,  and  five
days  later  the  second  parallel  was  begun  by  the
Pennsylvania  and  Maryland  troops,  covered  by  two
battalions  under  the  command  of  Wayne.  In  the
attack  on  the  14th,  Wayne  supported  the  French
troops  with  his  Pennsylvania  regiments.  After
the  surrender  he  was  sent  to  join  Gen.  Nathanael
Greene  in  the  south,  and  on  the  night  of  23-24
June  he  was  surrounded  by  a  numerous  body  of
Creek  Indians  under  an  able  chief  and  a  British
officer.  For  a  few  moments  they  held  possession
of  his  artillery,  but,  mustering  his  forces,  Wayne
attacked  the  assailants  so  furiously  in  flank  and
rear  with  sword  and  bayonet  alone,  that  they  soon
broke  and  fled.  With  his  own  hand  Wayne  cut
down  a  Creek  chieftain,  and  in  the  morning  the
dead  body  of  Guistersigo,  the  principal  warrior  of
the  Creeks,  and  the  bitterest  enemy  of  the  Ameri-
cans among  these  Indians,  was  found  on  the  battle-
field. When  Charleston,  S.  C,  was  evacuated  by
the  British  on  14  Dec,  1782,  Gen.  Wayne  took
possession  of  that  city,  which  was  the  last  military
service  he  performed  during  the  Revolutionary
war. The  brevet  rank  of  major-general  was  con-


ferred on  him  on  10  Oct.,  1783.  He  then  returned
to  Pennsylvania  and  resumed  his  civil  life.  In
1784  he  was  elected  to  the  general  assembly  from
Chester  county,  and  also  served  in  the  convention
that  ratified  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.
Subsequently  he  settled  in  Georgia  on  a  tract  of
land  that  the  state  gave  him  as  a  recompense  for
his  military  services,  and  was  elected  a  delegate  to
the  convention  that  framed  the  state  constitution
in  1787.  He  was  elected  from  Georgia  to  congress,
and  served  from  24  Oct.,  1791,  to  21  March,  1792,
when  his  seat  was  contested  and  congress  declared
it  vacant.  A  new  election  was  ordered,  but  he  de-
clined to  be  a  candidate.  He  was  nominated  on
Washington's  recommendation  to  be  general-in-
chief  of  the  U.  S.  army,  with  the  rank  of  major-
general,  and  was  confirmed  in  that  office  on  3
April,  1792.  ,
Certain  of  the
Indian  tribes
of  the  north-
west, instigat-
ed by  the  Brit-
ish, refused  to
cease  hostili-
ties after  the
peace  of  1783,
and  previous
attempts  by
Gen.  Josiah
Harmer  and
Gen.  Arthur
St.  Clair  at  subjugating  the  savages  had  failed.
Wayne  collected  an  adequate  force,  and,  con-
scious that  failure  in  negotiating  with  the  In-
dians would  be  followed  by  immediate  hostilities
on  the  frontiers,  spent  more  than  a  year  in  drill-
ing his  troops  and  training  them  for  the  peculiar
service  for  which  they  were  required.  In  the  au-
tumn of  1793  he  marched  into  the  northwest,  and
near  Greenville,  Ohio,  built  a  stockade  which  he
called  Fort  Recovery.  He  pushed  on  during  the
following  summer  through  the  wilderness  toward
Maumee  river,  and  at  its  junction  with  the  Au-
glaize he  built  Fort  Adams,  as  an  intermediate
post.  In  August  he  went  down  the  Maumee  with
1,000  men,  and  encamped  near  a  British  post  at
the  foot  of  the  Maumee  rapids,  called  Fort  Miami.
Here  Gen.  Wayne,  with  a  force  ample  to  destroy
the  Indians  in  spite  of  British  influence,  offered
them  peace  if  they  would  lay  down  their  weapons.
On  their  refusal  he  advanced  to  the  head  of  the
rapids,  and  on  20  Aug.,  at  Fallen  Timbers,  attacked
and  defeated  the  Indians.  Almost  all  the  dead
warriors  were  found  with  British  arms.  After
laying  their  country  waste  he  moved  up  to  the
junction  of  St.  Mary's  and  St.  Joseph's  rivers,
where  he  built  a  strong  fortification  which  he  called
Fort  Wayne.  He  spent  the  winter  in  Greenville,
where,  on  3  Aug.,  1795,  was  signed  a  treaty  with
the  Indians,  in  which  twelve  tribes  participated.
A  lasting  peace  followed,  and  a  large  territory
was  acquired  by  the  United  States.  Wayne  re-
turned on  a  visit  to  Pennsylvania,  and  was  ap-
pointed sole  commissioner  to  treat  with  the  Indians
of  the  northwest,  and  to  take  possession  of  all  the
forts  that  had  been  held  by  the  British  in  that
territory;  but.  while  descending  Lake  Erie  from
Detroit,  he  died  from  an  attack  of  the  gout.  Al-
though Washington  called  him  "  prudent,"  Wayne's
unexpected  successes  in  perilous  expeditions  won
for  him  his  more  popular  appellation  of  "  Mad
Anthony  Wayne."  The  title  of  "  Dandy  Wayne  "
was  also  applied  to  him,  owing  to  his  constant  at-
tention to  dress,  and  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Wash-


400


WAYNE


WEAKLEY


ington  he  expressed  himself  in  favor  of  an  elegant
uniform  and  soldierly  appearance  in  preference  to
poorly  clad  troops  with  a  greater  amount  of  ammu-
nition. He  was  called  "  Black  Snake  "  by  the  In-
dians, perhaps  because  that  reptile  will  attack  any
other  species  and  rarely  gets  the  worst  of  an  en-
counter. After  he  defeated  them  in  1794  he  was
given  the  name  of  "  Wind  "  or  "  Tornado,"  because
"  he  was  exactly  like  a  hurricane,  that  drives  and
tears  and  prostrates  everything  before  it."  His
body  was  removed  from  Presque  Isle  in  1809  by
his  son,  and  buried  in  Radnor  churchyard  in  his
native  county,  where  the  Pennsylvania  Society  of
the  Cincinnati  caused  a  marble  monument  to  be
erected,  which  was  dedicated  with  appropriate
ceremonies  on  4  July  of  that  year.  His  portrait
was  painted  by  Charles  Wilson  Peale  and  by  John
Trumbull,  from  whose  picture  our  vignette  is
copied.  Wayne's  residence  at  Easttown,  Chester
co.,  Pa.,  is  represented  in  the  accompanying  illus-
tration. See  "  Life  of  Anthony  Wayne,  by  John
Armstrong,  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biography,"
and  "  Orderly  Book  of  the  Northern  Army  at  Fort
Ticonderoga  and  Mount  Independence  "  (Albany,
1859). — His  son,  Isaac,  b.  in  Warren  county,  Pa.,
in  1770 ;  d.  in  Chester  county.  Pa.,  25  Oct.,  1852,
received  a  public-school  education,  was  graduated
at  Dickinson  college,  and  acquired  the  title  of  colo-
nel by  his  military  experiences.  He  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in  1795.
In  1814  he  was  the  Federal  candidate  for  governor
of  Pennsylvania,  but  was  defeated.  He  was  elected
to  congress  from  Pennsylvania  as  a  Federalist,  and
served  from  1  Dec,  1823,  to  3  March,  1825.— His
great-nephew,  William,  b.  6  Dec,  1828,  is  the
grandson  of  Gen.  Wayne's  daughter,  and  took  the
name  of  Wayne,  being  the  representative  of  the
family  and  the  owner  of  Waynesborough.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1846,  and  during  the  civil  war  held  the  rank  of
captain  in  the  97th  Pennsylvania  volunteers.  From
1881  till  1887  he  served  as  a  member  of  the  Penn-
sylvania assembly.

WAYNE,  Henry  Constantino,  soldier,  b.  in
Savannah,  Ga.,  8  Sept.,  1815 ;  d.  there,  15  March,
1883.  He  was  educated  at  Northampton  and  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  and  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1838.  He  served  on  the
northern  frontier  at  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  in  1838-40,
during  the  Canadian  border  disturbances ;  on  the
Maine  frontier  at  Houlton  in  1840-'l,  pending  the
disputed- territory  controversy,  and  at  the  tJ.  S.
military  academy  in  1841-6  as  assistant  instructor
of  artillery  and  cavalry,  of  the  sword-exercise  and
of  infantry  tactics,  and  as  quartermaster.  He
was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  the  1st  artillery,  16
May,  1842.  He  was  on  quartermaster  duty  dur-
ing the  war  with  Mexico,  1846-'7.  He  took  part
in  the  battles  of  Churubusco  and  Contreras,  being
brevetted  major  for  gallant  conduct  in  those  en-
gagements. From  1848  till  1855  he  was  in  charge
of  the  clothing  bureau  of  the  quartermaster-gen-
eral's office  at  Washington,  D.  (J.  Soon  after  the
annexation  of  the  territory  acquired  by  the  United
States  from  Mexico,  the  question  of  transportation
coming  up,  Maj.  Wayne  suggested  that  camels
should  be  used  as  a  means  of  conveyance  over  the
plains  of  Texas  and  New  Mexico.  The  government
adopted  the  suggestion,  and  Maj.  Wayne  was  sent
to  Egypt  to  investigate  and  report  upon  the  sub-
ject. On  his  return  his  recommendations  were
adopted,  and  he  was  employed  in  Texas  in  1857-8
in  testing  the  adaptability  of  these  animals  for
army  transportation.  He  was  again  employed  at
the  quartermaster -general's  office  from  1858  till


1860,  when  he  resigned  to  become  adjutant-  and
inspector-general  of  the  state  of  Georgia  under  the
Confederacy.  He  received  in  1858  a  first-class  gold
medal  from  the  Societe  imperiale  zoologique  d'ac-
climatation  of  Paris,  for  the  successful  introduc-
tion and  acclimation  of  the  camel  in  the  United
States.  He  was  also  the  author  of  "  The  Sword  Ex-
ercise, arranged  for  Military  Instruction  "  (1856).

WAYNE,  James  Moore,  jurist,  b.  in  Savan-
nah, Ga.,  in  1790;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  5  July,
1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1808,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1810,  and
began  practice  at  Savannah.  He  served  for  two
years  in  the  state  house  of  representatives,  was
elected  mayor  of  Savannah  in  1823,  and  chosen
judge  of  the  superior  court  in  1824,  serving  for  five
years.  He  was  a  member  of  congress  in  1829-'35,
took  an  active  part  as  a  debater,  and  was  a  sup-
porter of  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson,  who  appointed
him,  9  Jan.,  1835,  associate  justice  of  the  U.  S.  su-
preme court.  His  opinions  upon  admiralty  juris-
prudence are  cited  as  being  of  high  authority.  In
congress  he  favored  free-trade,  opposed  internal
improvements  by  congress,  except  of  rivers  and
harbors,  and  opposed  a  recharter  of  the  U.  S.
bank,  claiming  that  it  would  confer  dangerous
political  powers  upon  a  few  individuals.  He  took
an  active  part  in  the  removal  of  the  Indians  to
the  west.  Judge  Wayne  presided  in  two  conven-
tions that  were  held  for  revising  the  constitution
of  Georgia.  Princeton  college  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  in  1849.

WEAD,  Charles  Kasson,  physicist,  b.  in  Ma-
lone,  N.  Y.,  1  Sept.,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Vermont  in  1872,  afterward  was
appointed  professor  of  physics  in  the  Pittsburg
(Pa.)  high-school,  and  in  1877  accepted  a  similar
chair  in  the  University  of  Michigan,  where  he  con-
tinued until  1885.  Subsequently  he  settled  in  Hart-
ford, and  became  an  electrician.  Since  1880  he  has
been  a  fellow  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science.  He  has  prosecuted  origi-
nal experimental  work  in  acoustics,  the  results  of
which  he  has  contributed  to  the  "American  Jour-
nal of  Sciences  "  and  other  periodicals.  He  has
published  "  The  Aims  and  Methods  of  the  Teach-
ing of  Physics  "  (Washington,  1884).

WEAKLEY,  Robert,  pioneer,  b.  in  Halifax
county,  Va.,  20  July,  1764 ;  d.  near  Nashville,  Tenn.,
4  Feb.,  1845.  He  joined  the  Revolutionary  army  at
the  age  of  sixteen,  and  served  in  it  till  the  close  of
the  war.  He  then  emigrated  to  the  country  beyond
the  Alleghanies,  taking  with  him  his  entire  worldly
possessions,  a  horse,  saddled  and  bridled,  and  one
dollar  and  seventy-five  cents  in  currency.  He  soon
rose  to  the  rank  of  colonel  in  the  force  of  riflemen
with  which  James  Robertson  beat  off  the  raids  of
the  Creeks  and  Cherokees.  When  but  twenty-two
years  of  age  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  con-
vention that  North  Carolina  convened  to  ratify  the
Federal  constitution,  and  subsequently  he  was  a
member  of  the  Tennessee  house  of  representatives.
In  1809  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  in  1811  he
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  of  which
he  was  speaker  from  1819  till  1821,  and  again  from
1823  till  1825.  His  last  office  was  that  of  member
of  the  convention  to  revise  the  constitution  of  Ten-
nessee in  1834.  In  early  life  he  was  a  zealous
member  of  the  Methodist  church,  but,  marrying  a
lady  who  was  not  a  church  member,  he  was  called
to  account  for  thus  violating  the  rules  of  the  de-
nomination. He  was  told  that  if  he  expressed  his
regret,  no  further  action  would  be  taken ;  but  he
refused  to  do  so,  and  thenceforward  was  connected
with  no  religious  body.


WEARE


WEAVER


401


WEARE,  Meshech,  jurist,  b.  in  Hampton,
N.  H.,  16  June,  1713 ;  d.  in  Hampton  Falls,  N.  H.,
15  Jan.,  1786.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1735,  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  law,  also
sitting  in  the  legislature  for  several  years,  and
serving  as  speaker  in  1752.  In  1754  he  was  a  com-
missioner to  the  colonial  congress  at  Albany,  and
he  was  afterward  a  justice  of  the  supreme  court,
and  in  1777  became  chief  justice.  He  was  also  a
member  of  the  executive  council,  and  chairman  of
the  committee  of  safety  at  the  outset  of  the  Revo-
lution. He  was  elected  president  of  the  state  in
1776,  and  was  annually  re-elected  during  the  war,
and  in  1784  under  the  new  constitution.  He  was
made  fellow  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences  in  1782.  During  the  Revolution  he  ren-
dered great  services  in  raising  and  equipping  the
forces  that  were  sent  to  the  northern  frontier  of
New  Hampshire  under  Gen.  John  Stark  to  oppose
the  progress  of  Gen.  John  Burgoyne.

WEATHERSFORD,  William,  Indian  chief,  b.
in  the  Creek  settlement,  Ala.,  about  1770;  d.  in
Monroe  county,  Ala.,  in  1824.  His  father  was  a
white  trader,  and  his  mother  a  Seminole  Indian.
William  was  a  skilful  hunter  and  warrior,  and  in
the  second  war  with  Great  Britain  commanded  the
Creeks  against  the  U.  S.  forces.  On  14  April,  1814,
he  surrendered  voluntarily  to  Gen.  Andrew  Jack-
son, and  he  afterward  lived  peaceably  on  his  plan-
tation at  Little  River,  Monroe  county,  Ala.

WEAVER,  George  Sumner,  author,  b.  in
Rockingham,  Vt.,  24  Dec,  1818.  He  studied  law
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but,  relinquishing  law
for  theology,  was  ordained  as  a  Universalist  min-
ister in  1848.  He  has  published  "Lectures  on
Mental  Science  according  to  the  Philosophy  of
Phrenology  "  (New  York,  1852) ;  "  Hopes  and  Helps
for  the  Young  of  Both  Sexes  "  (1853) ;  "  Aims  and
Aids  for  Girls"  (1854);  "The  Ways  of  Life"
(1855);  " The  Christian  Household"  (1855);  "The
Open  Way  "  (1873) ;  "  Moses  and  Modern  Science  "
(1874) ;  "  The  Heart  of  the  World "  (1883) ;  and
"  Lives  and  Graves  of  our  Presidents  "  (1884).

WEAVER,  James  B.,  candidate  for  the  presi-
dency, b.  in  Dayton,  Ohio,  12  June,  1833.  He  was
graduated  at  the  law-school  of  Ohio  university.
Cincinnati,  in  1854.  In  April,  1861,  he  enlisted  as
a  private  in  the  2d  Iowa  infantry,  was  elected  a
lieutenant,  rose  to  be  major  on  3  Oct.,  1861,  and
after  the  senior  field-officers  had  fallen  at  Corinth
was  commissioned  colonel.  12  Oct.,  1862.  He  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  on  13  March,  1865,  for

f gallantry  in  action.  After  the  war  he  resumed
egal  practice,  was  elected  district  attorney  of  the
2d  judicial  district  of  Iowa  in  1866,  and  was  ap-
pointed assessor  of  internal  revenue  for  the  5th
district  of  the  state  in  1867,  serving  six  years.  He
became  editor  of  the  "  Iowa  Tribune,"  published
at  Des  Moines,  and  was  elected  to  congress,  taking
his  seat  on  18  March,  1879.  In  June,  1880,  he  was
nominated  for  the  presidency  by  the  convention  of
the  National  Greenback-Labor  party,  and  in  the
November  election  he  received  307,740  votes.  He
was  returned  to  congress  after  an  interval  of  two
terms  by  the  vote  of  the  Greenback  -  Labor  and
Democratic  parties,  taking  his  seat  on  7  Dec,  1885,
and  in  1886  was  re-elected.

WEAVER,  Jonathan,  bishop  of  the  United
Brethren  in  Christ,  b.  in  Carroll  county,  Ohio,  23
Feb.,  1824.  He  was  brought  up  on  a  farm,  educated
at  the  common  schools  and  at  Hagerstown  acad-
emy, and  in  1845  began  to  preach.  He  was  a
pastor  in  1847-52,  presiding  elder  in  1852-'7,  and
general  agent  for  Otterbein  university  in  1857-'65.
He  was  elected  in  1865  a  bishop  of  the  Church  of
vol.  vi. — 26


the  United  Brethren  in  Christ,  has  been  re-elected
five  times,  and  was  in  the  Ohio  diocese  in  1887.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Otterbein
university  in  1873.  He  has  published  "  Discourses
on  the  Resurrection  "  (Dayton.  Ohio,  1871) ;  "Min-
isterial Salary"  (1872);  "Divine  Providence"
(1873) ;  and  "  Universal  Restoration  not  sustained
by  the  Word  of  God"  (1878).  He  has  written
much  for  his  church  organ,  the  "  Religious  Tele-
scope," published  at  Dayton,  and  is  now  preparing
for  the  press  a  volume  of  sermons  by  different
ministers  of  his  denomination.

WEAVER,  William  Augustus,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Dumfries,  Va.,  in  1797;  d.  there  in  1846.  He
entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  4  Feb.,  1811,
and  made  his  first  cruise  in  the  "Chesapeake,"
which  was  captured  by  the  frigate  "  Shannon "
after  a  short  engagement  off  Boston,  1  June,  1813.
Midshipman  Weaver  was  severely  wounded  in  this
battle  and  was  taken  to  Halifax  as  a  prisoner  with
the  rest  of  the  officers  and  crew  who  survived.  He
was  promoted  to  lieutenant  after  the  war  and  com-
manded the  schooner  "  Tom  Bowlin"  in  1816  and
the  schooner  "Spark"  in  1817,  in  the  Mediterra-
nean squadron.  He  served  in  the  ship  "  Franklin  "
in  1818-'24  in  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Pacific
squadrons.  By  a  misunderstanding  as  to  his  leave
of  absence,  he  was  obliged  to  abandon  the  naval
service,  27  Nov.,  1824,  after  which  he  was  employed
by  the  government  in  the  state  department,  where
his  knowledge  of  modern  languages  made  his  ser-
vices specially  valuable.  He  was  secretary  of  the
commission  to  adjust  the  claims  of  the  Spanish
citizens,  was  commissioner  to  Mexico  in  1834,  and
superintendent  of  the  census  of  1840. — His  son,
Aaron  Ward,  naval  officer,  b.  in  the  District  of
Columbia,  1  July.  1832,  was  appointed  a  midship-
man in  the  navy,  10  May,  1848,  attended  the  naval
academy  in  1853-'4,  was  graduated,  and  became  a
passed  midshipman,  15  June,  1854.  He  was  com-
missioned lieutenant,  16  Sept.,  1855.  He  cruised
in  the  sloop  "  Marion,"  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  in
1858-'9,  and  came  home  in  the  prize  slaver  "  Ar-
dennes "  in  command.  When  the  civil  war  opened
he  was  assigned  to  the  steamer  "Susquehanna"  on
the  blockade,  in  which  he  participated  in  the  bom-
bardment and  capture  of  Fort  Hatteras  and  Fort
Clarke  at  Hatteras  inlet,  in  the  battle  of  Port
Royal  and  capture  of  Fort  Beauregard  and  Fort
Walker,  and  in  operations  on  the  coast  in  com-
mand of  the  armed  boats  before  the  fall  of  Fort
Pulaski.  He  was  present  at  the  engagements  with
batteries  on  Sewall's  point  and  at  the  capture  of
Norfolk,  Va.  He  was  commissioned  lieutenant-
commander,  16  July,  1862,  and  commanded  the
steam  gun-boat  "Winona,"  in  the  Western  Gulf
squadron,  in  1862-'3.  He  participated  in  the  en-
gagements at  Port  Hudson  in  December,  1862,  at
Plaquemine,  La.,  at  the  defeat  of  the  Confederates
when  they  attacked  Donaldsonville,  and  in  the
engagements  below  that  place  after  the  capture  of
Port  Hudson.  He  was  highly  commended  by  Ad-
miral Farragut  for  his  services.  He  had  the  gun-
boat -  Chippewa,"  in  the  North  Atlantic  blockading
squadron,  in  1864.  in  which  he  took  part  in  the
first  attack  on  Fort  Fisher.  He  was  transferred  to
command  the  monitor  "Mahopac,"  in  which  he
participated  in  the  final  attack  and  capture  of  Fort
Fisher  in  January,  1865,  and  was  recommended  for
promotion.  He  went  to  Charleston,  S.  ft,  and  was
in  the  advanced  picket  when  the  city  surrendered
and  its  forts  were  captured.  He  next  took  the
"Mahopac"  up  James  river,  and  was  present  at
the  fall  of  Richmond.  After  the  war  he  served  at
the  Boston  navy-yard. He  was  promoted  and  ad-


402


WEBB


WEBB


vanced  to  the  grade  of  commander,  25  July,  1866.  j
He  commanded  the  double-turreted  monitor  "  Ter-
ror" in  1870-'l,  in  which  he  went  to  Havana  under  |
great  difficulties,  owing  to  defective  boilers,  and
arrived  in  season  on  the  occasion  when  the  Spanish
students  were  executed  by  order  of  the  govern-
ment. During  the  excitement  and  threatened  war
with  Spain  owing  to  the  "Virginius"  affair,  he  was
selected  to  command  the  sea-going  iron-clad  "  Dic-
tator," then  one  of  the  most  formidable  vessels  of
the  navy,  in  which  he  was  for  some  time  the  senior
officer  of  the  forces  in  the  harbor  of  Havana.  He
remained  in  command  of  the  "  Dictator  "  until  May,
1877.  He  was  commissioned  captain,  8  Aug.,  1876,
was  equipment-officer  at  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  in
1879-'80,  and  captain  of  the  yard  in  1880-'!.  He
commanded  the  steam  sloop  "  Brooklyn,"  on  the
South  Atlantic  station,  in  1881-4.  He\vas  a  mem-
ber of  the  naval  examining  and  retiring  board  in
1885-'6,  was  promoted  to  commodore,  7  Oct.,  1886,
and  is  now  president  of  the  retiring-board.

WEBB,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Stamford,  Conn.,
13  Feb.,  1724;  d.  after  1794.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Connecticut  legislature  in  1758,  and  was  re-
chosen  twenty-three  times.  He  served  in  the
French  war,  and  attained  the  rank  of  captain  in
1760,  was  sent  by  congress,  in  May,  1775,  on  a
tour  of  inspection  to  Ticonderoga,  and  became
colonel  of  the  19th  regiment  in  July,  1775.  He
participated  in  the  battles  of  Long  Island,  27  Aug.,
1776,  White  Plains,  28  Oct.,  1776,  and  Whitemarsh,
5  Dec,  1777,  in  which  his  regiment  suffered  severe-
ly. He  retired  from  the  service  in  June,  1778.

WEBB,  Charles  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Rouse's
Point,  Clinton  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Jan.,  1834.  He  re-
ceived his  preliminary  education  in  his  native
place.  In  early  youth  he  ran  away  to  sea,  was  ab-
sent three  years,  and  on  his  return  went  to  Illinois,
to  which  state  his  parents  had  removed  in  the
mean  time.  He  was  editorially  connected  with  the
New  York  "Times"  in  1860-3  and  with  the  San
Francisco  "  Bulletin "  in  1863-'4,  and  then  edited
"  The  Californian,"  a  weekly,  which  he  left  in  1866.
He  had  been  engaged  in  business  on  the  banks  of
Mississippi  river  from  1856  till  1860,  dealt  subse-
quently in  wheat  in  Chicago,  and  at  a  later  period
was  a  banker  and  broker  in  Wall  street.  New  York.
In  1868  he  invented  and  patented  "  Webb's  adder,"
an  adding-machine  which  was  placed  upon  the
market  in  that  year ;  and  in  1874  he  invented,  pat-
ented, and  manufactured  a  cartridge-loading  ma-
chine, the  utility  of  which  was  recognized  by  the
manufacturers  of  fire-arms  and  others.  Mr.  Webb
is  now  engaged  in  constructing  an  improved  add-
er. He  has  published  "  Liffith  Lank,  or  Lunacy,"
a  travesty  of  Charles  Reade's  "  Griffith  Gaunt "
(New  York,  1867) ;  "  St.  Twel'mo,  or  the  Cunei-
form Cyclopedist  of  Chattanooga,"  a  travesty  of
Mrs.  Augusta  Evans  Wilson's  "  St.  Elmo  "  (1868) ;
"John  Paul's  Book"  (Hartford,  1874);  "The
Wickedest  Woman  in  New  York"  (New  York,
1875);  "Parodies,  Prose,  and  Verse  "  (1876);  and
"  Sea- Weed  and  what  we  seed  :  my  Vacation  at
Long  Branch  and  Saratoga  "  (1876).  In  San  Fran-
cisco he  brought  out  two  plays,  "  Our  Friend  from
Victoria"  (1865),  and  "  Ar'rah-na-Poke,"  a  bur-
lesque of  Dion  Boucicault's  "  Arrah-na-Pogue "
(1865).  He  edited,  under  the  name  of  "  John  Paul,"
"  The  Celebrated  Jumping  Frog."

WEBB,  George  James,  musician,  b.  near  Salis-
bury, Wiltshire,  England,  24  June,  1803 ;  d.  in  Or-
ange, N.  J.,  7  Oct.,  1887.  He  studied  music  under
Alexander  Lucas  in  Salisbury,  and  became  organ-
ist of  the  church  at  Falmouth.  In  1830  he  came
to  the  United  States,  settling  in  Boston. He  be-


came well  known  as  an  organist  and  teacher,  and
was  the  friend  and  associate  of  Lowell  Mason.
When  the  Boston  academy  of  music  was  founded,
in  1833,  he  and  Mason  were  appointed  as  musical
directors.  He  also  held  office  in  the  Handel  and
Haydn  society,  and  other  associations.  In  1871  he,
resided  in  Orange,  N.  J.,  and  his  time  after  this
was  devoted  principally  to  teaching  his  new  meth-
od for  treating  the  voice.  He  wrote,  with  Chester
G.  Allen,  "  Voice-Culture  "  (New  York,  1871 ;  re-
vised ed.,  1884),  and  edited  collections  of  vocal
music,  most  of  them  jointly  with  Lowell  Mason.

WEBB,  James,  Jurist,  b.  in  Georgia  in  1792 ;
d.  in  Goliad,  Tex.,  1  Nov.,  1856.  He  was  educated
at  William  and  Mary  college,  studied  law,  and,  re-
moving to  Georgia,  practised  his  profession  for  a
few  years,  after  which  he  was  made  judge  of  the
supreme  court.  While  filling  this  office  he  was
appointed  U.  S.  district  judge  in  the  territory  of
Florida,  which  post  he  held  for  many  years,  when
he  resigned.  In  1839  he  removed  to  the  republic
of  Texas,  and  was  successively  attorney-general  and
secretary  of  state  under  the  administration  of  Presi-
dent Mirabeau  B.  Lamar.  He  served  one  term  in
the  Texas  senate,  and  after  the  annexation  was  re-
porter of  the  decisions  of  the  supreme  court,  and
secretary  of  state.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
judge  of  the  14th  judicial  district.  With  Thomas
II.  Duval  he  published  "Reports  of  Cases  in  the
Supreme  Court  of  the  State  of  Texas,  1846-8"
(3  vols.,  Galveston.  1848-'51).

WEBB,  John  Russell,  educator,  b.  in  Brown-
ville,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  6  Aug..  1824 ;  d.  in  Ben-
ton Harbor,  Berrien  co.,  Mich.,  10  Sept.,  1887.  He
was  graduated  at  the  New  York  state  normal
school  at  Albany  among  the  first  students  in  1846.
While  still  a  pupil  of  David  P.  Page,  he  conceived
the  idea  of  teaching  children  to  read  by  familiariz-
ing them  at  once  with  the  complete  forms  of  words,
without  first  compelling  them  to  learn  the  letters
of  the  alphabet.  Soon  after  leaving  school,  and
while  teaching,  he  published  a  book  to  exemplify
this  method.  He  taught  with  success,  went  to  In-
dianapolis in  1851,  and  soon  afterward  relinquished
professional  work  on  account  of  failing  health,  and
settled  in  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  removing  in  1861  to
Michigan.  He  published  "  John's  First  Book  "  (Wa-
tertown,  N.  Y.,  1846)  and  "  Webb's  Word  Method,"
in  which  he  expounded  his  system  cf  instruction
(Detroit,  1864;  revised  ed.,  New  York,  1885).  be-
sides a  series  of  readers  emhodving  the  method.

WEBB,  Samuel  Blatchlev,  soldier,  b.  in  Weth-
ersfield,  Conn.,  15  Dec,  1753 ;  cf.  in  Claverack,  N.  Y.,
3  Dec,  1807.  He  was  descended  from  Richard
Webb,  of  Gloucestershire,  England,  who  was  made
a  freeman  of  Boston  in  1632,  and  accompanied  the
Rev.  Thomas  Hooker  in  the  settlement  of  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  in  1635.  He  was  a  step-son  and  pri-
vate secretary  to  Silas  Deane,  and  took  part  at  an
early  age  in  the  movements  that  preceded  the  Revo-
lution. In  command  of  a  company  of  light  infant-
ry he  left  Wethersfield  for  Boston  on  hearing  of
the  battle  of  Lexington,  participated  in  the  battle
of  Bunker  Hill,  where  he  was  wounded,  and  was
commended  in  general  orders  for  gallantry.  A  let-
ter that  he  wrote  to  his  step-father  describing  that
battle  is  now  possessed  by  the  Connecticut  histori-
cal society  at  Hartford.  He  was  soon  afterward
appointed  aide  to  Gen.  Israel  Putnam,  and  on  21
June,  1776,  was  made  private  secretary  and  aide-
de-camp  to  Washington,  with  the  rank  of  lieuten-
ant-colonel. He  wrote  the  order  for  promulgating
the  Declaration  of  Independence  in  New  York  city,
9  July,  1776,  and  was  associated  with  Col.  Joseph
Reed  a  few  days  later  in  refusing  to  receive  a  let-


WEBB


WEBB


403


ter  from  Lord  Howe  that  was  addressed  to  "  George
Washington,  Esq."  He  was  present  at  the  battle
of  Long  Island,  was  wounded  at  White  Plains  and
Trenton,  and  was  engaged  also  at  Princeton.  He
raised  and  organized,  almost  entirely  at  his  own
expense,  the  3d  Connecticut  regiment,  of  which  he
'assumed  command  in  1777.  He  took  part  with  it
in  Gen.  Samuel  H.  Parsons's  unfortunate  expedi-
tion to  Long  Island,  was  captured  with  his  com-
mand by  the  British  fleet,  10  Dec,  1777,  and  was
not  exchanged  till  1780,  when  he  took  command
of  the  light  infantry,  with  the  brevet  rank  of
brigadier-general.  He  arranged  the  meeting  be-
tween Washington  and  Rochambeau  at  Wethers-
field,  Conn.,  19  May,  1781,  and  was  a  founder  of
the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  in  1783.  When
Washington  took  the  oath  of  office  as  first  presi-
dent of  the  United  States,  Gen.  Webb  was  selected
to  hold  the  Bible  on  which  he  was  sworn.  From
1789  till  his  death  he  resided  at  Claverack,  Colum-
bia co.,  N.  Y. — His  son,  James  Watson,  journal-
ist, b.  in  Claverack,  N.  Y.,  8  Feb.,  1802 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  7  June,  1884,  was  educated  at  Coopers-
town,  N.  Y.,  en-
tered the  army
as  2d  lieutenant
in  1819,  and  be-
came 1st  lieuten-
ant in  1823,  as-
sistant commis-
sary of  subsist-
ence in  1824,  and
adjutant  of  the
3d  regiment  in
1826.  In  1827  he
resigned  and  be-
came editor  of
the  New  York
"Courier,"  which
had  been  estab-
lished the  same
year,  and  in  1829
he  purchased  the
"  Enquirer,"  and  united  the  two  under  the  name  of
the  "  Morning  Courier  and  New  York  Enquirer."
To  expedite  the  business  of  reporting,  Mr.  Webb
established  a  daily  horse-express  between  New  York
and  Washington,  with  relays  of  horses  every  six
miles  of  the  way.  This  cost  him  $7,500  a  month,
but  enabled  him  to  obtain  news  twenty-four  hours
before  his  rivals.  He  owned  and  edited  the  "  Courier
and  Enquirer  "  till  June,  1861,  when  it  was  merged
in  the  "  World."  During  the  existence  of  the  Whig
party  his  paper  was  the  chief  advocate  of  its  princi-

&les.  In  June,  1842,  he  fought  a  duel  with  Thomas
'.  Marshall,  a  member  of  congress  from  Kentucky,
concerning  whom  he  had  published  an  article,  and
was  wounded.  He  was  indicted  by  the  New  York
grand  jury  in  November  "for  leaving  the  state
with  the  intention  of  giving  or  receiving  a  chal-
lenge," pleaded  guilty,  and  was  sentenced  to  the
full  penalty  under  the  law,  but  was  pardoned  after
two  weeks'  detention.  In  1843  he  became  engineer-
in-chief  of  the  state  of  New  York  with  the  rank  of
major-general,  and  in  1849  he  was  appointed  min-
ister to  Austria,  but  was  rejected  by  the  senate.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  applied  for
an  appointment  as  major-general  of  volunteers,
which  was  refused;  but  he  was  offered  a  briga-
dier-generalship, which  he  declined.  He  refused
the  mission  to  Turkey  in  1861,  but  was  imme-
diately appointed  minister  to  Brazil,  in  which  office
he  secured  the  settlement  of  long-standing  claims
against  that  country,  and,  through  his  intimacy
with  Napoleon  HI.,  aided  in  procuring  the  with-


(X^OzUAt^-  l>&is&6~~,


drawal  of  the  French  from  Mexico.  He  resigned
the  Brazilian  mission  in  1869  and  returned  to  New
York  in  1870.  He  published  "  Altowan,  or  Inci-
dents of  Life  and  Adventure  in  the  Rocky  Moun-
tains "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1846) ;  "  Slavery  and  its
Tendencies  "  (Washington,  1856) ;  and  a  pamphlet
on  "  National  Currency  "  (New  York,  1875).— James
Watson's  son,  Alexander  Stewart,  soldier,  b.  in
New  York  city,  15  Feb.,  1835,  was  educated  at  pri-
vate schools  and  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,
where  he  was  graduated  13th  in  a  class  of  34  in
1855,  and  assigned  to  the  artillery.  He  served  in
Florida,  Minnesota,  and  for  three  years  as  assistant
professor  at  West  Point,  became  1st  lieutenant  in
the  2d  artillery,  28  April,  1861,  captain  in  the  11th
infantry,  14  May,  and  major  of  the  1st  Rhode  Island
artillery  on  14  Sept.  He  was  present  at  Bull  Run
and  in  the  defences  of  Washington  until  1862,  when
he  participated  in  the  battles  of  the  peninsula  cam-
paign of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  and  as  chief-
of-staff  of  the  5th  corps  during  the  Maryland  and
Rappahannock  campaigns  till  23  June,  1863.  He
was  then  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, and  placed  in  command  of  a  brigade  of  the
2d  corps,  serving  with  great  credit  at  the  battle  of
Gettysburg.  At  the  "  angle  "  he  met  the  famous
charge  of  Pickett's  Confederate  division,  and  took
the  major  part  in  its  repulse.  He  was  wounded
while  leading  his  men,  and  received  from  Gen.
George  G.  Meade  a  bronze  medal  for  "  distin-
guished personal  gallantry  on  that  ever-memora-
ble field.  During  the  Rapidan  campaign  he  com-
manded a  division  in  the  battle  of  Bristow  Station
and  auxiliary  affairs.  Gen.  Webb  then  returned  to
the  command  of  his  brigade,  and  led  it  with  abil-
ity during  the  Wilderness  campaign,  being  severe-
ly wounded  at  the  battle  of  Spottsylvania  in  May,
1864.  On  his  return  from  sick-leave  he  was  ap-
pointed chief-of-staff  to  Gen.  George  G.  Meade,
commanding  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  the  op-
erations before  Petersburg.  From  June,  1865,  till
February,  1866,  Gen.  Webb  was  acting  as  inspect-
or-general of  the  military  division  of  the  Atlantic,
and  then  he  was  professor  at  the  military  academy
till  August,  1868.  On  the  reorganization  o"f  the
army  he  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  44th  in-
fantry, 28  July,  1866,  and  commanded  his  new
regiment  in  1868-'9  and  (with  his  brevet  rank)  the
5th  military  district  in  April,  1869,  and  was,  at  his
own  request,  discharged  the  service,  3  Dec,  1870.
He  was  brevetted  major,  U.  S.  A.,  3  July,  1863,
"  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services  "  at  Gettys-
burg; lieutenant-colonel,  U.  S.  A.,  11  Oct.,  1863.  for
Bristow  Station ;  colonel,  U.  S.  A.,  12  May,  1864,
for  Spottsylvania ;  major-general  of  volunteers,
1  Aug.,  1864,  "  for  gallant  and  distinguished  con-
duct ' ;  and  brigadier-general  and  major-general,
U.  S.  A.,  13  March,  1865,  "  for  gallant  and  merito-
rious services  in  the  campaign  terminating  with
the  surrender  of  the  insurgent  army  under  Gen.
Lee."  Gen.  Webb  has  been  since  21  July,  1869,
president  of  the  College  of  the  city  of  New  York,
and  in  1870  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred
upon  him  bv  Hobart  college.  He  has  published
"The  Peninsula:  McClellan's  Campaign  of  1862"
(New  York,  1882)  and  articles  on  the  civil  war,  in
the  "  Century  "  magazine. — Another  son  of  Samuel
Blatchlev.  Henry  Livingston,  soldier,  b.  in  Clav-
erack, N!  Y.,  6  Feb.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Makanda,  111.,  5
Oct.,  1876,  settled  in  southern  Illinois  in  1817,
and  was  repeatedly  a  member  of  both  houses  of  the
legislature.  He  was  a  major  of  volunteers  in  the
Black  Hawk  war,  colonel  of  the  18th  regiment,
U.  S.  infantry,  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  was  after-
ward a  general  of  Illinois  militia.


404


WEBB


WEBBER


WEBB,  Thomas,  Methodist  pioneer,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1724;  d.  in  Bristol,  England,  20  Dec,  1796.
He  was  a  British  officer,  served  in  the  royal  Amer-
ican army,  and  was  wounded  at  Louisburg  and
Quebec.  He  was  converted  to  Methodism  in  1765
by  the  preaching  of  John  Wesley  at  Bristol,  Eng-
land, united  with  a  Methodist  society,  was  licensed
to  preach,  and  gave  freely  of  his  means  to  found
societies,  attending  conferences,  and  preaching  fre-
quently with  great  fervor.  Being  ordered  again
to  this  country,  he  was  stationed  at  first  at  Albany,
N.  Y.,  as  barrack-master,  and  there  conducted  re-
ligious services  in  his  house.  When  Barbara  Heck
established  a  society  in  New  York  city,  he  went
thither,  making  his  first  appearance  in  the  congre-
gation about  February,  1767.  He  preached  in  al-
ternation with  Philip  Embury,  always  wearing
regimentals,  with  his  sword  on  the  pulpit  before
him.  He  was  the  most  active  worker  and  the
largest  contributor  for  the  erection  of  a  meeting-
house. On  being  placed  on  the  retired  list,  with
the  rank  of  captain,  he  thenceforth  travelled  much
as  a  missionary,  preaching  in  Trenton,  Burlington,
and  other  New  Jersey  towns,  where  he  founded
societies,  and  holding  regular  services  in  Jamaica,
L.  I.,  which  was  his  home.  He  began  to  visit
Philadelphia  as  early  as  1767,  and  there  founded
the  first  Methodist  society,  to  which  he  ministered
until  the  arrival  of  Wesley's  itinerants  in  1769.  In
that  year  he  introduced  Methodism  into  Delaware,

E reaching  in  Newcastle  and  Wilmington,  and  later
e  labored  in  Baltimore,  Md.  In  1772  he  went  to
England,  preached  in  Dublin,  London,  and  other
places,  made  appeals  for  missionaries  and  pecuniary
aid  at  the  conference  in  Leeds  and  elsewhere,  and
returned  in  the  following  year  with  two  of  the
preachers  that  were  sent  in  response  to  his  solicita-
tions. Repeating  his  visit,  he  gained  other  recruits
for  the  itinerancy.  Returning  to  England  at  the
beginning  of  the  Revolution,  he  spent  the  remain-
der of  his  life  at  Bristol,  preaching  there  and  in
the  neighborhood,  visiting  Winchester  during  the
war,  where  he  preached  to  the  French  prisoners  in
their  own  language,  and  addressing  large  congre-
gations of  soldiers  and  sailors  at  Portsmouth.

WEBB,  Thomas  Smith,  Masonic  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  30  Oct.,  1771 ;  d.  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,
6  July,  1819.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  was  ap-
prenticed to  a  printer  in  Boston,  and  he  afterward
removed  to  Keene,  N.  H.,  where  he  worked  for
some  time  at  his  trade.  Here  the  three  degrees  of
ancient  craft  Masonry  were  conferred  upon  him  by
Rising  Sun  lodge.  In  1793  he  removed  to  Alba-
ny and  established  a  paper-staining  factory.  On
14  Sept.,  1797,  as  appears  from  the  copyright,  he
published  "  The  Freemason's  Monitor,  or  Illustra-
tions of  Masonry,"  and  thus  secured  for  himself
fame  as  a  Masonic  ritualist  and  author.  This  small
volume,  which  is  now  exceedingly  rare,  consisted  of
two  parts,  the  second  part  containing  an  account
of  the  "  Ineffable  Degrees  of  Masonry,"  together
with  several  Masonic  songs  by  the  author.  The
publication  of  this  work  was  followed  by  suc-
cessively enlarged  and  improved  editions  in  1802,
1805,  1808,  1816,  1818,  and  by  numerous  editions
after  the  author's  decease.  It  is  still  regarded  as
a  standard  work.  Mr.  Webb  has  long  been  known
as  the  founder  of  the  American  system  of  chap-
ter and  encampment  Masonry.  He  presided  over
a  convention  of  committees  in  Boston  in  October,
1797,  for  the  formation  of  a  general  grand  chapter
of  royal  arch  Masons,  and  at  a  meeting  in  Provi-
dence in  January,  1799,  he  presented,  as  chairman
of  a  committee,  a  constitution  which  was  adopted.
The  formation  of  the  grand  encampment  of  the


United  States  was  the  result  of  his  Masonic  work.
The  original  draft  of  the  constitution,  with  all  the
changes,  additions,  and  interlineations  in  his  own
handwriting,  is  now  on  file  among  the  archives
of  St.  John's  commandery,  Providence.  In  1799  he
removed  with  his  family  to  Providence,  where  he
spent  the  greater  part  of  his  remaining  years.  His"
musical  attainments  were  considerable,  and  he  was
the  first  president  of  the  Psallonian  society,  an  or-
ganization for  the  improvement  of  its  members  in
sacred  melody.  In  1815,  having  changed  his  resi-
dence to  Boston,  he  instituted,  in  connection  with
others,  the  Handel  and  Haydn  society,  of  which
he  was  the  first  president.

WEBB,  Thomas  T.,  naval  .officer,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia about  1806;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  11  April,
1853.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  1
Jan.,  1808,  and  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  19
Dec.,  1814.  He  served  in  the  navy  during  the  war
of  1812,  cruised  in  the  frigate  "  Macedonian  "  of
the  Mediterranean  station  in  1815-'18  during  the
Algerine  war,  was  attached  to  the  Norfolk  navy-
yard  in  1818-'21,  cruised  in  the  sloop  "John
Adams  "in  the  West  Indies  in  182 1-'4,  served  in
the  receiving-ship  "  Alert  "  at  Norfolk  in  1825-'6,
and  at  the  navy-yard,  Pensacola,  1828-'9.  He  com-
manded the  schooner  fo  Shark  "  in  the  West  Indies
in  1830-'2,  was  promoted  to  master-commandant,
8  March,  1831,  and  commanded  the  sloop  "  Van-
dalia  "  on  the  coast  of  Florida  in  1833-'6.  In  1837
he  was  on  leave,  and  in  1838-'41  he  commanded
the  receiving-ship  at  Norfolk.  He  was  promoted
to  captain,  8  March,  1841,  and  was  on  waiting  or-
ders until  his  death.

WEBB,  William  Benning,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  17  Sept.,  1825.  He  was  graduated
at  Columbian  college  in  1844,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1847,  and  entered  upon  active
practice,  in  which  he  was  soon  successful.  When
the  civil  war  opened  in  1861  he  became  captain  of
a  company  of  District  of  Columbia  volunteers,  and
when  the  district  police  force  was  reorganized
about  that  time,  Mr.  Webb  was  appointed  its  su-
perintendent. After  holding  the  office  for  three
years,  and  doing  much  good  in  the  way  of  organi-
zation, he  resigned  his  commission  and  resumed
the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  subsequently  be-
came counsel  for  the  Washington  gas-light  com-
pany, for  Adams  express  company,  and  the  1st  na-
tional bank  of  Washington ;  was  also  a  director  in
the  first-named  company,  and  was  chosen  president
of  the  Washington  bar  association.  In  1885  he  be-
came president  of  the  board  of  district  commis-
sioners. He  is  the  author  of  a  codification  of  the
laws  of  the  Corporation  of  Washington,  which  is
accepted  as  a  standard  authority  (Washington,  1868).

WEBB,  William  Henry,  ship-builder,  b.  in
New  York  city,  19  June.  1816. He  was  educated

f>rivately  and  at  Columbia  college  grammar-school,
earned  the  ship-building  trade  in  the  yard  of  his
father,  Isaac,  and  after  1843  carried  on  the  business
alone.  He  has  constructed  many  vessels  of  great
speed  and  capacity,  upon  original  plans,  among
them  "  The  General  Admiral,"  a  steam  frigate  for
the  Russian  navy,  two  steam  screw-frigates  for  the
Italian  navy,  and  the  iron-clad  ram  "  Dunderberg  "
for  the  U.  S.  navy. He  has  declined  all  offers  of

?ublic  office.  Mr.  Webb  purposes  to  erect  in  New
'ork  a  building  to  be  known  as  "  Webb's  free
academy  and  home  for  ship-builders,"  and  has  in
preparation  a  work  on  M  Practical  Ship-Building."
WEBBER,  Charles  Wilkins,  author,  b.  in
Russellville,  Ky.,  29  May,  1819 ;  d.  in  Nicaragua,
Central  America.  11  April,  1856.  He  was  the  son  of
Dr.  Augustine  Webber,  a  well-known  physician  in


WEBBER


WEBSTER


Kentucky,  and  inherited  from  his  mother,  who  was
the  daughter  of  Gen.  John  Tannehill,  a  fondness
for  out-door  life.  In  1838  he  went  to  Texas,  then
struggling  for  independence,  and  was  for  several
years  connected  with  the  famous  Texas  rangers,
with  whom  he  saw  much  wild  and  adventurous
life.  He  then  returned  to  Kentucky  and  studied
medicine  ;  but  this ,  he  soon  relinquished,  and  in
1843  entered  Princeton  theological  seminary  with  a
view  to  the  Presbyterian  ministry.  This  he  soon
abandoned,  and  settled  in  New  York  city,  where  lie
devoted  himself  to  a  literary  career  and  became
connected  with  the  "  New  World,"  the  "  Demo-
cratic Review,"  and  the  "  Sunday  Despatch."  Sub-
sequently he  was  joint  proprietor  and  associate
editor  of  the  "  Whig  Review  "  for  two  years.  In
1849  he  organized  an  expedition  to  the  region  of
Colorado  and  Gila  rivers ;  but,  for  various  reasons,
the  principal  of  which  was  the  seizure  of  the  horses
by  Comanche  Indians,  it  failed.  The  difficulty
in  crossing  the  western  deserts  led  to  his^efforts  to
form  a  camel  company,  for  which  he  obtained  a
charter  from  the  New  York  legislature  in  1854.
In  the  winter  of  1855-'6  he  left  New  York  to  join
William  Walker,  who  was  then  endeavoring  to
maintain  himself  in  Central  America.  He  took
part  with  Walker's  forces  in  the  battle  of  Rivas,
and  fell  in  some  chance,  rencontre  or  ambuscade  in
that  engagement.  In  addition  to  many  stories  that
he  contributed  to  periodicals,  he  published  "  Old
Hicks,  the  Guide,  or  Adventures  in  the  Comanche
Country  in  Search  of  a  Gold-Mine  "  (New  York,
1848) ;  "  Gpld-Mines  of  the  Gila  "  (1849) ;  "  The
Hunter  Naturalist,  a  Romance  of  Sporting  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1851) ;  "  Texan  Virago,  or  the  Tailor
of  Gotham  "  (1852) ;  "  Wild  Girl  of  Nebraska "
(1852) ;  "  Tales  of  the  Southern  Border  "  (part  i.,
1852  ;  complete,  1853)  ;  "  Spiritual  Vampirism  :
the  History  of  Ethered  Softdown  and  her  Friends
of  the  New  Light"  (1853);  "Shot  in  the  Eye"
(which  was  his  most  successful  story)  and  "  Adven-
tures with  Texas  Rifle  Rangers"  (London,  1853);
"  Wild  Scenes  and  Song  Birds"  (New  York,  1854) ;
and  "  Historv  of  Mystery  "  (Philadelphia,  1855).

WEBBER,  Samuel,  educator,  b.  in  Byfield,
Mass.,  in  1759;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  17  July,
1810.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1784,  tak-
ing high  rank  in  mathematics,  entered  the  minis-
try, .and  in  1787  was  made  tutor.  In  1789  he  was
appointed  to  the  chair  of  mathematics  and  natural
philosophy,  which  he  held  till  he  was  raised  in  1804
to  the  presidency  of  the  college.  Dr.  Webber  was
one  of  the  commissioners  that  were  appointed  to
settle  the  boundary-line  between  the  United  States
and  the  British  provinces.  He  was  vice-president
of  the  American  academy,  and  Harvard  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1806.  He  was  the  author  of
a  "System  of  Mathematics,"  which  was  intended
for  use  in  Harvard,  and  for  a  long  time  was  almost
the  only  text-book  on  that  subject  in  New  England
colleges  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1801),  and  a  "  Eulogy  on
President  Willard "  (1804).  He  also  revised  the
introduction  to  Jedidiah  Morse's  "  American  Uni-
versal Geography"  (1796).  See  a  "Eulogy"  by
Henry  Ware,  D.  D.  (Cambridge,  1810).— His  son,
Samuel,  phvsician,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  15
Sept.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,  N.  H.,  5  Dec,  1880,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1815,  taught  four
years,  at  the  same  time  studying  medicine,  and  re-
ceived his  medical  degree  iii  1822,  after  serving  as
assistant  to  the  professor  of  chemistry  at  Harvard
for  eighteen  months.  During  the  rest  of  his  life
he  resided  at  Charlestown,  N.  H.,  on  Connecticut
river,  where  he  gave  much  attention  to  study,
and  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society  of


northern  antiquarians  of  Copenhagen,  Denmark.
He  published  several  poems,  including  "  Logan,  an
Indian  Tale  "  (1821),  and  -  War  "  (1824).

WEBER,  Gustav  C.  E.,  physician,  b.  in  Bonn,
Prussia,  26  May,  1828.  His  father,  Dr.  M.  I.
Weber,  became  professor  of  anatomy  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Bonn  on  its  foundation  in  1818,  and
is  the  author  of  many  professional  works.  The
son  studied  at  the  university  till  the  revolution-
ary movement  of  1848  caused  him  to  emigrate
to  the  United  States,  where  he  settled  near  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  and  engaged  in  farming.  He  after-
ward completed  his  studies  in  Vienna,  Amsterdam,
and  Paris,  and  in  1853  began  to  practise  medicine
in  New  York  city.  In  1856-'63  he  was  professor
of  surgery  in  Cleveland  medical  college,  and  in
1861,  as  surgeon-general  of  the  state,  he  organized
a  system  for  the  better  medical  care  of  the  troops
in  the  field.  In  1864  he  organized  Charity  hos-
pital medical  college,  where  he  became  professor
of  clinical  surgery  and  dean  of  the  faculty,  and  he
was  also  consulting  surgeon  to  the  Charity  hospi-
tal, which  had  been  founded  chiefly  through'  his
efforts.  The  school  subsequently  became  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Wooster,
Dr.  Weber  retaining  his  chair.  He  is  the  origi-
nator of  a  new  method  of  closing  large  arteries  in
surgical  operations  without  a  ligature,  and  of  a
method  for  removing  stone  from  the  bladder.  In
1859  Dr.  Weber  established  the  Cleveland  "  Medi-
cal Gazette,"  which  he  conducted  for  several  years.

WEBER,  Max,  soldier,  b.  in  Achern,  Baden,
27  Aug.,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at  the  military
school  of  Carlsruhe,  in  1843,  as  a  lieutenant  of  in-
fantry, and  held  a  commission  in  the  army  of
Baden  until  1849.  when  he  served  with  the  revo-
lutionists under  Gen.  Franz  Sigel.  He  came  to
this  country  in  the  same  year,  settled  in  New  York
city,  and  on  16  May,  1861,  became  colonel  of  the
20th  New  York  regiment.  He  was  stationed  at
Fort  Monroe  and  took  part  in  the  capture  of  Fort
Hatteras,and  from  September,  1861,  till  May,  1862,
commanded  Camp  Hamilton,  near  the  former  post,
being  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, 28  April,  1862.  He  was  at  Newport  News
during  the  fight  between  the  "  Monitor  "  and  "  Mer-
rimac,"  in  anticipation  of  a  Confederate  attack
by  land,  took  part  in  the  capture  of  Norfolk  in
May,  and  then  commanded  at  Suffolk  till  Sep-
tember, when  he  was  ordered  to  the  Army  of  the
Potomac.  He  led  a  brigade  at  South  Mountain
and  Antietam,  where  he  received  a  wound  that
crippled  his  right  arm  for  life.  He  served  under
Gen.  David  Hunter  and  Gen.  Franz  Sigel  in  the
Shenandoah  valley  in  1864,  and,  while  command-
ing at  Harper's  Ferry,  repelled  Gen.  Jubal  A.
Early's  attack  of  4-7  July.  Gen.  Weber  resigned
his  commission  on  13  May,  1865.  He  was  assessor
of  internal  revenue  in  New  York  in  1870-'2,  and
then  collector  till  April,  1883,  when  he  resigned.

WEBER,  Paul,  German  artist,  b.  about  1823.
He  studied  art  in  Frankfort,  and  in  1848  came
to  the  United  States,  settling  in  Philadelphia.
In  1858  he  went  to  Darmstadt,  where  he  was  ap-
pointed court  painter.  Among  those  of  his  works
that  are  owned  in  the  United  States  are  "  A  Scene
in  the  Catskills,"  in  the  Corcoran  gallery,  Wash-
ington (1858) ;  "  Morning,"  in  the  Pennsylvania
academy  of  fine  arts ;  and  "  Lake  Chiemsee,  in  the
Bavarian  Highlands."

WEBSTER,  Albert  Falvey,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  in  1848 ;  d.  at  sea,  27  Dec,  1876.  His
father  was  a  confectioner  in  Boston.  After  en-
gaging for  a  short  time  in  various  kinds  of  busi-
ness, he  became  a  writer  for  the  magazines,  and


406


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


published  many  short  stories  in  "  Scribner's
Monthly,"  "  The  Atlantic  Monthly,"  and  "  Apple-
tons'  Journal,"  in  which  appeared  his  "  Boarding-
House  Sketches."  He  also  published  a  series  of
articles  exposing  abuses  in  the  administration  of
criminal  law  and  in  the  management  of  prisons.
He  was  consumptive,  went  to  California  by  way  of
the  isthmus,  and  died  on  his  way  from  San  Fran-
cisco to  Honolulu,  and  was  buried  in  the  Pacific.
At  the  time  of  his  death  Mr.  Webster  was  en-
gaged to  be  married  to  Una,  eldest  daughter  of
Nathaniel  Hawthorne.  He  left  an  unfinished
novel.  His  most  notable  stories  are  "  Our  Friend
Sullivan,"  "  My  Daughter's  Watch,"  "  The  Clytem-
nestra,"  and  "  An  Operation  in  Money."

WEBSTER.  Ebenezer,  patriot,  b.'in  Kingston,
N.  H.,  in  1739;  d.  in  Salisbury  (now  Franklin),
N.  H.,  in  1806.  He  served  in  the  old  French  war
under  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst,  and  in  1761  was  one  of
the  first  settlers  in  what  is  now  Franklin,  N.  H.,
then  the  most  northern  of  the  New  England  set-
tlements. There  he  became  a  farmer  and  also
kept  a  tavern.  At  the  opening  of  the  Revolution
he  led  the  Salisbury  mditia  to  Cambridge,  and
subsequently  saw  much  service  till  the  close  of  the
war,  when  he  had  attained  the  rank  of  colonel  of
militia.  He  was  a  member  of  the  lower  branch  of
the  legislature  for  several  years,  served  also  in  the
state  senate,  and  from  1791  till  his  death  was  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  of  Hillsborough
county,  N.  H. — His  son,  Ezekiel,  lawyer,  b.  in
Salisbury,  N.  H.,  11  March,  1780;  d.  in  Concord,
N.  H.,  10  April,  1829,  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1804,  studied  law,  and  rose  to  eminence  at  the
bar.  He  was  also  a  member  for  several  years  of
the  New  Hampshire  legislature.  His  death  re-
sulted suddenly  from  disease  of  the  heart  while  he
was  trying  a  case. — Another  son,  Daniel,  states-
man, b.  in  Salisbury  (now  Franklin),  N.  H.,  18  Jan.,
1782;  d.  in  Marshfield,  Mass.,  24  Oct.,  1852,  was
the  second  son  of  Ebenezer  Webster  by  his  second
wife,  Abigail  Eastman.  He  seemed  so  puny  and
sickly  as  an  infant  that  it  was  thought  he  would
not  live  to  grow  up.  He  was  considered  too  deli-
cate for  hard  work  on  the  farm,  and  was  allowed  a
freat  deal  of  time  for  play.  Much  of  this  leisure
e  spent  in  fishing  and  hunting,  or  in  roaming  about
the  woods,  the  rest  in  reading.  In  later  life  he  could
not  remember  when  he  learned  to  read.  As  a  child
his  thirst  for  knowledge  was  insatiable;  he  read
every  book  that  came  within  reach,  and  conned  his
favorite  authors  until  their  sentences  were  in  great
part  stored  in  his  memory.  In  May,  1796,  he  was
sent  to  Exeter  academy,  where  he  made  rapid
progress  with  his  studies,  but  was  so  overcome  by
shyness  that  he  found  it  impossible  to  stand  up
and  "speak  pieces"  before  his  school-mates.  In
spite  of  this  timidity,  some  of  his  natural  gifts  as
an  orator  bad  already  begun  to  show  themselves.
His  great,  lustrous  eves  and  rich  voice,  with  its
musical  intonations,  had  already  exerted  a  fas-
cination upon  those  who  came  within  their  range ;
passing  teamsters  would  stop,  and  farmers  pause,
sickle  in  hand,  to  hear  him  recite  verses  of  poetry
or  passages  from  the  Bible.  In  February,  1797,  his
father  sent  him  to  Boscawen,  where  he  continued
his  studies  under  the  tuition  of  the  Rev.  Samuel
Wood.  Although  Ebenezer  Webster  found  it  diffi-
cult, by  unremitting  labor  and  strictest  economy,
to  support  his  numerous  family,  he  still  saw  such
signs  of  promise  in  Daniel  as  to  convince  him  that
it  was  worth  while,  at  whatever  sacrifice,  to  send
him  to  college.  In  view  of  this  decision,  he  took
him  from  school,  to  hasten  his  preparation  under
a  private  tutor,  and  on  the  journey  to  Boscawen  he


informed  Daniel  of  his  plans.  The  warm-hearted
boy,  who  had  hardly  dared  hope  for  such  good
fortune,  and  keenly  felt  the  sacrifice  it  involved,
laid  his  head  upon  his  father's  shoulder  and  burst
into  tears.  After  six  months  with  his  tutor  he
had  learned  enough  to  fulfil  the  slender  require-
ments of  those  days  for  admission  to  Dartmouth,
where  he  was  duly  graduated  in  1801.  At  college,
although  industrious  and  punctual  in  attendance
and  soon  found  to  be  very  quick  at  learning,  he
was  not  regarded  as  a  thorough  scholar.  He  had
not,  indeed,  the  scholarly  temperament — that  rare
combination  of  profound  insight,  sustained  atten-
tion, microscopic  accuracy,  iron  tenacity,  and  dis-
interested pursuit  of  truth — which  characterizes
the  great  scientific  discoverer  or  the  great  his-
torian. But,  while  he  had  not  these  qualities  in
perfect  combination— and  no  one  knew  this  better
than  Mr.  Webster  himself — there  was  much  about
him  that  made  him  more  interesting  and  remark-
able, even  at  that  early  age,  than  if  he  had  been
consummate  in  scholarship.  He  was  capable  of
great  industry,  he  seized  an  idea  with  astonishing
quickness,  his  memory  was  prodigious,  and  for
power  of  lucid  and  \convincing  statement  he  was
unrivalled.  With  these  rare  gifts  he  possessed  that
supreme  poetic  quality  that  defies  analysis,  but  is  at
once  recognized  as  genius.  He  was  naturally,  there-
fore, considered  by  tutors  and  fellow-students  the
most  remarkable  man  in  the  college,  and  the  po-
sition of  superiority  thus  early  gained  was  easily
maintained  by  him  through  life  and  wherever  he
was  placed.  While  at  college  he  conquered  or  out-
grew his  boyish  shyness,  so  as  to  take  pleasure  in
public  speaking,  and  his  eloquence  soon  attracted
so  much  notice  that  in  1800  the  townspeople  of
Hanover  selected  this  undergraduate  to  deliver  the
Fourth-of-July  oration.  It  has  been  well  pointed
out  by  Henry  Cabot  Lodge  that  "the  enduring
work  which  Mr.  Webster  did  in  the  world,  and  his
meaning  and  influence  in  American  history,  are  all
summed  up  in  the  principles  enunciated  in  that
boyish  speech  at  Hanover,  which  "  preached  love
of  country,  the  grandeur  of  American  nationality,
fidelity  to  the  constitution  as  the  bulwark  of  na-
tionality, and  the  necessity  and  the  nobility  of  the
union  of  the  states."  After  leaving  college,  Mr.
Webster  began  studying  law  in  the  office  of  Thomas
W.  Thompson,  of  Salisbury,  who  was  afterward  U.  S.
senator.  Some  time  before  this  he  had  made  up
his  mind  to  help  his  elder  brother,  Ezekiel,  to  go
through  college,  and  for  this  purpose  he  soon
found  it  necessary  to  earn  money  by  teaching
school.  After  some  months  of  teaching  at  Frye-
burg,  Me.,  he  returned  to  Mr.  Thompson's  office.
In  July,  1804,  he  went  to  Boston  in  search  of  em-
ployment in  some  office  where  he  might  complete
his  studies.  He  there  found  favor  with  Chris-
topher Gore,  who  took  him  into  his  office  as  stu-
dent and  clerk.  In  March,  1805,  Mr.  Webster  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  presently  he  began  prac-
tising his  profession  at  Boscawen.  In  1807,  having
acquired  a  fairly  good  business,  he  turned  it  over
to  his  brother,  Ezekiel,  and  removed  to  Ports-
mouth, where  his  reputation  grew  rapidly,  so  that
he  was  soon  considered  a  worthy  antagonist  to
Jeremiah  Mason,  one  of  the  ablest  lawyers  this
country  has  ever  produced.  In  June,  1808,  he
married  Miss  Grace  Fletcher,  of  Hopkinton,  N.  H.
His  first  important  political  pamphlet,  published
that  year,  was  a  criticism  on  the  embargo.  In  1812,
in  a  speech  before  the  Washington  benevolent  so-
ciety at  Portsmouth,  he  summarized  the  objections
of  the  New  England  people  to  the  war  just  de-
clared against  Great  Britain. He  was  immediately


nagutiTBohnpe  Try  Whipple


Engl  hyV.  G.Jac"kmaT\.


#7?^  ^^r^Zz^


D.APPU.TON  &  C9


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


407


afterward  chosen  delegate  to  a  convention  of  the
people  of  Rockingham  county,  and  drew  up  the
so-called  "  Rockingham  Memorial,"  addressed  to
President  Madison,  which  contained  a  formal  pro-
test against  the  war.  In  the  following  autumn  he
was  elected  to  congress,  and  on  taking  his  seat,  in
May,  1813,  he  was  placed  on  the  committee  on  for-
eign relations.  His  first  step  in  congress  was  the
.introduction  of  a  series  of  resolutions  aimed  at  the
president,  and  calling  for  a  statement  of  the  time
and  manner  in  which  Napoleon's  pretended  revo-
cation of  his  decrees  against  American  shipping
had  been  announced  to  the  United  States.  His
first  great  speech,  14  Jan.,  1814,  was  in  opposition
to  the  bill  for  encouraging  enlistments,  and  at
the  close  of  that  year  he  opposed  Sec.  Monroe's
measures  for  enforcing  what  was  known  as  the
"draft  of  1814."  Mr.  Webster's  attitude  toward
the  administration  was  that  of  the  Federalist  party
to  which  he  belonged;  but  he  did  not  go  so  far  as
the  leaders  of  that  party  in  New  England.  He
condemned  the  embargo  as  more  harmful  to  our-
selves than  to  the  enemy,  as  there  is  no  doubt  it
was ;  he  disapproved  the  policy  of  invading  Cana-
da, and  maintained  that  our  wisest  course  was  to
increase  the  strength  of  the  navy,  and  on  these
points  history  will  probably  judge  him  to  have
been  correct.  But  in  his  opinion,  that  the  war
itself  was  unnecessary  and  injurious  to  the  country,
he  was  probably,  like  most  New  Englanders  of  that
time,  mistaken.  Could  he  have  foreseen  and  taken
into  account  the  rapid  and  powerful  development
of  national  feeling  in  the  United  States  which  the
war  called  forth,  it  would  have  modified  his  view,
for  it  is  clear  that  the  war  party,  represented  by
Henry  Clay  and  his  friends,  was  at  that  moment
the  truly  national  party,  and  Mr.  Webster's  sym-
pathies were  then,  as  always,  in  favor  of  the  broad-
est nationalism,  and  entirely  opposed  to  every  sort
of  sectional  or  particularist  policy.  This  broad,
national  spirit,  which  was  strong  enough  in  the
two  Adamses  to  sever  their  connection  with  the
Federalists  of  New  England,  led  Mr.  Webster  to
use  his  influence  successfully  to  keep  New  Hamp-
shire out  of  the  Hartford  convention.  In  the  13th
congress,  however,  he  voted  191  times  on  the  same
side  with  Timothy  Pickering,  and  only  4  times  on
the  opposite  side.  In  this  and  the  next  congress
the  most  important  work  done  by  Mr.  Webster
was  concerned  with  the  questions  of  currency
and  a  national  bank.  He  did  good  service  in  kill-
ing the  pernicious  scheme  for  a  bank  endowed
with  the  power  of  issuing  irredeemable  notes  and
obliged  to  lend  money  to  the  government.  He  was
disposed  to  condemn  outright  the  policy  of  allow-
ing the  government  to  take  part  in  the  manage-
ment of  the  bank.  He  also  opposed  a  protective
tariff,  but,  by  supporting  Mr.  Calhoun's  bill  for  in-
ternal improvements,  he  put  himself  on  record  as
a  loose  constructionist.  His  greatest  service  was
unquestionably  his  resolution  of  26  April,  1816,  re-
quiring that  all  payments  to  the  national  treasury
must  be  made  in  specie  or  its  equivalents.  This
resolution,  which  he  supported  in  a  very  powerful
speech,  was  adopted  the  same  day  by  a  large  ma-
jority, and  its  effect  upon  the  currency  was  speedi-
ly beneficial.  In  the  course  of  this  session  lie  de-
clined, with  grim  humor,  a  challenge  sent  him  by
John  Randolph.

In  June,  1816,  he  removed  to  Boston,  and  at  the
expiration  of  his  second  term  in  congress,  4  March,
1817,  he  retired  for  a  while  to  private  life.  His
reason  for  retiring  was  founded  in  need  of  money
and  the  prospect  of  a  great  increase  in  his  law-
practice. On  his  removal  to  Boston  this  prospect


was  soon  realized  in  an  income  of  not  less  than
$20,000  a  year.  One  of  the  first  cases  upon  which
he  was  now  engaged  was  the  famous  Dartmouth
college  affair.  While  Mr.  Webster's  management
of  this  case  went  far  toward  placing  him  at  the
head  of  the  American  bar,  the  political  significance
of  its  decision  was  such  as  to  make  it  an  important
event  in  the  history  of  the  United  States.  It
shows  Mr.  Webster  not  only  as  a  great  constitu-
tional lawyer  and  consummate  advocate,  but  also
as  a  powerful  champion  of  Federalism.  In  its  ori-
gin Dartmouth  college  was  a  missionary  school  for
Indians,  founded  in  1754  by  the  Rev.  Eleazar
Wheelock,  at  Lebanon,  Conn.  After  a  few  years
funds  were  raised  by  private  subscription  for  the
purpose  of  enlarging  the  school  into  a  college,  and
as  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth  had  been  one  of  the  chief
contributors,  Dr.  Wheelock  appointed  him  and
other  persons  trustees  of  the  property.  The  site
of  the  college  was  fixed  in  New  Hampshire,  and
a  royal  charter  in  1769  created  it  a'perpetual  cor-
poration. The  charter  recognized  Wheelock  as
founder,  and  appointed  him  president,  with  power
to  name  his  successor,  subject  to  confirmation  by
the  trustees.  Dr.  Wheelock  devised  the  presidency
to  his  son,  John  Wheelock,  who  accordingly  be-
came his  successor.  The  charter,  in  expressly  for-
bidding the  exclusion  of  any  person  on  account  of
his  religious  belief,  reflected  the  broad  and  toler-
ant disposition  of  Dr.  Wheelock,  who  was  a  liberal
Presbyterian,  and  as  such  had  been  engaged  in
prolonged  controversy  with  that  famous  repre-
sentative of  the  strictest  Congregationalism,  Dr.  Jo-
seph Bellamy.  In  1793  Bellamy's  pupil,  Nathan-
iel Niles,  became  a  trustee  of  Dartmouth,  and  be-
tween him  and  John  Wheelock  the  old  controversy
was  revived  and  kept  up  with  increasing  bitterness
for  several  years,  dividing  the  board  of  trustees
into  two  hostile  parties.  At  length,  in  1809,  the
party  opposed  to  President  Wheelock  gained  a
majority  in  the  board,  and  thus  became  enabled  in
various  ways  to  balk  and  harass  the  president,
until  in  1815  the  quarrel  broke  forth  into  a  war  of
pamphlets  and  editorial  articles  that  convulsed  the
whole  state  of  New  Hampshire.  The  Congrega-
tional church  was  at  that  time  the  established
church  in  New  Hampshire,  supported  by  taxation,
and  the  Federalist  party  found  its  strongest  adher-
ents among  the  members  of  that  church.  Natu-
rally, therefore,  the  members  of  other  churches,  and
persons  opposed  on  general  principles  to  the  estab-
lishment of  a  state  church,  were  inclined  to  take
sides  with  the  Republicans.  In  1815  President
Wheelock  petitioned  the  legislature  for  a  commit-
tee to  investigate  the  conduct  of  the  trustees,
whom  he  accused  of  various  offences,  from  intoler-
ance in  matters  of  religion  to  improper  manage-
ment of  the  funds.  Thus  the  affair  soon  became  a
party  question,  in  which  the  Federalists  upheld  the
trustees,  while  the  Republicans  sympathized  with
the  president.  The  legislature  granted  the  peti-
tion for  a  committee,  but  the  .trustees  forthwith,
in  a  somewhat  too  rash  spirit  of  defiance,  deposed
Mr.  Wheelock  and  chose  a  new  president,  the  Rev.
Francis  Brown.  In  the  ensuing  state  election  Mr.
Wheelock  and  his  sympathizers  went  over  to  the
Republicans,  who  thus  succeeded  in  electing  their
candidate  for  governor,  with  a  majority  of  the  legis-
lature. In  June,  1816,  the  new  legislature  passed
an  act  reorganizing  the  college,  and  a  new  board
of  trustees  was  at  once  appointed  by  the  governor.
Judge  Woodward,  secretary  of  the  old  board,  went
over  to  the  new  board,  arid  became  its  secretary,
taking  with  him  the  college  seal.  The  new  board
proceeded  to  expel  the  old  board,  which  forthwith


408


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


2W*z£V^g*^E<


brought  suit  against  Judge  Woodward  in  an  action
of  trover  for  the  college  seal.  The  case  was  tried
in  May,  1817,  with  those  two  great  lawyers,  Jere-
miah Mason  and  Jeremiah  Smith,  as  counsel  for

the  plaintiffs.  It
was  then  post-
poned till  Sep-
tember, when  Mr.
Webster  was  se-
cured by  the
plaintiffs  as  an
additional  coun-
sel. The  plain-
tiffs contended
that,  in  the  case
of  a  corporation
chartered  for  pri-
vate uses,  any
alleged  miscon-
duct of  the  trus-
tees was  proper-
ly a  question  for
the  courts,  and
not  for  the  legis-
lature, which  in
meddling  with
such  a  question
plainly  transcended  its  powers.  Thei r  chief  reliance
was  upon  this  point,  but  they  also  contended  that
the  act  of  legislature  reorganizing  the  college  was
an  act  impairing  the  obligation  of  a  contract,  and
therefore  a  violation  of  the  constitution  of  the
United  States.  The  state  court  at  Exeter  decided
against  the  plaintiffs,  and  the  point  last  mentioned
enabled  them  to  carry  up  their  case  to  the  supreme
court  of  the  United  btates.  As  the  elder  counsel
were  unable  to  go  to  Washington,  it  fell  to  Mr.
Webster  to  conduct  the  case,  which  was  tried  in
March,  1818.  Mr.  Webster  argued  that  the  charter
of  Dartmouth  college  created  a  private  corporation
for  administering  a  charity ;  that  in  the  adminis-
tration of  such  uses  the  trustees  have  a  recognized
right  of  property ;  that  the  grant  of  such  a  charter
is  a  contract  between  the  sovereign  power  and  the
grantees,  and  descends  to  their  successors ;  and
that,  therefore,  the  act  of  the  New  Hampshire  legis-
lature, in  taking  away  the  government  from  one
board  of  trustees  and  conferring  it  upon  another,
was  a  violation  of  contract.  These  points  were  de-
fended by  Mr.  Webster  with  masterly  cogency,  and
re-enforced  by  illustrations  calculated  to  appeal  to
the  Federalist  sympathies  of  the  chief  justice.  He
possessed  in  the  highest  degree  the  art  of  so  pre-
senting a  case  that  the  mere  statement  seemed
equivalent  to  demonstration,  and  never  did  he  ex-
hibit that  art  in  greater  perfection  or  use  it  to
better  purpose  than  in  this  argument.  A  few  sen-
tences at  the  close,  giving  utterance  to  deep  emo-
tion, left  judges  and  audience  in  tears.  .The  de-
cision, rendered  in  the  autumn,  sustained  Mr.
Webster  and  set  aside  the  act  of  the  legislature  as
unconstitutional.  -It  was  one  of  those  far-reaching
decisions  in  which  the  supreme  court,  under  John
Marshall,  fixed  the  interpretation  of  the  constitu-
tion in  such  wise  as  to  add  greatly  to  its  potency
as  a  fundamental  instrument  of  government.  The
clause  prohibiting  state  legislation  in  impairment
of  contracts,  like  most  such  general  provisions,
stood  in  need  of  judicial  decisions  to  determine  its
scope.  By  bringing  under  the  protection  of  this
clause  every  charter  granted  by  a  state,  the  decis-
ion in  the  Dartmouth  college  case  went  further
perhaps  than  any  other  in  our  history  toward  lim-
iting state  sovereignty  and  extending  the  jurisdic-
tion of  the  Federal,  supreme  court.


In  the  Massachusetts  convention  of  1820  for  re-
vising the  state  constitution  Mr.  Webster  played  an
important  part.  He  advocated  with  success  the  abo-
lition of  religious  tests  for  office-holders,  and  in  a
speech  in  support  of  the  feature  of  property-repre-
sentation in  the  senate  he  examined  the  theory  and
practice  of  bicameral  legislation.  His  discussion  of
that  subject  is  well  worthy  of  study.  In  the  same
year,  at  the  celebration  of  the  second  centennial  of
the  landing  of  the  Pilgrims,  his  commemorative
oration  was  one  of  the  noblest  ever  delivered.  In
1825,  on  the  laying  of  the  corner-stone  of  Bunker
Hill  monument  (see  illustration),  he  attained  still
higher  perfection  of  eloquence  ;  and  one  year  later,
on  the  deaths  of  Adams  and  Jefferson,  his  eulogy
upon  those  statesmen  completed  a  trio  of  historical
addresses  unsurpassed  in  splendor.  The  spirit  of
these  orations  is  that  of  the  broadest  patriotism,
enlightened  by  a  clear  perception  of  the  funda-
mental importance  of  the  Federal  union  between
the  states  and  an  ever-present  consciousness  of  the
mighty  future  of  our  country  and  its  moral  signifi-
cance in  the  history  of  the  world.  Such  topics
have  often  been  treated  as  commonplaces  and  made
the  theme  of  vapid  rhetoric;  but  under  Daniel
Webster's  treatment  they  acquired  a  philosophical
value  and  were  fraught  with  most  serious  and
earnest  meaning.  These  orations  were  conceived
in  a  spirit  of  religious  devotion  to  the  Union,  and
contributed  powerfully  toward  awakening  such  a
sentiment  in  those  who  read  them  afterward,  while
upon  those  who  heard  them  from  the  lips  of  the
majestic  speaker  the  impression  was  such  as  could
never  be  effaced.  The  historian  must  assign  to
them  a  high  place  among  the  literary  influences
that  aroused  in  the  American  people  a  sentiment
of  union  strong  enough  to  endure  the  shock  of
civil  war.

In  1822  Mr.  Webster  was  elected  to  congress
from  the  Boston  district,  and  he  was  twice  re-
elected by  a  popular  vote  that  was  almost  unani-
mous. When  he  took  his  seat  in  congress  in  De-
cember, 1823,  the  speaker,  Henry  Clay,  appointed
him  chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee.  In  that
capacity  he  prepared  and  carried  through  the
"  Crimes  act,"  which  was  substantially  a  thorough
remodelling  of  the  criminal  jurisprudence  of  the
United  States.  The  preparation  of  this  bill  showed
in  the  highest  degree  his  constructive  genius  as  a
legislator,  while  in  carrying  it  through  congress
his  parliamentary  skill  and  persuasiveness  in  debate
were  equally  conspicuous.  In  1825  he  prepared  a
bill  for  increasing  the  number  of  supreme  court
judges  to  ten,  for  making  ten  Federal  circuits,  and
otherwise  strengthening  the  working  capacity  of
the  court;  but  this  bill,  after  passing  the  house,
was  lost  in  the  senate.  Of  his  two  most  celebrated
speeches  in  congress  during  this  period,  the  first
was  on  the  revolution  in  Greece.  Mr.  Webster
moved,  19  Jan.,  1824,  the  adoption  of  his  own  reso-
lution in  favor  of  making  provision  for  a  commis-
sioner to  Greece  should  President  Monroe  see  fit  to
appoint  one.  In  his  speech  on  this  occasion  he
set  forth  the  hostility  of  the  American  people  to
the  principles,  motives,  and  methods  of  the  "  Holy
Alliance,"  and  their  sympathy  with  such  struggles
for  self-government  as  that  in  which  the  Greeks
were  engaged.  The  resolution  was  not  adopted,
but  Mr.  Webster's  speech  made  a  profound  im-
pression at  home  and  abroad.  It  was  translated
into  several  European  languages,  and  called  forth
much  foreign  comment.  The  other  great  speech,  de-
livered on  1  and  2  April,  1824,  was  what  is  commonly
called  his  "  free-trade  speech."  A  bill  had  been  in-
troduced for  revising  the  tariff  in  such  a  way  as  to


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


409


extend  the  operation  of  the  protective  system.  In
this  speech  Mr.  Webster  found  fault  with  the
phrase  ''American  policy,"  as  applied  by  Mr.  Clay
to  the  system  of  high  protective  duties.  "  If
names  are  thought  necessary,"  said  Mr.  Webster,
u  it  would  be  well  enough,  one  would  think,  that
the  name  should  be  in  some  measure  descriptive  of
the  thing ;  and  since  Mr.  Speaker  denominates  the
policy  which  he  recommends  a  '  new  policy  in  this
country ' ;  since  he  speaks  of  the  present  measure
as  a  new  era  in  our  legislation ;  since  he  professes
to  invite  us  to  depart  from  our  accustomed  course,
to  instruct  ourselves  by  the  wisdom  of  others,  and
to  adopt  the  policy  of  the  most  distinguished  for-
eign states — one  is  a  little  curious  to  know  with
what  propriety  of  speech  this  imitation  of  other
nations  is  denominated  an  'American  policy,'
while,  on  the  contrary,  a  preference  for  our  own  es-
tablished system,  as  it  now  actually  exists  and  al-
ways has  existed,  is  called  a  '  foreign  policy.'  This
favorite  American  policy  is  what  America  has  never
tried ;  and  this  odious  foreign  policy  is  what,  as  we
are  told,  foreign  states  have  never  pursued.  Sir,
that  is  the  truest  American  policy  which  shall
most  usefully  employ  American  capital  and  Ameri-
can labor."  After  this  exordium,  Mr.  Webster
went  on  to  give  a  masterly  exposition  of  some  of
the  elementary  theorems  of  political  economy  and
a  survey,  at  once  comprehensive  and  accurate,  of
the  condition  of  American  industry  at  the  time.
He  not  only  attacked  Mr.  Clay's  policy  on  broad
national  grounds,  but  also  showed  more  specifical-
ly that  it  was  likely  to  prove  injurious  to  the  mari-
time commerce  in  which  the  New  England  states
had  so  long  taken  the  lead ;  and  he  concluded  by
characterizing  that  policy  as  "  so  burdensome  and
so  dangerous  to  the  interest  which  has  steadily  en-
riched, gallantly  defended,  and  proudly  distin-
guished us,  that  nothing  can  prevail  upon  me  to
give  it  my  support."  Upon  this  last  clause  of  his
speech  he  was  afterward  enabled  to  rest  a  partial
justification  of  his  change  of  attitude  toward  the
tariff.  The  other  chief  incidents  in  his  career  in
the  house  of  representatives  were  his  advocacy  of  a
national  bankrupt  law,  his  defence  of  William  H.
Crawford,  secretary  of  the  treasury,  against  sun-
dry charges  brought  against  him  by  Ninian  Ed-
wards (q.  v.),  lately  senator  from  Illinois,  and  his
defence  of  President  Adams's  policy  in  the  matter
of  Georgia  and  the  Creek  Indians.

In  politics  Mr.  Webster  occupied  at  this  time
an  independent  position.  The  old  Federalist  party,
to  which  he  had  formerly  belonged,  was  completely
broken  down,  and  the  new  National  Republican
party,  with  its  inheritance  of  many  of  the  princi-
ples, motives,  and  methods  of  the  Federalists,  was
just  beginning  to  take  shape  under  the  leadership
of  Adams  and  Clay.  Between  these  eminent
statesmen  and  Mr.  Webster  the  state  of  feeling
was  not  such  as  to  insure  cordial  co-operation,  but
in  their  views  of  government  there  was  similarity
enough  to  bring  them  together  in  opposition  to  the
new  Democratic  party  represented  by  Jackson,
Benton,  and  Van  Buren.  With  the  extreme  south-
ern views  of  Crawford  and  Calhoun  it  was  impos-
sible that  he  should  sympathize,  although  his  per-
sonal relations  with  those  leaders  were  quite
friendly,  and  after  the  death  of  Calhoun,  the  no-
blest eulogium  upon  his  character  and  motives  was
made  by  Mr.  Webster.  There  is  a  sense  in  which
all  American  statesmen  may  be  said  to  be  intel-
lectually the  descendants  and  disciples  either  of
Jefferson  or  of  Hamilton,  and  as  a  representative
follower  of  Hamilton,  Mr.  Webster  was  sure  to  be
drawn  rather  toward  Clay  than  toward  Jackson.


The  course  of  industrial  events  in  New  England
was  such  as  to  involve  changes  of  opinion  in  that
part  of  the  country,  which  were  soon  reflected  in  a
complete  reversal  of  Mr.  Webster's  attitude  toward
the  tariff.  In  1827  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate. In  that  year  an  agitation  was  begun  by  the
woollen-manufacturers,  which  soon  developed  into
a  promiscuous  scramble  among  different  industries
for  aid  from  government,  and  finally  resulted  in
the  tariff  of  1828.  That  act,  which  was  generally
known  at  the  time  as  "  the  tariff  of  abominations,"
was  the  first  extreme  application  of  the  protective
system  in  our  Federal  legislation.  When  the  bill
was  pending  before  the  senate  in  April,  1828,  Mr.
Webster  made  a  memorable  speech,  in  which  he
completely  abandoned  the  position  he  had  held  in
1824,  and  from  this  time  forth  he  was  a  supporter
of  the  policy  of  Mr.  Clay  and  the  protectionists.
For  this  change  of  attitude  he  was  naturally
praised  by  his  new  allies,  who  were  glad  to  inter-
pret it  as  a  powerful  argument  in  favor  of  their
views.  By  every  one  else  he  was  blamed,  and  this
speech  has  often  been  cited,  together  with  that  of
7  March,  1850,  as  proving  that  Mr.  Webster  was
governed  by  unworthy  motives  and  wanting  in  po-
litical principle.  The  two  cases,  as  we  shall  see,
are  not  altogether  pai'allel.  Probably  neither  ad-
mits of  entire  justification,  but  in  neither  case  did
Mr.  Webster  attempt  to  conceal  or  disguise  his  real
motives.  In  1828  he  frankly  admitted  that  the
policy  of  protection  to  manufactures  by  means  of
tariff  duties  was  a  policy  of  which  he  had  disap-
proved, whether  as  a  political  economist  or  as  a
representative  of  the  interests  of  New  England.
Against  his  own  opposition  and  that  of  New  Eng-
land, the  act  of  1824  had  passed.  "  What,  then,
was  New  England  to  do  ?  .  .  .  Was  she  to  hold  out
forever  against  the  course  of  the  government,  and
see  herself  losing  on  one  side  and  yet  make  no  ef-
fort to  sustain  herself  on  the  other?  No,  sir.
Nothing  was  left  for  New  England  but  to  conform
herself  to  the  will  of  others.  Nothing  was  left  to
her  but  to  consider  that  the  government  had  fixed
and  determined  its  own  policy;  and  that  policy
was  protection."  In  other  words,  the  tariff  policy
adopted  at  Washington,
while  threatening  the  com-
mercial interests  of  New
England,  had  favored  the
investment  of  capital  in
manufactures  there,  and
it  was  not  becoming  in
a  representative  of  New
England  to  take  part  in
disturbing  the  new  ar-
rangement of  things.  This
argument,  if  pushed  far
enough,  would  end  in  the
doctrine — now  apparently
obsolete,  though  it  has  of-
ten been  attacked  and  de-
fended— that  a  senator  is
simply  the  minister  of  his
state  in  congress.  With
Mr.  Webster  it  went  so  far
as  to modify  essentially

his  expressions  of  opinion  as  to  the  constitutional-
ity of  protective  legislation.  He  had  formerly  been
inclined  to  interpret  the  constitution  strictly  upon
this  point,  but  in  1828  and  afterward  his  position
was  that  of  the  loose  constructionists.  Here  the
strong  Federalist  bias  combined  with  that  tempera-
ment which  has  sometimes  been  called  "  opportun-
ism "  to  override  his  convictions  upon  the  economic
merits  of  the  question.


410


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


This  tariff  of  1828  soon  furnished  an  occasion
for  the  display  of  Mr.  Webster's  strong  Federalist
spirit  in  a  way  that  was  most  serviceable  for  his
country  and  has  earned  for  him  undying  fame  as
an  orator  and  statesman.  It  led  to  the  distinct
announcement  of  the  principles  of  nullification  by
the  public  men  of  South  Carolina,  with  Mr.  Cal-
houn at  their  head.  During  President  Jackson's
first  term  the  question  as  to  nullification  seemed
to  occupy  everybody's  thoughts  and  had  a  way  of
intruding  upon  the  discussion  of  all  other  ques-
tions. In  December,  1829,  Samuel  A.  Foote,  of
Connecticut,  presented  to  the  senate  a  resolution
inquiring  into  the  expediency  of  limiting  the  sales
of  the  public  lands  to  those  already  in  the  market,
besides  suspending  the  surveys  of  the  public  lands
and  abolishing  the  office  of  surveyor-general.  The
resolution  was  quite  naturally  resented  by  the
western  senators  as  having  a  tendency  to  check  the
growth  of  their  section  of  the  country.  The  de-
bate was  opened  by  Mr.  Benton,  and  lasted  several
weeks,  with  increasing  bitterness.  The  belief  in  the
hostility  of  the  New  England  states  toward  the  west
was  shared  by  many  southern  senators,  who  desired
to  unite  south  and  west  in  opposition  to  the  tariff.
On  19  Jan.,  1830,  Robert  Y.  Hayne,  of  South  Caro-
lina, attacked  the  New  England  states,  accusing
them  of  aiming  by  their  protective  policy  at  ag-
grandizing themselves  at  the  expense  of  all  the
rest  of  the  Union.  On  the  next  day  Mr.  Webster
delivered  his  "  first  speech  on  Poote's  resolution,"
in  which  he  took  up  Mr.  Hayne's  accusations  and
answered  them  with  great  power.  This  retort  pro-
voked a  long  and  able  reply  from  Mr.  Hayne,  in
which  he  not  only  assailed  Mr.  Webster  and  Massa-
chusetts and  New  England,  but  set  forth  quite
ingeniously  and  elaborately  the  doctrines  of  nulli-
fication. In  view  of  the  political  agitation  then
going  on  in  South  Carolina,  it  was  felt  that  this
speech  would  work  practical  mischief  unless  it
should  meet  with  instant  refutation.  It  was  finished
on  25  Jan.,  and  on  the  next  two  davs  Mr.  Webster
delivered  his  "second  speech  on  Poote's  resolu-
tion," better  known  in  history  as  the  "  Reply  to
Hayne."  The  debate  had  now  lasted  so  long  that
people  had  come  from  different  parts  of  the  coun-
try to  Washington  to  hear  it,  and  on  26  Jan.  the
crowd  not  only  filled  the  galleries  and  invaded  the
floor  of  the  senate-chamber,  but  occupied  all  the
lobbies  and  entries  within  hearing  and  even  be-
yond. In  the  first  part  of  his  speech  Mr.  Webster
replied  to  the  aspersions  upon  himself  and  New
England ;  in  the  second  part  he  attacked  with
weighty  argument  and  keen-edged  sarcasm  the
doctrine  of  nullification.  He  did  not  undertake
to  deny  the  right  of  revolution  as  a  last  resort  in
cases  with  which  legal  and  constitutional  methods
are  found  inadequate  to  deal :  but  he  assailed  the
theory  of  the  constitution  maintained  by  Cal-
houn and  his  followers,  according  to  which  nulli-
fication was  a  right,  the  exercise  of  which  was
compatible  with  loyal  adherence  to  the  constitu-
tion. His  course  of  argument  was  twofold;  he
sought  to  show,  first,  that  the  theory  of  the  con-
stitution as  a  terminable  league  or  compact  be-
tween sovereign  states  was  unsupported  by  the
history  of  its  origin,  and,  secondly,  that  the  attempt
on  the  part  of  any  state  to  act  upon  that  theory
must  necessarily  entail  civil  war  or  the  disruption
of  the  Union.  As  to  the  sufficiency  of  his  histori-
cal argument  there  has  been  much  difference  of
opinion.  The  question  is  difficult  to  deal  with  in
such  a  way  as  to  reach  an  unassailable  conclusion,
and  the  difficulty  is  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  in
the  various  ratifying  conventions  of  1787-9  the


men  who  advocated  the  adoption  of  the  constitu-
tion did  not  all  hold  the  same  opinions  as  to  the
significance  of  what  they  were  doing.  There  was
great  divergence  of  opinion,  and  plenty  of  room
for  antagonisms  of  interpretation  to  grow  up  as
irreconcilable  as  those  of  Webster  and  Calhoun.
If  the  South  Carolina  doctrine  distorted  history  in
one  direction,  that  of  Mr.  Webster  probably  de-
parted somewhat  from  the  record  in  the  other;  but
the  latter  was  fully  in  harmony  with  the  actual
course  of  our  national  development,  and  with  the
increased  and  increasing  strength  of  the  sentiment
of  union  at  the  time  when  it  was  propounded  with
such  powerful  reasoning  and  such  magnificent
eloquence  in  the  "  Reply  to  Hayne."  As  an  appeal
to  the  common  sense  of  the  American  people,
nothing  could  be  more  masterly  than  Mr.  Webster's
demonstration  that  nullification  practically  meant
revolution,  and  their  unalterable  opinion  of  the
soundness  of  his  argument  was  amply  illustrated
when  at  length  the  crisis  came  which  he  deprecated
with  such,  intensity  of  emotion  in  his  concluding
sentences.  To  some  of  the  senators  who  listened
to  the  speech,  as,  for  instance,  Thomas  H.  Benton,
it  seemed  as  if  the  passionate  eloquence  of  its
close  concerned  itself  with  imaginary  dangers
never  likely  to  be  realized :  but  the  event  showed
that  Mr.  Webster  estimated  correctly  the  perilous-
ness  of  the  doctrine  against  which  he  was  contend-
ing. For  genuine  oratorical  power,  the  "  Reply  to
Hayne "  is  probably  the  greatest  speech  that  has
been  delivered  since  the  oration  of  Demosthenes
on  the  crown.  The  comparison  is  natural,  as  there
are  points  in  the  American  orator  that  forcibly
remind  one  of  the  Athenian.  There  is  the  fine
sense  of  proportion  and  fitness,  the  massive  weight
of  argument  due  to  transparent  clearness  and
matchless  symmetry  of  statement,  and  along
with  the  rest  a  truly  Attic  simplicity  of  diction.
Mr.  Webster  never  indulged  in  mere  rhetorical
flights;  his  sentences,  simple  in  structure  and
weighted  with  meaning,  went  straight  to  the  mark,
and  his  arguments  were  so  skilfully  framed  that
while  his  most  learned  and  critical  hearers  were
impressed  with  a  sense  of  their  conclusiveness,  no
man  of  ordinary  intelligence  could  fail  to  under-
stand them.  To  these  high  qualifications  of  the
orator  was  added  such  a  physical  presence  as  but
few  men  have  been  endowed  with.  Mr.  Webster's
appearance  was  one  of  unequalled  dignity  and
power,  his  voice  was  rich  and  musical,  and  the  im-

Sressiveness  of  his  delivery  was  enhanced  by  the
epth  of  genuine  manly  feeling  with  which  he
spoke.  Yet  while  his  great  speeches  owed  so
much  of  their  overpowering  effect  to  the  look  and
manner  of  the  man,  they  were  at  the  same  time
masterpieces  of  literature.  Like  the  speeches  of
Demosthenes,  they  were  capable  of  swaying  the
reader  as  well  as  the  hearer,  and  their  effects  went
far  beyond  the  audience  and  far  beyond  the  occa-
sion of  their  delivery.  In  all  these  respects  the
"  Reply  to  Hayne  "  marks  the  culmination  of  Mr.
Webster's  power  as  an  orator.  Of  all  the  occa-
sions of  his  life,  this  encounter  with  the  doctrine
of  nullification  on  its  first  bold  announcement  in
the  senate  was  certainly  the  greatest,  and  the
speech  was  equal  to  the  occasion.  It  struck  a  chord
in  the  heart  of  the  American  people  which  had
not  ceased  to  vibrate  when  the  crisis  came  thirty
years  later.  It  gave  articulate  expression  to  a
sentiment  of  loyalty  to  the  Union  that  went  on
growing  until  the  American  citizen  was  as  prompt
to  fight  for  the  Union  as  the  Mussulman  for  his
prophet  or  the  cavalier  for  his  king.  It  furnished,
moreover,  a  clear  and  comprehensive  statement  of


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


411


the  theory  by  which  that  sentiment  of  loyalty  was
justified.  Of  the  men  who  in  after-years  gave  up
their  lives  for  the  Union,  doubtless  the  greater
number  had  as  school-boys  declaimed  passages
from  this  immortal  speech  and  caught  some  inspi-
ration from  its  fervid  patriotism.  Probably  no
other  speech  ever  made  in  congress  has  found  so
many  readers  or  exerted  so  much  influence  in  giv-
ing shape  to  men's  thoughts.

Three  years  afterward  Mr.  Webster  returned  to
struggle  with  nullification,  being  now  pitted  against
the  master  of  that  doctrine  instead  of  the  disciple.
In  the  interval  South  Carolina  had  attempted  to
put  the  doctrine  into  practice,  and  had  been  res-
olutely met  by  President  Jackson  with  his  procla-
mation of  10  Dec,  1832.  In  response  to  a  special
message  from  the  president,  early  in  January,  1833,
the  so-called  "Force  bill,"  empowering  the  president
to  use  the  army  and  navy,  if  necessary,  for  enforc-
ing the  revenue  laws  in  South  Carolina,  was  re-
Sorted  in  the  senate.  The  bill  was  opposed  by
temocrats  who  did  not  go  so  far  as  to  approve  of
nullification,  but  the  defection  of  these  senators
was  more  than  balanced  by  the  accession  of  Mr.
Webster,  who  upon  this  measure  came  promptly
to  the  support  of  the  administration.  For  this,
says  Benton,  "  his  motives  .  .  .  were  attacked,  and
he  was  accused  of  subserviency  to  the  president  for
the  sake  of  future  favor.  At  the  same  time  all  the
support  which  he  gave  to  these  measures  was  the
regular  result  of  the  principles  which  he  laid  down
against  nullification  in  the  debate  with  Mr.  Hayne,
and  he  could  not  have  done  less  without  being  der-
elict to  his  own  principles  then  avowed.  It  was  a
proud  era  in  his  life,  supporting  with  transcendent
ability  the  cause  of  the  constitution  and  of  the
country,  in  the  person  of  a  chief  magistrate  to
whom  he  was  politically  opposed,  bursting  the
bonds  of  party  at  the  call  of  duty,  and  displaying
a  patriotism  worthy  of  admiration  and  imitation.
Gen.  Jackson  felt  the  debt  of  gratitude  and  admira-
tion which  he  owed  him ;  the  country,  without  dis-
tinction of  party,  felt  the  same.  ...  He  was  the
colossal  figure  on  the  political  stage  during  that
eventful  time ;  and  his  labors,  splendid  in  their  day,
survive  for  the  benefit  of  distant  posterity"  ("  Thirty
Years'  View,"  i.,  334).  The  support  of  the  presi-
dent's policy  by  Mr.  Webster,  and  its  enthusiastic
approval  by  nearly  all  the  northern  and  a  great
many  of  the  southern  people,  seems  to  have  alarmed
Mr.  Calhoun,  probably  not  so  much  for  his  personal
safety  as  for  the  welfare  of  his  nullification  schemes.
The  story  that  he  was  frightened  by  the  rumor  that
Jackson  had  threatened  to  begin  by  arresting  him
on  a  charge  of  treason  is  now  generally  discredited.
He  had  seen  enough,  however,  to  convince  him
that  the  theory  of  peaceful  nullification  was  not
now  likely  to  be  realized.  It  was  not  his  aim  to
provoke  an  armed  collision,  and  accordingly  a  mo-
mentary alliance  was  made  between  himself  and
Mr.  Clay,  resulting  in  the  compromise  tariff  bill  of
12  Feb.,  1833.  Only  four  days  elapsed  between  Mr.
Webster's  announcement  of  his  intention  to  support
the  president  and  the  introduction  of  this  com-
promise measure.  Mr.  Webster  at  once  opposed
the  compromise,  both  as  unsound  economically  and
as  an  unwise  and  dangerous  concession  to  the
threats  of  the  nullifiers.  At  this  point  the  Force
bill  was  brought  forward,  and  Mr.  Calhoun  made
his  great  speech,  15-16  Feb.,  in  support  of  the  reso-
lutions he  bad  introduced  on  22  Jan.,  affirming  the
doctrine  of  nullification.  To  this  Mr.  Webster  re-
plied, 16  Feb.,  with  his  speech  entitled  "The  Con-
stitution not  a  Compact  between  Sovereign  States,"
in  which he supplemented  and re-enforced the


argument  of  the  "  Reply  to  Hayne."  Mr.  Calhoun's
answer,  26  Feb.,  was  perhaps  the  most  powerful
speech  he  ever  delivered,  and  Mr.  Webster  did  not
reply  to  it  at  length.  The  burden  of  the  discussion
was  what  the  American  people  really  did  when  they
adopted  the  Federal  constitution.  Did  they  simply
create  a  league  between  sovereign  states,  or  did
they  create  a  national  government,  which  operates


immediately  upon  individuals,  and,  without  super-
seding the  state  governments,  stands  superior  to
them,  and  claims  a  prior  allegiance  from  all  citi-
zens ?  It  is  now  plain  to  be  seen  that  in  point  of
fact  they  did  create  such  a  national  government ;
but  how  far  they  realized  at  the  outset  what  they
were  doing  is  quite  another  question.  Mr.  Web-
ster's main  conclusion  was  sustained  with  colossal
strength ;  but  his  historical  argument  was  in  some
places  weak,  and  the  weakness  is  unconsciously  be-
trayed in  a  disposition  toward  wire-drawn  subtlety,
from  which  Mr.  Webster  was  usually  quite  free.
His  ingenious  reasoning  upon  the  meaning  of  such
words  as  "compact"  and  "accede"  was  easily  de-
molished by  Mr.  Calhoun,  who  was,  however,  more
successful  in  hitting  upon  his  adversary's  vulnerable
points  than  in  making  good  his  own  case.  In  fact,
the  historical  question  was  not  really  so  simple  as
it  presented  itself  to  the  minds  of  those  two  great
statesmen.  But  in  whatever  way  it  was  to  be
settled,  the  force  of  Mr.  Webster's  practical  conclu-
sions remained,  as  he  declared  in  the  brief  rejoinder
with  which  he  ended  the  discussion :  "  Mr.  Presi-
dent, turn  this  question  over  and  present  it  as  we
will — argue  it  as  we  may — exhaust  upon  it  all  the
fountains  of  metaphysics — stretch  over  it  all  the
meshes  of  logical  or  political  subtlety — it  still  comes
to  this:  Shall  we  have  a  general  government?
Shall  we  continue  the  union  of  the  states  under  a
government  instead  of  a  league  %  This  is  the  upshot
of  the  whole  matter ;  because,  if  we  are  to  have  a
government,  that  government  must  act  like  other
governments,  by  majorities;  it  must  have  this
power,  like  other  governments,  of  enforcing  its  own
laws  and  its  own  decisions;  clothed  with  authority
by  the  people  and  always  responsible  to  the  people,
it  must  be  able  to  hold  its  course  unchecked  by  ex-
ternal interposition.  According  to  the  gentleman's
views  of  the  matter,  the  constitution  is  a  league ;
according  to  mine,  it  is  a  regular  popular  govern-
ment. This  vital  and  all-important  question  the
people  will  decide,  and  in  deciding  it  they  will  de-
termine whether,  by  ratifying  the  present  constitu-
tion and  frame  of  "government,  they  meant  to  do
nothing  more  than  to  amend  the  articles  of  the  old
confederation."  As  the  immediate  result  of  the
debates,  both  the  Force  bill  and  the  Compromise
tariff  bill  were  adopted,  and  this  enabled  Mr.  Cal-
houn to  maintain  that  the  useful  and  conservative
character  of  nullification  had  been  demonstrated,
since  the  action  of  South  Carolina  had,  without
leading  to  violence,  led  to  such  modifications  of  the


412


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


tariff  as  she  desired.  But  the  abiding  result  was,
that  Webster  had  set  forth  the  theory  upon  which
the  Union  was  to  be  preserved,  and  that  the  ad-
ministration, in  acting  upon  that  theory,  had  estab-
lished an  extremely  valuable  precedent  for  the
next  administration  that  should  be  called  upon  to
meet  a  similar  crisis.

The  alliance  between  Mr.  Webster  and  President
Jackson  extended  only  to  the  question  of  main-
taining the  Union.  As  an  advocate  of  the  policy
of  a  national  bank,  a  protective  tariff,  and  internal
improvements,  Mr.  Webster's  natural  place  was  by
the  side  of  Mr.  Clay  in  the  Whig  party,  which  was
now  in  the  process  of  formation.  He  was  also  at
one  with  both  the  northern  and  the  southern
sections  of  the  Whig  party  in  opposition  to  what
Mr.  Benton  called  the  "  demos  krateo "  principle,
according  to  which  the  president,  in  order  to  carry
out  the  "  will  of  the  people,"  might  feel  himself
authorized  to  override  the  constitutional  limita-
tions upon  his  power.  This  was  not  precisely  what
Mr.  Benton  meant  by  his  principle,  but  it  was  the
way  in  which  it  was  practically  illustrated  in
Jackson's  war  against  the  bank.  In  the  course  of
this  struggle  Mr.  Webster  made  more  than  sixty
speeches,  remarkable  for  their  wide  and  accurate
knowledge  of  finance.  His  consummate  mastery
of  statement  is  nowhere  more  thoroughly  exempli-
fied than  in  these  speeches.  Constitutional  ques-
tions were  brought  up  by  Mr.  Clay's  resolutions
censuring  the  president  for  the  removal  of  the  de-
posits, and  for  dismissing  William  J.  Duane,  sec-
retary of  the  treasury.  In  reply  to  the  resolutions,
President  Jackson  sent  to  the  senate  his  remarka-
ble "Protest,"  in  which  he  maintained  that  in  the
mere  discussion  of  such  resolutions  that  body  tran-
scended its  constitutional  prerogatives,  and  that
the  president  is  the  "  direct  representative  of  the
American  people,"  charged  with  the  duty,  if  need
be,  of  protecting  them  against  the  usurpations  of
congress.  The  Whigs  maintained,  with  much
truth,  that  this  doctrine,  if  carried  out  in  all  its
implications,  would  push  democracy  to  the  point
where  it  merges  in  Caesarism.  It  was  now  that
the  opposition  began  to  call  themselves  Whigs,  and
tried  unsuccessfully  to  stigmatize  the  president's
supporters  as  "  Tories."  Mr.  Webster's  speech  on
the  president's  protest,  7  May,  1884.  was  one  of
great  importance,  and  should  be  read  by  every
student  of  our  constitutional  history.  In  another
elaborate  speech,  16  Feb.,  1835,  he  tried  to  show
that  under  a  proper  interpretation  of  the  constitu-
tion the  power  of  removal,  like  the  power  of  ap-
pointment, was  vested  in  the  president  and  senate
conjointly,  and  that  "the  decision  of  congress  in
1789,  which  separated  the  power  of  removal  from
the  power  of  appointment,  was  founded  on  an
erroneous  construction  of  the  constitution."  But
subsequent  opinion  has  upheld  the  decision  of  1789,
leaving  the  speech  to  serve  as  an  illustration  of
the  way  in  which,  under  the  stress  of  a  particular
contest,  the  Whigs  were  as  ready  to  strain  the  con-
stitution in  one  direction  as  the  Democrats  were
inclined  to  bend  it  in  another.  An  instance  of  the
latter  kind  was  Mr.  Benton's  expunging  resolution,
against  which  Mr.  Webster  emphatically  protested.

About  this  time  Mr.  Webster  was  entertaining
thoughts  of  retiring,  for  a  while  at  least,  from
public  life.  As  he  said,  in  a  letter  to  a  friend,  he
had  not  for  fourteen  years  had  leisure  to  attend  to
his  private  affairs,  or  to  become  acquainted  by
travel  with  his  own  country.  This  period  had  not,
however,  been  entirely  free  from  professional  work.
It  was  seldom  that  Mr.  Webster  took  part  in  crimi-
nal trials,  but  in  this  department  of  legal  practice


he  showed  himself  qualified  to  take  rank  with  the
greatest  advocates  that  have  ever  addressed  a  jury.
His  speech  for  the  prosecution,  on  the  trial  of  the
murderers  of  Capt.  Joseph  White,  at  Salem,  in
August,  1830,  has  been  pronounced  superior  to  the
finest  speeches  of  Lord  Erskine.  In  the  autumn
of  1824,  while  driving  in  a  chaise  with  his  wife
from  Sandwich  to  Boston,  he  stopped  at  the  beau-
tiful farm  of  Capt.  John  Thomas,  by  the  sea-shore
at  Marshfield.  For  the  next  seven  years  his  fami-
ly passed  their  summers  at  this  place  as  guests  of
Capt.  Thomas ;  and,  as  the  latter  was  growing  old
and  willing  to  be  eased  of  the  care  of  the  farm,
Mr.  Webster  bought  it  of  him  in  the  autumn  of
1831.  Capt.  Thomas  continued  to  live  there  until
his  death,  in  1837,  as  Mr.  Webster's  guest.  For  the
latter  it  became  the  favorite  home  whither  he  re-
tired in  the  intervals  of  public  life.  It  was  a  place,
he  said,  where  he  "  could  go  out  every  day  in  the
year  and  see  something  new."  Mr.  Webster  was
very  fond  of  the  sea.  He  had  also  a  passion  for
country  life,  for  all  the  sights  and  sounds  of  the
farm,  for  the  raising  of  fine  animals,  as  well  as  for
hunting  and  fishing.  The  earlier  years  of  Mr.
Webster's  residence  at  Marshfield,  and  of  his  ser-
vice in  the  U.  S.  senate,  witnessed  some  serious
events  in  his  domestic  life.  Death  removed  his
wife,  21  Jan.,  1828,  and  his  brother  Ezekiel,  10
April,  1829.  In  December,  1829,  he  married  Miss
Caroline  Le  Roy,  daughter  of  a  wealthy  merchant
in  New  York.  Immediately  after  this  second  mar-
riage came  the  "  Reply  to  Hayne."  The  beginning
of  a  new  era  in  his  private  life  coincided  with  the
beginning  of  a  new  era  in  his  career  as  a  statesman.
After  1880  Mr.  Webster  was  recognized  as  one  of
the  greatest  powers  in  the  nation,  and  it  seemed
natural  that  the  presidency  should  be  offered  to
such  a  man.  His  talents,  however,  were  not  those
of  a  party  leader,  and  the  circumstances  under
which  the  Whig  party  was  formed  were  not  such
as  to  place  him  at  its  head.  The  elements  of  which
that  party  was  made  up  were  incongruous,  the
bond  of  union  between  them  consisting  chiefly  of
opposition  to  President  Jackson's  policy.  In  the
election  of  1836  they  had  not  time  in  which  to  be-
come welded  together,  and  after  the  brief  triumph
of  1840  they  soon  fell  apart  again.  In  1836  there
was  no  general  agreement  upon  a  candidate.  The
northern  Whigs,  or  National  Republicans,  sup-
ported by  the  anti-Masons,  nominated  Gen.  Will-
iam H.  Harrison  ;  the  southern  or  "  state-rights  "
Whigs  nominated  Hugh  L.  White ;  the  legislature
of  Massachusetts  nominated  Mr.  Webster,  and  he
received  the  electoral  vote  of  that  state  only.  Over
such  an  ill-organized  opposition  Mr.  Van  Buren
easily  triumphed.  In  March,  1837,  on  his  way
from  Washington  to  Boston,  Mr.  Webster  stopped
in  New  York  and  made  a  great  speech  at  Niblo's
garden,  in  which  he  reviewed  and  criticised  the
policy  of  the  late  administration,  with  especial  ref-
erence to  its  violent  treatment  of  the  bank.  In  the
course  of  the' speech  he  used  language  that  was
soon  proved  prophetic  by  the  financial  crisis  of
that  year.  In  the  summer  he  made  a  journey
through  the  western  states.  In  the  next  session  of
congress  his  most  important  speeches  were  those
on  the  sub-treasury  bill.  The  second  of  these,  de-
livered 12  March,  1838,  contained  some  memorable
remarks  on  the  course  of  Mr.  Calhoun,  who  had
now  taken  sides  with  the  administration.  No  pas-
sage in  all  his  speeches  is  more  graphic  than  that
in  which,  with  playful  sarcasm,  he  imagines  Gen.
Jackson  as  coming  from  his  retirement  at  the  Her-
mitage, walking  into  the  senate-chamber,  and
looking  across  "to  the  seats  on  the  other  side."


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


413


The  whole  of  that  portion  of  the  speech  which  re-
lates to  nullification  is  extremely  powerful.  Mr.
Calhoun,  in  his  reply,  "carried  the  war  into  Af-
rica," and  attacked  Mr.  Webster's  record.  He  was
answered,  22  March,  by  a  speech  that  was  a  model
for  such  parliamentary  retorts.  Mr.  Webster  never
sneered  at  his  adversaries,  but  always  rendered
them  the  full  meed  of  personal  respect  that  he
would  have  demanded  for  himself.  He  discussed
questions  on  their  merits,  and  was  too  great  to  de-
scend to  recriminations.  His  Titanic  power  owed
very  little  to  the  spirit  of  belligerency.  Never  was
there  an  orator  more  urbane  or  more  full  of  Chris-
tian magnanimity.

In  the  summer  of  1839  Mr.  Webster  with  his
family  visited  England,  where  he  was  cordially  re-
ceived and  greatly  admired.  On  his  return  in  De-
cember he  learned  that  the  Whigs  had  this  time
united  upon  Gen.  Harrison  for  their  candidate  in
the  hope  of  turning  to  their  own  uses  the  same
kind  of  unreflecting  popular  enthusiasm  that  had
elected  Jackson.  The  panic  of  1837  aided  them
still  more,  and  Mr.  Webster  made  skilful  use  of  it
in  a  long  series  of  campaign  speeches,  during  the
summer  of  1840,  in  Massachusetts,  New  York,
Pennsylvania,  and  Virginia.  He  accepted  the  office
of  secretary  of  state  in  President  Harrison's  ad-
ministration, and  soon  showed  himself  as  able  in
diplomacy  as  in  other  departments  of  statesman-
ship. There
was  a  compli-
cation of  dif-
ficulties with
Great  Britain
which  seemed
to  be  bringing
us  to  the  verge
of  war.  There
was  the  long-
standing dis-
pute about
the  northeast-
ern bounda-
ry, which  had
not  been  adequately  defined  by  the  treaty  of  1783,
and  along  with  the  renewal  of  this  controversy
came  up  the  cases  of  McLeod  and  the  steamer
"  Caroline,"  the  slave-ship  "  Creole,"  and  all  the
manifold  complications  that  these  cases  involved.
The  Oregon  question,  too,  was  looming  in  the
background.  In  disentangling  these  difficulties
Mr.  Webster  showed  wonderful  tact  and  discretion.
He  was  fortunately  aided  by  the  change  of  minis-
try in  England,  which  transferred  the  manage-
ment of  foreign  affairs  from  the  hands  of  Lord
Palmerston  to  those  of  Lord  Aberdeen.  Edward
Everett  was  then  in  London,  and  Mr.  Webster  se-
cured his  appointment  as  minister  to  Great  Britain.
In  response  to  this  appointment,  Lord  Ashburton,
whose  friendly  feeling  toward  the  United  States
was  known  to  every  one,  was  sent  over  on  a  special
mission  to  confer  with  Mr.  Webster,  and  the  result
was  the  Ashburton  treaty  of  1842,  by  which  an
arbitrary  and  conventional  line  was  adopted  for
the  northeastern  boundary,  while  the  loss  thereby
suffered  by  the  states  of  Maine  and  Massachusetts
was  to  be  indemnified  by  the  United  States.  It
was  also  agreed  that  Great  Britain  and  the  United
States  should  each  keep  its  own  squadron  to  watch
the  coast  of  Africa  for  the  suppression  of  the
slave-trade,  and  that  in  this  good  work  each  nation
should  separately  enforce  its  own  laws.  This  clause
of  the  treaty  was  known  as  the  "  cruising  conven-
' The  old  grievance  of  the  impressment  of


tion.


seamen,  which  had  been  practically  abolished  by


the  glorious  victories  of  American  frigates  in  the
war  of  1812-15,  was  now  formally  ended  by  Mr.
Webster's  declaration  to  Lord  Ashburton  that
henceforth  American  vessels  would  not  submit
themselves  to  be  searched.  Henceforth  the  en-
forcement of  the  so-called  "  right  of  search  "  by  a
British  ship  would  be  regarded  by  the  United
States  as  a  casus  belli.  When  all  the  circumstances
are  considered,  this  Ashburton  treaty  shows  that
Mr.  Webster's  powers  as  a  diplomatist  were  of  the
highest  order.  In  the  hands  of  an  ordinary  states-
man the  affair  might  easily  have  ended  in  a  war ;
but  his  management  was  so  dexterous  that,  as  we
now  look  back  upon  the  negotiation,  we  find  it
hard  to  realize  that  there  was  any  real  danger.
Perhaps  there  could  be  no  more  conclusive  proof
or  more  satisfactory  measure  of  his  really  brilliant
and  solid  success.

While  these  important  negotiations  were  going
on,  great  changes  had  come  over  the  political  hori-
zon. There  had  been  a  quarrel  between  the  north-
ern and  southern  sections  of  the  Whig  party  (see
Tyler,  John),  and  on  11  Sept.,  1841,  all  the  mem-
bers of  President  Tyler's  cabinet,  except  Mr.  Web-
ster, resigned.  It  seems  to  have  been  believed  by
many  of  the  Whigs  that  a  unanimous  resignation
on  the  part  of  the  cabinet  would  force  President
Tyler  to  resign.  The  idea  came  from  a  misunder-
standing of  the  British  custom  in  similar  cases,
and  it  is  an  incident  of  great  interest  to  the  stu-
dent of  American  history ;  but  there  was  not  the
slightest  chance  that  it  should  be  realized.  Had
there  been  any  such  chance,  Mr.  Webster  defeated
it  by  staying  at  his  post  in  order  to  finish  the
treaty  with  Great  Britain.  The  Whigs  were  in-
clined to  attribute  his  conduct  to  unworthy  mo-
tives, and  no  sooner  had  the  treaty  been  signed,
9  Aug.,  1842,  than  the  newspapers  began  calling
upon  him  to  resign.  The  treaty  was  ratified  in
the  senate  by  a  vote  of  39  to  9,  but  it  had  still  to
be  adopted  by  parliament,  and  much  needless  ex-
citement was-  occasioned  on  both  sides  of  the  ocean
by  the  discovery  of  an  old  map  in  Paris,  sustain-
ing the  British  view  of  the  northeastern  boundary,
and  another  in  London,  sustaining  the  American
view.  Mr.  Webster  remained  at  his  post  in  spite
of  popular  clamor  until  he  knew  the  treaty  to  be
quite  safe.  In  the  hope  of  driving  him  from  the
cabinet,  the  Whigs  in  Massachusetts  held  a  con-
vention and  declared  that  President  Tyler  was  no
longer  a  member  of  their  party.  On  a  visit  to
Boston,  Mr.  Webster  made  a  noble  speech  in
Faneuil  hall,  30  Sept.,  1842,  in  the  course  of  which
he  declared  that  he  was  neither  to  be  coaxed  nor
driven  into  an  action  that  in  his  own  judgment
was  not  conducive  to  the  best  interests  of  the
country.  He  knew  very  well  that  by  such  inde-
pendence he  was  likely  to  injure  his  chances  for
nomination  to  the  presidency.  He  knew  that  a
movement  in  favor  of  Mr.  Clay  had  begun  in
Massachusetts,  and  that  his  own  course  was  adding
greatly  to  the  impetus  of  that  movement.  But  his
patriotism  rose  superior  to  all  personal  considera-
tions. In  May,  1843,  having  seen  the  treaty  firmly
established,  he  resigned  the  secretaryship  and  re-
turned to  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Boston.
In  the  canvass  of  1844  he  supported  Mr.  Clay  in
a  series  of  able  speeches.  On  Mr.  Choate's  resigna-
tion, early  in  1845,  Mr.  Webster  was  re-elected  to
the  senate.  The  two  principal  questions  of  Mr.
Polk's  administration  related  to  the  partition  of
Oregon  and  the  difficulties  that  led  to  war  with
Mexico.  The  Democrats  declared  that  we  must
"have  the  whole  of  Oregon  up  to  the  parallel  of  54°
40',  although  the  49th  parallel  had  already  been  sug-


414


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


gested  as  a  compromise-line.  In  a  very  able  speech
at  Faneuil  hall,  Mr.  Webster  advocated  the  adop-
tion of  this  compromise.  The  speech  was  widely
read  in  England  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,
and  Mr.  Webster  followed  it  by  a  private  letter  to
Mr.  Macgregor,  of  Glasgow,  expressing  a  wish  that
the  British  government  might  see  fit  to  offer  the
49th  parallel  as  a  boundary-line.  The  letter  was
shown  to  Lord  Aberdeen,  who  adopted  the  sug-
gestion, and  the  dispute  accordingly  ended  in  the
partition  of  Oregon  between  the  United  States  and
Great  Britain.  This  successful  interposition  dis-
gusted some  Democrats  who  were  really  desirous
of  war  with  England,  and  Charles  J.  Ingersoll,
member  of  congress  from  Pennsylvania  and  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs,  made  a
scandalous  attack  upon  Mr.  Webster,  charging
him  with  a  corrupt  use  of  public  funds.  Mr.  Web-
ster replied  in  his  great  speech  of  6  and  7  April,
1846,  in  defence  of  the  Ashburton  treaty.  The
speech  was  a  triumphant  vindication  of  his  public
policy,  and  in  the  thorough  investigation  of  details
that  followed,  Mr.  Ingersoll's  charges  were  shown
to  be  utterly  groundless.

During  the  operations  on  the  Texas  frontier,
which  brought  on  war  with  Mexico,  Mr.  Webster
was  absent  from  Washington.  In  the  summer  of
1847  he  travelled  through  the  southern  states,  and
was  everywhere  received  with  much  enthusiasm.
He  opposed  the  prosecution  of  the  war  for  the  sake
of  acquiring  more  territory,  because  he  foresaw
that  such  a  policy  must  speedily  lead  to  a  danger-
ous agitation  of  the  slavery  question.  The  war
brought  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  into  the  foreground
as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency,  and  some  of  the
Whig  managers  actually  proposed  to  nominate
Mr.  Webster  as  vice-president  on  the  same  ticket
with  Gen.  Taylor.  He  indignantly  refused  to  ac-
cept such  a  proposal ;  but  Mr.  Clay's  defeat  in  1844
had  made  many  Whigs  afraid  to  take  him  again
as  a  candidate.  Mr.  Webster  was  thought  to  be
altogether  too  independent,  and  there  was  a  feeling
that  Gen.  Taylor  was  the  most  available  candidate
and  the  only  one  who  could  supplant  Mr.  Clay.
These  circumstances  led  to  Taylor's  nomination,
which  Mr.  Webster  at  first  declined  to  support.
He  disapproved  of  soldiers  as  presidents,  and  char-
acterized the  nomination  as  "one  not  fit  to  be
made."  At  the  same  time  he  was  far  from  ready
to  support  Mr.  Van  Buren  and  the  Free-soil  party,
yet  in  his  situation  some  decided  action  was  neces-
sary. Accordingly,  in  his  speech  at  Marshfield,
1  Sept.,  1848,  he  declared  that,  as  the  choice  was
really  between  Gen.  Taylor  and  Gen.  Cass,  he
should  support  the  former.  It  has  been  contended
that  in  this  Mr.  Webster  made  a  great  mistake,
and  that  his  true  place  in  this  canvass  would  have
been  with  the  Free-soil  party.  He  had  always
been  opposed  to  the  further  extension  of  slavery ;
but  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  he  looked  with
dread  upon  the  rise  of  an  anti-slavery  party  that
should  be  supported  only  in  the.  northern  states.
Whatever  tended  to  array  the  north  and  the  south
in  opposition  to  each  other  Mr.  Webster  wished
especially  to  avoid.  The  ruling  purpose  of  his  life
was  to  do  what  he  could  to  prevent  the  outbreak  of
a  conflict  that  might  end  in  the  disruption  of  the
Union ;  and  it  may  well  have  seemed  that  there
was  more  safety  in  sustaining  the  Whig  party  in
electing  its  candidate  by  the  aid  of  southern  votes
than  in  helping  into  life  a  new  party  that  should
be  purely  sectional.  At  the  same  time,  this  cau-
tious policy  necessarily  involved  an  amount  of  con-
cession to  southern  demands  far  greater  than  the
rapidly  growing  anti- slavery  sentiment in  the


northern  states  would  tolerate.  No  doubt  Mr.
Webster's  policy  in  1848  pointed  logically  toward
his  last  great  speech,  7  March,  1850,  in  which  he
supported  Mr.  Clay's  elaborate  compromises  for
disposing  of  the  difficulties  that  had  grown  out  of
the  vast  extension  of  territory  consequent  upon
the  Mexican  war.  (See  Clay,  Henry.)  This  speech
aroused  intense  indignation  at  the  north,  and  espe-
cially in  Massachusetts.  It  was  regarded  by  many
people  as  a  deliberate  sacrifice  of  principle  to  policy.
Mr.  Webster  was  accused  of  truckling  to  the  south
in  order  to  obtain  southern  support  for  the  presi-
dency. Such  an  accusation  seems  inconsistent
with  Mr.  Webster's  character,  and  a-  comprehen-
sive survey  of  his  political  career  renders  it  highly
improbable.  The  "  Seventh  -  of  -  March  "  speech
may  have  been  a  political  mistake ;  but  one  cannot
read  it  to-day,  with  a  clear  recollection  of  what
was  thought  and  felt  before  the  civil  war,  and
doubt  for  a  moment  the  speaker's  absolute  frank-
ness and  sincerity.  He  supported  Mr.  Clay's  com-
promises because  they  seemed  to  him  a  conclusive
settlement  of  the  slavery  question.  The  whole
territory  of  the  United  States,  as  he  said,  was  now
covered  with  compromises,  and  the  future  destiny
of  every  part,  so  far  as  the  legal  introduction  of
slavery  was  concerned,  seemed  to  be  decided.  As
for  the  regions  to  the  west  of  Texas,  he  believed
that  slavery  was  ruled  out  by  natural  conditions
of  soil  and  climate,  so  that  it  was  not  necessary  to
protect  them  by  a  Wilmot  proviso.  As  for  the
fugitive  -  slave  law,  it
was  simply  a  provision
for  carrying  into  effect
a  clause  of  the  constitu-
tion, without  which  that
instrument  could  never
have  been  adopted,  and
in  the  frequent  infrac-
tion of  which  Mr.  Web-
ster saw  a  serious  dan-
ger to  the  continuance
of  the  Union.  He  there-
fore accepted  the  fugi-
tive-slave law  as  one  fea-
ture in  the  proposed
system  of  compromises ;
but,  in  accepting  it,  he
offered  amendments,
which,  if  they  had  been
adopted,  would  have
gone  far  toward  depriv-
ing it  of  some  of  its
most  obnoxious  and  ir-
ritating features. By

adopting  these  measures  of  compromise.  Mr.  Web-
ster believed  that  the  extension  of  slavery  would
have  been  given  its  limit,  that  the  north  would,  by
reason  of  its  free  labor,  increase  in  preponderance
over  the  south,  and  that  by  and  by  the  institution
of  slavery,  hemmed  in  and  denied  further  expan-
sion, would  die  a  natural  death.  That  these  views
were  mistaken,  the  events  of  the  next  ten  years
showed  only  too  plainly,  but  there  is  no  good  rea-
son for  doubting  their  sincerity.  There  is  little
doubt,  too,  that  the  compromises  had  their  practi-
cal value  in  postponing  the  inevitable  conflict  for
ten  years,  during  which  the  relative  strength  of  the
north  was  increasing  and  a  younger  generation  was
growing  up  less  tolerant  of  slavery  and  more  ready
to  discard  palliatives  and  achieve  a  radical  cure.
So  far  as  Mr.  Webster's  moral  attitude  was  con-
cerned, although  he  was  not  prepared  for  the  bitter
hostility  that  his  speech  provoked  in  many  quar-
ters, he  must  nevertheless  have  known  that  it  was


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


415


quite  as  likely  to  injure  him  at  the  north  as  to
gain  support  for  him  in  the  south,  and  his  resolute
adoption  of  a  policy  that  he  regarded  as  national
rather  than  sectional  was  really  an  instance  of  high
moral  courage.  It  was,  however,  a  concession  that
did  violence  to  his  sentiments  of  humanity,  and
the  pain  and  uneasiness  it  occasioned  is  visible  in
some  of  his  latest  utterances.

On  President  Taylor's  death,  9  July,  1850,  Mr.
Webster  became  President  Fillmore's  secretary  of
state.  An  earnest  attempt  was  made  on  the  part  of
his  friends  to  secure  his  nomination  for  the  presi-
dency in  1852 ;  but  on  the  first  ballot  in  the  con-
vention he  received  only  29  votes,  while  there
were  131  for  Gen.  Scott  and  133  for  Mr.  Fillmore.
The  efforts  of  Mr.  Webster's  adherents  succeeded
only  in  giving  the  nomination  to  Scott.  The  re-
sult was  a  grave  disappointment  to  Mr.  Webster.
He  refused  to  support  the  nomination,  and  took
no  part  in  the  campaign.  His  health  was  now
rapidly  failing.  He  left  Washington,  8  Sept.,  for
the  last  time,  and  returned  to  Marshfield,  which
he  never  left  again,  except  on  20  Sept.  for  a  brief
call  upon  his  physician  in  Boston.  By  his  own
request  there  were  no  public  ceremonies  at  his
funeral,  which  took  place  very  quietly,  29  Sept.,
at  Marshfield.  The  steel  engraving  of  Webster
is  from  a  portrait  made  about  1840.  the  vignette
from  a  painting  by  James  B.  Longacre,  executed
in  1833.  The  other  illustrations  represent  the
Bunker  Hill  monument,  his  residence  and  grave  at
Marshfield,  and  the  imposing  statue  by  Thomas
Ball,  erected  in  the  Central  park,  New  York.  See
Webster's  "  Works,"  with  biographical  sketch  by
Edward  Everett  (6  vols.,  Boston.  1851) ;  "  Webster's
Private  Correspondence,"  edited  by  Fletcher  Web-
ster (2  vols..  Boston,  1856) ;  George  Ticknor  Curtis's
"  Life  of  Webster"  (2  vols..  New  York,  1870) ;  Ed-
win P.  Whipple's  "  Great  Speeches  of  Webster "
(Boston,  1879) ;  and  Henry  Cabot  Lodge's  "  Web-
ster," in  "American  Statesmen  Series"  (Boston,
1883). — Daniel's  son,  Fletcher,  lawyer,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, N.  H.,  23  July,  1813  ;  d.  near  Bull  Run,  Va.,
30  Aug.,  1862,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1833,
studied  law  with  his  father,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  He  was  private  secretary  to  his  father
during  part,  of  the  latter's  service  as  secretary  of
state,  secretary  of  legation  in  China  under  Caleb
Cushing  in  1843,  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
legislature  in  1847,  and  from  1850  till  1861  surveyor
of  the  port  of  Boston.  He  became  colonel  of  the
12th  Massachusetts  regiment,  26  June,  1861,  served
in  Virginia  and  Maryland,  and  was  killed  at  the
second  battle  of  Bull  Run.  Besides  editing  his
father's  private  correspondence,  Col.  Webster  pub-
lished an  "  Oration  before  the  Authorities  of  the
City  of  Boston,  July  4,  1846."

WEBSTER,  Harrison  Edwin,  educator,  b.
in  Angelica,  N.  Y.,  8.  Sept.,  1842.  He  served  in
the  U.  S.  army  during  the  civil  war,  and  was
graduated  at  Union  in  1868.  From  1869  till  1873
he  was  tutor  in  natural  history  and  physical  geog-
raphy, and  then  until  1883  held  the  chair  of  natu-
ral history  at  Union.  He  then  accepted  the  pro-
fessorship of  geology  and  natural  history  at  the
University  of  Rochester,  where  he  remained  until
1888,  when  he  was  elected  president  of  Union.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  the
University  of  Rochester  in  1888,  and  he  is  a  mem-
ber of  scientific  societies.  Prof.  Webster  has  writ-
ten several  pamphlets  on  natural  history  subjects,
especially  on  marine  forms.

WEBSTER,  Horace,  educator,  b.  in  Hartford.
Vt.,  21  Sept.,  1794 :  d.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  12  July,
1871. He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military


academy  in  1818,  and  was  assistant  professor  of
mathematics  there  till  1825.  when  he  resigned  his
commission  in  the  army.  He  was  then  professor
of  mathematics  and. natural  philosophy  in  Geneva
(now  Plobart)  college  till  1848,  when  he  became
principal  of  the  Free  academy  in  New  York  city.
Here  he  held  the  chair  of  moral  and  intellectual
philosophy  from  1851,  and  in  1852  that  of  political
philosophy  was  added.  In  1866  the  name  of  the
academy  was  changed  by  law  to  "The  College  of
the  city  of  New  York,"  and  he  continued  at  its
head  till  1869,  after  which  he  was  emeritus  profes-
sor till  his  death.  He  was  eminently  successful  in
his  administration  of  the  affairs  of  the  college,  and
the  impression  he  made  on  the  students  was  last-
ing. From  his  precept  and  his  example  they
learned  thoroughness,  devotion  to  duty,  and  regard
for  the  best  ideals  of  life.  Columbia  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1849,  and  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  that  of  M.  D.  in  1850.

WEBSTER,  James,  British  soldier,  b.  about
1743 :  d.  in  North  Carolina  in  March,  1781.  His
father,  Dr.  Alexander  Webster,  was  an  eminent
divine  of  Edinburgh.  The  son  entered  the  army,
became  major  of  the  33d  foot  in  February,  1771,
and  fought  with  credit  in  the  American  Revolu-
tion, becoming  a  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  active
in  the  operations  in  New  Jersey  in  1777,  at  Ver-
planck's  point  in  1778,  and  in  Cornwallis's  cam-
paign in  the  south.  He  commanded  the  British
right  wing  at  the  battle  of  Guilford,  N.  C,  14
March,  1781,  and  there  received  a  wound  that  re-
sulted in  his  death.

WEBSTER,  John  Adams,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Harford  county,  Md.,  19  Sept.,  1785;  d.  there,  4
July,  1876.  He  entered  the  merchant  marine,  but
at  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1812  became  3d
lieutenant  on  the  privateer  "  Rossie,"  under  Com.
Joshua  Barney.  Afterward  he  received  a  sailing-
master's  warrant  in  the  navy,  and  was  placed  by
Barney  in  command  of  a  barge,  of  which  he  had
charge  till  on  the  advance  of  the  British  on  Wash-
ington he  was  transferred  to  shore  duty.  He  com-
manded a  detachment  of  sailors  under  Barney  at
Bladensburg,  serving  his  guns  till  the  powder  was
exhausted,  and  had  charge  of  Battery  Babcock,
near  Baltimore,  during  the  attack  on  that  place.
This  battery  of  six  guns  was  old  and  dilapidated,
the  guns  were  corroded,  the  carriages  rusty,  and
the  trucks  immovable,  the  earthworks  were  de-
fective, and  the  place  was  overgrown  with  briers,
but  in  forty-eight  hours  Webster  had  it  ready  for
action.  On  the  night  of  13  Sept.,  Webster  dis-
covered the  British  landing-party,  and  opened  fire
on  it,  and  his  battery,  together  with  Fort  Cov-
ington, repelled  the  enemy  after  a  brisk  engage-
ment, saving  Baltimore.  For  this  service  he  was
specially  mentioned  in  Com.  John  Rodgers's  report
to  the  secretary  of  the  navy,  and  presented  with
swords  by  the  citizens  of  Baltimore  and  the  state
of  Maryland.  On  22  Nov.,  1819,  he  was  commis-
sioned captain  in  the  revenue  service,  and  during
the  Mexican  war  he  commanded  a  fleet  of  eight  cut-
ters to  co-operate  in  the  campaign  on  Rio  Grande
river  and  before  Vera  Cruz.  In  1865  he  retired
from  active  duty,  and  at  his  death  he  was  the  sen-
ior officer  in  the  service. — His  son,  John  Adams,
b.  in  the  homestead,  Mount  Adams.  Harford  co.,
Md..  26  June,  1823 ;  d.  in  Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.,  6
April,  1875,  entered  the  revenue  service  in  1842,
was  promoted  captain  in  1860,  and  saved  his  vessel,
the  "Dobbin,"  from  capture  by  the  Confederates
at  Savannah  and  Hampton  Roads.  At  the  latter
place  she  was  the  only  U.  S.  vessel  that  escaped,
While  on  the  New  England  coast  he  received  a


416


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


gold  watch  from  the  British  board  of  trade  for
services  to  English  seamen.

WEBSTER,  John  White,  chemist,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  20  May,  1793  ;  d.  there,  30  Aug.,  1850.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1811,  and  at  its
medical  department  in  1815.  In  1824  he  was  ap-
pointed lecturer  in  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and
geology  in  that  institution,  and  in  1827  he  was
elected  to  the  chair  of  chemistry  and  mineralogy,
which  he  then  held  until  the  year  of  his  death.
In  1842  Prof.  Webster  borrowed  a  sum  of  money
from  Dr.  George  Parkman,  afterward  increased
to  upward  of  $2,000,  as  security  for  which  he
gaves  notes  and  mortgages  on  household  prop-
erty and  collections.  The  mineral  cabinets  he  se-
cretly disposed  of,  and  during  an  interview  with
Parkman,  to  whom  he  paid  considerable  money,
the  latter  accused  him  of  dishonesty  in  selling  his
collections,  and  threatened  to  foreclose  the  mort-
gages. An  arrangement  was  made  for  a  meeting
on  23  Nov.,  1849,  at  the  college  laboratory,  at
which  Parkman  was  murdered.  According  to  the
confession  made  by  Webster,  at  the  time  appointed
Parkman  arrived,  and  at  once  asked  for  the
money,  which  not  being  forthcoming,  he  "called
me  a  scoundrel  and  a  liar,  and  went  on  heaping  on
me  the  most  bitter  taunts  and  opprobrious  epi-
thets." Seizing  a  billet  of  wood,  Webster  struck
Parkman  a  blow  on  the  side  of  the  head,  which
killed  him.  The  concealment  of  the  body  at  once
presented  itself  as  the  only  means  of  escaping  the
fatal  effects  of  the  crime,  and  Webster  immedi-
ately dismembered  it,  burning  such  parts  with  the
clothes  as  he  could,  and  concealing  the  remaining

Sarts  for  further  treatment.  As  soon  as  Parkman's
isappearance  was  noted,  efforts  were  made  to  find
him,  and  he  was  traced  to  the  laboratory.  Further
search  revealed  parts  of  the  cadaver,  and  Webster
was  arrested.  On  the  trial,  which  lasted  eleven
days,  the  chain  of  circumstantial  evidence  was  per-
fect in  its  conclusions  as  to  the  identity  of  the
body.  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  Jeffries  Wyman,  and
others  testified  as  to  the  anatomical  proportions  of
the  body.  The  teeth  were  identified  beyond  doubt
by  the  dentist  who  had  made  them  for  Parkman.
Webster  was  defended  by  John  II.  Clifford,  and
116  witnesses  were  examined  on  the  trial.  Not-
withstanding that  every  effort  was  made  in  his  be-
half, the  jury  returned  a  verdict  of  guilty,  and  he
was  hanged.  During  l823-'6  he  was  one  of  the
editors  with  John  Ware  and  Daniel  Treadwell,  of
the  "  Boston  Journal  of  Philosophy  and  Arts,"
and  he  published  "  Description  of  the  Island  of
St,  Michael "  (Boston,  1821) ;  "  A  Manual  of  Chem-
istry "  (1820) ;  and  edited  Playfair's  "  Liebig's  Or-
ganic Chemistry  "  (Cambridge,  1841).  Several  re-
ports of  his  trial  were  published,  including  one  by
George  Bemis,  one  of  the  counsel  (Boston,  1850).

WEBSTER,  Joseph  Dana,  soldier,  b.  in  Old
Hampton,  N.  H.,  25  Aug.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,
12  March,  1876.  His  father,  Josiah  (1772-1837),
was  pastor  at  Hampton  from  1808  until  his  death.
The  son  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1832,  and
read  law  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  but  became  a  clerk
in  the  engineer  and  war  offices  in  Washington,  was
made  a  U.  S.  civil  engineer  in  1835,  and  on  7  July,
1838,  entered  the  army  as  2d  lieutenant  of  topo-
graphical engineers.  He  served  through  the  Mexi-
can war,  and  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  July,
1849,  and  captain  in  March,  1853,  but  resigned  in
April,  1854,  and  removed  to  Chicago,  where  he  en-
gaged in  business.  He  was  president  of  the  com-
mission that  perfected  the  remarkable  system  of
sewerage  for  that  place,  and  also  planned  and  exe-
cuted the  operations  whereby  the  grade  of  a  large


part  of  the  city  was  made  from  two  to  eight  feet
higher,  whole  blocks  being  raised  by  jack-screws
while  new  foundations  were  inserted.  He  entered
the  service  of  the  state  at  the  opening  of  the  civil
war,  took  charge  of  the  construction  of  fortifica-
tions at  Cairo,  111.,  and  Paducah,  Ky.,  in  April,  and
was  made  paymaster,  with  rank  of  major,  of  U.  S.
volunteers  on  1  June,  but  in  February,  1862,  he  be-
came colonel  of  the  1st  Illinois  artillery.  He  was
chief  of  Gen.  Grant's  staff  for  several  months,  was

E resent  at  the  capture  of  Fort  Henry  and  Fort
>onelson,  and  at  Shiloh  was  also  chief  of  artillery.
At  the  close  of  the  first  day's  fight  at  Shiloh  he  oc-
cupied with  all  available  artillery  the  ridge  that
covered  Pittsburg  Landing,  thus  checking  the
hitherto  victorious  Confederates.  He  received  the
highest  commendation  in  Gen.  Grant's  official  re-
port, and  continued  to  be  his  chief  of  staff  till,  in
October,  1862,  he  was  detailed  by  the  war  depart-
ment to  make  a  survey  of  the  Illinois  and  Michigan
canal.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1862,  and,  after  serving  for
some  time  as  military  governor  of  Memphis,  Tenn.,
and  as  superintendent  of  military  railroads,  was
again  Grant's  chief  of  staff  in  the  Vicksburg  cam-
paign, and  from  1864  till  the  close  of  hostilities
held  the  same  post  under  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman.
He  was  with  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas  at  the  battle
of  Nashville.  Gen.  Webster  was  given  the  brevet
of  major-general  of  volunteers,  13  March,  1865,  re-
signed on  6  Nov.,  and  returned  to  Chicago,  where
he  remained  during  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  was
assessor  of  internal  revenue  in  that  city  in  1869-'72,
and  then  assistant  U.  S.  treasurer  there  till  July,
1872,  when  he  became  collector  of  revenue.

WEBSTER,  Joseph  Philbrick,  musician,  b.
in  Manchester,  N.  H.,  in  1820 ;  d.  in  Elkhorn,  Wis.,
18  Jan.,  1875.  He  acquired  a  good  English  educa-
tion at  Pembroke  academy,  and  at  ten  years  of  age
could  play  by  ear  upon  the  violin  and  flute.  At
twenty  years  of  age  he  went  to  Boston,  where  for
three  years  he  was  under  the  instruction  of  Dr.
Lowell  Mason  and  other  teachers  of  music,  and  be-
came known  as  a  singer.  At  twenty-eight  he  lost
his  voice,  after  which  he  taught  music  in  Connecti-
cut, and  from  1850  till  1855  in  the  south.  While
there  he  became  a  bitter  foe  to  slavery,  and  this  feel-
ing was  subsequently  manifested  in  his  many  war
songs.  He  afterward  removed  to  Indianapolis,  and
then  to  Elkhorn,  Wis.,  where  he  died.  He  com-
posed a  great  number  of  sentimental  songs.  His
cantata  of  "  The  Rebellion,"  in  which  is  expressed
his  sorrow  for  the  death  of  Lincoln,  is  one  of  his
best  efforts.  His  war  songs  were  very  popular  in
their  day.  Among  his  ballads  are  "  Sweet  Bv  and
By,"  "  Lorena,"  and  "  The  Golden  Stair."

WEBSTER,  Nathan  Bnrnham,  educator,  b.  in
Unity,  N.  H„  13  June,  1821.  He  was  educated  at
Norwich  university,  but  left  in  1840,  without  being
graduated,  to  take  charge  of  the  Virginia  literary,
scientific,  and  military  academy  which  had  been  es-
tablished by  Cant.  Alden  Partridge  in  Portsmouth.
Two  years  later  he  resigned  and  established  a  similar
school  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  In  1844  he  returned  to
the  Virginia  military  academy,  but  in  1847  he
taught  in  Richmond  and  lectured  on  physics  in
Richmond  college.  During  1848-'9  ho  was  civil
engineer  in  the  U.  S.  navy-yard  at  Norfolk,  Va.,
and  then  he  founded  the  Virginia  collegiate  insti-
tute, and  conducted  it  in  Norfolk  till  1862,  when,
owing  to  the  civil  war  he  removed  to  Ottawa,  Can-
ada, where  he  established  a  similar  school.  He
opened  the  Webster  institute  in  Norfolk  in  1869,
which  he  there  continued  till  1886.  Prof.  Webster
invented  the  meteorgraph,  an  automatic  meteoro-


WEBSTER


WEBSTER


417


logical  register,  which  he  described  in  the  "Proceed-
ings of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advance-
ment of  Science  for  1854,"  of  which  organization
he  has  been  a  member  since  1853  and  a  fellow  since
1874.  He  was  one  of  the  founders,  and  for  several
years  president,  of  the  Ottawa  natural  history  soci-
ety. Prof.  Webster  has  published  addresses  on
educational  and  agricultural  topics,  and  edited
"  Notes,  Queries,  and  Answers,"  published  in  Man-
chester, N.  H.,  during  1882-3.  He  is  the  author
of  "  Outlines  of  Chemistry  "  (New  York,  1883).

WEBSTER,  Noah,  philologist,  b.  in  Hartford.
Conn.,  16  Oct.,  1758;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  28
May,  1843.  His  father  was  a  farmer,  a  descend-
ant in  the  fourth generation  of  John  Webster,

who  previous  to
1660  was  one  of
the  magistrates
and  governor  of
Connecticut.  His
mother  was  a  de-
scendant of  Will-
iam Bradford,  sec-
ond governor  of
Plymouth  colony.
Noah  entered  Yale
in  1774,  but  his
studies  were  inter-
rupted by  the  war
of  independence,
and  in  his  junior
year  he  served  in
his  father's  com-

Siany of militia,
le  was  graduated

\^//i>as/n,  rA&&?Z&v~'  same '  d'ass  with

Joel  Barlow,  Uri-
ah Tracy,  and  Oliver  Wolcott.  He  became  a  teach-
er, gave  his  leisure  hours  to  the  study  of  law,  and
in  1781  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  But  the  state  of
the  country  was  unfavorable  to  law  business,  and
he  resumed  teaching  at  Goshen,  N.  Y.  Here  he
began  the  compilation  of  text-books,  and  published
"  A  Grammatical  Institute  of  the  English  Lan-
guage "  (3  parts,  Hartford,  1783-'5).  This  con-
sisted of  a  spelling-book,  a  grammar,  ;and  a  read-
ing-book ;  and  so  successful  was  the  speller  that
for  twenty  years  while  he  was  at  work  "on  his  dic-
tionary it  supported  him  and  his  family,  though
his  royalty  was  less  than  one  cent  on  a  copy.  It
is  still  in  use,  and  62,000,000  copies  have  been
published.  After  the  war  the  question  of  giving
the  soldiers  pay  for  five  years  beyond  their  term
of  enlistment  was  discussed  under  great  excite-
ment, and  in  Connecticut  a  convention  was  held
to  protest  against  the  passage  of  a  bill  for  that
purpose.  Mr.  Webster  published  a  series  of  articles,
under  the  signature  of  "  Honorius,"  favoring  the
bill,  and  they  were  said  to  have  been  the  principal
cause  of  a  revulsion  of  popular  feeling,  as  indi-
cated in  the  next  election.  This  turned  his  atten-
tion to  governmental  matters,  and  in  1784  he  pub-
lished a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Sketches  of  American
Policy,"  in  which  he  argued  that  a  new  system  of
government  was  necessary  for  the  country,  in
which  the  people  and  congress  shoidd  act  without
the  constant  intervention  of  the  states.  This  is
believed  to  have  been  the  first  movement  toward  a
national  constitution.  In  the  spring  of  the  next
year  Mr.  Webster  visited  the  southern  states,  to
petition  their  legislatures  for  a  copyright  law,  and
at  Mount  Vernon  gave  Washington  a  copy  of  his
pamphlet.  In  1786  he  delivered,  in  several  cities,  a
course  of  lectures,  which  were  published  under  the
vol.  ti. — 27


title  "Dissertations  on  the  English  Language"
(1789).  In  1787  he  was  superintendent  of  an
academy  in  Philadelphia,  and  after  the  adjourn-
ment of  the  Constitutional  convention  published
a  pamphlet  on  "  The  Leading  Principles  of  the
Federal  Constitution."  In  1788  he  established  in
New  York  the  "  American  Magazine,"  but  it  lived
only  twelve  months,  and  the  next  year  he  settled
in  Hartford  as  a  lawyer,  and  married  a  daughter
of  William  Greenleaf,  of  Boston.  His  friend,  John
Trumbull,  the  poet,  referring  to  the  dullness  of
business,  wrote :  "  1  fear  he  will  breakfast  upon
Institutes,  dine  upon  Dissertations,  and  go  to  bed
supperless."  Yet  he  enjoyed  a  profitable  practice
for  four  years,  when  he  removed  to  New  York  and
established  a  daily  paper,  the  "  Minerva "  (sub-
sequently changed  to  "  Commercial  Advertiser  "),
to  support  Washington's  administration.  In  1794
he  published  a  pamphlet  on  "  The  Revolution  in
France,"  which  was  widely  circulated  ;  and  in  1795
he  wrote  ten  of  the  twelve  articles  under  the  signa-
ture of  "  Curtius,"  to  sustain  the  Jay  treaty,  which
were  said  by  Rufus  King  to  have  done  more  than
anything  else  to  render  that  treaty  acceptable  to
the  people.  A  little  later  he  wrote  a  history  of
pestilences,  containing  a  large  collection  of  facts
and  his  own  theories  (2  vols.,  New  York  and  Lon-
don, 1799).  He  had  removed  to  New  Haven  in
1798,  and  devoted  himself  to  literature.  In  1802
he  produced  a  treatise  on  blockade  and  rights  of
neutrals,  and  also  "  The  Origin  and  State  of  Bank-
ing Institutions  and  Insurance  Offices."

Mr.  Webster  had  long  been  studying  the  origin
and  structure  of  his  mother  tongue,  and  in  1807
he  published  the  first  results  of  his  special  labors,
under  the  title  "  A  Philosophical  and  Practical
Grammar  of  the  English  Language."  He  objected
to  the  ordinary  English  grammars,  on  the  ground
that  they  attempted  to  make  the  language  con-
form to  the  Greek  and-  Latin ;  but  his  book  was
never  very  successful.  In  the  preceding  year,
1806,  he  had  published  a  vocabulary  of  words  not
contained  in  any  existing  lexicon,  and  he  now  be-
gan work  upon  his  "  American  Dictionary  of  the
English  Language."  To  collect  new  words,  and
make  fuller  and  more  exact  definitions,  was  the
special  work  to  which  he  devoted  many  years,  and
he  made  a  "  synopsis  of  words  in  twenty  languages,"
which  is  still  in  manuscript.  He  also  went  to
Europe  in  1824  to  consult  literary  men  and  ex-
amine works  not  to  be  found  on  this  side  of  the
Atlantic,  and  in  the  library  of  the  University  of
Cambridge  finished  his  dictionary,  returning  with
the  manuscript  in  June,  1825.  In  1828  an  edition
of  2,500  copies  was  printed,  followed  by  one  of
3,000  in  England.  In  1840-1  he  published  an  en-
larged edition,  in  two  volumes.  The  first  edition
had  contained  12,000  words  and  40,000  definitions
that  were  not  to  be  found  in  any  similar  work,
and  in  each  successive  edition  the  number  has
been  increased.  Just  before  his  death  he  revised
the  appendix  and  added  several  hundred  words.
In  that  year  also  he  published  "A  Collection  of
Papers  on  Political,  Literary,  and  Moral  Sub-
jects," which  included  a  treatise  "On  the  Sup-
posed Change  in  the  Temperature  of  Winter."

In  1812,  for  more  economical  living,  he  had  re-
moved to  Amherst,  Mass.,  where  he  was  instru-
mental in  founding  Amherst  college,  and  became
the  first  president  of  its  board  of  trustees.  He  was
the  centre  of  a  small  literary  circle  there,  and  his
large  library  was  always  open  to  his  neighbors.  In
1822  he  resumed  his  residence  in  New  Haven,  and
the  next,  year  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
He  was  for  several  years  an  alderman  of  New


418


WEBSTER


WEDDERBURN


Haven,  was  a  judge  of  one  of  the  Connecticut
courts,  and  sat  in  the  legislatures  of  that  state  and
Massachusetts.  He  is  described  as  a  genial  man,
of  great  frankness,  who  rendered  all  the  affairs  of
his  household  perfectly  systematic,  and  never  was
in  debt.  He  read  the  Bible  thoroughly,  believed
fully  in  its  inspiration,  had  deep  religious  convic-
tions, and  during  the  last  thirty-five  years  of  his
life  was  a  member  of  an  orthodox  Congregational
church.  He  was  tall  and  slender,  but  perfectly
erect.  His  wife  survived  him  four  years.  They
had  one  son  and  six  daughters.  Dr.  Webster's
life  has  been  written  by  one  of  his  daughters,
as  an  introduction  to  his  great  dictionary,  and
by  Horace  E.  Scudder,  in  the  "  Men  of  Letters  "
series  (Boston,  1882).

WEBSTER,  Pelatiah,  political  economist,  b.
in  Lebanon,  Conn.,  in  1725 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  September,  1795.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1746,  studied  theology,  and  preached  in  Greenwich,
Mass.,  in  the  winter  of  1748-9.  About  1755  he
engaged  in  business  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  ac-
cumulated a  small  fortune,  at  the  same  time  devot-
ing himself  to  study  and  literary  work.  He  was
an  active  patriot  during  the  Revolution,  aiding  the
American  cause  with  pen  and  purse,  and  in  Febru-
ary, 1788,  was  seized  by  the  British  and  confined
for  132  days  in  the  city  jail.  Part  of  his  property,
to  the  value  of  £500,  was  confiscated.  He  gave
much  time  to  the  study  of  the  currency,  finance,
and  the  resources  of  the  country,  and  was  often
consulted  on  these  matters  by  members  of  congress.
In  his  first  essay,  in  October,  1776,  he  strongly
urged  the  laying  of  a  tax  to  provide  for  the  speedy
redemption  of  the  continental  currency,  and  in
1779  he  began  in  Philadelphia  the  publication  of
a  series  of  "  Essays  on  Free  Trade  and  Finance,"
of  which  seven  were  issued,  the  last  in  1785.  His
"  Dissertation  on  the  Political  Union  and  Constitu-
tion of  the  Thirteen  United  States  of  North  Amer-
ica "  (Philadelphia,  1783)  is  mentioned  by  James
Madison  as  having  an  influence  in  directing  the
public  mind  to  the  necessity  of  a  better  form  of
government.  Mr.  Webster  also  published  "  Essay
on  Credit "  (1786) ;  "  Reasons  for  repealing  the  Act
of  the  Legislature  which  took  away  the  Charter  of
the  Bank  of  North  America"  (1786) ;  and  "  Politi-
cal Essays  on  the  Nature  and  Operation  of  Money,
Public  Finances,  and  other  Subjects,  published
during  the  American  War"  (1791).

WEBSTER,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  14  July,  1811 ;  d.  in  Mauch  Chunk,  Pa.,  19
June,  1856.  His  father,  Charles  R.  Webster  (1763-
1834).  a  bookseller  of  Albany,  established  and  con-
ducted the  "Albany  Gazette  "  (1784-1824),  and  pub-
lished "Webster's  Calendar"  from  1784  till  his
death.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Union  college
in  1829  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in
1834,  and  was  ordained  as  a  Presbyterian  minister,
29  April,  1835.  After  laboring  for  a  short  time  at
South  Easton,  Pa.,  he  organized  a  church  at  Mauch
Chunk,  1  Nov.,  1835,  and  was  its  pastor  till  his
death.  He  also  did  much  work  in  all  parts  of  the
coal  region,  and  aided  in  founding  about  a  dozen
churches.  Defective  sight  and  hearing  induced
him  to  give  much  time  to  historical  studies,  and,
besides  frequent  contributions  to  current  religious
literature  under  the  signature  of  "  K.  H.,"  he  issued
a  "  Digest  of  the  Acts  of  the  General  Assembly,"
and  left  a  "  History  of  the  Presbyterian  Church
in  America  from  its  Origin  till  the  Year  1760,
with  Biographical  Sketches  of  its  Early  Minis-
ters," which  was  published  after  his  death  by  the
Presbyterian  historical  society,  with  a  memoir  of
the  author by  Rev. Cortlandt  Van  Rensselaer,


D.  D.,  and  a  historical  introduction  by  Rev.  Will-
iam Blackwood,  D.  D.  (Philadelphia,  1857).

WEBSTER,  Warren,  surgeon,  b.  in  Gilmanton,
N.  H,  7  March,  1835.  He  was  educated  in  New
Hampshire  and  at  medical  schools  in  Boston  and
Paris,  and  graduated  at  the  medical  department
of  Harvard  in  1860.  Dr.  Webster  was  appointed
assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army,  23  June,  1860,
and  after  brief  service  on  the  frontier  was  ordered
to  Washington,  where  in  1861  he  was  placed  in
charge  of  Douglas  general  hospital,  at  the  same  time
engaging  in  the  organization  and  superintending
the  construction  of  other  permanent  military  hos-
pitals at  Washington.  He  was  on  duty  on  the  field
at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  was  made  a
medical  inspector  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in
1862.  Dr.  Webster  was  present  in  the  battle  of
Fredericksburg  and  active  in  the  care  of  the
wounded  after  Chancellorsville  (1863),  where  he  or-
ganized numerous  field  hospitals,  passing  to  and
fro  for  the  purpose  within  the  opposing  lines  under
flag  of  truce.  He  was  in  charge  of  McDougall
general  hospital,  Fort  Schuyler,  N.  Y.,  in  1863-'4,
and  then  of  De  Camp  general  hospital,  where  in
1866,  during  the  cholera  epidemic,  he  greatly  dis-
tinguished himself.  He  was  promoted  surgeon
with  rank  of  major,  28  July,  1866,  was  medical  di-
rector of  the  5th  military  district  in  1868-'70,  when
he  organized  a  quarantine  system  for  the  Texas
coast,  and  afterward  served  at  various  military
stations  in  California  and  the  east.  Dr.  Webster
was  brevetted  captain  "  for  gallant  and  meritorious
services "  at  Chancellorsville,  major  "  for  faithful
and  meritorious  services"  during  the  war,  and
lieutenant  -  colonel  "for  meritorious  and  distin-
guished services  at  Hart's  and  David's  islands,  New
York  harbor,  where  cholera  prevailed."  He  is  the
author  of  "The  Army  Medical  Staff"  (Boston,
1865);  "Regulations  for  the  Government  of  De
Camp  General  Hospital"  (New  York,  1865);
"  Quarantine  Regulations,  5th  Military  District
(Austin,  Tex.,  1869);  and  "Sympathetic  Diseases
of  the  Eye,"  translated  (New  York,  1881).

WEDDERBURN,  Alexander,  Baron  Lough-
borough, b.  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  13  Feb.,  1733 ;
d.  in  Bayles,  Berkshire,  England,  3  Jan.,  1805.  He
was  educated  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,
called  to  the  Scottish  bar  at  nineteen  years  of  age,
and  was  rapidly  rising  in  his  profession  when  he
became  offended  by  a  rebuke  that  was  administered
by  one  of  the  judges,  removed  to  London,  and  was
admitted  to  the  English  bar  in  1757.  He  soon
gained  high  reputation,  especially  in  the  great
Douglas  case  in  1768-'9,  in  which  the  succession  in
that  family  had  become  a  subject  of  litigation
among  its  several  branches.  He  obtained  a  seat  in
parliament,  and  on  26  Jan.,  1771,  became  solicitor-
general  in  the  ministry  of  Lord  North,  in  which
office  he  added  to  his  reputation  by  his  defence  of
Lord  Clive,  who  was  accused  of  maladministration
in  the  affairs  of  India.  In  January,  1774,  when
the  petition  of  Massachusetts  for  the  removal  of
Thomas  Hutchinson  and  Andrew  Oliver  was  laid
before  the  privy  council,  Wedderburn  defended
those  functionaries  in  a  speech  in  which  he  made  a
gross  attack  upon  Benjamin  Franklin,  the  agent  of
the  petitioners,  stigmatizing  him  as  a  "  true  incen-
diary." He  violently  opposed  the  claims  of  the
American  colonies,  and  throughout  the  Revolution
was  a  strong  supporter  of  Lord  North's  ministry.
When,  in  1776,  Fox  directed  the  attention  of  that
ministry  to  the  assumption  of  power  on  the  part  of
the  government  to  raise  taxes  in  America,  or  an-
nihilate charters  at  its  pleasure,  as  the  two  princi-
pal grievances  of  the  colonists  that  needed  revision


WEED


WEED


419


Wedderburn  replied :  "  Till  the  spirit  of  inde-
pendence is  subdued,  revisions  are  idle ;  the  Ameri-
cans have  no  terms  to  demand  from  your  justice,
whatever  they  may  hope  from  your  grace  and
mercy."  He  was  burned  in  effigy  in  Philadelphia,
and  justly  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  unscrupu-
lous foes  to  the  liberties  of  the  people.  He  became
attorney-general  in  1778.  chief  justice  of  the  court
of  common  pleas  in  1780,  and  the  same  year  was
raised  to  the  peerage  as  Lord  Loughborough,  Baron
of  Loughborough  in  the  county  of  Leicester.  In
April,  1783,  he  assisted  Lord  North  in  forming  the
famous  coalition  ministry,  in  which  he  was  the  first
commissioner  of  the  great  seal.  After  its  dissolu-
tion he  remained  out  of  office  till  27  Jan.,  1793,
when  he  became  high  chancellor  under  William
Pitt.  On  his  resignation  of  that  office  in  April,
1801,  he  was  created  Earl  Rosslyn,  in  the  county
of  Mid-Lothian.  When  George  III.  heard  that
Wedderburn  was  dead,  he  remarked :  "  He  has  not
left  a  greater  knave  behind  him  in  my  dominions."
He  published  a  "  Treatise  on  English  Poor  Laws  "
and  "  Management  of  Prisons  "  (London,  1793).

WEED,  Edwin  Gardner,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Savannah,  Ga.,  23  July,  1837.  He  was  graduated
at  the  General  theological  seminary,  New  York,  in
1870,  ordered  deacon,  24  Aug.,  1870,  and  ordained
priest,  29  Aug.,  1871.  He  became  rector  of  the
Church  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  Summerville,  Ga.,
his  first  and  only  charge,  which  he  held  for  fifteen
years.  He  was  consecrated  third  bishop  of  Florida
in  St.  John's  church,  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  11  Aug.,
1886.  The  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  was  conferred  upon
him  by  Racine  college,  Wis.,  and  that  of  D.  D.  by
the  University  of  the  south.  He  has  taken  great
interest  in  the  work  of  the  church  among  the
colored  people  of  the  south,  and  is  an  active  mem-
ber of  the  commission  in  charge  of  that  work.

WEED,  Stephen  Hinsdale,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1834 ;  d.  near  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  2  July,
1863.  He  was  graduated  at  the  New  York  free
academy  in  1851,  and  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1854,  and  assigned  to  the  artillery.  After
frontier  duty  in  Texas,  and  service  against  the
Seminoles  in  1856-'7,  he  was  engaged  in  quelling
the  Kansas  disturbances  in  1858,  and  then  on  the
Utah  expedition,  participating  in  skirmishes  with
hostile  Indians  at  Egan  Canon,  11  Aug.,  1860,  and
Deep  Creek  on  6  Sept.  He  was  promoted  captain
on  14  May,  1861,  and  served  in  the  peninsular,
northern  Virginia,  and  Maryland  campaigns,  in
command  of  a  battery.  From  3  Dec,  1862,  till  23
Jan.,  1863,  he  was  chief  of  the  artillery  corps  at  Fal-
mouth, Va.  After  a  short  leave  of  absence  he  took
part  in  the  battle  of  Chancellorsville,  and  on  6
June,  1863,  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers for  gallant  conduct  there.  After  10  May,
1863,  he  commanded  an  artillery  brigade  in  the
5th  army  corps.  At  Gettysburg,  while  holding
the  position  on  Little  Round  Top,  he  was  mor-
tally wounded,  exclaiming  as  he  fell :  "  I  would
rather  die  here  than  that  the  rebels  should  gain
an  inch  of  this  ground."  The  point  was  essen-
tially important  to  retain,  and  it  is  historically
marked  as  "  Weed's  Hill."

WEED,  Thurlow,  journalist,  b.  in  Cairo,  Greene
co.,  N.  Y.,  15  Nov.,  1797 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  22
Nov.,  1882. At  twelve  years  of  age  he  entered  a

Erinting-office  in  Catskill,  N.  Y.  Soon  afterward
e  removed  with  his  father's  family  to  the  frontier
village  of  Cincinnatus,  Cortland  co.,  N.  Y.,  and
aided  in  clearing  the  settlement  and  in  farming,
but  in  1811  returned  to  the  printing  business,  and
was  successively  employed  in  several  newspaper
offices. At  the  beginning  of  the  second  war  with


Great  Britain  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  a  New
York  regiment,  and  served  on  the  northern  fron-
tier. In  1815  he  removed  to  New  York  city,  where
he  was  employed  in  the  printing  establishment  of
Van  Winckle  and  Wiley.  They  were  the  pub-
lishers at  that  time  of  William  Cobbett's  "Weekly
Register,"  and  Weed  became  acquainted  with  the
eccentric  author
by  carrying  proof-
sheets  to  him.  He
went  to  Norwich,
Chenango  co..  N.
Y.,  in  1819,  estab-
lished the  "Agri-
culturist,"andtwo
years  afterward  re-
moved to  Manlius,
N.  Y.,  where  he
founded  the  "  On-
ondaga County
Republican."  In
1824  he  became
owner  and  editor
of  the  "  Rochester
Telegraph," the ^ — — -

second  daily  pa-  AS  #  /fi/~  s
per  that  was  pub-  rUt^VOu  CK/^e^^C-
lished  west  of  Al-
bany. While  Mr.  Weed  was  editing  that  journal
Lafayette  visited  the  United  States,  and  Weed  ac-
companied him  in  a  part  of  his  tour  throughout
the  country.  Difficulties  arising  out  of  the  anti-
Mason  excitement  caused  Mr.  Weed's  retirement
from  the  "Telegraph"  in  1826,  and  in  the  same
year  he  founded  the  "  Anti-Mason  Enquirer."  He
was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1825.  In  1830
he  established  the  Albany  "Evening  Journal,"
which  took  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  formation
of  the  Whig  and  the  Republican  parties,  being
equally  opposed  to  the  Jackson  administration  and
to  nullification.  During  the  thirty-five  years  of
his  control  of  that  organ  it  held  an  influential
place  in  party  journalism,  and  brought  Mr.  WTeed
into  intimate  relations  with  politicians  of  all  par-
ties. His  political  career  began  in  1824  in  the
presidential  conflict  that  resulted  in  the  election
of  John  Quincy  Adams.  He  succeeded  in  uniting
the  Adams  and  Clay  factions,  and  was  acknowl-
edged by  the  leaders  of  his  party  to  have  con-
tributed more  than  any  other  to  their  success  in
that  canvass.  He  was  active  in  the  nomination
of  William  Henry  Harrison  in  1836  and  1840,  of
Henry  Clay  in  1844,  of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  in
1852,  and  of  John  C.  Fremont  in  1856.  In  1860  he
earnestly  advocated  the  nomination  of  William  H.
Seward  for  the  presidency,  but  he  afterward  cor-
dially supported  Abraham  Lincoln,  whose  re-elec-
tion he  promoted  in  1864.  He  subsequently  aided
the  regular  nominations  of  the  Republican  party,
and  did  good  service  in  the  canvass  of  Gen.  Ulysses
S.  Grant  for  the  presidency.  Especially  in  his  own
state  he  influenced  the  elections,  and  in  the  con-
stitutional crisis  that  arose  from  the  presidential
election  in  1876  he  guided  in  a  powerful  degree  the
decisions  of  his  party.  He  had  visited  Europe  sev-
eral times  before  the  civil  war,  and  in  1861  with
Archbishop  Hughes  and  Bishop  Mcllvaine  he  was
sent  abroad  to  prevail  on  foreign  governments  to
refrain  from  intervention  in  behalf  of  the  Con-
federacy. In  this  service  he  stoutly  defended  the
national  interests,  and,  through  his  influence  with
English  and  French  statesmen,. brought  about  a
result  that  permanently  affected  the  feeling  of
Europe  toward  the  United  States.  His  "  Letters  "
from  abroad  were  collected  and  published  (New


420


WEEDON


WEEMS


York,  1866).  He  became  editor  of  the  New  York
"Commercial  Advertiser"  in  1867,  but  was  com-
pelled to  resign  that  office  the  next  year,  owing
to  failing  health,  and  did  not  again  engage  in
regular  work.  Mr.  Weed  was  tall,  with  a  large
head,  overhanging  brows,  and  massive  person.  He
had  great  natural  strength  of  character,  good  sense,
judgment,  and  cheerfulness.  From  his  youth  he
possessed  a  geniality  and  tact  that  drew  all  to  him,
and  it  is  said  that  he  never  forgot  a  fact  or  a  face.
He  was  a  journalist  for  fifty-seven  years,  and,  al-
though exercising  great  influence  in  legislation  and
the  distribution  of  executive  appointments,  he  re-
fused to  accept  any  public  office.  He  was  one  of
the  earliest  advocates  of  the  abolition  of  imprison-
ment for  debt,  was  a  warm  opponent  of  slavery,
supported  the  policy  of  constructing  and  enlarging
the  state  canals,  and  aided  various  railway  enter-
prises and  the  establishment  of  the  state  banking
system.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  promotion
of  several  New  York  city  enterprises — the  intro-
duction of  the  Croton  water,  the  establishment  of
the  Metropolitan  police,  the  Central  park,  the  har-
bor commission,  and  the  Castle  Garden  depot  and
commission  for  the  protection  of  immigrants.  He
gave  valuable  aid  to  many  charitable  institutions,
and  devoted  a  large  part  of  his  income  to  private
charity.  He  published  some  interesting  "  Remi-
niscences "  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly  "  (1876),  and
after  his  death  his  "  Autobiography,"  edited  by  his
daughter,  appeared  (Boston,  1882),  the  story  of  his
life  being  completed  in  a  second  volume  by  his
grandson,  Thurlow  Weed  Barnes  (1884).

WEEDON,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Fredericks-
burg, Va.,  about  1730;  d.  there  after  1790.  He
was  an  inn-keeper  in  his  native  town  previous  to
the  Revolution,  and  a  zealous  patriot.  Dr.  John
D.  F.  Smythe,  who  made  a  tour  of  this  country,  of
which  he  published  an  account  (2  vols.,  London,
1784),  says  of  him  in  1772:  "He  was  very  active  in
blowing  the  seeds  of  sedition."  Weedon  was  Dr.
Smythe's  host  during  his  visit  to  Fredericksburg.
He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d  Virginia
regiment  in  February,  1776,  and  in  August  of  the
same  year  was  transferred  with  the  same  rank  to
the  1st  Virginia  regiment.  He  was  commissioned
brigadier-general,  23  Feb.,  1777,  participated  in  the
battles  of  the  Brandy  wine  and  Germantown,  in  the
former  battle  supporting  the  brigade  in  Gen.  Na-
thanael  Greene's  division  that  rendered  valuable
service  in  arresting  the  British  pursuit  and  rally-
ing the  routed  army.  In  consequence  of  a  question
of  supremacy  in  rank  with  Gen.  William  Wood-
ford, Weedon  retired  from  the  service  shortly  after
the  battle  of  Germantown,  but  he  resumed  the  com-
mand of  a  brigade  in  1780,  and  during  the  siege  of
Yorktown  in  October,  1781,  was  in  charge  of  the
Virginia  militia  at  Gloucester.

WEEKS,  Edwin  Lord,  artist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1849.  He  studied  under  Jean  L.  Gorome
and  Leon  Bonnat  in  Paris,  and  has  travelled
through  Egypt,  Syria,  and  other  oriental  countries,
where  the  scenes  of  most  of  his  works  are  laid.  He
has  exhibited  frequently  at  the  salon  in  Paris,
receiving  honorable  mention  in  1885.  Among  his
paintings  are  "  A  Cup  of  Coffee  in  the  Desert,"  "  A
Scene  in  Tangiers,"  "  Pilgrimage  to  the  Jordan,"
"Jerusalem  to  the  Bethany  Road."  "Alhambra
Windows,"  "  They  Toil  not.  neither  do  they  Spin,"
"  A  Prayer  in  the  Desert,"  and  "  A  Blacksmith's
Shop  in  Tangiers."  His  "An  Arab  Story-Teller"
was  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  (Philadelphia,
1876),  "A  Moorish  Camel-Driver"  at  the  salon  of
1878,  and  his  "  Departure  for  the  Hunt,  India"
(1884),  is  in  the  Corcoran  gallery,  Washington.


WEEKS,  John  M..  inventor,  b.  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  22  May,  1788 ;  d.  in  Salisbury,  Vt.,  1  Sept.,
1858.  He  removed  with  his  parents  to  Salisbury
in  1789,  was  educated  in  that  town,  and  subse-
quently resided  there  until  his  death.  He  was  a
constant  contributor  to  agricultural  journals,  made
a  study  of  bees,  and  invented  the  "Vermont  bee-
hive." He  is  the  author  of  a  "Manual  on  Bees"
(New  York,  1854) ;  and  a  "  History  of  Salisbury,
Vt.,  with  a  Memoir  of  the  Author,"  by  George  A.
Weeks  (Middlebury,  Vt,.  1860).  He  left  a  "His-
tory of  the  Five  Nations  "  in  manuscript.

WEEKS,  Robert  Kelley,  poet,  b.  in  New  York
city,  21  Sept.,  1840;  d.  there,  13  April,  1876.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1862  and  at  Columbia
law-school  in  1864,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  New  York  in  the  same  year,  but  relinquished
that  profession  and  devoted  himself  thenceforth
to  literary  pursuits.  He  published  "  Poems  "  (New
York,  1866)  and  "  Episodes  and  Lyric  Pieces "
(1870).  A  third  volume  of  his  poems  appeared
shortly  after  his  death  (1876).

WEEKS,  William  Raymond,  clergyman,  b.
in  Brooklyn,  Conn.,  6  Aug.,  1783;  d.  in  Oneida,
N.  Y.,  27  June,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1809,  studied  at  Andover  theological  semi-
nary, and  was  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in
New  York  state  from  1812  till  1832,  when  he  ac-
cepted a  charge  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  which  he  held
till  1846.  Williams  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1828.  He  is  the  author  of  "Nine  Sermons"
(1813),  a  series  of  tracts  (1834-'41),  and  a  posthu-
mous volume  entitled  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  in  the
Nineteenth  Century  "  (1849).

WEEMS,  Mason  Locke,  historian,  b.  in  Dum-
fries, Va.,  about  1760;  d.  in  Beaufort,  S.  C,  23
May,  1825.  He  studied  theology  in  London,  took
orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  for
several  years  was  rector  of  Pohick  church.  Mount
Vernon  parish,  Va.,  of  which  Washington  was  an
attendant.  The  necessities  of  Weems's  large  fam-
ily compelled  him  to  resign  that  charge  about  1790,
and  he  became  a  book  agent  for  Mathew  Carey,
the  Philadelphia  publisher.  He  was  remarkably
successful  in  that  employment, "  travelling  through-
out the  south  with  his  books  in  his  saddle-bags,
equally  ready  for  a  stump,  a  fail-,  or  a  pulpit."  He
was  eccentric  in  mind  and  manner,  and  whenever
he  heard  of  a  public  meeting  he  would  attend  it,
and,  collecting  a  crowd  around  him,  urge  on  his
hearers  the  merits  of  his  books,  interspersing  his  re-
marks with  anecdotes  and  humorous  sallies.  With
his*  temperance  pamphlet,  entitled  the  "Drunk-
ard's Glass,"  illustrated  with  cuts,  he  would  enter
taverns,  and,  by  mimicking  the  extravagances  of  the
drunkard,  so  amuse  and  delight  his  audiences  that
he  had  no  trouble  in  selling  his  wares.  He  was  an
expert  violin-player,  on  which  he  performed  for
young  people  to  dance,  thereby  causing  much
scandal  in  pious  communities.  On  one  occasion
he  had  promised  to  assist  at  a  merry-making,  but,
fearing  for  his  clerical  character,  he  decided  to
play  behind  a  screen.  In  the  course  of  the  evening
it  was  overturned,  disclosing  the  parson  to  the
jeers  of  the  company.  On  another  occasion  he  was
obliged  to  pass  through  a  dangerous  district  of
South  Carolina,  which  at  that  time  was  infested
with  robbers.  Just  at  nightfall  his  wagon  sank
into  a  quagmire ;  two  ruffians  appeared  and  were
about  to  seize  him,  when  he  took  out  his  violin  and
so  charmed  them  by  his  music  that  they  lifted  his
wheels  out  of  the  mud  and  let  him  go.  "  I  took
precious  care,"  says  Weems,  "  to  say  nothing  of  my
name.  When  they  pressed  the  question  my  fiddle
drowned  their  words  and  mine  too." Of  his  tern-


WEIDEMEYER


WEIR


421


perance  tracts  Bishop  William  Meade  says  in  his
"Old  Churches  and  Old  Families  of  Virginia":
"They  would  be  most  admirable  in  their  effects
but  for  the  fact  that  you  know  not  what  to  believe
of  the  narrative.  There  are  passages  of  deep  pa-
thos and  great  eloquence  in  them."  This  charge
of  a  want  of  veracity  is  brought  against  all  Weems's
writings,  for  it  is  probable  he  would  have  ac-
counted it  excusable  to  tell  any  good  story  to  the
credit  of  his  heroes.  Several  of  the  most  widely
circulated  anecdotes  of  the  youth  of  Washington,
especially  the  famous  one  of  the  hatchet,  rest  on  his
questionable  authority.  He  obtained  his  material
for  the  life  of  Gen.  Francis  Marion  from  Gen.
Peter  Horry,  who  disavowed  all  responsibility  for
the  manner  in  which  the  narrative  is  told.  An  en-
tertaining sketch  of  Weems's  early  pastorate  is
given  in  the  "Travels  in  America"  of  John  Davis
(London,  1802). In  this  narrative  he  figures  as  a

Sious  and  devout  preacher,  devoted  to  good  works,
ne  of  his  pamphlets,  "The'Philanthropist,"  was
somewhat  mildly  commended  by  Washington  in
an  autograph  letter  to  the  author,  who  prefixed  it
to  subsequent  editions  of  the  tract.  His  principal
works  are  "  Life  of  George  Washington,"  which  is
still  largely  sold  in  the  rural  districts  of  many
parts  of  this  country,  and  is  the  most  popular
biography  of  that  general  in  existence  (Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  1800;  11th  ed.,  with  additions,  1811);
"  Life  of  Gen.  Francis  Marion  "  (1805) ;  "  Life  of
Benjamin  Franklin,  with  Essays "  (1817) ;  and
"  Life  of  William  Penn"  (1819).

WEIDEMEYER,  John  William,  author,  b.  in
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  26  April,  1819.  His  father
was  an  officer  in  the  life-guards  of  Jerome  Bona-
part,  king  of  Westphalia,  with  whom  at  an  early
age  he  came  to  New  York  city.  Among  the  son's
first  teachers  was  Alexander  T.  Stewart,  and  he
completed  his  education  at  the  Columbia  college
grammar-school.  For  several  years  he  taught  at
various  seminaries  in  Ohio,  but  subsequently  set-
tled in  New  York  city,  where  he  entered  on  a  busi-
ness career.  He  made  collections  of  lepidoptera,
and  discovered  several  important  species,  among
which  was  the  Limenitis  Weidemeyerii  of  the
Adirondack  mountains. His  large  collection  was

fiurchased  by  the  museum  in  Ratisbon,  Germany,
n  connection  with  the  study  of  entomology,  he
published  "Catalogue  of  North- American  Butter-
flies" (Philadelphia,  1864).  He  contributed  to  the
"  Christian  Inquirer"  and  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"
and  prepared  political  articles  for  various  journals.
In  1841  ne  wrote  a  play  entitled  "  The  Vagabonds,"
which  was  produced  at  the  Franklin  theatre  in  New
York  city  and  the  Arch  street  theatre  in  Philadel-
phia, and  he  has  in  preparation  "  Ca?sar  and  Cleo-
patra." an  acting  drama.  Mr.  Weidemeyer  has  also
published  "  Real  and  Ideal :  a  Collection  of  Metrical
Compositions  by  John  W.  Montclair  "  (Philadelphia,
1865);  "Themes  and  Translations"  (New  York,
1867) ;  "  American  Fish,  and  how  to  catch  Them  "
(1885);  and  "From  Alpha  to  Omega"  (1889).

WEIDNER,  Revere  Franklin,  clergyman,  b.
in  Centre  Valley,  Lehigh  co.,  Pa.,  22  Nov.,  1851.
He  was  graduated  at  Muhlenberg  college,  Allen-
town,  Pa.,  in  1869,  at  the  Lutheran  theological
seminary  at  Philadelphia  in  1873,  and  was  ordained
to  the  ministry  in  the  latter  year.  In  1887  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Carthage  college,
111.  He  was  tutor  in  Muhlenberg  college  in  1868-'9,
pastor  at  Phillipsburg,  N.  J.,  in  1873-'8,  professor
of  the  English  language  and  history  at  Muhlenberg
college  in  1875-'7,  and  pastor  in  Philadelphia  in
1878-'82.  He  was  director  of  the  Theological  semi-
nary in  Philadelphia  in  1882,  and  has  been  a  fre-


quent delegate  to  the  general  council.  Dr.  Weidner
was  on  the  staff  of  "  The  Lutheran,"  in  Philadel-
phia, in  1878-80,  and  one  of  the  editors  of  the
"Lutheran  Church  Review"  in  1882-'5.  Since
1885  he  has  been  professor  of  systematic  theology
and  exegesis  at  Augustana  Swedish-English  theo-
logical seminary,  Rock  Island,  111.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  philological  association,  che
American  oriental  society,  the  Society  of  biblical
literature  and  exegesis,  and  other  learned  bodies.
He  has  for  several  years  been  one  of  the  instructors
in  the  summer  schools  of  Hebrew,  under  the  direc-
torship of  Prof.  William  R.  Harper,  of  Yale,  and
he  has  devoted  much  time  to  a  careful  and  critical
study  of  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  texts  of  the  Bible,
as  well  as  to  Sanskrit  and  other  languages.  He  is
a  frequent  contributor  to  theological  and  philologi-
cal periodicals,  and  has  published  a  critically  re-
vised translation  of  the  book  of  Daniel  in  Dr.  Joseph
A.  Seiss's  "  Voices  from  Babylon  "  (Philadelphia,
1879) ;  "  Luther's  Small  Catechism,"  with  proof-
texts,  additions,  and  appendixes  (1882);  "Theo-
logical Encyclopaedia,"  including  "  Part  I.,  Exe-
getical  Theology"  (1885)  and  "Part  II..  Historical
Theology"  (Chicago,  1888);  "Biblical  Theology  of
the  Old  Testament "  (Chicago,  1886);  "System  of
the  Dogmatic  Theology  of  the  Evangelical  Luther-
an Church,  Part  I.,  Prolegomena  "  (Philadelphia.
1888);  "Grammar  of  the  New  Testament  Greek "
(New  York,  1888) ;  "  The  Greek  Text  of  St.  John,
according  to  the  Critical  Texts  of  Westcott  and
Ilort,  Tischendorf  and  Tregelles  "  (1888) ;  "  Method
for  the  Study  of  the  New  Testament  Greek  "  (1888) ;
and  "  Commentary  on  the  Hebrew  Text  of  Oba-
diah  "  (Philadelphia,  1888).

WEIGHTMAN,  Richard  Hanson,  soldier,  b.
in  Maryland  in  1818 ;  d.  near  Wilson's  creek,  Mo.,
10  Aug.,  1861.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1837,  but  was  expelled  in  the  same  year
for  cutting  a  comrade  in  the  face  in  a  personal  en-
counter. With  the  same  knife  he  afterward  killed
a  Santa  Fe  trader  in  a  quarrel.  He  was  a  captain
in  the  Missouri  light 'infantry  volunteers  in  the
Mexican  war.  He  became  an  additional  paymas-
ter in  the  U.  S.  army  in  1848,  was  honorably  dis-
charged in  1849,  settled  in  New  Mexico,  and  was
chosen  provisionally  a  senator,  when  in  1850  the
territory  unsuccessfully  applied  for  admission  into
the  Union.  In  1851— '3  he  served  in  congress,  hav-
ing been  elected  as  a  Democrat.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  became  colonel  of  a  regiment
of  the  Missouri  state  guard,  participated  in  the
battle  of  Carthage,  5  July,  1861.  and  was  killed
while  commanding  a  brigade  at  Wilson's  creek.

WEIGHTMAN,  Roger  C,  librarian,  b.  in  Alex-
andria, Va.,  in  1786;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  2
Feb.,  1876.  He  adopted  the  printing  business,  set-
tled in  Washington,  D.  C,  and  at  one  time  was
congressional  printer.  During  the  second  war  with
Great  Britain  he  was  an  officer  of  cavalry,  and  sub-
sequently he  became  a  general  of  District  of  Co-
lumbia militia.  He  was  mayor  of  Washington  in
1824-'7,  became  cashier  of  the  Washington  bank,
and  was  for  many  years  librarian  of  the  patent-
office.  He  commanded  the  troops  that  were  quar-
tered in  that  building  during  the  civil  war.

WEIR,  Robert  Walter,  artist,  b.  in  New  Ro-
chelle,  N.  Y.,  18  June,  1803;  d.  in  New  York  city,
1  May,  1889.  He  engaged  in  business  until  the  age
of  nineteen,  when  he  decided  to.  adopt  art  as  a  pro-
fession and  had  some  instruction  from  John  Wesley
Jarvis.  After  painting  for  several  years  in  New
York  he  went  in  1824  to  Florence,  where  he  exe-
cuted his  "  Christ  and  Nicodemus  "  and  "  The  An-
gel relieving  Peter,"  and  thence,  in  1825,  to  Rome.


422


WEIR


WEISS


CWVec^


In  1828  he  became  an  associate  member  of  the
National  academy,  and  the  following  year  he  was
elected  an  academician.  He  succeeded  Charles  R.
Leslie  in  1832  as  pro-
fessor of  drawing  at
the  U.  S.  military
academy  at  West
Point,  which  post  he
held  for  forty-two
years.  Subsequently
he  resided  in  New
York  city.  His  por-
trait was  painted  by
Daniel  Huntington,
and  is  in  the  library
of  the-  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy.  Prof.
Weir  was  perhaps
best  known  by  his
historical  paintings,
and  was  one  of  the
first  American  art-
ists to  practise  this
branch  of  art.  His
numerous  works,  in  many  of  which  he  was  espe-
cially effective  in  the  rendering  of  the  accessories
and  "still-life,  include  "  The  Belle  of  the  Carnival "
(1836) ;  "  The  Bourbons'  Last  March  " ;  "  Landing
of  Henry  Hudson"  (1842);  "Indian  Captive";
'•  Taking  the  Veil " ;  "  Church  of  the  Holy  Inno-
cents at  Highland  Falls,  West  Point,"  in  the  Cor-
coran gallery,  Washington  (1847) ;  "  Embarkation
of  the  Pilgrims  "  (1845),  in  the  rotunda  of  the  eapi-
tol  at  Washington ;  "  The  Evening  of  the  Cruci-
fixion" (1867);  "Virgil  and  Dante  crossing  the
Styx"  (1869);  "Christ  in  the  Garden"  (1873);
"  The  Portico  of  the  Palace  of  Octavia,  Rome  "
(1874);  "Our  Lord  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  "  (1877) :
"Indian  Falls"  (1878);  "Titian  in  his  Studio";
"  Last  Communion  of  Henry  Clay,"  in  water-color ;
and  "Columbus  before  the  Council  of  Salaman-
ca" (1884).  He  also  executed  a  number  of  por-
traits, including  one  of  Red  Jacket. — His  son,
John  Ferguson,  artist,  b.  in  West  Point,  N.  Y.,
28  Aug.,  1841,  began  to  paint  under  his  father.
He  opened  a  studio  in  New  York  in  1861,  was
elected  an  associate  of  the  National  academy  in
1864,  and  an  academician  in  1866.  In  1869  and
again  in  1880  he  went  abroad,  and,  after  returning
from  his  first  trip  in  1869,  he  became  director  of
the  School  of  fine  arts  at  Yale. He  was  appointed

i'ndge  of  the  fine  arts  at  the  Centennial  exhibition,
'hiladelphia,  in  1876,  and  wrote  the  official  report
on  his  department.  His  two  best-known  pictures
are  "  The  Gun-Foundry,"  exhibited  at  the  National
academy  in  1867,  in  Paris  the  same  year,  and  in
Philadelphia  in  1876,  and  "  Forging  the  Shaft "
(1868).  The  latter  was  burned,  but  a  replica  was
exhibited  in  Paris  in  1878.  Among  his  other
works  are  "  Sunset  at  West  Point "  (1859) ;  "  The
Christmas  Bell "  (1860) ;  "  The  Culprit  Fay  "  (1861) ;
"  Tapping  the  Furnace  "  (1872) ;  "  The  Confession-
al," shown  at  Philadelphia  in  1876 ;  "  Venice "
(1887) ;  and  various  portraits,  including  those  of
the  faculty  of  the  Yale  theological  school  (1882),
and  S.  Wells  Williams  (1883).  Of  late  years  he
has  given  some  attention  to  sculpture,  and  has  pro-
duced a  statue  of  the  elder  Benjamin  Silliman,
which  stands  on  the  Yale  college  grounds  (1884).
— Another  son,  Julian  Alden,  artist,  b.  at  West
Point,  N.  Y.,  30  Aug.,  1852,  studied  under  his
father  and  Jean  L.  Gerome.  He  is  noted  for  his
excellent  portraits,  and  has  also  painted  genre
pieces  with  success.  In  Paris  he  received  honor-
able mention  at  the  salon  of  1881,  and  in  1888  he


was  awarded  the  prize,  at  the  exhibition  of  the
American  art  association,  for  his  "  Idle  Hours."
His  studio  is  in  New  York,  where  he  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  Society  of  American  artists,
and  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National  acade-
my in  1885  and  an  academician  the  following  year.
Among  his  works  are  "  A  Brittany  Interior  "  (1875) ;
"  Brittany  Peasant-Girl "  and  "  Study  of  an  Old
Peasant  *  (1877) ;  "  Breton  Interior  "  (1878) ;  "  The
Muse  of  Music "  (1880) ;  "  Jeune  Fille"  and  "The
Good  Samaritan  "  (1881) ;  and  portraits  of  Robert
W.  Weir  (1880);  Warren  Delano  and  Olin  L.
Warner  (1881) ;  Richard  Grant  White  (1883) ;  Peter
Cooper  (1884);  and  John  Gilbert  (1888).  Two  of
Prof.  Robert  W.  Weir's  sons,  Gulian  Verplanck
and  William  Bayard,  were  in  the  regular  army  and
served  through  the  civil  war,  while  Henry  C.  served
in  the  volunteer  army  and  attained  the  brevet  rank
of  colonel. Another  son,  Robert,  was  in  the  navv.

WEISS,  or  WEITZIUS,  George  Michael
(wys),  clergyman,  b.  in  the  Palatinate  of  the  Rhine,
Germany,  in  1697;  d.  near  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in
1762.  He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  at  Heidel-
berg in  1725,  and  two  years  afterward  emigrated
to  this  country  with  400  set-tlers.  He  went  with
them  to  Pennsylvania,  organized  a  Reformed  Dutch
church  at  Skippack,  returned  to  Holland,  and  col-
lected funds  for  its  support.  He  became  pastor  of
German  congregations  in  Schoharie  and  Dutchess
counties,  N.  Y.,  in  1731,  and  labored  there  fourteen
years,  but  was  compelled  to  fly  to  Pennsylvania  to
escape  the  attacks  of  the  Indians.  From  about  1746
until  his  death  he  preached  in  Old  Gosenhoppen  and
Great  Swamp,  Pa.  He  published  "An  Account
and  Instruction  relating  to  the  Colony  and  Church
of  Pennsylvania,  made  up  by  the  Deputies  of  the
Synod  of  South  Holland  "  (Amsterdam,  1730) ;  a
pamphlet  concerning  his  arrangements  with  the
classis  of  Amsterdam  to  care  for  the  Germans  in
Pennsylvania  (1731) ;  and  an  "  Account  of  the  In-
dians" (1743).

WEISS,  John,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  28
June,  1818 ;  d.  there,  9  March,  1879.  His  father,  a
German  Jew,  was  a  barber  in  Worcester,  Mass.
John  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1837,  and  at  the
divinity-school  in  1843,  meanwhile  studying  abroad.
He  then  was  settled  over  the  Unitarian  church  in
Watertown,  Mass.,  but  withdrew  on  account  of  his
anti-slavery  opinions,  and  was  pastor  at  New  Bed-
ford a  short  time,  resigning  on  account  of  the  failure
of  his  health.  After  several  years  of  study  and
travel  he  resumed  his  pastorate  in  Watertown,  and
preached  there  in  1859-70.  Mr.  Weiss  was  an
ardent  Abolitionist,  an  advocate  of  women's  rights,
a  rationalist  in  religion,  and  a  disciple  of  the  trans-
cendental philosophy.  He  delivered  courses  of
lectures  on  "Greek  Religious  Ideas."  "Humor  in
Shakespeare,"  and  "Shakespeare's  Women."  Of
his  lectures  on  Greek  religious  ideas,  Octavius  B.
Frothingham  says :  "  They  wei-e  the  keenest  inter-
pretation of  the  ancient  myths,  the  most  profound,
luminous,  and  sympathetic,  I  have  met  with."  He
is  the  author  of  many  reviews,  sermons,  and  maga-
zine articles  on  literary,  biographical,  social,  and
political  questions,  "Life  and  Correspondence  of
Theodore  Parker"  (2  vols..  New  York,  1864),  and
"American  Religion"  (1871).  He  also  edited  and
translated  "  Henry  of  Afterdingen,"  a  romance  by
Friedrich  Van  Hardenberg  (Boston.  1842);  "Philo-
sophical and  ^Esthetic  Letters  and  Essays  of  Schil-
ler," with  an  introduction  (1845);  and  "Memoir  of
Johann  G.  Fichte,"  bv  William  Smith  (1846).

WEISS,  Lewis,  jurist,  b.  in  Berlin,  Prussia.  28
Dec,  1717;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22  Oct.,  1796.
He  was  educated  at  Lindheim.  near  Frankfort-on-


WEISS


WELCH


423


the-Maine,  came  to  Pennsylvania  in  December,  1755,
and  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  German  society,  and  its  presi-
dent in  1783-'4.  He  was  commissioned  by  the  ex-
ecutive council  of  the  province,  20  May,  1786,  a
justice  of  the  peace,  and  on  26  May  a  justice  of  the
court  of  common  pleas.  He  edited  "  Collection  of
the  Laws  of  Pennsylvania"  (1760-'2).  Horace  Bin-
ney  says  of  this  collection :  "  It  is  valuable  for  sev-
eral old  laws  not  to  be  found  in  other  editions,  and
especially  for  many  proceedings  in  the  privy  coun-
cil of  England,  repealing  or  disallowing  certain  of
the  laws  of  the  province."

WEISS,  Susan  Archer  Talley,  poet,  b.  in  Han-
over county, Va.,  14  Feb.,  1835.  Her  father,  Thomas
Talley,  a  lawyer,  removed  in  1842  to  Richmond,
where  she  went  to  school  for  one  year.  At  the
age  of  eleven  she  became  deaf,  and  afterward  edu-
cated herself.  During  the  civil  war  she  was  ac-
cused by  the  National  authorities  of  being  a  spy,
and  was  arrested  and  imprisoned  at  Fort  McHenry,
Baltimore.  While  there  in  1863  she  married  Col.
von  Weiss,  a  German  officer,  who  died  in  1869.
She  has  thrown  new  and  favorable  light  on  Poe's
domestic  character  in  a  paper  published  in  "  Scrib-
ner's  Monthly  "  in  March,  1876.

WEISSE,  John  Adam  (wys),  philologist,  b.  in
Ropperville,  Lorraine,  3  Dec,  1810;  d.  in  New
York  city,  12  Jan.,  1888.  He  was  graduated  in
classics  and  natural  sciences  at  the  college  in
Bitsche,  and  in  chemistry  and  philosophy  at  the
seminary  in  Metz,  and  subsequently  became  pro-
fessor of  French  in  the  Imperial  school  in  Vienna.
He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1840,  and  during
an  eight-years'  residence  in  Boston  published  a
';  Key  to  the  French  Language."  He  went  to  Brus-
sels in  1849,  was  graduated  in  medicine  there  in
1850,  and  settled  in  New  York  city,  where  he  passed
the  remainder  of  his  life.  He  retired  from  active
practice  several  years  previous  to  his  death,  devot-
ing his  later  life  to  literary  pursuits  and  lecturing
before  learned  societies.  He  was  president  of  the
New  York  philological  society.  He  published  "  Ori-
gin, Progress,  and  Destiny  of  the  English  Language
and  Literature,"  which  was  favorably  criticised  by
William  E.  Gladstone  and  Max  Miiller  (New  York,
1873),  and  "  The  Obelisk  and  Freemasonry  "  (1881).

WEISSENFELS,  Frederick  H,  Baron  de,
soldier,  b.  in  Prussia  in  1738;  d.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  14  May,  1806.  During  his  early  life  he  was
an  officer  in  the  British  service,  but  he  emigrated
to  this  country,  and  in  1763  settled  in  Dutchess
county,  N.  Y.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  3d  New  York  battalion  in  1776,  and  afterward
commanded  the  2d  New  York  battalion  at  White
Plains,  Trenton,  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne,  and
the  battle  of  Monmouth.  He  accompanied  Gen.
John  Sullivan's  expedition  against  the  Six  Nations
in  1779,  and  fought  at  Newton.  The  war  left  him
impoverished,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  he  filled
a  minor  office  in  New  Orleans.

WEITZEL,  Godfrey,  soldier,  b.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  1  Nov.,  1835;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19
March,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1855,  became  1st  lieutenant  of  en-
gineers in  1860,  and  was  attached  to  the  staff  of
Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler  as  chief  engineer  of  the
Department  of  the  Gulf.  After  the  capture  of
New  Orleans  he  became  assistant  military  com-
mander and  acting  mayor  of  the  city.  He  was
commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  29
Aug.,  1862,  routed  a  large  force  of  the  enemy  at
Labadieville,  La.,  in  October  of  that  year,  and  was
brevetted  major  in  the  U.  S.  army  for  that  service.
He  became  captain  of  engineers,  3  March,  1863,


commanded  the  advance  in  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.
Banks's  operations  in  western  Louisiana  in  April
and  May,  1863,  a  division  at  the  siege  of  Port
Hudson,  La.,  and  a  division  in  the  19th  army  corps
in  the  Lafourche  campaign.  On  8  July,  1863,  he
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  U.  S.  army,  "  for
gallant  and  meritorious  services  at  the  siege  of  Port
Hudson."  He  joined  in  the  western  Louisiana
campaign,  and  from  May  till  September,  1864,  was
chief  engineer  of  the  Army  of  the  James,  being
engaged  at  Swift's  Creek,  the  actions  near  Drury's
Bluff,  and  in  constructing  the  defences  of  Bermuda
Hundred,  James  River,  and  Deep  Bottom.  In
August,  1864,  he  was  brevetted  major-general  of
volunteers  "  for  meritorious  and  distinguished  ser-
vices during.the  civil  war."  He  commanded  the
18th  army  corps  from  September  till  December,
1864,  was  brevetted  colonel  in  the  U.  S.  army  "  for

fallant  and  meritorious  services  at  the  capture  of
'ort  Harrison,  30  Sept.,  1864,"  became  full  major-
general  of  volunteers  on  7  Nov.,  was  second  in
command  of  the  first  expedition  to  Fort  Fisher,
and  in  March  and  April,  1865,  was  in  charge  of
all  troops  north  of  Potomac  river  during  the  final
operations  against  Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee's  army,  tak-
ing possession  of  Richmond,  3  April,  1865.  In
March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
in  the  regular  army  for  services  in  that  campaign,
and  major-general  in  the  same  rank  "  for  gallant
and  meritorious
services  in  the
field  during  the
civil  war."  He
commanded  the
Rio  Grande  dis-
trict, Texas,  in
1865-'6,  and  was
mustered  out  of
volunteer  service
on  1  March  of  the
latter  year.  He
became  major  of
engineers  in  1866,
and  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1882,
and  from  that  date
was  in  charge  of
various  works  of
improvement  in
and  near  Philadel-
phia, and  chairman  of  the  commission  advisatory
to  the  board  of  harbor  commissioners  of  that  city.
WELBY,  Amelia  B.  Coppuck,  poet,  b.  in  St.
Michael's,  Md.,  3  Feb.,  1819 ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,
3  May,  1852.  She  removed  with  her  parents  to
Kentucky  in  childhood,  and.  after  residing  in  Lex-
ington and  Louisville,  married  in  1838  George  B.
Welby,  a  merchant  of  the  latter  city.  She  began
in  1837  to  contribute  poems  to  the  Louisville
"  Journal,"  under  the  name  of  "  Amelia,"  by  which
she  gained  some  reputation.  They  were  highly
praised  by  George  D.  Prentice,  Rufus  W.  Griswold.,
Edgar  A  Poe,  and  other  critics.  A  small  collec-
tion (Boston,  1844)  passed  through  several  editions,
and  a  larger  one  was  afterward  published,  with  il-
lustrations, by  Robert  W.  Weir  (New  York,  1850).

WELCH,  Adonijah  Strong,  senator,  b.  in
East  Hampton,  Conn.,  12  April,  1821.  He  re-
moved to  Michigan  in  1839,  and  was  graduated  at
the  State  university  in  1846,  after  serving  as  prin-
cipal of  its  preparatory  department  from  1844.
He  then  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1847,  but  in  that  year  became  principal  of
Jonesville  high-school.  He  went  to  California  in
1849,  and  on  his  return  in  1851  took  charge  of  the


424


WELCH


WELD


Michigan  normal  school  at  Ypsilanti,  where  he
remained  till  18(55.  In  that  year  he  removed  to
Florida  and  settled  in  Jacksonville,  where  he  was
chairman  of  the  State  Republican  committee  dur-
ing the  canvass  of  1868,  which  brought  Florida
back  into  the  Union.  He  was  then  chosen  U.  S.
senator,  serving  from  2  Julv,  1868,  till  3  March,
1869.  In  1869-83  he  was  president  of  Iowa  state
agricultural  college,  where  he  is  still  a  professor.
It  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1873,  and  he
received  the  same  from  Michigan  university  in
1879.  He  was  president  of  the  first  teachers'  asso-
ciation of  Michigan  in  1851.  In  1882  he  was  sent
to  Europe  by  the  commissioner  of  agriculture  to
inspect  colleges  of  that  science,  and  his  report  was
published  by  the  U.  S.  government.  Dr.  Welch  is
the  author  of  "  Analysis  of  the  English  Sentence  "
(New  York,  1850) ;  "  Object  Lessons  "  (1861) ;  "  Talks
on  Psychology  "  (1888) ;  and  "  The  Teachers'  Psy-
chology "  (1888).

WELCH,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Harrison  county,
Ohio,  28  Oct.,  1805.  He  was  graduated  at  Frank-
lin college  in  1828,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1833.  He  was  prosecuting  attorney  from
1834  till  1839,  sat  in  the  Ohio  senate  in  1846-7,  and
in  1850  was  elected  to  congress,  serving  one  term.
He  was  a  member  in  1852  of  the  national  conven-
tion that  nominated  Winfield  Scott  for  the  presi-
dency, and  in  1856  was  an  elector  on  the  Fremont
ticket.  He  was  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  in  1863-'5,  and  was  then  raised  to  the  su-
preme bench,  serving  thirteen  years.  He  resumed
Eractice,  but  retired  after  seven  or  eight  years,  and
as  since  devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuits.  The
degree  of  LL.  D.  was  given  him  by  Franklin  col-
lege in  1867.  Judge  Welch  has  invented  a  new
method  of  computing  interest,  and  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Mathematical  Curiosities  "  (Athens,  Ohio,
1883) ;  "  Index-Digest  of  Ohio  Decisions  "  (Cincin-
nati, 1886) ;  and  lectures  and  essays  on  "  Thomas
Ewing,"  "  Mob  Law,"  "  History  of  the  Ohio  Uni-
versity," and  other  subjects. — His  brother,  John-
son, b.  in  Harrison  county,  Ohio,  15  Sept.,  1809 ;
d.  in  New  Athens,  Ohio,  1  April,  1837,  became  a
minister  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  adhering  to
the  Scotch  or  Seceding  party,  and  at  the  time  of
his  death  was  president  of  Franklin  college.

WELCH,  Moses  Cook,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mans-
field, Conn.,  22  Feb.,  1754;  d.  there,  21  April,
1824.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1772.  After
teaching  and  then  studying  law  for  a  year,  he
gave  some  attention  to  medicine,  but  abandoned  it
and  again  engaged  in  teaching.  At  the  opening
of  the  Revolution  he  was  associated  with  Samuel
Nott  in  making  saltpetre  for  the  powder-supply
of  the  army.  Afterward  he  studied  theology,  and
was  ordained,  2  June,  1784,  serving  as  his  father's
successor  in  the  pastorate  of  his  native  place  till
his  death.  He  published  various  discourses  and
pamphlets,  including  "  Eulogy  on  Benjamin  Chap-
lin "  (1795),  and  "  The  Addresser  Addressed,"  a
reply  to  Hon.  Zephaniah  Swift  (1796).

WELCH,  Ransom  Bethune,  clergyman,  b.  in
Greenville,  N.  Y.,  about  1825.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1846,  studied  two  years  at  An-
dover  theological  seminary,  and  then  at  Auburn,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1852.  In  1853-4  he
arranged  a  system  of  colportage  in  Mississippi  for
the  American  tract  society.  lie  was  ordained  in
December,  1854,  as  pastor  of  the  Dutch  Reformed
church  at  Gilboa,  N.  Y.,  remained  there  till  1856,
and  was  then  in  charge  of  a  congregation  at  Cats-
kill  till  1859.  He  was  professor  of  logic,  rhetoric,
and  English  literature  at  Union  college  in  1860-'76,
and  since  the  latter  date  has  occupied  the  chair  of


Christian  theology  in  Auburn  theological  seminary.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University
of  the  city  of'  New  York  and  Rutgers  in  1868,  and
that  of  LL.  D.  from  Maryville  college,  Tenn.,  in
1872.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Presbyterian  alli-
ance at  Belfast,  Ireland,  in  1884,  and  London  in
1888,  and  to  the  centennial  conference  of  Foreign
missions  at  London  in  the  latter  year.  In  1886  he
became  vice-president  of  the  American  institute  of
Christian  philosophy.  Prof.  Welch  is  the  author
of  "  Faith  and  Modern  Thought,"  with  an  intro-
duction by  Prof.  Tayler  Lewis  (New  York,  1876) ;
"  Outlines  of  Christian  Theology  "  (1881) ;  separate
addresses ;  and  contributions  to  current  religious
literature.  In  1881  he  became  an  associate  editor
of  the  '.'  Presbyterian  Review."

WELD,  Horatio  Hastings,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  4  Feb.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Riverton,  N.  J.,  27
Aug.,  1888.  He  became  a  printer  and  then  edited
newspapers  in  Lowell,  Boston,  New  York,  and
Philadelphia,  but  in  1845  took  orders  in  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church.  He  was  rector  succes-
sively of  St.  James's,  Downingtown,  Pa. ;  Trinity,
Morristown,  N.  J. ;  and  Christ  church,  Riverton,
N.  J.  He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from
Andalusia  college,  Pa.,  in  1868.  Dr.  Weld  has
published  "  Corrected  Proofs,"  a  volume  of  sketches
(Boston,  1837);  "Life  of  Christ"  (Philadelphia,
1850) ;  "  Scripture  Quotations  "  (1850) ;  and  M  Sa-
cred Poetical  Quotations"  (1851),  and  has  edited
"  Scenes  in  the  Lives  of  the  Apostles  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1846) ;  "  Scenes  in  the  Lives  of  the  Patriarchs
and  Prophets  "  (1847) ;  "  Women  of  the  Scriptures  "
(1848) ;  "Benjamin  Franklin's  Autobiography,  with
a  Narrative  of  his  Public  Life  and  Services  "  (New
York,  1849) ;  "  Sacred  Poetical  Quotations  "  (1851) ;
and  "  The  Star  of  Bethlehem  "  (1852).

WELD,  Isaac,  British  traveller,  b.  in  Dublin,
Ireland,  15  March,  1774;  d.  near  Bray,  County
Dublin,  4  Aug.,  1856.  His  father,  Isaac  Weld,  of
Dublin,  was  a  personal  friend  of  Charles  James
Fox.  The  son  travelled  extensively  on  this  conti-
nent, and  was  for  fifty-six  years  connected  with
the  Royal  society  of  Dublin,  of  which  he  was  long
secretary  and  vice-president.  His  journey  in  this
country  was  prompted  by  the  idea  that  the  Irish
people  would  afterward  be  led  to  emigrate  hither
in  great  numbers.  Arriving  in  Philadelphia  in
September,  1795,  he  made  his  way,  on  horseback,
on  foot,  or  in  a  canoe,  through  dense  forests  and
along  rivers,  trusting  often  to  friendly  Indians  for
safe  conduct.  In  the  cities  he  saw  much  of  the
best  society,  and  made  the  acquaintance  of  George
Washington  and  Thomas  Jefferson.  The  result  of
his  trip  was  his  "  Travels  through  the  States  of
North  America  and  the  Provinces  of  Upper  and
Lower  Canada  during  the  Years  1795.  1796,  and
1797"  (London,  1799,  many  later  editions;  French
translation,  3  vols.,  Paris.  1800 ;  German  transla-
tion, 3  vols.,  The  Hague,  1801-2).  Mr; Weld  wrote
also  "  Illustrations  of  the  Scenery  of  Killarney  and
the  Surrounding  Country"  (1807).— His  'half-
brother,  Charles  Richard,  English  traveller,  b.
in  Windsor,  England,  in  1818 ;  d.  in  Bath,  15  Jan.,
1869,  was  for  many  years  assistant  secretary  of  the
Royal  society,  and  the  author,  among  many  other
works,  of  "  A  Vacation  Tour  in  the  United  States
and  Canada  "  (London,  1855).

WELD,  Lewis,  educator,  b.  in  Hampton,  Conn.,
17  Oct.,  1796 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  30  Dec,
1853.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1818,  and
became  a  teacher  in  the  American  asylum  for  the
education  of  the  deaf  and  dumb,  of  which,  on  the
resignation  of  Thomas  H.  Gallaudet  in  1830,
he  was  made  principal. Previously  he served


WELD


WELLBOON


425


from  1822  as  principal  of  the  Pennsylvania  insti-
tution for  the  deaf  and  dumb,  at  Philadelphia.
His  success  in  these  offices  gave  him  a  wide  impu-
tation in  his  own  field.  For  the  last  few  years  of
his  life  he  was  a  sufferer  from  a  chronic  disease.

WELD,  Theodore  Dwiarht,  reformer,  b.  in
Hampton,  Conn.,  23  Nov.,  1803.  He  entered  Phil-
lips Andover  academy  in  1819,  but  was  not  gradu-
ated, on  account  of  failing  eyesight.  In  1830  he
became  general  agent  of  the  Society  for  the  promo-
tion of  manual  labor  in  literary  institutions,  pub-
lishing afterward  a  valuable  report  (New  York,
1833).  He  entered  Lane  theological  seminary,  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  in  1833,  but  left  that  institution  on
the  suppression  of  the  Anti-slavery  society  of  the
seminary  by  the  trustees.  Mr.  Weld  then  became
well  known  as  an  anti-slavery  lecturer,  but  in  1836
he  lost  his  voice,  and  was  appointed  by  the  Ameri-
can anti-slavery  society  editor  of  its  books  and
pamphlets.  In  1841-'3  he  labored  in  Washington
in  aid  of  the  anti-slavery  members  of  congress,
and  in  1854  he  established  at  Eagleswood,  N.  J.,  a
school  in  which  he  received  pupils  irrespective  of
sex  and  color.  In  1864  he  removed  to  Hyde  Park,
near  Boston,  and  devoted  himself  to  teaching  and
lecturing.  Mr.  Weld  is  the  author  of  many  pam-
phlets, and  of  "  The  Power  of  Congress  over  the
District  of  Columbia"  (New  York,  1837);  "The
Bible  against  Slavery  "  (1837) ;  "  American  Slavery
as  it  Is :  Testimony  of  a  Thousand  Witnesses ''
(1839) ;  and  "  Slavery  and  the  Internal  Slave  Trade
in  the  United  States"  (London,  1841). — His  wife.
Angelina  Emily  Grrimke",  reformer,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  20  Feb.,  1805,  is  the  daughter  of  Judge
John  F.  Grimke,  of  South  Carolina,  but  in  1828,
with  her  sister,  Sarah  M.  Grimke  (q.  v.),  she  joined
the  Society  of  Friends  in  Philadelphia,  afterward
emancipating  the  slaves  that  she  inherited  from
her  parents  in  1836.  She  was  the  author  of  an
"  Appeal  to  the  Christian  Women  of  the  South,"
which  was  republished  in  England  with  an  intro-
duction by  George  Thompson,  and  was  associated
with  her  sister  in  delivering  public  addresses  under
the  auspices  of  the  American  anti-slavery  society,
winning  a  reputation  for  eloquence.  The  contro-
versy that  the  appearance  of  the  sisters  as  public
speakers  caused  was  the  beginning  of  the  woman's
rights  agitation  in  this  country.  She  married  Mr.
Weld  on  14  May,  1838,  and  was  afterward  asso-
ciated with  him  in  educational  and  reformatory
work.  Besides  the  work  noticed  above,  she  wrote
"  Letters  to  Catherine  E.  Beecher,"  a  review  of  the
slavery  question  (Boston,  1837).

WELDE,  Thomas,  b.  in  England  about  1590 ;
d.  there,  23  March,  1662.  He  was  graduated  at
Cambridge  in  1613,  became  a  minister  of  the  es-
tablished church,  and  had  charge  for  some  time
of  a  parish  in  Terling,  Essex;  but  his  Puritan
opinions  caused  him  to  emigrate  to  Boston,  where
he  arrived  on  5  June,  1632.  In  July  he  became
minister  of  the  1st  church  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,
where,  after  the  following  November,  John  Eliot,
the  "apostle,"  was  associated  with  him.  He  was
active  in  opposition  to  Anne  Hutchinson  and  her
doctrines,  took  a  conspicuous  part  in  her  trial,
and  afterward  wrote  "  A  Short  Story  of  the  Rise,
Reign,  and  Ruin  of  the  Antinomians,  Familists,
and  Libertines  that  infested  the  Churches  of  New
England  "  (London,  1644  ;  2d  ed.,  1692).  A  shorter
version,  entitled  "  Antinomians  and  Familists  Con-
demned," which  appeared  about  the  same  time,
may  be  the  original ;  and  some  authorities  main-
tain that  Gov.  John  Winthrop  was  the  chief  au-
thor. The  book  was  answered  by  Rev.  John
Wheelwright in his "  Mercurius Americanus "


(1645).  Welde  was  also  associated  with  John  Eliot
and  Richard  Mather  in  preparing,  by  request  of
the  authorities,  the  translation  of  the  Psalms  in
metre  that  is  usually  called  the  "  Bay  Psalm-Book,"
and  is  entitled  "  The  Whole  Book  of  Psalms  Faith-
fully translated  into  English  Metre  "  (Cambridge,
1640).  This  was  the  first  volume  that  was  printed
in  New  England.  Welde  was  sent  with  Hugh
Peters  to  England  in  1641  as  an  agent  of  the
colony,  but  was  dismissed  in  1646,  and  requested
to  return.  He  did  not  comply,  but  remained  in
England,  and  was  minister  of  a  church  at  Gates-
head, near  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.  He  accompa-
nied Lord  Forbes  to  Ireland,  and,  after  residing
there  for  some  time,  returned  to  England,  where
he  was  ejected  from  his  living  for  non-conformity
in  1662.  Besides  the.  works  already  noticed,  Welde
was  the  author  of  "  An  Answer  to  W.  R„  his  Nar-
ration of  Opinions  and  Practices  of  the  New  Eng-
land Churches  "  (1644).  With  three  other  cler-
gymen he  wrote  "  The  Perfect  Pharisee  under
Monkish  Holiness,"  an  attack  on  the  Quakers  (1654),
and  "  The  False  Jew  Detected." — One  of  his  sons,
Thomas,  remained  in  New  England,  and  was  in
the  general  court  in  1676-'7.

WELDON,  Charles  Wesley,  Canadian  member
of  parliament,  b.  in  Richibucto,  New  Brunswick,
27  Feb.,  1830.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  John  W.
Weldon,  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Bruns-
wick. He  was  graduated  at  King's  college,  Wind-
sor, Nova  Scotia,  in  1847,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  New  Brunswick  in  1852,  became  a  queen's
counsel  in  1852,  and  was  elected  to  the  Dominion
parliament  in  1878,  1882,  and  1887.  He  opposed
the  confederation  of  the  provinces,  and  is  opposed
to  the  national  policy  and  the  present  (1889)  ad-
ministration. He  is  president  of  the  Law  society
of  St.  John,  a  governor  of  King's  college,  and
president  of  the  New  Brunswick  electric  telegraph
company,  and  is  connected  with  several  other
financial  corporations.

WELDON,  Richard  Chapman,  educator,  b.  in
Sussex,  New  Brunswick,  19  Jan.,  1849.  He  was
graduated  at  Wesleyan  college,  Sackville,  New
Brunswick,  and  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  at
Yale  in  1872.  He  afterward  studied  international
law  at  Heidelberg,  and  was  called  to  the  bar  of
New  Brunswick.  He  was  a  professor  in  the  Wes-
leyan college,  1875-83,  and  since  the  latter  date
has  been  professor  of  constitutional  law  in  Dal-
housie  university,  Halifax,  and  is  also  dean  of  the
law  faculty  there.  He  was  elected  to  the  Domin-
ion parliament  in  February,  1887,  for  Albert  coun-
ty, New  Brunswick.

WELLBOON,  Marshall  Johnson,  lawyer,  b.
in  Putnam  county,  Ga.,  29  May,  1808 ;  d.  in  Co-
lumbus, Ga.,  16  Oct.,  1874.  After  passing  through
the  junior  year  in  the  University  of  Georgia,  he
studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  nine-
teen years  of  age  by  special  act  of  the  legislature.
At  twenty-one  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of
Georgia,  and  in  1842  he  became  judge  of  the  su-
perior court  of  the  Chattahoochee  circuit.  Subse-
quently, after  a  prolonged  trip  in  Europe,  he
served  one  term  in  congress  in  1849-'51,  having
been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  In  1858  he  began  to
think  seriously  on  religious  subjects,  and  in  1864
was  ordained  to  the  Baptist  ministry  at  Colum-
bus, Ga.  From  that  time  until  his  death  he  was
pastor  of  various  churches,  serving  them  without
compensation.  In  the  earlier  part  of  his  life  he
was  a  brilliant,  accomplished,  and  successful  man
of  the  world,  and  in  his  later  years,  by  the  con-
sent of  all  who  knew  him,  a  man  of  truly  apostolic
devoutness  and  zeal.


426


WELLER


WELLES


WELLER,  George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  15  Nov.,  1790;  d.  in  Raymond,  Miss.,  9
Nov.,  1841.  He  received  a  good  English  education
in  the  public  schools  of  his  native  city,  but  his

fmrents  were  unable  to  send  him  to  college.  He
earned  the  trade  of  a  book-binder,  and  while  pur-
suing his  studies  opened  a  small  book-store  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  and  subsequently  in  Danbury,
Conn.  While  preparing  for  the  ministry  in  the
Episcopal  church  in  Norwalk,  Conn.,  he  officiated
as  lay  reader  in  Bedford,  N.  Y.,  in  1814-'16.  He
was  ordained  deacon  in  St.  Matthew's  church,
Bedford,  16  June,  1816,  by  Bishop  Hobart,  and
priest  in  St.  Paul's  church.  East  Chester,  N.  Y.,  2
April,  1817,  by  the  same  bishop.  In  November,
1817,  he  became  rector  of  Great  Choptank  parish,
Cambridge,  Md.,  which  post  he  filled  for  five  years.
In  1822  he  accepted  a  call  to  St.  Stephen's  church,
Cecil  county,  Md.,  where  he  served  acceptably  for
three  years.  At  this  date  Bishop  White  was  de-
sirous of  finding  a  competent  editor  for  a  new
journal  in  the  interests  of  the  Episcopal  church.
He  accordingly  invited  Mr.  Weller  to  occupy  this

Eost,  and  the  offer  was  accepted.  The  first  num-
er  of  "  The  Church  Register  "  was  issued  on  7  Jan.,
1826.  After  three  years'  service  as  its  editor,  and
occupying  himself  in  other  literary  labors,  he  re-
moved to  Nashville,  Tenn.,  where  during  his  minis-
trations the  first  church  for  Episcopal  worship
was  consecrated  in  1831.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Nashville  university  in  1834.  In
addition  to  his  pastoral  labors  he  gave  instruction
to  candidates  for  orders,  and  opened  a  school  for
girls,  which  met  with  great  success.  His  health
was  seriously  impaired  by  work,  but,  after  resting,
he  accepted  a  call  to  Calvary  church,  Memphis,
Tenn.,  in  1838,  and  the  following  year  became  rec-
tor of  Christ  church,  Vicksburg,'  Miss.  In  1841
the  yellow  fever  broke  out  with  great  virulence,
and  he  deemed  it  his  duty  to  remain  at  his  post
and  minister  to  the  sick.  He  was  attacked  by  the
malady,  which  proved  fatal.  In  addition  to  con-
tributions to  church  journalism,  Dr.  Weller  pub-
lished a  "Vindication  of  the  Church,"  being  a  de-
fence of  Anglican  ordinations  against  the  asper-
sions of  Roman  Catholics,  and  u  Two  Letters  in
Reply  to  Certain  Publications  of  the  Rev.  Samuel
Miller,  of  Princeton,  N.  J."  (1835),  the  object  of
which  was  to  support  episcopacy  chiefly  by  ear-
ly patristic  testimony.  He  also  issued  the  first
American  collection  of  "  Bishop  Heber's  Poems "
(Philadelphia,  1828),  with  a  short  memoir ;  and  re-
published treatises  by  eminent  Anglican  divines  in
convenient  form :  these  are  known  as  "  The  Weller
Tracts,"  and  are  still  regarded  with  favor.

WELLER,  John  B.,  senator,  b.  in  Ohio  in
1812 :  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  7  Aug.,  1875.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  in
1839-'45,  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  an  Ohio  regi-
ment in  the  Mexican  war,  becoming  its  commander
on  the  death  of  its  colonel  at  Monterey,  and  a
commissioner  to  Mexico  under  the  treaty  of  Gua-
dalupe Hidalgo.  Afterward  he  removed  to  Cali-
fornia and  was  elected  U.  S.  Senator,  holding
his  seat  from  17  March,  1852,  till  3  March,  1857.
He  was  governor  of  the  state  in  1858-'60,  U.  S.
minister  to  Mexico  from  7  Nov.,  1860,  till  14  Mav,
1861,  and  a  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic
convention  of  1864.

WELLES,  Edward  Randolph,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Waterloo,  N.  Y.,  10  Jan.,  1830 ;  d.  there,  19
Oct.,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Hobart  in  1850,
ordered  deacon,  20  Dec,  1857,  and  served  as  tutor
in  De  Veaux  college,  Suspension  Bridge,  N.  Y.,
also  officiating  in  Lewiston,  Lockport,  and  Suspen-


sion Bridge.  He  was  ordained  priest,  12  Sept.,
1858,  began  work  at  Red  Wing,  Minn.,  where  he
organized  the  parish  of  Christ  church,  and  became
its  rector,  holding  this  post  until  his  election  to  the
episcopate.  He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.
from  Racine  college  in  1874.  Dr.  Welles  was  conse-
crated bishop  of  Wisconsin  in  St.  Thomas's  church,
New  York,  24  Oct.,  1874.  In  the  course  of  the  year
following,  the  northeastern  part  of  the  state  was
erected  into  a  separate  jurisdiction,  under  the  name
of  the  diocese  of  Fond  du  Lac,  and  Bishop  Welles
elected  to  remain  in  the  old  diocese.  He  published
sermons  and  addresses.

WELLES,  Noah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Colchester,
Conn.,  25  Sept.,  1718;  d.  in  Stamford,  Conn.,  31
Dec,  1776.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1741,  re-
mained there  a  year  as  dean's  scholar,  and  then
took  charge  of  Hopkins  grammar-school  at  Hart-
ford, at  the  same  time  studying  theology.  He  was
a  tutor  at  Yale  in  1 745-'6,  and  in  the  latter  year  re-
ceived a  call  to  Stamford,  where  he  remained  till
the  day  of  his  death,  the  thirtieth  anniversary  of
his  ordination.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  dis-
cussion of  the  validity  of  Presbyterian  ordination
and  in  relation  to  the  proposed  American  episco-
pate, and  at  the  opening  of  the  Revolution  advo-
cated from  his  pulpit  resistance  to  the  mother
country.  In  1774  he  was  chosen  a  fellow  of  Yale,
and  in  the  same  year  Princeton  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  On  the  resignation  of  Dr.  Thomas
Clap  from  the  presidency  of  Yale  in  1766,  Dr.
Welles  was  a  prominent  candidate  for  the  office.
President  Timothy  Dwight,  who  was  his  nephew
by  marriage,  says :  "  His  imagination  was  vivid  and
poetical,  his  intellect  vigorous,  and  his  learning  ex-
tensive. His  manners,  at  the  same  time,  were  an
unusual  happy  compound  of  politeness  and  dig-
nity." Dr.  Welles  published  "  The  Real  Advan-
tages which  Ministers  and  People  may  enjoy,
especially  in  the  Colonies,  by  conforming  to  the
Church  of  England,"  a  clever  anonymous  attack
on  the  Episcopalian  party,  which  has  been  attrib-
uted also  to  Rev.  Noah  Hobart,  of  Fairfield  (Bos-
ton, 1762);  "The  Divine  Right  of  Presbyterian
Ordination  Asserted  "  (New  York,  1763) ;  "  Patriot-
ism Described  and  Recommended,"  the  annual
"election  sermon"  (New  London,  1774);  and
"  Vindication  of  the  Validity  and  Divine  Right  of
Presbyterian  Ordination,  as  set  forth  in  Dr.
Chauncy's  Sermon,  and  Mr.  Welles's  Discourse  in
Answer  to  the  Exceptions  of  Mr.  Jeremiah  Learn-
ing "  (New  Haven,  1767).  He  was  also  the  author
of  a  poem  addressed  to  his  class-mate  and  friend,
Gov.  William  Livingston,  which  is  prefixed  to  the
latter's  "  Philosophic  Solitude  "  (New  York,  1747).

WELLES,  Thomas,  governor  of  Connecticut,
b.  in  England  in  1598 ;  d.  in  Wethersfield,  Conn.,
14  Jan.,  1660.  ne  came  to  this  country  before
1636  and  settled  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  where  he  was
magistrate  from  1637  till  his  death.  In  1639  he
became  first  treasurer  of  the  colony,  and  he  held
that  office  till  1651.  He  was  secretary  of  Connecti-
cut in  1640-'8,  and  was  commissioner  of  the  united
colonies  in  1649  and  again  in  1654.  During  the
absence  of  Gov.  Edward  Hopkins  in  England  in
1654  he  was  elected  moderator  of  the  general  court,
and  in  the  same  year  he  was  chosen  deputy  gov-
ernor. In  1655  he  was  elected  governor,  but  after
two  years  he  returned  to  the  office  of  deputy  gov-
ernor. He  was  chosen  governor  for  a  second  time
in  1658,  and  in  1659  again  held  the  office  of  deputy
governor.  Gov.  Welles  possessed  the  full  confi-
dence of  the  people,  and  many  of  the  most  impor-
tant of  the  early  laws  and  papers  pertaining  to  the
founding  of  the  colony  were  drafted  by  him. The


WELLES


WELLING


427


(^Lti^Ae^


successful  issue  of  Connecticut  from  her  difficulty
concerning  the  fort  erected  at  Saybrook  on  one  side
and  the  Dutch  encroachments  on  the  other  was
largely  due  to  his  skill  and  wisdom. — His  descend-
ant, Gideon,  secretary  of  the  navy,  b.  in  Glaston-
bury, Conn.,  1  July,  1802 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
11  Feb.,  1878,  entered  Norwich  university,  Vt,
but,  without  being  graduated,  began  to  study  law.
In  1826  he  became  editor  and  part  owner  of  the

Hartford"Times,"
with  which  he  re-
mained connect-
ed till  1854,  though
he  retired  from
the  responsible
editorship  in  1836.
He  made  his  pa-
per the  chief  or-
gan of  the  Demo-
cratic party  in  the
state.  It  was  the
first  to  advocate
the  election  of
Andrew  Jackson
to  the  presiden-
cy, and  earnestly
upheld  his  ad-
ministration. Mr.
Welles  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  legis-
lature in  1827-35,
and  both  in  that  body  and  in  his  journal  at-
tacked with  severity  the  proposed  measure  to
exclude  from  the  courts  witnesses  that  did  not
believe  in  a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punish-
ments. He  also  labored  for  years  to  secure  the
abolition  of  imprisonment  for  debt,  opposed  spe-
cial and  private  legislation,  and  secured  the  pas-
sage of  general  laws  for  the  organization  of  finan-
cial corporations.  He  began  an  agitation  for  low
postage  before  the  subject  had  begun  to  attract
general  attention.  He  was  chosen  comptroller  of
the  state  by  the  legislature  in  1835,  and  elected  to
that  office  by  popular  vote  in  1842  and  1843,  serv-
ing as  postmaster  of  Hartford  in  the  intervening
years.  From  1846  till  1849  he  was  chief  of  the
bureau  of  provisions  and  clothing  in  the  navy  de-
partment at  Washington.  Mr.  Welles  had  always
opposed  the  extension  of  slavery.  He  identified
himself  with  the  newly  formed  Republican  party
in  1855,  and  in  1856  was  its  candidate  for  gover-
nor of  Connecticut.  In  1860  he  labored  earnestly
for  the  election  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  and  on  the
latter's  election  Mr.  Welles  was  given  the  portfolio
of  the  navy  in  his  cabinet.  Here  his  executive
ability  compensated  for  his  previous  lack  of  special
knowledge,  and  though  many  of  his  acts  were
bitterly  criticised,  his  administration  was  popular
with  the  navy  and  with  the  country  at  large.  His
facility  as  a  writer  made  his  state  papers  more
interesting  than  such  documents  usually  are.  In
his  first  report,  dated  4  July,  1861,  he  announced
the  increase  of  the  effective  naval  force  from  forty-
two  to  eighty-two  vessels.  This  and  the  subse-
quent increase  in  a  few  months  to  more  than  500
vessels  was  largely  due  to  his  energy.  In  the  report
that  has  just  been  mentioned  he  also  recommended
investigations  to  secure  the  best  iron-clads,  and  this
class  of  vessels  was  introduced  under  his  adminis-
tration. In  the  cabinet  Mr.  Welles  opposed  all
arbitrary  measures,  and  objected  to  the  declara-
tion of  a  blockade  of  southern  ports,  holding  that
this  was  a  virtual  acknowledgment  of  belligerent
rights,  and  that  the  preferable  course  would  be  to
close  our  ports  to  foreign  commerce  by  proclama-


tion. By  request  of  the  president,  he  presented
his  ideas  in  writing ;  but  the  cabinet  finally  yield-
ed to  the  views  of  Sec.  Seward.  Early  in  the  war,
on  25  Sept.,  1861,  he  ordered  that  the  negro  refu-
gees that  found  their  way  to  U.  S.  vessels  should
be  enlisted  in  the  navy.  He  held  his  post  till  the
close  of  President  Johnson's  administration  in
1869.  In  1872  he  acted  with  the  Liberal  Repub-
licans, and  in  1876  he  advocated  the  election  of
Samuel  J.  Tilden,  afterward  taking  strong  grounds
against  the  electoral  commission  and  its  decision.
After  his  retirement  from  office  he  contributed
freely  to  current  literature  on  the  political  and
other  events  of  the  civil  war,  and  provoked  hostile
criticism  by  what  many  thought  his  harsh  strict-
ures on  official  conduct.  In  1872  he  published  an
elaborate  paper  to  show  that  the  capture  of  New
Orleans  in  1862  was  due  entirely  to  the  navy,  and
in  1873  a  volume  entitled  "  Lincoln  and  Seward."
WELLING,  James  Clarke,  educator,  b.  in
Trenton,  N.  J.,  14  July,  1825.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1844,  and,  after  studying  law,  re-
nounced that  profession  in  1848  to  become  asso-
ciate principal  of  the  New  York  collegiate  school.
In  1850  he  was  secured  by  Joseph  Gales  and  Will-
iam W.  Seaton  as  literary  editor  of  the  "  National
Intelligencer"  at  Washington,  and  he  was  after-
ward associated  with  them  in  the  political  conduct
of  that  journal,  becoming  charged  in  1856  with  its
chief  management,  for  which  post  he  was  qualified
by  his  accurate  scholarship,  his  facility  in  writing,
and  his  judicial  temperament.  His  editorship  con-
tinued through  the  crisis  of  the  civil  war.  Ad-
hering to  the  old-line  Whigs  as  against  the  Re-
publican and  the  Democratic  parties,  he  supported
the  Bell-Everett  ticket  for  president  and  vice-
president  in  1860.  Steadfastly  resisting  the  dis-
union movement  at  the  south  in  all  its  phases,  he
gave  to  the  war  for  the  Union  his  loyal  support.  He
advocated  Lincoln's  proposition  of  emancipation
with  compensation  to  loyal  owners,  the  abolition  of
slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  its  abolition
throughout  the  Union  by  constitutional  amend-
ment ;  but  he  questioned  the  validity  of  the  eman-
cipation proclamation,  and  strenuously  opposed
the  constitutionality  of  military  commissions  for
the  trial  of  citizens  in  loyal  states,  which  practice
was  subsequently  condemned  by  the  supreme  court.
The  discussions  of  the  "  Intelligencer  "  during  this
period  often  took  the  form  of  elaborate  papers  on
questions  of  constitutional  or  international  law,
and  exercised  an  acknowledged  influence  on  public
opinion.  Some  of  them  have  been  republished,  and
are  still  cited  in  works  of  history  and  jurisprudence.
Dr.  Welling  withdrew  from  journalism  in  1865,  and
spent  the  following  year  travelling  in  Europe  for
health  and  study.  He  had  been  previously  ap-
pointed a  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  court  of  claims,  and
served  in  that  office  till  1867,  when  he  was  chosen
president  of  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,  Md.
During  his  presidency  the  number  of  students  ad-
vanced from  90  to  250.  In  1868  he  received  the
honorary  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Columbian  college,
Washington.  In  1870  he  was  appointed  professor
of  belles-lettres  in  Princeton,  but  he  resigned  the
post  in  the  following  year  to  accept  the  presidency
of  Columbian  college  (now  university).  Under  his
administration  that  institution  has  been  enlarged,
has  received  a  new  charter  from  congress,  erected
a  building  in  the  heart  of  Washington  (see  illus-
tration), added  new  professional  schools,  and  laid
the  foundation  of  a  free  endowment.  At  the
same  time  he  has  been  connected  with  many  liter-
ary, historical,  and  scientific  societies.  As  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Corcoran  gal-


428


WELLINGTON


WELLS


lery  of  art  since  1877  he  has  devoted  much  time
to  its  development,  visiting  in  1887  the  studios  of

the  chief  art-
ists of  Europe
in  its  interest.
In  1884  he
was  appointed
a  regent  of
the  Smithso-
nian institu-
tion, and  soon
afterward  he
was  elected
chairman  of
its  executive
committee.  He
is  an  active
member  of  the  Philosophical  and  Anthropological
societies  of  Washington,  was  chosen  in  1884  presi-
dent of  the  former,  and  has  contributed  valuable
memoirs  to  the  published  proceedings  of  both
bodies.  He  is  president  of  the  Copyright  league  of
the  District  of  Columbia.  For  many  years  he  has
been  a  contributor  to  periodicals.

WELLINGTON,  Arthur  Mellen,  civil  en-
gineer, b.  in  Waltham.  Mass.,  20  Dec,  1847.  He
was  graduated  at  the  Boston  Latin-school,  and  was
about  to  enter  Harvard  when  his  eyesight  failed,
and  he  turned  his  attention  to  civil  engineering,
studying  under  Prof.  John  B.  Henck  in  Boston.
On  the  completion  of  his  studies  he  engaged  ac-
tively in  the  work,  and  among  other  places  has
held  those  of  chief  engineer  of  the  Interoceanic
railway  from  Vera  Cruz  to  Mexico  and  assistant

feneral  manager  of  the  Mexican  Central  railway,
[e  devised  a  plan  for  multiplying  the  traffic  facili-
ties of  the  Brooklyn  bridge  fivefold,  which  was
recommended  in  1887  by  the  board  of  experts  in
preference  to  all  others.  Mr.  Wellington  has  been
a  member  of  the  American  society  of  civil  engi-
neers since  1881.  In  addition  to  his  professional
work,  he  is  editor  of  the  "  Engineering  News  "  in
New  York  city,  and  has  published  "  Computation
from  Diagrams  of  Railway  Earthworks  "  (New
York,  1878) ;  "  Economic  Theory  of  the  Location
of  Railways"  (1878;  enlarged  ed.,  1887);  "Car-
Builders'  Dictionary ;'  (New  York,  1884)  ;  and
"  Field  Work  of  Railway  Location  and  Laying  out
of  Works  "  (1889).

WELLS,  Clark  Henry,  naval  officer;  b.  in
Reading,  Pa.,  22  Sept.,  1822 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  28  Jan.,  1888.  He  was  appointed  a  mid-
shipman in  the  navy.  25  Sept.,  1840,  attended
the  naval  academy  at  Annapolis  in  1846,  and  be-
came a  passed  midshipman  on  11  July  of  that  year.
During  the  Mexican  war  he  served  in  the  brig
"  Somers,"  which  was  capsized  and  sunk  in  a  squall
off  Vera  Cruz,  after  which  he  joined  the  "  Petrel,"
in  which  he  participated  in  covering  the  landing
of  Scott's  army  and  in  the  bombardment  of  Vera
Cruz.  He  also  took  part  in  the  expeditions  that
captured  Tampico  and  Tuspan  in  1846-'7.  He
was  promoted  to  master,  1  March,  1855,  and  to
lieutenant,  14  Sept.,  1855,  served  in  the  steam
frigate  "Niagara,  laying  the  first  Atlantic  sub-
marine cable  in  1857.  When  the  civil  war  opened
he  was  appointed  executive  of  the  steamer  "  Sus-
quehanna," in  which  he  participated  in  the  captui'e
of  Port  Royal,  S.  C.  He  led  several  boat  expedi-
tions in  engagements  with  batteries  in  the  in-
land coast  waters  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and
Florida,  and  was  present  at  the  capture  of  Fer-
nandina.  He  commanded  the  sloop  "  Vandalia,"
on  the  blockade  of  Charleston,  and  took  the  sloop
'•  Dale  "  home  in  1862. He  was  commissioned  a


lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,  was  execu-
tive of  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard  in  1868,  and
commanded  the  wooden  steamer  "Galena"  in  the
Western  Gulf  blockading  squadron  in  1863-'4.  He
participated  in  the  battle  of  Mobile,  in  which  his
vessel  was  lashed  to  the  "  Oneida."  When  they
were  passing  the  forts  a  shell  from  the  ram  "  Ten-
nessee "  exploded  in  one  of  the  "  Oneida's  "  boilers,
and  he  towed  her  along,  in  command  of  both  ves-
sels because  the  commander  of  the  "  Oneida  "  had
been  wounded.  He  was  highly  commended  by
Admiral  Farragut  in  his  official  report  and  by  a
special  letter.  He  served  in  the  Eastern  Gulf
squadron  for  a  few  months,  was  refitted  at  Phila-
delphia and  joined  Admiral  Porter's  fleet  at  Hamp-
ton Roads,  where  he  remained  until  the  close  of
the  war.  He  commanded  the  steamer  "  Kansas  "
on  the  Brazil  station  in  1865-'6,  where  he  rendered
assistance  to  a  British  gun-boat  that  was  stranded
in  the  river  Plate,  and  also  to  a  British  merchant-
vessel,  for  which  he  received  a  letter  of  thanks
from  the  British  government  through  the  presi-
dent. He  was  commissioned  a  commander,  25
July,  1866,  captain,  19  June,  1871,  and  with  the
"  Shenandoah  "  rendered  valuable  assistance  to
the  iron-clad  "  Compt  de  Verde  "  which  had  broken
from  her  moorings  at  Spezia.  He  received  the
decoration  of  the  Legion  of  honor  from  President
Thiers  of  France  for  this  service.  He  was  chief
signal  officer  of  the  navy  in  1879-'80,  was  pro-
moted to  commodore.  22  Jan.,  1880,  and  on  1  Aug.,
1884,  to  rear-admiral,  and  he  was  placed  on  the
retired  list,  22  Sept.,  1884.

WELLS,  Darius,  inventor,  b.  in  Johnstown,
N.  Y.,  26  April,  1800 ;  d.  in  Paterson,  N.  J.,  27  May,
1875.  He  was  apprenticed  to  the  printers  trade  in
his  native  place,  and  after  serving  for  six  years  re-
moved to  Amsterdam,  N.  Y.,  where,  with  William
Childs,  he  established  the  first  newspaper.  In  1826
he  went  to  New  York,  and  continued  the  printing
business.  At  that  time  the  largest  metal  type  that
was  made  was  only  twelve-line  pica,  and  it  cost  more
than  the  average  printer  could  afford  to  pay.  This
led  to  his  making  large  type  from  wood,  and  he
followed  the  method  of  engravers  by  using  cross-
grained  sections.  The  advantage  of  wood-type
having  been  established,  it  was  found  necessary  to
devise  means  of  manufacturing  it  with  greater  ra-
pidity and  less  labor.  Mr.  Wells  found  that  by
using  a  vertical  revolving  cutter  a  more  speedy  re-
moval of  the  superfluous  wood  could  be  effected.
This  device,  improved  by  various  modifications,  is
known  as  the  routing  machine.  Subsequently  he
engaged  in  the  business  of  furnishing  wooden  type,
and  also  made  a  specialty  of  preparing  boxwood
for  engravers.  This  was  gradually  extended  to  in-
clude printers'  materials,  and  in  1840  he  established
a  factory  at  Paterson,  N.  J.  He  continued  in  this
occupation  until  1856,  when  he  retired.  During
1861-74  he  was  postmaster  of  Paterson,  except
that  he  was  removed  from  office  by  President
Johnson  in  1866,  but  restored  a  short  time  later
through  the  efforts  of  Charles  Sumner.

WELLS,  David  Ames,  economist,  b.  in  Spring-
field, Mass.,  17  June,  1828.  He  is  a  lineal  descend-
ant of  Thomas  Welles,  governor  of  Connecticut,
and,  on  his  mother's  side,  of  David  Ames,  who  built
and  established  the  National  armory  in  Springfield.
In  1847  he  was  graduated  at  Williams,  and,  with
others,  published  a  "  History  and  Sketches  of  Will-
iams College"  (Springfield,  1847).  For  a  time
during  1848  he  was  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the
"Springfield  Republican."  While  thus  engaged,
he  suggested  the  idea,  and  was  associated  in  the  in-
vention, of  folding  newspapers  and  books  by  ma-


WELLS


WELLS


429


chinery  in  connection  with  power  printing-presses.
The  first  machine  that  was  ever  constructed  and
successfully  operated  was  built  at  his  expense,  and
worked  under  his  direction,  in  the  office  of  the
"  Republican."  He  then  sold  his  interest,  and  en-
tered the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard,
where  he  became  a  special  pupil  of  Louis  Agassiz,
and  was  graduated  in  1851.  Mr.  Wells  continued
at  Harvard  as  assistant,  and  was  lecturer  on  phys-
ics and  chemistry  at  Groton  academy,  Mass.  In
Cambridge  he  began,  with  George  Bliss,  in  1849,
the  publication  of  the  "Annual  of  Scientific  Dis-
covery," which  he  continued  until  186(5.  He  in-
vented in  1856  improvements  in  preparing  tex-
tile fabrics.  During  1857-'8  he  was  a  member  of
the  publishing-firm  of  G.  P.  Putnam  and  Co.,  New
York.  He  compiled  "  Science  of  Common  Things  "
(New  York,  1857) ;  "  Elements  of  Natural  Philoso-
phy "  (1857) :  "  Principles  and  Applications  of
Chemistry  "  (1858) ;  and  "  First  Principles  of  Ge-
ology "  (1861),  of  which  works  two  were  translated
into  Chinese,  and  that  on  chemistry  was  adopted
as  a  text-book  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  In
1864  he  issued  an  essay  on  "  Our  Burden  and  our
Strength,"  which  was  considered  "  one  of  the  most
original  and  startling  brochures  of  political  litera-
ture." The  Loyal  publication  society  of  New  York
reprinted  it,  and  it  was  published"  in  England.
French  and  German  translations  were  issued
abroad,  and  its  entire  circulation  probably  ex-
ceeded 200,000  copies.  In  1865  he  was  called  to
Washington,  and  made  chairman  of  a  commission
to'  consider  the  subject  of  raising  by  taxation  the
necessary  revenue  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  gov-
ernment. On  the  completion  of  his  report  in  Janu-
ary, 1866,  he  was  appointed  special  commissioner
of  the  revenue,  which  office  was  created  for  him,
and  later  under  his  direction  the  bureau  of  statis-
tics was.  formed.  He  visited  Europe  in  1867,  under
a  government  commission,  and  investigated  indus-
tries competitive  with  those  of  the  United  States.
Although  he  was  originally  a  believer  in  the  eco-
nomic system  of  protection,  his  experience  resulted
in  his  acceptance  of  free-trade  doctrines.  His  term
of  office  expired  in  1870,  and  he  was  appointed
chairman  of  a  commission  to  examine  the  laws  re-
lating to  local  taxation  in  the  state  of  New  York.
In  1872  he  was  invited  to  lecture  on  political
science  in  Yale.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Demo-
cratic national  conventions  of  1872  and  1880,  and
in  1876  was  a  candidate  for  congress  from  Con-
necticut. He  was  appointed  by  the  U.  S.  court
in  1876  one  of  the  trustees  and  receivers  of  the
Alabama  and  Chattanooga  railroad,  and  in  four-
teen months  rescued  the  corporation  from  bank-
ruptcy, and  expended  a  considerable  sum  for  im-
provements and  repairs,  without  incurring  an  ad-
ditional dollar  of  indebtedness.  In  1877  he  was  ap-
pointed by  the  state  board  of  canal  commissioners
chairman  of  a  commission  to  consider  the  subject
of  tolls  on  the  New  York  canals,  and  in  1878  made
an  exhaustive  report.  He  was  one  of  the  trustees
of  the  bondholders  that  bought,  under  foreclosure
and  sale,  and  reorganized  the  Erie  railway.  In
1879  he  was  elected  by  the  associated  railways  of
the  United  States  a  member  of  the  board  of  arbi-
tration, to  which  they  agreed  to  refer  all  disputes
and  arrangements  for  "  pooling "  or  apportioning
their  respective  earnings.  Mr.  Wells  was  invited
to  deliver  the  annual  address  before  the  Cobden
club  in  1873,  and  in  1874  was  elected  a  foreign  as-
sociate of  the  French  academy  of  political  science,
also  in  1877  a  foreign  associate  of  the  Accademia  dei
Lincei  of  Italy,  receiving  its  medal  of  honor  in  1863.
The  degree  of  M.  D.  was  given  him  by  Berkshire


medical  college  in  1863,  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Will-
iams in  1871,  and  that  of  D.  C.  L.  by  Oxford  in
1874.  He  was  president  of  the  American  social
science  association  in  1875-9,  president  of  the  New
London  county  (Conn.)  historical  society  in  1880,
and  of  the  American  free-trade  league  in  1881.
He  has  been  a  prolific  writer  of  pamphlets  on  eco-
nomic subjects ;  some  of  the  best  known  of  which
are  "  The  Creed  of  the  Free-Trade  "  (1875) ;  "  Pro-
duction and  Distribution  of  Wealth  "  (1875) ;  "  Why
we  Trade  and  How  we  Trade  "  (1878) ;  "  The  Silver
Question,  o,r  the  Dollar  of  the  Fathers  vs.  the  Dollar
of  the  Sons  "  (1878)  and  "  Principles  of  Taxation  "
(1886).  In  book-form  he  has  published  "Year-
Book  of  Agriculture  "  (Philadelphia,  1856);  "  Wells's
Science  of  Common  Things"  (New  York,  1856);
"  Report  of  U.  S.  Revenue  Commission  "  (Wash-
ington, 1866),  "  Reports  U.  S.  Special  Commis-
sioners of  Revenue  (4  vols.,  1866-'9);  "Robinson
Crusoe's  Money"  (New  York,  1876);  "Our  Mer-
chant Marine:  how  it  Rose,  Increased,  became
Great,  Declined,  and  Decayed"  (1882);  "A  Primer
of  Tariff  Reform  "  (1884) ;  "  Practical  Economics,
a  Collection  of  Essavs  "  (1885) ;  "  A  Study  of  Mexi-
co" (1887);  "A  Short  and  Simple  Catechism"
(1888)  and  "  Relation  of  the  Tariff  to  Wages  "  (1888).
He  has  edited  Charles  Knight's  "Knowledge  is
Power  "(Boston,  1856);  Richard  F.  Burton's  "  Pil-
grimage to  El-Medinah  and  Meccah  "  (New  York,
1857) ;  "  Things  not  Generally  Known  "  (1857) ;  and
Sir  Benjamin  C.  Brodie's  "Psychological  Inqui-
ries," with  notes  (1857).

WELLS,  Erastus,  congressman,  b.  in  Jefferson
county,  N.  Y.,  2  Dec,  1823.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  being
thrown  on  his  own  resources,  removed  to  St.  Louis,
Mo.  He  established  the  first  omnibus  line  in  that
city,  and  subsequently  the  first  street  railroad,  was
for  fifteen  years  a  member  of  the  city  council,
served  as  president  of  the  Missouri  railroad  com-
pany, and  was  a  director  of  several  corporations.
He  was  afterward  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, and  served  through  four  successive  terms,
from  4  March,  1869,  till  3  March,  1877.

WELLS,  Henry,  expressman,  b.  in  New  Hamp-
shire, 12  Dec,  1805 ;  d.  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  10
Dec,  1878.  He  early  entered  the  express  business,
becoming  an  agent  for  Henry  F.  Harnden,  and  in
1841  suggested  to  George  Pomeroy  the  desirability
of  establishing  an  express  from  Albany  to  Buffalo.
Subsequently  Crawford  Livingston  acted  on  the
proposition,  and  weekly  trips  were  made  between
the  two  points.  Beginning  in  1843,  railroad  com-
munication having  been  established  between  the
two  cities,  trips  were  made  daily.  The  firm-name
was  at  first  Pomeroy  and  Co.,  but  was  altered  to
Livingston,  Wells  and  Pomeroy,  and,  on  the  retire-
ment of  the  latter,  became  Livingston  and  Wells.
In  1845  the  business  was  extended  westward  from
Buffalo  to  Chicago,  with  William  G.  Fargo  in
charge  of  that  division,  under  the  name  of  Wells
and  Co.  Meanwhile  they  established  a  letter  ex-
press to  carry  communications  from  New  York
to  Buffalo  for  six  cents,  while  the  government
charge  for  the  same  distance  was  twenty-five  cents.
Every  means  was  taken  by  the  National  authori-
ties to  destroy  the  practice,  but  without  success.
In  1846  a  European  express  was  established,  with
offices  in  London  and  Paris.  Competition  by  vari-
ous companies  resulted  in  the  consolidation  of  the
different  organizations  in  1850,  and  the  formation
of  the  American  express  company,  of  which  Mr.
Wells  was  elected  president.  In  1832  he  was  as-
sociated with  William  G.  Fargo  and  others  in  form-
ing the  firm  of  Wells,  Fargo  and  Co.,  for  conduct-


430


WELLS


WELLS


ing  the  express  business  in  the  far  west,  and  he
continued  an  active  officer  of  that  company  until
its  management  was  transferred  to  western  capital-
ists after  the  completion  of  the  Transcontinental
railroad.  In  1860  the  American  express  company
was  reorganized  with  a  capital  of  $1,000,000,  and
he  acted  as  its  president  until  1868.  He  gave
$150,000  to  found  and  endow  Wells  female  college
at  Aurora,  N.  Y.,  one  of  the  first  collegiate  insti-
tutions to  be  established  in  this  country  for  the
higher  education  of  women.

WELLS,  Henry  Horatio,  lawyer,  b.  in  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.,  17  Sept.,  1823.  He  was  educated  at
Romeo  academy,  Mich.,  studied  law  in  Detroit  with
Theodore  Romeyn,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1846,  and  in  1854-'6  was  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture. He  entered  the  army  in  September,  1862,  as
colonel  of  the  26th  Michigan  infantry,  and  served
until  September,  1866.  In  February,  1863,  he  was
made  provost-marshal-general  of  the  defences  south
of  Potomac  river,  which  office  he  held  until  the
close  of  the  war.  In  May,  1865,  he  received  the
brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  and,  set-
tling in  Virginia  in  1868-'9,  was  military  governor
of  that  state.  He  was  the  Republican  candidate
for  governor  in  the  latter  year,  but  was  defeated
by  Gilbert  C.  Walker.  On  the  assassination  of
President  Lincoln,  he  took  charge  of  the  investi-
gation in  Washington  that  resulted  in  the  capture
of  the  conspirators,  and  afterward  he  was  associate
counsel  in  the  criminal  proceedings  against  Jeffer-
son Davis  for  treason.  In  1870-'l  he  was  counsel,
with  Henry  A.  Wise,  in  the  Chohoon  and  Ellyson
mayoralty  case,  during  the  trial  of  which  he  was
almost  fatally  injured  by  the  falling  of  a  gallery,
crowded  with  people,  in  the  capitol  at  Richmond.
In  1871-'2  he  was  U.  S.  attorney  for  the  eastern
district  of  Virginia,  and  he  then  removed  to  Wash-
ington, where,  in  1875-'80,  he  was  U.  S.  attorney
for  the  District  of  Columbia.

WELLS,  Horace,  dentist,  b.  in  Hartford.  Vt,
21  Jan.,  1815 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24  Jan.,  1848.
He  was  educated  at  New  England  academies,  and
in  1834  began  the  study  of  dentistry  in  Boston.  In
1836  he  opened  an  office  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  where
he  soon  gained  a  lucrative  practice.  His  attention
was  early  turned  to  the  desirability  of  preventing
pain  during  the  extraction  of  teeth.  After  unsuc-
cessfully experimenting  with  various  narcotics  he
expressed  his  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  nitrous  oxide
in  1840  ;  but  it  was  not  until  1844,  when  that  agent
had  been  administered  publicly  in  Hartford  to
several  persons  by  Dr.  Gardiner  Q.  Colton  in  his
lecture  on  laughing-gas,  that  he  became  convinced
of  the  practicability  of  its  use.  On  the  following
day,  11  Dec,  1844,  he  had  a  tooth  extracted  from
his  own  mouth  without  experiencing  any  pain
while  under  the  influence  of  the  gas.  and  he  at
once  began  to  use  it  in  the  extraction  of  teeth
from  other  persons.  Subsequently  other  dentists
in  Hartford  became  convinced  of  its  value  and  used
it. He  went  to  Boston  in  January,  1845,  for  the

Eurpose  of  laying  his  discovery  more  prominently
efore  the  profession,  and  communicated  his  ex-
perience to  Dr.  William  T.  G.  Morton,  Dr.  Charles
T.  Jackson,  and  Dr.  John  C.  Warren.  Dr.  Warren
invited  him  to  lecture  before  his  class  at  the  Har-
vard medical  school  and  to  administer  the  gas  to
a  patient ;  but  the  experiment  failed,  as  the  subject
was  only  partially  anaesthetized,  and  in  consequence
Mr.  Wells  was  Kissed  by  the  students,  who  pro-
nounced him  a  charlatan  and  his  gas  a  humbug.
Dr.  Morton  had  been  his  pupil  in  Hartford,  and  by
his  aid  established  himself  in  Boston.  Subse-
quently, when  he  and  Dr.  Jackson  laid  claim  to


the  discovery  of  anaesthesia  and  in  1846  applied  for
a  patent,  Mr.  Wells  remonstrated,  stating  the  re-
sults of  his  own  experiments  and  introducing  the
testimony  of  the  medical  profession  in  Hartford ;
but  to  no  avail,  for  a  patent  was  issued  to  Dr.  Mor-
ton in  November,  1840.  Later,  when  Dr.  Jackson
and  Dr.  Morton  submitted  their  claims  to  the  In-
stitute of  France,  Mr.  Wells  at  once  sailed  for  Eu-
rope in  order  to  present  his  statement  before  that
body  also ;  but  without  success.  He  removed  to
New  York  city  in  1847,  where  he  tried  to  impress
on  the  community  the  validity  of  his  discovery.
Mr.  Wells  was  arrested  on  a  charge  of  throwing
vitriol  on  the  clothes  of  women  in  the  street,  and
this  so  aggravated  a  mental  disorder  with  which
he  had  been  attacked  that  he  committed  suicide.
He  published  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  A  History  of
the  Application  of  Nitrous-Oxide  Gas.  Ether,  and
other  Vapors  to  Surgical  Operations"  (1847).  A
bronze  statue  by  Truman  H.  Bartlett  has  been
erected  to  his  memory  by  the  citizens  of  Hartford
in  Bushnell  park.  Charles  T.  Jackson,  Crawford
W.  Long,  William  T.  G.  Morton,  and  Horace  Wells
are  the  claimants  for  the  discovery  of  anaesthesia.
See  "  An  Examination  of  the  Question  of  Anaesthe-
sia" (Boston,  1859)  and  "An  Inquiry  into  the  Ori-
gin of  Modern  Anaesthesia  "  (Hartford,  1867).

WELLS,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cherry  Valley,  Ot-
sego co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1770;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  7
Sept.,  1823.  Owing  to  the  massacre  of  his  entire
family  by  the  Indians  in  Cherry  Valley,  he  was  in
1778  placed  in  charge  of  his  aunt,  who  took  him
to  New  York  city,
and  he  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in
1788.  He  then  stud-
ied law  with  Ed-
ward Griswold,  was
admitted  to  the  bar
in  1791,  and  in  1797
was  appointed  an
associate  justice  of
the  peace  by  Gov.
John  Jay.  About
this  time  James
Cheetham  attacked
the  Federalists  with
vigorin  "The  Amer-
ican Citizen"  and
Mr.  Wells  replied
in  the  "  Evening
Post."  The  ability
with  which  his  task
was  performed  led
to  the  belief  that  Alexander  Hamilton  was  the  au-
thor, and  so  well  pleased  was  the  latter  with  their
strength  that  he  sought  the  acquaintance  of  the
younger  man.  Subsequently  Mr.  Wells  had  charge
of  bringing  out  the  papers  known  as  "  The  Federal-
ist," although  for  final  revision  they  passed  through
the  hands  of  Hamilton.  In  1804  Mr.  Cheetham  at-
tacked the  conduct  and  character  of  William  S.
Smith,  son-in-law  of  President  John  Adams,  in  his
journal,  in  consequence  of  which  an  action  for  libel
was  brought  against  him  in  the  supreme  court.
Mr.  Cheetham  secured  the  services  of  Mr.  Wells  as
counsel,  and,  although  the  latter  failed  to  win  the
case,  his  conduct  gained  for  him  considerable  repu-
tation. After  the  war  of  1812  his  argument  in
the  case  of  Griswold  vs.  Waddington,  in  which  he
took  the  ground  that  the  war  was  a  dissolution  of
partnership  between  the  two  brothers  Wadding-
ton, one  of  whom  was  a  resident  of  Liverpool  and
the  other  of  New  York,  was  regarded  as  one  of
his  best  efforts. He  was  a  trustee  of  the  General


WELLS


WELLS


431


theological  seminary  and  of  Columbia  college  in
1815-23.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  given  him  by
Princeton.  A  bust  was  erected  by  the  bar  of  New
York  in  Grace  church,  of  which  he  was  a  vestry-
man, and  upon  the  removal  of  the  church  it  was
E laced  in  St.  Paul's  chapel,  where  it  still  remains,
ee  "  Memorial  of  the  Life  and  Character  of  John
Wells  "  (printed  privately,  New  York,  1874).

WELLS,  John  Sullivan,  senator,  b.  in  Dur-
ham, N.  H.,  18  Oct.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  1
Aug.,  1860.  His  mother  was  a  niece  of  Gen.  John
Sullivan.  He  studied  law,  teaching  to  support
himself,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  for
five  years  in  Guildhall,  Vt.,  and  after  1846  at  Exe-
ter, N.  H.  Mr.  Wells  filled  various  local  offices,
was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  lower  house
of  the  legislature,  serving  in  1841  as  its  speaker,
and  was  president  of  the  state  senate  in  1852-3.
He  was  also  attorney-general  of  the  state  in  1847.
In  1854  he  was  Democratic  candidate  for  U.  S.
senator,  but  was  defeated  by  five  votes  on  account
of  his  approval  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  bill.  Short-
ly afterward  he  was  appointed  a  U.  S.  senator  to
fill  the  vacancy  that  was  caused  by  the  death  of
Moses  Norris,  holding  his  seat  from  22  Jan.  till  3
March,  1855.  He  was  again  a  candidate  in  that
year  and  in  1860.  He  was  the  Democratic  candi-
date for  governor  in  1856-'7,  and  sat  in  two  Na-
tional conventions. — His  brother,  Samuel,  jurist,
b.  in  Durham,  N.  H.,  15  Aug.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  15  July,  1868,  was  self-educated,  became  a
lawyer,  and  in  1836-'7  sat  in  the  Maine  legislature.
From  1847  till  1854  he  was  on  the  supreme  bench
of  the  state,  and  in  1855-6  he  was  governor.

WELLS,  Robert,  printer,  b.  in  Scotland  in
1728;  d.  in  London,  England,  in  1794.  He  re-
moved to  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1758,  and  established
himself  as  a  book-seller  and  publisher.  He  was  the
chief  book-seller  in  the  Carolinas  for  many  years,
and  published  a  paper  called  "  The  South  Carolina
and  American  General  Gazette."  At  the  open-
ing of  the  Revolution  he  resigned  his  business  to
his  son  John  and  returned  to  Europe.  His  es-
tate was  confiscated  in  1782.  Mr.  Wells  ac-
quired a  fortune  in  England,  but  lost  most  of  it.
While  in  Charleston  he  wrote  and  published  a
"  Travestie  of  Virgil." — His  son,William  Charles,
scientist,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  May,  1757 ;  d.
in  London,  England,  18  Sept.,  1817,  was  placed  at
school  in  Dumfries,  Scotland,  in  1767,  and  entered
Edinburgh  university  in  1770,  but  returned  to
Charleston  in  1771,  and  in  1775,  refusing  to  sign
the  "  Association,"  a  patriotic  paper,  embarked  for
London.  He  then  resumed  medical  studies  at
Edinburgh,  and  in  1780  received  his  degree.  After
a  short  service  as  surgeon  of  a  Scottish  regiment  in
Holland  he  went  back  to  Charleston  in  1781  to  ar-
range his  family  affairs.  There  he  was  a  printer,
book-seller,  and  merchant,  and  wrote  a  paper  to  show
that  Whigs  of  rank  that  appeared  in  arms  after
being  sent  home  on  parole  should  be  put  to  death.
He  also  published  about  this  time  a  description  of
Henry  Laurens  under  the  signature  of  '•  Marius."
When  the  British  evacuated  Charleston  in  Decem-
ber, 1782,  Dr.  Wells  accompanied  them  to  St.  Au-
gustine, Fla.,  where  he  edited  the  first  weekly  pa-
per in  the  province,  was  captain  of  a  military  com-
pany, and  managed  a  theatre  that  was  established
by  young  officers  for  the  benefit  of  loyalist  refu-
gees. In  1784  he  established  himself  in  practice  in
London,  where  in  1788  he  was  admitted  as  a  licen-
tiate of  the  College  of  physicians,  in  1790  elected
physician  to  Finsbury  dispensary,  and  in  1800  a
physician  of  St.  Thomas's  hospital.  His  reputa-
tion as  a  scientist  rest's  principally  on  his  celebrated


"Essay  on  Dew  and  Several  Appearances  con-
nected with  It"  (London,  1814),  by  which  he  is
chiefly  known.  This  was  the  first  announcement
of  a  comprehensive  theory  of  dew,  and  its  conclu-
sions, which  were  drawn  from  a  series  of  ingenious
experiments,  are  accepted  to-day  with  slight  modi-
fications. His  experimental  work  on  this  subject
was  remarkable  for  patient  research,  close  reason-
ing, and  the  simplicity  of  the  means  that  he  em-
ployed. He  was  the  first  to  show  the  relation  of
radiation  to  the  deposition  of  dew  and  to  explain
the  true  origin  and  nature  of  the  latter,  which  had
generally  been  misunderstood.  His  essay  on  "  Sin-
gle Vision  with  Two  Eyes,"  which  had"  appeared
previously  (1792),  had  gained  him  an  election  in
1793  to  the  Royal  society  of  London,  which  in  1816
awarded  him  the  gold  and  silver  Rumford  medals.
He  also  was  chosen  to  the  Royal  society  of  Edin-
burgh in  1814.  In  1813  Dr.  Wells  read  "before  the
Royal  society  a  paper  in  which,  says  Charles  R.
Darwin,  "  he  distinctly  recognizes  the  principle  of
natural  selection,  and  this  is  the  first  recognition
that  has  been  indicated."  A  volume  containing
his  essays  and  an  autobiographical  sketch  ap-
peared after  his  death  (Edinburgh,  1818).

WELLS,  Samuel  Roberts,  phrenologist,  b.  in
West  Hartford,  Conn.,  4  April,  1820;  d.  in  New
York  city,  13  April,  1875.  He  studied  medicine,
and  obtained  his  degree,  but  never  practised.  He
early  became  interested  in  phrenology,  and  was
also  one  of  the  first  advocates  of  an  exclusively
vegetable  diet.  In  1845  he  became  a  partner  in
the  publishing-house  of  0.  S.  and  L.  N.  Fowler  in
New  York  city,  the  firm-name  being  Fowlers  and
Wells,  and  in  1865  he  became  sole  proprietor.
Mr.  Wells  edited  the  "Water-Cure  Journal"  in
1850-62,  the  "  Phrenological  Journal  "  from  1863
till  his  death,  and  the  "  Annual  of  Phrenology  and
Physiognomy  "  after  1865.  He  accompanied  Lo-
renzo N.  Fowler  in  phrenological  lecturing  tours
in  the  United  States,  Canada,  and  Great  Britain,
and  was  the  author,  among  other  works,  of  "  The
New  Physiognomy,  or  Signs  of  Character"  (New
York,  1866);  "How  to  read  Character"  (1869);
and  "  Wedlock,  or  the  Right  Relations  of  the  Sexes  "
(1869).— His  wife,  Charlotte  Fowler,  b.  in  Co-
hocton,  Steuben  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Aug.,  1814,  is  a  sis-
ter of  the  Fowler  brothers.  She  was  educated  at
Franklin  academy,  Prattsburg,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1834
became  interested  in  phrenology,  which  she  taught
as  early  as  1835.  She  joined  her  brothers  in  their
New  York  enterprise  in  1837,  married  Mr.  Wells  in
1844,  and  after  her  husband's  death  succeeded  to
the  management  of  his  business.

WELLS,  Walter,  author,  b.  in  Salisbury,  N.  H.,
in  November,  1830;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  21  April,
1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1852,  and
then  taught  in  the  high-school  at  Augusta,  Me.,
for  several  years.  Subsequently  he  lectured  on
scientific  subjects,  and  was  connected  with  the
Western  university  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  was
invited  to  take  charge  of  the  chair  of  physical
geography  in  the  scientific  department.  In  1867
he  was  appointed  to  the  hydrographic  survey  of
Maine,  and  he  published  in  connection  with  that
work  "The  Water -Power  of  Maine"  (Augusta,
1869).  Subsequently  he  became  connected  with
the  Fairbanks  scale  company,  and  then  was  in  the
employ  of  various  railroads.  He  was  appointed
in  1869  secretary  of  the  National  association  of
cotton  manufacturers  and  planters  in  Boston,  and
made  an  exhaustive  report  on  the  tariff  in  relation
to  the  growth  and  manufacture  of  cotton  in  this
country.  Mr.  Wells  also  contributed  papers 'to  the
periodical  press,  and  prepared  an  elementary  physi-


432


WELLS


WELLSTOOD


cal  geography.  He  was  engaged  in  literary  work
at  the  time  of  his  death.

WELLS,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Kentucky
about  1770 ;  d.  near  Fort  Dearborn  (now  Chicago),
111.,  15  Aug.,  1812.  When  he  was  twelve  years  of
age  he  was  taken  captive  by  the  Miami  Indians
and  adopted  by  Little  Turtle,  their  chief.  He
served  with  the  Indians  at  the  opening  of  hostili-
ties in  1790,  and  was  at  the  battle  when  Gen.  Ar-
thur St.  Clair  was  defeated.  Realizing  that  he
was  fighting  against  his  own  kindred,  he  informed
Little  Turtle  that  he  was  going  to  his  own  people,
set  out  for  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne's  army,  and  was
made  a  captain  of  a  company  of  scouts.  He  re-
mained in  the  army  till  the  treaty  of  Greenville  in
1795,  after  which  he  settled  upon  a  farm  near  Port
Wayne,  where  his  wife,  Little  Turtle's  daughter,
joined  him.  He  was  Indian  agent  and  justice  of
the  peace,  and  rendered  effective  service  to  Gen.
William  Henry  Harrison.  When  it  was  announced
in  1812  that  Fort  Dearborn  was  to  be  evacuated,  he
set  out  at  once  with  thirty  friendly  Miami  Indians
as  a  body-guard  for  the  people  on  their  route  to
Fort  Wayne.  He  arrived  at  the  fort  (Chicago)  on
13  Aug.,  but  too  late  to  prevent  its  evacuation,
which  he  was  certain  would  result  in  a  massacre.
On  the  morning  of  15  Aug.  the  gates  of  the  fort
were  opened  and  Capt.  Wells,  with  blackened  face, at
the  head  of  fifteen  of  his  trusted  Indians,  the  other
fifteen  bringing  up  the  rear,  set  out  on  their  jour-
ney for  Fort  Wayne.  They  had  not  gone  more
than  a  mile  and  a  half  when  about  500  Indians
sprang  from  their  ambush  behind  the  sand-hills
on  the  bank  of  Lake  Michigan  and  began  an  in-
discriminate slaughter  of  soldiers,  women,  and
children.  Capt.  Wells  was  pierced  by  half  a  dozen
bullets,  his  head  was  cut  off,  and  his  heart  was
taken  out  by  the  infuriated  savages.

WELLS,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Waterbury,
Vt.,  14  Dec,  1837.  He  attended  academies  in  Ver-
mont and  New  Hampshire,  and  became  a  mer-
chant, but  in  September,  1861,  enlisted  in  the  1st
Vermont  cavalry,  becoming  1  st  lieutenan  t  on  14  Oct.,
captain  on  18  Nov.,  1861,  and  major,  30  Oct.,  1862.
He  took  part  in  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks's  Shen-
andoah campaign,  and  Gen.  John  Pope's  Virginia
campaign  in  1862,  and  then  served  in  the  cavalry
corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  till  the  close  of
the  war,  except  from  August,  1864,  till  March,  1865,
when  he  was  under  Sheridan  in  the  Shenandoah
valley.  He  became  colonel  of  his  regiment,  4  June,
1864,  was  bre vetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
22  Feb.,  1865,  received  his  full  commission  on  19
May,  and  was  brevetted  major-general  on  30  March.
Gen.  Wells  commanded  the  2d  brigade  of  the  3d
cavalry  division  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and
for  some  time  was  temporarily  at  the  head  of  that
division.  After  June,  1865,  till  he  was  mustered
out,  15  Jan.,  1866,  he  commanded  the  1st  separate
brigade  of  the  2d  .army  corps  at  Fairfax  Court-
House.  His  regiment  took  part  in  numerous  bat-
tles and  skirmishes,  and  he  was  twice  wounded.
Gen.  Wells  was  in  the  Vermont  legislature  in
1865-'6,  adjutant-general  and  inspector-general  of
the  state  in  1866-72,  collector  of  internal  revenue
in  1872-'85,  and  state  senator  in  1886-'7.

WELLS,  William  Harvey,  educator,  b.  in
Tolland,  Conn.,  27  Feb.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,
21  Jan.,  1885.  He  lived  on  the  home  farm  till
1829,  and,  after  attending  school  for  a  short  time,
became  a  teacher.  He  taught  in  the  Teachers'
seminary  at  Andover,  Mass.,  in  1836-'47,  and  was
principal  of  Putnam  free  school,  Newburyport,
Mass.,  in  1848-'54,  and  of  the  State  normal  school
at  Westfield,  Mass.,  in  1854-'6. He  then  removed


to  Chicago,  where  he  was  superintendent  of  pub-
lic schools  from  1856  till  1864.  Mr.  Wells  was  an
organizer  of  the  Massachusetts  state  teachers'  as-
sociation, one  of  the  first  editors  of  the  "  Massa-
chusetts Teacher,"  and  at  different  times  a  mem-
ber or  officer  of  numerous  educational  and  learned
societies.  He  was  vice-president  of  the  Chicago
astronomical  society,  a  director  of  the  public  libra-
ry of  that  city,  and  an  organizer  and  life -long
friend  of  the  Washingtonian  home  of  Chicago.
Dartmouth  gave  him  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  A.
in  1845.  He  was  the  author  of  several  school-
books  and  "Historical  Authorship  of  English
Grammar"  (Chicago,  1878),  contributed  to  educa-
tional journals,  and  assisted  in  the  revision  of
"  Webster's  Unabridged  Dictionary."

WELLS,  William  Hill,  senator,  b.  in  Pennsyl-
vania about  1760;  d.  in  Millsboro',  Del.,  11  March,
1829.  He  engaged  in  mercantile  business  in  Dags-
boro'  and  Millsboro',  Del.,  and  also  practised  law  in
Georgetown,  but  late  in  life  he  removed  to  Dover.
He  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the  unex-
pired term  of  Joshua  Clayton,  deceased,  and  served
from  4  Feb.,  1799,  till  6  May,  1804,  when  he  re-
signed. On  the  resignation  of  James  A.  Bayard  he
was  elected  again,  holding  his  seat  from  10  June,
1813,  till  3  March,  1817.  Senator  Wells  became
the  owner,  through  his  wife,  of  vast  tracts  of  land
in  lower  Sussex  county,  including  what  is  known
as  the  Cypress  Swamp.

WELLS,  William  Vincent,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1826.  He  was  educated  in  the
common  schools  of  his  native  city,  and  became  a
sailor  and  then  an  officer  in  the  merchant  marine.
Afterward  he  engaged  in  mining  and  commercial
enterprises,  and  was  an  agent  for  American  capital-
ists in  obtaining  grants  from  foreign  governments.
In  these  capacities  he  has  travelled  since  boyhood
in  various  parts  of  the  world,  and  has  been  four
times  shipwrecked.  He  went  to  California  in  1849,
where  he  built  and  commanded  the  first  steamboat
in  that  state,  an/1  he  was  afterward  consul-general
of  Honduras  in  the  United  States.  Mr.  Wells  has
owned  and  edited  several  newspapers  in  San  Fran-
cisco, has  corresponded  with  various  journals  from
different  parts  of  the  globe,  and  is  the  author  of  a
narrative  of  "  Walker's  Expedition  to  Nicaragua,  a
History  of  the  Central  American  War  "  (New  York,
1856) ;  "  Explorations  and  Adventures  in  Hon-
duras "  (1857) ;  and  the  "  Life  and  Public  Services  "
of  his  great-grandfather,  Samuel  Adams,  with  ex-
tracts from  his  correspondence,  state  papers,  and
political  essays  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1865).

WELLSTOOD,  John  Geikie,  engraver,  b.  in
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  18  Jan.,  1813.  He  came  to
New  York  in  1830,  and  engaged  with  the  firm  of
Rawdon,  Wright  and  Co.,  with  whom  he  remained
until  1847,  when  he  entered  business  for  himself.
His  firm  in  1858  was  merged  into  what  is  now  the
American  bank-note  company,  and  he  rematned
with  this  company  until  1871.  In  that  year  he
founded  in  Washington,  D.  C,  the  Columbian
bank  -  note  company.  While  he  was  president  of
this  company  he  modelled  and  partially  engraved
the  backs  of  all  the  U.  S.  treasury-notes.  When
this  printing  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  govern-
ment, he  returned  to  the  American  bank  -  note
company  in  1879,  and  is  still  (1889)  employed  by
them  as  a  script-engraver.  He  is  the  oldest  liv-
ing bank-note  engraver  in  this  country,  and  has
made  many  improvements  in  that  class  of  work.
— His  brother,  William,  engraver,  b.  in  Edin-
burgh, Scotland,  19  Dec,  1819,  came  to  the  United
States  with  his  parents  in  1830,  and  when  about
sixteen  years  old  began  to  work  as  a  letter-en-


WELSER


WELSH


433


graver  in  New  York.  He  afterward  devoted  him-
self entirely  to  pictorial  work,  and  was  especially
successful  in  his  landscapes.  He  has  been  em-
ployed by  the  Western  Methodist  book  concern
(1846-'74)  and  by  various  firms  in  New  York.
Among  his  plates,  executed  in  the  line  manner,
are  portraits  of  Florence  Nightingale  (1857),  Ulysses
S.  Grant,  and  Henry  W.  Longfellow,  the  latter
after  Alonzo  Chappel,  and  the  landscapes  "  Coast
of  Mount  Desert,"  after  William  Hart  (1862);
"  Mount  Washington,"  after  Sanford  R.  Gifford
(1862) ;  Albert  F.  Bellows's  "  A  Quiet  Nook  "  (1864) ;
"  Life's  Day."  three  subjects  (1865) ;  Thomas  Mo-
ran's  "  Florida "  (1878) ;  and  Walter  Satterlee's
"Tempus  Fugit"  (1880).— William's  son,  James,
engraver,  b.  in  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  20  Nov.,  1855 ;  d.
there,  14  March,  1880,  followed  the  profession  of
his  father,  whose  pupil  he  was.  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of  William
Wellstood  and  Co.,  and  was  a  successful  and  prom-
ising engraver.  His  principal  plates  were  "  The
Pointer,'  and  "  Safe  in  Port,"  after  Thomas  Moran.

WELSER,  Bartholomeus,  Prince,  German
banker,  b.  in  Augsburg  about  1475 ;  d.  there  in
1559.  He  was  the  head  of  the  banking-firm  of
Welser  Brothers,  who  claimed  descent  from  the  By-
zantine general  Belisarius.  They  possessed  great
riches,  and  Bartholomeus  was  created  a  prince  of
the  empire  and  made  privy  councillor  to  the  em-
peror, to  whom  he  lent  large  sums,  for  the  repay-
ment of  which  he  was  granted,  in  1527,  the  newly
discovered  province  of  Venezuela.  He  was  to  con-
quer the  country  at  his  own  expense,  enlist  only
Spanish  and  Flemish  troops,  fit  out  two  expeditions
of  four  vessels,  and  build  two  cities  and  three  forts
within  two  years  after  taking  possession.  As  the
country  was  reputed  to  contain  gold-mines,  he  later
obtained  permission  to  send  out  150  German  miners.
In  virtue  of  this  contract,  Welser  armed  a  fleet,
which  sailed  from  San  Lucar  de  Barrameda  early
in  1528,  under  the  command  of  Ambrosio  Alfinger
(q.  v.),  whom  he  appointed  captain-general.  After
Alfinger's  death  in  1531,  Georg  von  Speier  (q.  v.)
became  captain-general,  and  fitted  out  a  new  ex-
pedition, which  sailed  in  1534.  After  Speier's  death
in  1540  the  crown  of  Spain  claimed  the  right  to  ap-
point the  governor,  and  finally,  in  1546,  Charles  V.
revoked  Welser's  charter.  Welser  did  much  to
establish  trade  between  the  Low  Countries,  Ger-
many, and  South  America.  His  enterprise  has
been  commended  by  many  writers,  and  is  eulogized
by  Henry  Ternaux-Compans  in  his  collection,  but
it  was  detrimental  to  the  interests  of  the  banker,
whose  losses  in  his  colonization  schemes  were  esti-
mated to  reach  the  sum  of  3,000,000  florins.  Wel-
ser's banking-house  still  exists,  as  does  also  the  old
family  mansion,  which  is  one  of  the  curiosities  of
the  city  of  Augsburg.

WELSH,  Alfred  Hix,  educator,  b.  in  Fostoria,
Ohio,*  7  Sept.,  1850.  He  spent  his  early  life  in
manual  labor,  contributing  to  the  support  of  his
widowed  mother  and  sisters.  He  was  graduated
at  Baldwin  university,  Ohio,  in  1872,  was  professor
of  mathematics  the  following  three  years  in  Buchtel
college,  became  teacher  of  rhetoric  in  the  Colum-
bus high-school  in  1876,  and  since  1885  has  been
professor  of  English  literature  in  Ohio  state  uni-
versity. Prof.  Welsh  is  well  known  for  his  series
of  school-books  on  rhetoric,  grammar,  and  mathe-
matics. He  has  also  published  "  The  Conflict  of
Ages"  (Columbus,  1877);  "The  Development  of
English  Literature  and  Language  "  (Chicago,
1882);  and  "Man  and  His  Relations"  (Cincinnati,
1888).  He  has  in  preparation  a  "Manual  of  Eng-
lish Literature."

vol.  vi.  —23


WELSH,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  9  Nov.,  1805 ;  d.  there,  10  April,  1886.  His
father,  of  the  same  name,  was  a  Philadelphia  mer-
chant. The  son  received  a  collegiate  education,
but  was  not  graduated.  After  conducting  a  mer-
cantile business
of  his  own,  he
entered,in  1874,
into  partner-
ship with  his
brothers  in  the
West  India
trade,  and  was
at  the  time  of
his  death  the  se-
nior member  of
the  firm,  which
had  been  es-
tablished since
1834.  Formany
years  he  was  ac-
tive in  public
affairs,  giving
largely  of  his
timeandmeans,
from  his  first
service  as  mem-
ber of  the  select

council  of  Philadelphia.  For  twenty  years  he  was  a
member  of  the  sinking  fund  commission,  and  for
the  same  length  of  time  a  trustee  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  of  which  he  was  also  a  patron.
He  was  president  of  the  Philadelphia  board  of
trade  and  of  the  Merchants'  fund  for  fifteen  years.
He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Episcopal  hos-
pital and  its  largest  contributor.  In  1862  he  was
appointed  commissioner  of  Fairmount  park.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  was  active  in  measures  of  re-
lief, and  in  1864  he  became  president  of  the  execu-
tive committee  of  the  sanitary  fair,  which  dis-
bursed over  $1,000,000  for  the  use  of  army  hospi-
tals and  ambulances.  His  best- known  work  was
as  president  of  the  Centennial  board  of  finance,  to
which  he  was  elected  in  April,  1873.  The  success
of  the  exhibition  was  in  a  great  measure  due  to  his
executive  ability,  in  recognition  of  which  he  was
presented  by  the  city  with  a  gold  medal  and  with
150,000.  With  this  sum  he  endowed  the  John
Welsh  chair  of  English  literature  in  the  University
of  Pennsylvania. Mr.  Welsh  was  an  active  Re-

gublican,  and  in  1878  was  appointed  minister  to
Ingland,  but  he  resigned  within  two  years.  The
degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1878,  and  by  Wash-
ington and  Lee  in  1880,  and  many  foreign  decora-
tions were  given  him  for  courtesies  that  he  ex-
tended during  the  Centennial  exhibition. — His
brother,  William,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia about  1810;  d.  there,  11  Feb.,  1878,  was  also
a  merchant  in  his  native  city,  where  he  occupied
many  public  posts,  among  them  those  of  president
of  the  board  of  trusts,  director  of  Girard  college,
and  trustee  of  Wills  hospital.  He  was  also  largely
identified  with  the  philanthropic  interests  of  the
city,  especially  as  a  member  of  the  Indian  peace
commission  during  Gen.  Grant's  administration,
which  place  he  resigned  upon  meeting  with  diffi-
culties in  the  Indian  bureau.  For  several  years
he  was  proprietor  of  the  "North  American"  and
the  "Philadelphia  Gazette,"  which  he  had  pur-
chased in  order  to  elevate  the  morals  of  the  daily
press.  Mr.  Welsh  published,  besides  various  pa-
pers, "  Lay  Co-operation  in  St.  Mark's  Church "
(Philadelphia,  1861);  "  Letters  on  the  Home  Mis-
sionary Work  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  "


434


WELSH


WENTWORTH


(18G3);  "The  Bishop  Potter  Memorial  House"
(1868);  and  "Taopi  and  his  Friends,  or  Indians'
Wrongs  and  Rights,"  with  Bishop  Henry  B.  Whip-
ple and  the  Rev.  Samuel  Dutton  Hinman  (1869).

WELSH,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Columbia,  Pa.,
5  May,  1824;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  14  Aug.,  1863.
He  received  a  common-school  education,  and  en-
gaged in  the  lumber  trade.  Enlisting  as  a  private
for  the  Mexican  war,  he  was  wounded  at  Buena
Vista,  and  promoted  lieutenant  for  gallantry.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  a  com-
pany, was  mustered  into  the  volunteer  service  as
captain,  and  was  elected  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
2d  Pennsylvania  regiment,  which  served  in  the
Shenandoah  valley  until  it  was  disbanded  at  the
end  of  three  months.  He  re-entered  the  service  as
colonel  of  the  45th  Pennsylvania  volunteers,  and
commanded  a  brigade  at  South  Mountain  and  An-
tietam,  as  also  at  Fredericksburg,  where  he  won
promotion  by  his  services  on  the  right  centre,  being
commissioned  as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on
13  March,  1863.  He  was  transferred  to  the  west
with  the  9th  armv  corps,  and,  after  doing  duty  for
some  time  in  Kentucky,  was  sent  to  Vicksburg.
After  the  fall  of  that  place  he  marched  with  Gen.
William  T.  Sherman  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  con-
tracted a  malarial  fever,  from  which  he  died  while
travelling  homeward.

WELTON,  Richard,  English  non-juring  bish-
op, b.  in  England  about  1675;  d.  in  Lisbon,  Portu-
gal, in  1726.  He  was  rector  of  St.  Mary's,  White-
chapel,  London,  and  in  1722  was  consecrated  to  the
episcopate  by  Dr.  Ralph  Taylor,  one  of  the  non-
juring  bishops.  A  short  time  afterward  he  assist-
ed Dr.  Taylor  in  consecrating  Rev.  John  Talbot,
then  on  a  visit  to  England,  who  for  many  years
had  urged  the  establishment  of  episcopacy  in  the
North  American  colonies.  In  1723  the  vestry  of
Christ  church,  Philadelphia,  which  was  without  a
rector,  prayed  the  bishop  of  London  to  send  them
"  such  a  gentleman  as  may  be  a  credit  to  our  com-
munion, an  ornament  to.  the  profession,  and  a  true
propagator  of  the  gospel."  Six  months  having
passed  without  an  appointment  being  made,  on  27
July,  1724,  they  invited  Dr.  Welton,  who  had  ar-
rived in  town  a  month  before,  to  take  charge  of
the  church.  He  entered  at  once  upon  his  duties,
served  with  great  acceptance  for  two  years,  when
he  was  commanded  to  return  to  England.  Receiv-
ing a  testimonial  of  his  conduct  from  the  church-
wardens, he  sailed  for  Lisbon  in  Jan.,  1726,  where
he  died  in  the  autumn,  refusing  to  commune  with
the  English  clergy.  It  is  said  that  among  his  effects
was  found  "  an  episcopal  seal  which  he  had  made
use  of  in  Pensilvania,"  where  "  he  assumed  and
exercised  privily  and  by  stealth  the  character  and
functions  of  a  bishop."  Dr.  Francis  L.  Hawks  as-
serts, in  his  "  Ecclesiastical  Contributions,"  that
"  there  is  direct  evidence  from  the  letters  of  some
of  the  missionaries  that  both  he  and  Dr.  Talbot
administered  confirmation  and  wore  the  robes  of
a  bishop."  It  was  believed  in  the  provinces  that
Dr.  Welton  also  ordained  clergymen,  and  these  se-
cret acts  occasioned  his  recall.

WEMYSS,  Francis  Courtney,  theatrical  man-
ager, b.  in  London,  13  May,  1797 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  5  Jan.,  1859.  He  appeared  at  the  Adelphi,
London,  in  April,  1821,  and  at  the  Chestnut  street
theatre,  Philadelphia,  in  December,  1822,  as  Vapid
in  "  The  Dramatist."  and  afterward  in  the  principal
cities  of  the  United  States.  He  was  subsequently
for  many  years  a  manager  of  theatres  in  Washing-
ton, Wheeling,  Va.,  Wilmington,  Del.,  Baltimore,
Pittsburg,  and  Philadelphia.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  and  a  director  of  the  American  dramatic


fund  association  of  New  York  city,  and  its  secre-
tary from  1852  till  his  death.  He  was  the  author
of  "  Twenty-six  Years  as  an  Actor  and  Manager  "  (2
vols.,  New  York,  1847) ;  "  Chronology  of  the  Ameri-
can Stage,  1752-1852"  (1852);  and  "  Theatrical  Biog-
raphy "  (New  York) ;  and  edited  "  The  Minor  Dra-
ma," to  which  he  also  contributed  (7  vols..  1848-'52).

WENDELL,  John  Lansing,  lawyer,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  2  Jan.,  1785 :  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
19  Dec,  1861.  He  was  a  descendant  of  one  of  the
Dutch  families  of  New  York.  He  was  educated  in
Albany  and  Cambridge,  N.  Y.,  his  family  having
removed  to  the  latter  place  about  1795.  He  there
entered  the  law-office  of  his  brother,  Gerritt  Wen-
dell, became  a  member  of  the  Albany  bar,  subse-
quently judge  of  Washington  county,  and  was  for
many  years  reporter  of  the  supreme  court  of  the
state  of  New  York.  He  published  "Reports  of
Cases  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Judicature  of  New
York,  1828-'41-'  (26  vols.,  Albany,  1829-'42),  and
"  Digest  of  Cases,  Supreme  Court  of  New  York,
1828-'35  "  (1836)  ;  and  edited  "  Starkie's  Law  of
Slander  "  (2  vols.,  Albany,  1843),  and  "  Blackstone's
Commentaries  "  (4  vols.,  New  York  city,  1847).

WENTWORTH,  William,  colonist,  b.  in  Al-
ford,  Lincolnshire,  England,  in  1615 ;  d.  in  Dover,
N.  H„  16  March,  1697.  He  was  a  follower  of  the
Rev.  John  Wheelwright,  came  with  him  to  Massa-
chusetts in  1636,  and  was  associated  with  him  in
his  difficulties  with  the  Massachusetts  government
respecting  his  Antinomian  opinions.  With  Wheel-
wright and  thirty-three  others  he  signed,  on  4  Aug.,
1639,  "  A  combination  for  a  government  at  Exeter,
N.  H.,"  of  which  town  he  was  an  early  settler.
Subsequently  he  removed  to  Wells,  Mass.,  but  he
afterward  settled  in  Dover,  N.  H.,  where  he  was  a
ruling  elder  in  the  church  and  of  ten  preached.  He
supplied  the  pulpit  in  Exeter,  after  Wheelwright's
return  to  England,  as  late  as  1693.  In  1689  he  was
instrumental  in  saving  a  garrison  from  destruction
by  the  Indians.  All  the  Wentworths  in  the  United
States  are  descended  from  him. — His  grandson,
John,  lieutenant-governor  of  New  Hampshire,  b.
in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  16  Jan.,  1671 ;  d.  there,'  12
Dec,  1730,  became  a  captain  in  the  merchant  ma-
rine, was  appointed  by  Queen  Anne  a  councillor
for  New  Hampshire  in  1711.  made  a  justice  of  the
common  pleas  in  1713,  and  in  1717  became  lieuten-
ant-governor of  the  province,  which  was  then  de-
pendent on  Massachusetts. — William's  great-great-
grandson,  Joshua,  soldier,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.
H.,  in  1742:  d.  there,  19  Oct.,  1809,  was  colonel
of  the  1st  New  Hampshire  regiment  in  1776,  was
elected  to  the  legislature,  served  for  four  years  as
state  senator,  and  was  appointed  a  delegate  to  the
Continental  congress,  but  did  not  attend. — Will-
iam's great-great-great-grandson,  Tappan,  lawyer,
b.  in  Dover,  N.  H.,  24  Sept.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  12  June,  1875,  received  a  public-school  edu-
cation, studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1826,  and  practised  in  Great  Falls,  N.  H.  In  1833
he  removed  to  Lowell,  where  he  was  a  member  of
the  town  council  in  1836-'41.  He  served  in  the
legislature  as  a  Whig  in  1851  and  as  a  Republican
in  1859  and  1863-'4,  and  in  the  state  senate  in
1848-'9  and  1865-6.  He  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig,  and  served  from  4  March,  1853,  till  3
March,  1855. — John's  son,  Benning,  governor  of
New  Hampshire,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  24
Julv,  1696;  d.  there,  14  Oct.,  1770,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1715,  and  became  a  merchant  in
Portsmouth,  which  town  he  represented  in  the
assembly.  On  12  Oct.,  1734,  he  was  appointed
a  king's  councillor,  and  when  New  Hampshire
was made a distinct province in 1741 he be-


WENTWORTH


WENTWORTH


435


came  its  governor  on  13  Dec,  and  held  this  post
until  1767.  He  was  authorized  by  the  crown  to
grant  patents  of  unoccupied  land,  and  in  1749  be-
gan to  make  grants  in  what  is  now  southern  Ver-
mont. This  land  was  considered  by  the  colonial
governor  of  New  York  as  lying  within  his  domain,
and  the  collision,  famous  in  the  history  of  Ver-
mont, respecting  the  "  New  Hampshire  grants,"
ensued.  A  proclamation  was  made  by  the  governor
of  New  York  on  28  Dec,  1763,  claiming  the  terri-
tory under  the  grant  from  Charles  II.  to  the  Duke
of  York  and  ordering  the  sheriff  to  make  returns
of  the  names  of  those  that  had  settled  west  of
Connecticut  river  under  titles  that  were  derived
from  New  Hampshire.  Gov.  Wentworth  issued  a
counter-proclamation  on  13  March,  1764,  declaring
these  claims  obsolete  and  maintaining  the  jurisdic-
tion of  New  Hampshire.  Gov.  Wentworth  exacted
heavy  fees  for  his  grants  of  land,  and  thus  accu-
mulated a  large  property.  In  each  of  them  he
stipulated  for  the  reservation  of  a  lot  for  an  Epis-
copal church.  After  his  resignation  as  governor
he  gave  to  Dartmouth  500  acres  of  land,  on  which
the  college  buildings  were  erected.  He  was  fond
of  display.  His  splendid  coach  with  its  retinue  of
servants  became  a  feature  of  Portsmouth,  and  in
his  spacious  mansion  he  assumed  what  was  then
looked  upon  as  almost  regal  state.  The  town  of
Bennington,  Vt.,  was  named  in  his  honor.  His
first  wife  was  Abigail,  the  daughter  of  John  Ruck,
of  Boston,  who  died  on  8  Nov.,  1755,  and  his  second
was  his  young  housekeeper,  who  had  been  brought
up  in  his  family. His  marriage  to  her,  which  took

f)lace  on  15  March,  1760,  is  the  subject  of  Longfel-
ow's  poem,  "Lady  Wentworth."  She  was  made
sole  heir  of  the  governor's  extensive  property,  and
after  his  death  married  Col.  Michael  Wentworth,
of  the  British  army.  Her  only  child,  Martha,  be-
came the  wife  of  Gov.  John  Wentworth's  nephew,
John  Wentworth,  author  of  "  Special  Pleading." —
Benning's  nephew,  Sir  John,  bart.,  governor  of
New  Hampshire  and  afterward  of  Nova  Scotia,  b.
in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  9  Aug.,  1737 ;  d.  in  Halifax,
Nova  Scotia,  8  April,  1820,  was  the  son  of  Mark

Hunking  Went-
worth, a  coun-
cillor of  New
Hampshire,  with
whom  he  was
associated  as  a
merchant  after
his  graduation
at  Harvard  in
1755.  He  went
to  England  in
1765  as  agent
of  the  provirfce,
and  through
the  influence  of
Charles  Watson
Wentworth.Mar-
quis  of  Rocking-
ham, obtained
the  appointment
of  governor  of
New  Hampshire,
succeeding  his
uncle,  and  serving  from  1767  till  1775.  To  this
office  was  added  that  of  surveyor-general  of  the
king's  woods  in  North  America,  with  a  salary  of
£700  and  perquisites.  He  landed  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  March,  1768,  and,  travelling  northward  by
land,  registered  his  commission  as  surveyor  in  each
of  the  colonies  through  which  he  passed.  He  en-
tered on  his  duties  as  governor  in  June,  1768,  was


?^??J?i7irrZfc


popular,  and  an  excellent  public  man  in  every  par-
ticular. In  business  he  was  prompt  and  efficient,
and  aided  greatly  in  encouraging  education.  He
gave  Dartmouth  college  its  charter  and  endowed  it
with  44,000  acres  of  land,  and  also  gave  a  piece  of
land  to  each  member  of  the  first  graduating  class.
(See  Wheelock,  Eleazar.)  He  did  much  to  en-
courage agriculture  and  to  promote  the  settlement
of  New  Hampshire,  and  labored  zealously  to  in-
crease its  wealth  and  importance.  When  the  Revo-
lution began,  his  efforts  to  prevent  a  rupture  were
unwearied,  and  he  was  popular  with  the  people  un-
til Gen.  Thomas  Gage  applied  to  him  to  procure
workmen  in  New  Hampshire  to  aid  in  the  erection
of  barracks  for  the  British  troops  in  Boston.  He
endeavored  to  comply  with  this  request,  which
gave  the  death-blow  to  his  authority,  and  he  was
forced  to  abandon  his  post.  The  indignation  of
the  people  compelled  him  to  take  refuge  first  in
Fort  William  and  Mary  and  then  on  board  a  Brit-
ish ship.  His  last  official  act  was  performed  at  the
Isles  of  Shoals,  where  he  prorogued  the  assembly.
He  embarked  for  Boston  in  the  ship-of-war  "  Scar-
borough "  on  24  Aug.,  1775,  and  soon  sailed  for
England,  where  he  remained  until  peace  was  de-
clared. Although  he  was  regarded  with  especial
favor  by  the'  king,  he  seems  to  have  held  no  of-
fice. In  1778  he  was  in  Paris,  and  John  Adams
records  meeting  him  as  he  was  leaving  his  box  in
the  theatre.  "  At  first,"  says  Adams,  "  I  was  some-
what embarrassed  and  knew  not  how  to  behave  to-
ward him.  As  my  classmate  and  friend  at  college
and  ever  since,  I  could  have  pressed  him  to  my
bosom  with  cordial  affection  ;  but  we  now  belonged
to  two  different  nations  at  war  with  each  other,
and  consequently  we  were  enemies."  During  their
interview  "  not  an  indelicate  expression  to  us  or
to  our  country  or  our  ally  escaped  him.  His  whole
behavior  was  that  of  an  accomplished  gentleman."
In  1792  he  was  appointed  governor  of  Nova  Scotia,
which  office  he  held  until  1808,  when  he  retired
with  a  pension  of  £500  per  annum,  and  was  suc-
ceeded by  Sir  George  Prevost.  He  also  resumed
his  post  of  surveyor  of  the  king's  woods.  In  1795
he  was  created  a  baronet.  In  1799  the  Duke  of
Kent,  the  father  of  Queen  Victoria,  visited  Halifax,
and  Sir  John  gave  a  dinner  and  ball  of  princely
magnificence  in  his  honor  at  the  government  house.
After  his  retirement  he  went  with  Lady  Went-
worth to  England,  but  returned  to  Nova  Scotia  in
1810  and  was  accorded  a  public  welcome.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Harvard  and
Princeton  in  1763,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Oxford
in  1766  and  Dartmouth  in  1773.  Gov.  Wentworth
owned  a  large  farm  in  Wolfsborough,  N.  H.,  on
which  he  erected  in  1773  a  mansion  100  feet  in
length  and  45  feet  in  width  and  out-buildings  of  a
corresponding  size.  His  entire  estate  was  confis-
cated and  this  house  was  burned  in  the  year  of  his
death.  His  house  in  Pleasant  street,  Portsmouth,
was  occupied  for  many  years  by  a  kinsman.  Ebe-
nezer  Wentworth,  at  one  time  a  cashier  of  the
branch  Bank  of  the  United  States,  who  died  in
1860.  He  preserved  the  parlor  in  the  same  style
in  which  its  old  occupant  left  it  at  the  time  of  the
Revolution.  Many  distinguished  visitors  from
abroad  have  had  curiosity  to  view  the  premises  and
his  valuable  collection  of  family  paintings. — His
wife,  Frances  Deering,  was  a  native  of  Boston
and  died  in  England  in  1813.  Her  maiden  name
was  Wentworth,  and,  although  her  earliest  attach-
ment was  for  John  Wentworth,  during  his  first
visit  to  England,  she  married  Theodore  Atkinson,
a  kinsman  of  both.  On  11  Nov.,  1769,  after  the
death  of  her  first  husband,  she  married  Gov.  Went-


436


WENTWORTH


WERDEN


worth.  She  was  beautiful,  accomplished,  and  gay,
and  when  abroad  was  conspicuous  at  court.  Her
portrait  by  John  Singleton  Copley  is  considered
an  "excellent  likeness  and  a  rare  picture."  The
towns  of  Francestown,  Deering,  and  Wentworth,
N.  H.,  perpetuate  her  name. — Their  son,  Charles
Mary,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in  1775 ;  d.  in
Hingsand,  Devonport,  England,  in  April,  1844,
was  long  private  secretary  to  the  Earl  of  Fitz-
william.  He  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
council  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1801,  and  died  unmar-
ried. His  property  descended  to  his  maternal
cousin,  Mrs.  Catherine  Frances  Gore,  the  novel-
ist.— William's  great-grandson,  John,  jurist,  b.  in
Dover,  N.  H.,  30  March,  1719;  d.  in  Somersworth,
N.  H.,  17  May,  1781,  was  a  member  of  the  legisla- ,
ture  from  1768  till  1775,  serving  as  speaker  in
1771,  in  1773  became  chief  justice  of  the  court  of
common  pleas,  and  on  17  Jan.,  1776,  was  made  one
of  the  judges  of  the  supreme  court,  although  he
had  never  studied  nor  practised  law.  He  was
president  of  the  first  Revolutionary  convention  in
Exeter,  N.  H.,  on  21  July,  1774,  and  was  also  chair-
man of  the  Revolutionary  committee  of  corre-
spondence. He  was  usually  called  Colonel  John,  or
Judge  John,  to  distinguish  him  from  others  of  the
same  name. — The  third  John's  son,  John,  lawyer,
b.  in  Somersworth,  N.  H.,  17  July,  1745;  d.  in
Dover,  N.  H.,  10  Jan.,  1787,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1768,  and  studied  law,  which  he  prac-
tised in  Dover.  From  1776  till  1780  he  served
in  the  legislature,  and  was  appointed  by  Gov.
John  Wentworth  register  of  probate  for  Stratford
county,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  in
1778-'9,  and  was  a  member  of  the  state  council  in
1780-'4,  of  the  state  senate  in  1784-'7,  and  of  the
New  Hampshire  committee  of  safety,  which  ad-
ministered the  government  during  the  recess  of
the  legislature.  He  was  an  ardent  patriot,  and
signed,  in  behalf  of  New  Hampshire,  the  origi-
nal articles  of  confederation. — The  second  John's
nephew,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
in  1768;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  in  1816,  was  taken  to
England  .about  1775  and  educated  as  a  lawyer.
He  was  appointed  attorney-general  of  Prince  Ed-
ward island,  and  removed  to  Portsmouth,  where
he  married  Martha  Wentworth.  In  1816  he  re-
turned to  Europe.  He  was  the  author  of  a  "Sys-
tem of  Pleading"  (10  vols.,  London,  1797).— The
fourth  John's  grandson,  John,  journalist,  b.  in
Sandwich,  N.  H.,  5  March,  1815;  d.  in  Chicago,
111.,  16  Oct.,  1888,  was  a  son  of  Paul  Wentworth,
and  the  grandson  on  his  mother's  side  of  Col.  Amos
Cogswell,  a  Revolutionary  officer.  After  gradua-
tion at  Dartmouth  in  1836,  he  settled  in  Illinois  in
1836,  attended  the  first  meeting  to  consider  the
propriety  of  organizing  the  town  of  Chicago  into  a
city,  did  much  to  procure  its  charter,  and  voted  at
its  first  city  election  in  May,  1837.  He  studied  law
at  Chicago,  attended  lectures  at  Harvard  law-school,
and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  Illinois  in  1841.
While  studying  law  he  conducted  the  Chicago
"  Democrat,"  which  he  soon  purchased  and  made
the  chief  daily  paper  of  the  northwest  and  of  which
he  was  publisher,  editor,  and  proprietor  until  1861.
Being  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  he  served
from  4  Dec,  1843,  till  3  March,  1851,  and  again
from  5  Dec,  1853,  till  3  March,  1855.  He  intro-
duced in  that  body  the  first  bill  favoring  the
establishment  of  the  present  national  warehouse
system,  was  instrumental  in  securing  the  grant  of
land  to  the  state  of  Illinois  out  of  which  was  con-
structed the  present  Illinois  Central  railroad.  He
was  one  of  the  Democrats  and  Whigs  in  congress


that  assembled  at  Crutchet's,  at  Washington,  the
morning  after  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compro-
mise passed  the  house,  and  resolved  to  ignore  all
party  lines  and  form  an  anti-slavery  party.  Out
of  this  grew  the
present  Republi-
can party,  with
which  he  after-
ward acted.  He
was  elected  mayor
of  Chicago  in  1857
and  again  in  1860,
and  was  the  first
Republican  may-
or elected  in  the
United  States  af-
ter the  formation
of  the  party,  and
issued  the  first
proclamation  af-
ter Fort  Sumter
was  fired  upon,
calling  on  his  fel-
low-citizens to  or-  y  jy  *

gani.ze  ^  send ^^n//^l^ic^r/£
soldiers  to  the  war. //  '

He  introduced  the ^

first  steam  fire-engine,  "  Long  John,"  in  Chicago
in  1857,  and  later  two  others,  the  "  Liberty  "  and
"  Economy."  Upon  each  occasion  of  his  assump-
tion of  the  mayor's  office  he  found  a  large  floating
debt,  and  left  money  in  the  treasury  for  his  suc-
cessor. In  1861  he  was  a  member  of  the  conven-
tion to  revise  the  constitution  of  Illinois,  and  he
was  a  member  of  the  board  of  education  in  1861-'4
and  in  1868-'72.  He  served  again  in  congress  from
4  Dec,  1865,  till  3  March,  1867,  was  a  member  of
the  committee  of  ways  and  means,  and  was  an
earnest  advocate  of  the  immediate  resumption  of
specie  payments.  Mr.  Wentworth  had  been  a  mem-
ber of  the  Illinois  state  board  of  agriculture,  and
was  the  largest  real  estate  owner  in  Cook  county.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Dartmouth,
to  which  college  he  gave  $10,000,  and  was  elected
president  of  its  alumni  in  1883.  Owing  to  his  ex-
treme height  he  was  called  "  Long  John"  Went-
worth. In  addition  to  lectures  and  writings  upon
the  early  history  of  Chicago,  and  historical  contri-
butions to  periodicals,  he  was  the  author  of  "  Genea-
logical, Bibliographical,  and  Biographical  Account
of  the  Descendants  of  Elder  William  Wentworth  "
(Boston,  1850),  and  "  History  of  the  Wentworth
Family"  (3  vols.,  1878).

WERDEN,  Reed,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Delaware
county,  Pa.,  28  Feb.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,
13  July,  1886.  He  was  appointed  from  Ohio  a  mid-
shipman in  the  navy,  9  Jan.,  1834,  became  a  passed
midshipman,  16  July,  1840,  was  commissioned  lieu-
tenant, 27  Feb.,  1847,  and  served  in  the  sloop  "  Ger-
mantown  "  during  the  Mexican  war  in  1847-'8,  in
which  he  commanded  a  detachment  of  men  from
that  ship  in  the  expeditions  against  Tuspan  and
Tampico.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was  at-
tached to  the  steam  frigate  "Minnesota,"  in  which
he  participated  in  the  attacks  on  the  forts  at  Hat-
teras  Inlet  and  operations  in  the  sounds  of  North
Carolina  in  Stringham's  squadron.  He  commanded
the  steamers  "  Yankee  "  and  "  Stars  and  Stripes  "
on  the  North  Atlantic  blockade  in  1861-'2,  and  in
the  latter  led  the  first  division  in  the  capture
of  Roanoke  island.  He  was  commissioned  com-
mander, 16  July,  1862,  had  charpe  of  the  steamer  '
"Conemaugh,"  on  the  South  Atlantic  blockade,
in  1862-'3,  was  fleet-captain  of  the  Eastern  Gulf
blockading  squadron  in  1864-'5,  and  commanded


WEREAT


WESLEY


437


the  steamer  "  Powhatan,"  in  which  he  blockaded
the  Confederate  ram  "  Stonewall "  in  the  port  of
Havana,  Cuba,  until  she  was  surrendered  by  the
Spanish  authorities.  He  was  commissioned  a  cap-
tain, 25  July,  1866,  promoted  to  commodore,  27
April,  1871,  was  made  rear-admiral,  4  Feb.,  1875,
and  commander-in-chief  of  the  South  Pacific  sta-
tion in  1875-6.  He  was  then  placed  on  the  retired
list  at  his  own  request.

WEREAT,  John,  patriot,  b.  about  1730 ;  d.  in
Bryan  county,  Ga.,  in  1798.  He  was  an  early  and
decided  advocate  of  colonial  rights,  was  a  member
of  the  Provincial  congress  of  Georgia  in  1775,  its
speaker  in  1776,  and  after  the  fall  of  Savannah  in
1779,  as  president  of  the  executive  council,  was  at
the  head  of  the  state  government  till  the  next
election.  In  1788  he  was  president  of  the  Georgia
convention  that  ratified  the  constitution  of  the
United  States.  In  1782  Mr.  Wereat  exerted  him-
self to  relieve  the  wants  of  the  suffering  popula-
tion west  of  Augusta,  employing  his  negroes  and
boats  in  carrying  food  to  them.

WERNICKE,  Gottlieb  (vair-nick-eh),  known
also  as  Miguel  de  Faria,  German  adventurer,
lived  in  the  first  half  of  the  18th  century.  He  was
a  merchant,  trading  in  Brazil,  and  made  several
expeditions  to  the  interior.  About  1720  he  dis-
covered rich  gold-mines  at  the  foot  of  the  peak  of
Itabira,  and  a  few  years  later  he  organized  a  new
expedition  to  explore  the  mountains  north  of
Itambe.  He  found  a  rich  gold-mine,  which  he
opened  and  worked  for  several  years,  acquiring
great  wealth ;  but  the  governor  of  the  province  of
Goyaz  claimed  that  Wernicke  had  never  obtained
a  grant  of  the  mine.  Soldiers  took  possession  of
Wernicke's  establishments,  and  he  was  taken
prisoner ;  but  the  complaints  of  his  friends  secured
his  release,  and  he  went  to  Portugal  to  lodge  a
complaint  against  the  governor,  but  died  before
obtaining  justice.  His  defence,  written  originally
in  Portuguese,  was  translated  into  French  under
the  title  "  Expose  des  explorations  et  de  la  decou-
verte  des  mines  du  district  d'ltabira,  par  Gottlieb
Wernicke,  et  de  leur  exploitation,  avec  un  resume
de  ses  contestations  avec  les  autorites  de  la  pro-
vince de  Goyaz"  (Amsterdam,  1736).

WERNWAG,  Lewis,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Alte-
burg,  Wurtemberg,  Germany,  4  Dec,  1769 ;  d.  in
Harper's  Ferry,  Va.,  12  Aug.,  1843.  On  leaving
school,  in  order  to  evade  military  service,  he  was  se-
creted by  a  shepherd  in  the  mountains,  who  direct-
ed his  attention  to  the  study  of  astronomy,  natural
history,  and  other  scientific  subjects.  In  1786  he
made  his  way  to  Amsterdam  and  thence  to  Phila-
delphia. His  earliest  venture  in  this  country  was
the  building  of  a  machine  for  making  whetstones.
Soon  afterward  he  began  to  build  power-mills  and
bridges.  While  conducting  this  business  he  pur-
chased land  containing  .large  quantities  of  white
oak  and  pine  timber  in  New  Jersey,  from  which  he
got  out,  about  1809,  the  keel  for  the  first  U.  S.
frigate  built  at  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard.  In
1810  he  erected  a  bridge  across  Neshaminy  creek,
on  the  road  between  Philadelphia  and  New  York,
and  the  next  year  one  across  Frankford  creek.
His  third  bridge  of  wood  was  built  across  the
Schuylkill  river  in  1812  at  Philadelphia.  This
structure,  known  as  the  "  Colossus  of  Fairmount,"
consisted  of  a  single  arch,  the  span  of  which
was  340  feet.  In  consideration  of  its  length  of
span  (it  being  the  longest  ever  erected),  solidity,
and  strength,  the  bridge  was  regarded  as  one  of
the  wonders  of  the  world.  From  that  time  until
1834  he  built  twenty-nine  additional  bridges.  In
1813  he  removed  to Phoenixville,  Pa.,  where  he


took  an  interest  in  and  charge  of  the  Phoenix  nail-
works,  and  there  invented  the  first  machine  for
cutting  and  heading  spikes  from  four  to  seven
inches  in  length.  The  other  machinery  was  also
remodelled  and  greatly  improved  by  him.  He  pur-
chased coal-lands  near  Pottsville.  which  led  to  his
experimenting  toward  the  use  of  anthracite  coal.
At  first  he  found  it  almost  impossible  to  ignite  it,
but  he  discovered  that,  by  closing  the  furnace-
doors  and  introducing  air  from  beneath,  combus-
tion was  possible.  He  was  sanguine  of  its  ulti-
mate use  for  fuel,  and  while  the  Philadelphians
drove  from  the  city  the  person  that  offered  to
sell  it,  believing  he  offered  stone  for  coal,  he  in-
vented and  used  in  his  own  residence  a  stove  for
burning  it.  The  canal  of  the  Schuylkill  naviga-
tion company,  one  of  the  first  in  the  United  States,
was  partially  constructed  by  him,  and  the  Fair-
mount  water-works  and  dam  at  Philadelphia  were
erected  in  accordance  with  his  plans.  In  1819
he  removed  to  Conowingo,  Md.,  where  he  built  a
bridge  and  double  saw-mill,  and  prepared  the  tim-
ber for  many  bridges.  Five  years  later  he  removed
to  Harper's  Ferry  and  purchased  the  Isle  of  Vir-
ginius,  where  he  continued  his  business  of  prepar-
ing timber  for  bridges.  His  last  bridge  was  across
the  Potomac  at  Harper's  Ferry  for  the  Baltimore
and  Ohio  railroad,  and  was  built  in  1833.

WERTMULLER,  Adolph  Ulric,  artist,  b.  in
Stockholm,  Sweden,  in  1751 ;  d.  near  Marcus  Hook,
Pa.,  5  Oct.,  1811.  He  worked  for  some  time  in
France,  where  he  became  a  member  of  the  academy
in  1782,  and  in  1787  he  was  made  court-painter  in
Sweden.  In  1794  he  came  to  the  United  States,
remaining  a  year  or  two,  and  in  1797  he  settled
finally  in  this  country.  During  his  first  visit  he
painted  several  portraits  of  Washington.  Though
the  work  of  an  excellent  artist,  they  are  hardly
successful  as  portraits,  for  Wertmuller  belonged  to
that  ideal  French  school,  which  usually  sacrificed
truth  to  nature  for  elegance  in  execution.  Eliza-
beth B.  Johnston,  in  her  "Original  Portraits  of
Washington"  (Boston,  1882),  speaks  of  five  por-
traits of  Washington  by  Wertmuller,  of  which  one,
executed  in  1797,  was  purchased  by  the  U.  S.  gov-
ernment in  1878,  and  another  is  owned  by  the  His-
torical society  of  Pennsylvania.  Among  his  other
portraits  are  those  of  Gustavus  III.  and  his  queen,
and  Gustavus  IV.  His  "  Marie  Antoinette  and  her
Children "  (1785)  is  in  the  museum  at.  Stockholm.
He  was  noted  especially  for  his  vivid  coloring,
"  Danae  "  being  a  good  example  of  his  powers  in
that  respect.  When  this  picture  was  first  exhibited
in  the  United  States  great  indignation  was  ex-
pressed, for  public  taste  and  sentiment  at  that
time  were  against  the  nude  in  art.

WESLEY,  John,  founder  of  Methodism,  b.  in
Epworth,  Lincolnshire,  England,  17  June,  1703;
d.  in  London,  2  March,  1791.  He  was  graduated
at  Christ  church  college,  Oxford,  in  1727,  and  the
same  year  he  was  ordained  presbyter  and  was  his
father's  curate  at  Epworth,  but  he  returned  to
Oxford  as  tutor  in  1729,  and  became  the  head  of
the  society  that  had  been  founded  by  his  brother
Charles  and  others  for  personal  purification  by
means  of  "  prayer,  fastings,  alms,  and  labors  among
the  poor,"  the  members  of  which  in  derision  were
called  "Methodists."  In  1735  he  accompanied
Gen.  James  Oglethorpe  to  Georgia  as  a  missionary
to  the  Indians.  He  began  his  labors  in  Savannah,
preached  and  read  the  liturgy  daily,  forded  rivers,
crossed  swamps,  slept  on  the  ground,  fasted,  and
went  barefooted  among  the  children  at  school  to
encourage  those  who  had  no  shoes.  His  preaching
was  at  first  successful,  but  his  rigorous  discipline


438


WESLEY


WESSELLS


J V/^fU.  'U&s  *


T>


became  distasteful  alike  to  settlers  and  Indians,
and  at  length,  on  becoming  the  subject  of  enmity
and  persecution,  through  his  attempt  to  influence
the  secular  affairs  of  the  colony,  he  relinquished

his  work  and  re-
turned to  Eng-
land in  1738.
Shortly  after  his
return  he  formed
the  first  Meth-
odist society  in
London,  and  in
the  following
year,  the  estab-
lished churches
being  closed
against  him,  he
joined  George
Whitefield  in  his
open-air  preach-
ing. The  num-
ber of  societies
increased,  and
in  May  he  laid
the  foundation
of  the  first  Meth-
odist chapel  in
the  world  at  Bristol.  At  first  there  was  no  de-
sign to  form  a  new  denomination,  his  desire  be-
ing rather  to  promote  a  revival  within  the  estab-
lished church.  About  1740  differences  with  White-
field  on  doctrinal  questions  caused  the  division  of
the  societies  into  the  Calvinistic  and  Arminian
Methodists.  He  employed  laymen  in  1741  to
take  charge  of  the  societies  during  his  travels,
assigned  them  circuits,  thus  forming  the  Meth-
odist itineracy,  and  convened  the  first  annual
conference  on  25  June,  1744.  In  1760  some
of  his  followers  sailed  for  America  from  Ire-
land, and  became  the  pioneers  of  Methodism  in
the  New  World.  (See  Embury,  Philip;  Heck,
Barbara;  and  Strawbridge,  Robert.)  In  1769
Wesley,  in  response  to  an  appeal  from  New  York,
sent  over  his  first  missionaries,  who  were  fol-
lowed by  others  in  1771.  (See  Asbury,  Francis.)
In  1780  Mr.  Wesley,  having  been  importuned  by
his  missionaries  for  an  ordained  ministry,  peti-
tioned Bishop  Lowth,  of  London,  to  ordain  a  pres-
byter to  administer  the  sacraments  in  America.
Being  refused,  he  conferred  with  Thomas  Coke,  a
presbyter  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  with  oth-
ers, and  on  2  Sept.,  1784,  he  ordained  Coke  bishop,
after  ordaining  Thomas  Vasey  and  Richard  What-
coat  as  presbyters,  with  his  assistance  and  that  of
another  presbyter.  Bishop  Coke  immediately  sailed
for  this  country,  and  established  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church.  This  same  year  Wesley  issued
his  "  Deed  of  Declaration,"  by  which  the  govern-
ment of  the  church  was  assigned  to  the  confer-
ence of  100  members  and  their  successors  for-
ever. Wesley  had  sent  by  Bishop  Coke  an  abridg-
ment of  the  English  liturgy,  entitled  "The  Sun-
day Services  of  the  Methodists  in  North  America  "
(London,  1784),  with  a  "  Collection  of  Psalms  and
Hymns  for  the  Lord's  Day,"  by  John  and  Charles
Wesley  (1784).  The  liturgy  soon  fell  into  disuse.
He  abridged  the  "  Articles  of  Religion  "  from  the
Forty-nine  articles  of  the  English  church,  and  the
"  Discipline  of  American  Methodism  "  (1785)  from
his  "  Large  Minutes  " ;  and  his  "  General  Rules  "  for
membership  was  adopted  bv  the  conference.  His
works  number  about  200  volumes.  Collections  of
his  writings  have  appeared  in  London  (32  vols.,
1771-'4;  16  vols.,  1806).  The  first  American  edi-
tion was  published  in  Philadelphia  (10  vols.,  1826).


The  best  is  a  corrected  edition  by  Rev.  Thomas
Jackson,  D.  D.  (7  vols.,  New  York,  1831).  His  life
was  written  by  Dr.  Thomas  Coke  and  Henry  Moore,
to  whom  all  his  manuscripts  were  left  (London,
1792) ;  by  Robert  Southey  (2  vols.,  London,  1820) ;
and  by  Rev.  Luke  Tyerman  (3  vols.,  London,
1870-1).  See  also  "History  of  the  Religious
Movement  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,"  by  Rev.
Abel  Stevens,  D.  D.  (3  vols.,  New  York,  1859-'62) ;
"  History  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  in
America,"  by  the  same  (4  vols.,  New  York,  1864-'7;
abridged  ed.,  1868) ;  the  "  Living  Wesley,"  by  Dr.
James  Harrison  Rigg  (London,  1875) ;  and  "  Jour-
nal of  John  Wesley,"  in  his  works,  edited  by  John
Emory  (7  vols.,  New  York,  1835). — His  brother,
Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Epworth,  England,  18
Dec,  1708;  d."  in  London,  29  March,  1788,  was
graduated  at  Oxford  in  1732,  and  in  1729  was  the
founder  of  the  society  there  which,  under  the  lead-
ership of  John,  was  the  beginning  of  Arminian
Methodism.  After  being  ordained,  he  sailed  with
his  brother  for  Georgia,  as  Gen.  Oglethorpe's  secre-
tary, and  preacher  to  the  colonists.  But  the  latter
refused  to  conform  to  the  severity  of  his  discipline,
and,  after  an  unsuccessful  effort  in  Frederica,  he
went  to  Savannah,  thence  to  Charleston,  and  re-
turned home  in  1736.  Two  years  later  he  joined
his  brother's  itinerancy,  meeting  with  great  suc-
cess, and  spent  the  last  years  of  his  life  in  London.
He  is  best  known  as  a  hymn-writer,  standing  sec-
ond only  to  Dr.  John  Watts.  He  wrote  7,000
hymns,  most  of  which  possess  great  merit,  625  being
in  use  by  the  Wesleyans.  A  volume  of  his  sermons,
with  a  memoir,  was  published  in  1816 ;  a  "  Jour-
nal," with  notes,  by  Rev.  Thomas  Jackson  (2  vols.,
London,  1841) ;  and  a  "  Poetical  Version  of  the
Psalms  of  David,"  edited  by  the  Rev.  Henry  Fish
(Nashville,  Tenn.,  1854);  See  "Memorials  of  the
Wesley  Family  "  (London,  1876).

WESSELLS,  Henry  Walton,  soldier,  b.  in
Litchfield,  Conn.,  20  Feb.,  1809.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1833,  as-
signed to  the  2d  infantry,  and  was  in  the  war  with
the  Seminole  Indians  in  1837-'40,  being  promoted
1st  lieutenant  on  7  July,  1838.  He  served  in  the
Mexican  war,  taking  part  in  Scott's  campaign,
and  was  promoted  captain.  16  Feb.,  1847.  At  Con-
treras,  Capt.  Wessells,  though  wounded,  seized  the
regimental  flag  on  the  death  of  the  color-sergeant,
and  led  his  men  against  the  enemy.  For  gallant
conduct  there  and  at  Churubusco  he  was  brevetted
major,  and  on  his  return  from  Mexico  the  state  of
Connecticut  presented  him  with  a  jeweled  sword
"for  distinguished  services  at  Vera  Cruz,  Cerro
Gordo,  Contreras,  and  Churubusco."  He  served
on  the  Pacific  coast  in  1849-'54,  and  on  the  north-
western frontier  in  1855-'61,  being  engaged  in  the
Sioux  expedition  of  1855.  He  was  promoted  ma-
jor, 6  June,  1861,  and  from  22  Aug.  till  15  Feb.,
1862,  was  colonel  of  the  8th  Kansas  volunteers,
being  engaged  on  the  Missouri  border.  In  March,
1862,  he  was  transferred  to  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, and  on  25  April  he  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers.  After  serving  in  the
peninsular  campaign,  being  wounded  at  Fair  Oaks,
where  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  and
commanding  the  rear-guard  from  Haxall's  to  Har-
rison's landing,  2-3  July,  1862,  he  engaged  in  the
defence  of  Suffolk,  Va.,  from  20  Sept.  till  9  Dec,
and  afterward  took  part  in  the  operations  in  North
Carolina.  He  was  at  Kinston  and  Goldsboro',  and
in  the  defence  of  New  Berne,  21  Dec,  1862,  till  1
May,  1863,  and  on  3  May  was  placed  in  command
of  the  sub-district  of  the  Albemarle.  On  17  April,
1864,  the  town  of  Plymouth,  N.  C,  which  Gen.


WEST


WEST


439


Wessells  held  with  a  garrison  of  1,600  men,  was
attacked  by  Gen.  Robert  F.  Hoke  with  about  7,000
Confederates,  assisted  by  the  iron-clad  ram  "  Albe-
marle." After  a  fight  of  four  days,  in  which  the
enemy  was  driven  back  repeatedly,  and  one  refusal
to  capitulate,  Gen.  Wessells  finally  surrendered,
with  1,600  troops,  25  cannon,  and  2,000  small-arms,
besides  valuable  stores.  After  the  destruction  of
the  "Albemarle"  the  town  fell  again  into  the
hands  of  the  National  troops.  After  confinement
at  Richmond,  Danville,  Macon,  and  Charleston,
where  he  was  placed  under  the  fire  of  the  National
batteries  on  Morris  island,  Gen.  Wessells  was  ex-
changed on  3  Aug.,  and  from  11  Nov.,  1864,  till  31
Jan.,  1865,  was  commissary  of  prisoners.  He  was
promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  16  Feb.,  1865,  and  re-
ceived the  brevet  of  colonel,  20  April,  1864,  for
"gallant  and  meritorious  services  during  the  rebel
attack  on  Plymouth,  N.  C,"  and  that  of  brigadier-
general,  U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865,  for  services
during  the  war.  Gen.  Wessells  then  served  on  the
northwestern  frontier  till  his  retirement,  1  Jan.,
1871,  since  which  time  he  has  resided  in  his  native

glace.  He  has  two  sons  in  the  army,  one  of  whom,
[enry  Walton,  a  captain  in  the  3d  cavalry,  has
attained  note  as  an  Indian  fighter. — Gen.  Wessells's
brother,  Leverett  Ward,  who  was  colonel  of  the
19th  Connecticut  regiment  in  1862  and  a  provost-
marshal  in  1863,  has  served  as  sheriff,  and  in  1879-'80
was  quartermaster-general  of  Connecticut.

WEST,  Benjamin,  astronomer,  b.  in  Rehoboth,
Mass.,  in  March,  1730 ;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  L,  13
Aug.,  1813.  He  settled  in  Providence  in  1753,  and
became  a  book-seller,  which  occupation,  he  followed
until  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution.  His  at-
tention was  then  directed  to  the  manufacture  of
clothing  for  the  Continental  army.  Meanwhile  he
diligently  prosecuted  scientific  studies,  especially
that  of  astronomy.  In  1784  he  was  called  upon  to
teach  mathematics  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal
seminary  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1786  he  returned
to  Providence,  accepting  the  chair  of  mathematics
and  natural  philosophy  in  Brown  university,  which
he  held  until  1799.  In  1812— '13  he  was  postmaster
of  Providence.  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred
on  him  by  Brown  and  Harvard  in  1770  and  by
Dartmouth  in  1782,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  was  given
him  by  Brown  in  1792.  He  was  elected  a  fellow  of
the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in  1781,
and  published  an  "  Account  of  the  Observation  of
Venus  upon  the  Sun,  June  3,  1769  "  (Providence,
1769).  From  1763  till  1793  he  issued  almanacs,  in-
cluding "  The  Ninth  American  Calendar."

WEST,  Benjamin,  artist,  b.  near  Springfield,
Chester  co..  Pa..  10  Oct.,  1738 ;  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 11  March,  1820.  It  is  said  that  before  the  age
of  seven  he  made  a  pen-and-ink  sketch  of  his  sister
sleeping  in  a  cradle,  and  his  first  attempts  in  color
were  made  with  the  red  and  yellow  earths  that
were  given  him  by  friendly  Indians,  and  the  blue
of  his  mother's  indigo-pot,  with  brushes  of  his  own
manufacture.  A  friend,  whose  attention  had  been
attracted  by  the  boy's  attempts,  sent  him  a  box  of
paints  and  several  engravings.  These  were  the
first  implements  or  works  of  art  the  boy  had  seen.
Soon  afterward  he  received  some  aid  and  instruc-
tion from  William  Williams,  a  painter  in  Philadel-
phia. At  Lancaster  he  made  his  first  attempts  in
portraiture,  and  even  tried  his  hand  at  painting  a
picture  of  the  death  of  Socrates  for  William  Henry,
a  gunsmith.  He  established  himself  as  a  portrait-
painter  in  Philadelphia  in  1756,  and  two  years  later
went  to  New  York.  In  1760  he  visited  Rome,  Italy,
furnished  with  letters  to  Cardinal  Albani  and  other
persons. He  soon  became  the  lion  of  the  day,  was


well  received  by  Pompcio  Battoni  and  Antonio
Raffaele  Mengs,  and  studied  in  Italy  until  1763.
There  he  painted  his  pictures  of  "  Cimon  and  Iphi-
genia,"  and  "  Angelica  and  Medora."  From  Italy
he  went  to  London,  where  he  opened  a  studio,
and  where,  two  years  later,  he  married  Elizabeth
Shewell.  At  the  time  of  his  arrival  there,  Eng-
land had  no  historical  painter  of  note,  and  his
works  soon  attracted  attention.  But  there  were
at  first  no  purchasers,  as  it  was  not  fashionable
to  buy  any  but  "  old  masters."  He  painted  at
this  time  "The  Parting  of  Hector  and  Andro-
mache "  and  "  Return  of  the  Prodigal  Son."
"  Agrippina  landing  with  the  Ashes  of  Germani-
cus  "  was  painted  for  Dr.  Drummond,  archbishop
of  York,  who  presented  the  artist  to  King  George
III.  His  majesty,  well  pleased  with  the  painting,
ordered  another,  "  The  Departure  of  Regulus  from
Rome."  These  paintings  won  for  West  royal  pat-
ronage and  favor,  which  he  long  enjoyed.  Among
the  paintings  that  he  subsequently  executed  by
order  of  the  king  were  "  The  Death  of  General
Wolfe,"  "  Death  of  Epaminondas,"  and  "  Death  of
Chevalier  Bayard"  (1771);  "Cyrus  liberating  the
Family  of  the  King  of  Armenia  " ;  "Segestes  and  his
Daughter  brought  before  Germanicus  " ;  "  Edward
III.  embracing  his  Son  on  the  Field  of  Battle  at
Cressy  " ;  "  The  Installation  of  the  Order  of  the
Garter  " ;  "  The  Black  Prince  receiving  the  King
of  France  and  his  Son  Prisoners  at  Poictiers";
"  St.  George  vanquishing  the  Dragon  " ;  "  Queen
Philippa  defeating  David  of  Scotland  in  the  Battle
of  Neville's  Cross  " ;  "  Queen  Philippa  interceding
with  Edward  for  the  Burgesses  of  Calais  " ;  "  King
Edward  forcing  the  Passage  of  the  Somme  " ;  and
"  King  Edward  crowning  Sir  Eustace  de  Ribau-
mont  at  Calais."  He  was  one  of  the  founders,  in
1768,  of  the  Royal  academy,  and  in  1792  succeeded
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  as  president  of  that  institu-
tion, which  post  he  held  almost  uninterruptedly
till  1815.  In  his  painting  of  the  death  of  Wolfe,
West  had  the  courage  to  repudiate  the  traditions
of  the  classical  school,  in  abandoning  classic  cos-
tume, and  clothing  his  characters  in  the  dress  of
their  time.  It  is  said  that  on  the  completion  of
the  picture,  Reynolds,  who  before  had  attempted  to
dissuade  him  from  his  purpose,  acknowledged  his
success,  and  said  to
the  archbishop  of
York  :  "  West  has
conquered ;  he  has
treated  his  subject
as  it  ought  to  be
treated ;  I  retract
my  objections.  I
foresee  that  this  pic-
ture will  not  only
become  one  of  the
most  popular,  but
will  occasion  a  revo-
lution in  art."  The
work  was  purchased
by  Lord  Grosvenor.
West  projected  in
1780  a  series  of  pic-
tures on  the  prog-
ress of  revealed  re-
ligion, divided  into
four  dispensations
— the  Antediluvian,  the  Patriarchal,  the  Mosaical,
and  the  Prophetical.  T  wenty-eight  of  the  proposed
thirty-six  subjects  were  executed,  but  the  mental
disease  that  fell  upon  the  king  gave  West's  ene-
mies an  opportunity,  and  he  was  ordered  to  sus-
pend work  on  the  series,  and  ceased  to  be  painter  to


$mJ.


'MJ


440


WEST


WEST


the  king.  Undaunted,  he  again  began  a  series  of
works.  The  first  was  "  Christ  healing  the  Sick  "
(1802),  which  was  painted  for  the  Pennsylvania
hospital  in  Philadelphia,  but  bought  by  the  British
institution  for  £3,000.  A  copy,  with  some  altera-
tions, was  afterward  presented  to  the  hospital.
This  was  followed  by  the  "  Descent  of  the  Holy
Ghost  on  Christ  at  Jordan,"  "  The  Crucifixion,"
"  The  Ascension,"  "  The  Inspiration  of  St.  Peter,"
and  the  famous  "  Death  on  the  Pale  Horse."
Among  his  other  important  works  are  "  The  Treaty
of  Penn,"  the  celebrated  "  Battle  of  La  Hogue,"
"  Christ  Rejected,"  and  various  illustrations  of
Shakespearean  scenes.  The  works  from  his  hand
that  are  owned  in  the  United  States  include  "  Death
on  the  Pale  Horse  "  and  "  Paul  and  Barnabas,"  in
possession  of  the  Pennsylvania  academy ;  "  Penn's
Treaty  with  the  Indians,"  in  Independence  hall,
Philadelphia;  some  classical  subjects  and  a  por-
trait of  Charles  W.  Peale,  owned  by  the  New  York
historical  society,  and  "  King  Lear,"  belonging  to
the  Boston  athenaeum.  In  1817  his  wife  died,  and
from  that  moment  his  strength  began  to  fail.
With  mental  faculties  unimpaired,  he  died  quietly
on  11  March,  1820.  He  was  buried  in  St.  Paul's
cathedral.  In  the  400  historical  and  sacred  sub-
jects that  he  painted,  and  of  which  many  have
been  engraved,  West  showed  skill  in  composition
and  a  profound  theoretical  knowledge  of  art.  But
the  monotonous  reddish-brown  tint  in  his  works
has  been  objected  to,  and  it  seems  undoubted  that
at  times  he  had  the  courage  to  attempt  subjects
which  it  would  have  been  almost  beyond  the
power  of  artists  of  greater  genius  to  delineate.
Yet,  as  one  critic  has  said,  "  men  should  be  judged
not  absolutely,  but  relatively,"  and  West,  though
not  entirely  free  from  the  conventionalities  of  his
time,  had  at  least  the  courage  to  protest  against
some  of  the  prevailing  ideas  and  fashions  in  art.
As  a  man  he  was  benevolent,  kind,  and  liberal  in
imparting  his  knowledge  to  others.  No  painter
has  shown  more  kindness  in  aiding  the  struggling
voung  artists  of  his  native  land.  Charles  W.
Peale,  Gilbert  Stuart,  Joseph  Wright,  and  John
Trumbull  were  among  those  young  students  that
sought  West  when  they  went  to  Europe,  and  all
received  the  same  hearty  welcome  and  generous
advice  from  him.  Several  portraits  of  West  have
been  made.  Sir  Thomas  Lawrence  painted  a
full-length  portrait  of  West.  A  copy  of  this,  by
Charles  R.  Leslie,  and  a  portrait  by  Washington
Allston,  are  owned  by  the  Boston  athenaeum.  He
also  executed  one  himself.  The  vignette  is  from  a
painting  by  George  H.  Harlow,  an  English  artist,
and  is  perhaps  the  best  of  all  West's  portraits.  A
life  of  West  was  written  by  John  Gait  (London,
1820),  which  was  severely  criticised  by  William
Dunlap.  Numerous  articles  on  West  have  been  pub-
lished, and  interesting  accounts  of  his  life  and  criti-
cisms on  his  works  may  be  found  in  William  Dun-
lap's  "History"  (New  York,  1834);  C.  Edwards
Lester's  "Artists  of  America"  (1846);  and  Henry
T.  Tuckerman's  " Book  of  the  Artists"  (1867).

WEST,  Charles  W.,  merchant,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery county,  Pa.,  7  Aug.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  21  Sept.,  1884.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  worked  on  a  farm  till  he  was
twenty-one  vears  old,  was  a  clerk  in  a  mill  at
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  for  four  years,  and  then  was  en-
gaged in  milling  at  Columbia,  Pa.,  for  a  year  or
two.  He  returned  to  Rochester,  went  to  the  west,
and  in  1841  established  himself  in  Cincinnati,
where  he  achieved  commercial  success.  In  Sep-
tember, 1880,  he  offered  to  contribute  $150,000
toward  the  erection  of  an  art  museum  building,


provided  that  an  equal  amount  was  raised  by
subscription,  and  on  the  condition  being  fulfilled
he  gave  twice  as  much  as  he  had  promised.  The
building  was  begun  in  September,  1882,  and  com-
pleted before  the  close  of  1885.

WEST,  George,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Devonshire,
England,  17  Feb.,  1823.  He  served  an  apprentice-
ship of  six  years  at  his  father's  business  of  paper-
making,  and  has  been  engaged  in  the  same  busi-
ness with  great  success  in  this  country  ever  since
he  arrived  in  1849.  He  soon  became  manager  of  a
paper-mill  in  Berkshire  county,  Mass.,  where  he
made  the  first  water-lined  paper  that  was  manu-
factured in  the  United  States.  In  1860  he  went  to
Ballston,  N.  Y.,  where  he  has  since  resided.  He
is  the  owner  of  nine  paper-mills,  with  additional
business  interests  in  England  and  New  York  city.
He  owns  "  The  Daily  Saratogian "  and  several
other  newspapers  in  central  New  York.  Mr.  West
was  a  member  of  the  general  assembly  of  the  state
of  New  York  from  1872  till  1876,  inclusive,  and  has
been  a  member  of  congress  since  1881.  He  was  also
a  delegate  to  the  Republican  national  conventions
of  1880  and  1884.  He  presented  the  Round  Lake
association  with  a  handsome  building  equipped
with  curiosities  and  specimens  at  a  cost  of  $  18,000,
and  called  the  George  West  museum  of  art  and
archaeology,  which  was  dedicated,  12  July,  1887.

WEST,  Joseph  Rodman,  U.  S.  senator,  b.  in
New  Orleans,  La.,  19  Sept.,  1822.  He  studied  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  but  was  not  gradu-
ated, served  in  the  war  with  Mexico  as  a  captain  of
volunteers,  and  emigrated  in  1849  to  California,
where  he  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits.  At  the
opening  of  the  civil  war  he  was  proprietor  of  the
San  Francisco  "  Prices  Current."  He  entered  the
army  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st  California  in-
fantry, saw  service  in  New  Mexico,  and  afterward
in  Arkansas  and  the  southwest,  was  appointed
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  25  Oct.,  1862,  and
became  brevet  major-general,  4  Jan.,  1866,  when  he
was  mustered  out  of  the  service.  After  the  war  he
settled  for  a  short  time  in  Texas,  and  then  re-
moved to  New  Orleans,  where  he  served  as  chief
deputy  U.  S.  marshal  and  auditor  of  the  customs,
and  afterward  as  administrator  of  improvements,
till  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Louisiana  as
a  Republican,  serving  from  4  March,  1871,  till  3
March,  1877.  Removing  afterward  to  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  he  engaged  in  business,  and  in  1882-'5
was  a  commissioner  of  the  District  of  Columbia.

WEST,  Lionel  Sackville  Sackville-,  British
diplomatist,  b.  in  Bourne  Hall,  Cambridgeshire,
England,  19  July,  1827.  He  is  the  fifth  son  of
George  John  West,  fifth  Earl  Delawarr,  and  Lady
Elizabeth  Sackville,  younger  daughter  of  the  Duke
of  Dorset.  He  was"  educated  by  private  tutors,
entered  the  diplomatic  service  in  1847  as  attache
to  the  legation  at  Lisbon,  and  was  appointed  first
paid  attache  at  Berlin  in  1853,  and  secretary  of  lega-
tion at  Turin  in  1858.  He  was  transferred  to  Mad-
rid in  1863,  in  1867  promoted  to  secretary  of
embassy  at  Berlin,  and  during  the  absence  or  the
ambassador  in  1868  and  1869  acted  as  such  at
Paris.  He  was  appointed  minister  to  the  Argen-
tine Republic  in  1872,  was  minister  to  Spain  in
1878-'81,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  appointed
minister  to  the  United  States,  which  post  he  held
till  November,  1888.  He  was  made  a  knight  com-
mander of  the  Order  of  St.  Michael  and  St.
George  on  26  June,  1885,  and  in  August,  1888,
grand  cross  of  the  same  order.  He  is  a  lineal  de-
scendant of  Thomas  West,  third  Lord  Delawarr,
who  was  governor  of  Virginia  in  1609,  and  from
whom  the  state  of  Delaware  takes  its  name. By


WEST


WEST


441


the  death  of  his  brother  Mortimer  on  1  Oct.,
1888,  he  succeeded  as  second  Baron  Sackville.
During  the  presidential  canyass  of  1888  he  wrote
a  letter  in  answer  to  one  that  purported  to  come
from  an  English-born  citizen  of  the  United  States,
resident  in  California,  who  asked  his  advice  with
regard  to  voting,  having  reference  to  England's
interest  in  a  reduction  of  the  tariff.  This  letter,
being  published,  created  much  feeling  in  both
countries,  and  caused  his  dismissal  in  November.

WEST,  Mary  Allen,  educator,  b.  in  Galesburg,
111.,  31  July,  1837.  She  was  graduated  at  Knox
seminary,  Galesburg,  in  1854,  and  taught  till  1873,
when  she  was  elected  county  superintendent.  She
took  an  active  part  in  all  educational  and  reforma-
tory movements,  was  for  two  years  editor  of  "  Our
Home  Monthly "  in  Philadelphia,  and  frequently
contributed  articles  to  educational  and  temperance
journals.  Miss  West's  reputation  has  been  estab-
lished chiefly  by  her  connection  with  the  National
and  state  woman's  Christian  temperance  union,  of
which  she  was  one  of  the  founders.  Miss  West
has  held  in  the  State  union  the  highest  posts,  and
is  editor-in-chief  of  the  "  Union  Signal "  in  Chi-
cago. She  has  published  "  Childhood :  its  Care  and
Culture  "  (Chicago,  1887).

WEST,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ulster,
Ireland,  in  September,  1794;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  2  Sept.,  1864.  He  studied  theology  in  Edin-
burgh, Scotland,  was  ordained  in  1820,  labored
there  for  several  years  as  a  missionary,  and  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  first  temperance  society
in  that  city.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1834,  was
installed  as  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at
Meadville,  Pa.,  11  May,  1836,  and  after  1838  was
pastor  successively  of  churches  in  Monroe,  Mich.,
and  Northeast,  Pittsburg,  McKeesport,  and  Phila-
delphia, Pa.  In  1853  he  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  and  he  was  elected
a  corresponding  member  of  numerous  literary  and
scientific  societies.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  he  resigned  his  pastoral  charge  in  Philadel-
phia, and  in  May,  1862,  was  appointed  chaplain  of
the  Satterlee  U.  S.  general  hospital  at  West  Phila-
delphia, one  of  the  largest  military  hospitals  in  the
country,  where  he  served  till  his  death.  He  pub-
lished "  The  Ark  of  God  the  Safety  of  the  Nation  "
(Pittsburg,  1850) ;  "  Popery  the  Prop  of  European
Despotisms "  (1852) ;  "The  Fugitive-Slave  Law"
(1852) :  "  Babylon  the  Great "  (1882) ;  "  Right-  and
Left-Hand  Blessings  of  God  "  (Philadelphia,  1852) ;
"  Complete  Analysis  of  the  Holy  Bible,  containing
the  Whole  of  the  New  and  Old  Testaments  "  (New
York,  1853)  ;  "  The  Overturning  of  Tyrannical
Governments,"  a  sermon  preached  before  Louis
Kossuth  when  he  was  in  the  United  States,  which,
by  his  order  and  at  his  expense,  was  translated
and  published  in  Magyar ;  "  Lecture  on  the
Causes  of  the  Ruin  of  Republican  Liberty  in  the
Ancient  Roman  Republic  "  (Philadelphia,  1861) ;
and  "  History  of  the  U.  S.  Army  General  Hospital,
West  Philadelphia"  (1863).

WEST,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Yarmouth,
Mass.,  3  March,  1730;  d.  in  Tiverton,  R.  I.,  24
Sept.,  1807.  His  father,  Sackville  West,  a  physi-
cian, removed  soon  after  his  son's  birth  to  Barn-
stable, Mass.,  where  the  boy  labored  on  a  farm  and
Srepared  himself  for  college.  He  was  graduated  at
[arvard  in  1754,  entered  the  ministry,  was  settled
over  the  congregation  in  New  Bedford  in  1761,
and  taught  the  doctrine  that  afterward  became
known  as  Unitarian.  Immediately  after  the  bat-
tle of  Bunker  Hill  he  joined  the  American  army
as  a  chaplain,  remained  several  months  with  it,
and  deciphered  for  Gen.  Washington  a  treasonable


letter  from  Dr.  Benjamin  Church  to  an  officer  in
the  British  army.  He  was  a  member  of  the  con-
vention that  formed  the  constitution  of  the  state
of  Massachusetts,  and  also  of  the  convention  for
the  adoption  of  the  constitution  of  the  United
States.  Among  his  publications  are  a  sermon  that
was  delivered,  29  May,  1776,  being  the  anniversary
for  the  election  of  the  honorable  council  for  the
colony  (Boston,  1776) ;  "  A  Sermon  on  the  Anni-
versary of  the  Landing  of  the  F'athers  at  Plym-
outh "  (1777) ;  and  "  Essays  on  Liberty  and  Ne-
cessity," in  reply  to  Jonathan  Edwards  "  On  the
Will"  (2  parts,  l'793-'5).— His  brother,  Benjamin,
lawyer,  b.  in  Plymouth  county,  Mass.,  8  April,
1746;  d.  in  Charlestown,  N.  H.,  27  July,  1817,  was
educated  at  Princeton  and  at  Harvard,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1768.-  He  afterward  taught  for
two  years,  then  studied  theology  with  his  brother
Samuel  at  Needham,  Mass.,  and  began  to  preach
at  Wrentham,  Mass.,  in  January,  1771.  He  soon
abandoned  divinity  for  law,  which  he  pursued  at
Lancaster,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1773,  and
began  practice  at  Charlestown.  He  was  chosen  a
delegate  from  New  Hampshire  to  the  Continental
congress,  was  elected  a  member  of  the  convention
that  framed  the  Federal  constitution,  and  also  a
representative  from  New  Hampshire  to  the  first
congress,  but  he  declined  in  each  instance.  He  was
distinguished  for  amiability,  modesty,  uprightness,
and  piety,  and  was  universally  esteemed  and  loved.

WEST,  Stephen,  clergyman,  b.  in  Tolland,
Conn.,  13  Nov.,  1735 ;  d.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,
15  May,  1819.  His  father,  Zebulon  West,  was  a
judge  of  the  court  of  Hartford  county.  The  son
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1755,  and  afterward
taught  school  at  Hatfield,  Mass.,  where  he  began
the  study  of  theology.  He  became  chaplain  at
Hoosick  fort  in  1757,  succeeded  Jonathan  Ed-
wards in  the  Indian  mission  at  Stockbridge  in
1758,  and  was  ordained  as  minister  of  the  Congre-
gational church  there  in  1759.  In  1770  he  re-
signed charge  of  the  Indian  mission,  and  about
the  same  time  he  adopted  Calvinistic  theological
opinions  in  opposition  to  his  former  views,  which
were  Arminian.  He  was  one  of  the  original  trus-
tees of  Williams  college,  was  chosen  vice-president
at  the  first  meeting  of  the  board,  and  held  this
office  for  nineteen  years.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  in  1792  by  Dartmouth.  In  ad-
dition to  many  theological  treatises  and  sermons,
and  essays  in  the  "  Theological  Magazine "  and
"  Connecticut  Evangelical  Magazine,"  he  published
"  Essay  on  Moral  Agency  :  Remarks  on  Edwards's
'  Inquiry  on  the  Freedom  of  the  Will ' "  (New
Haven,  1772) ;  "  Duty  and  Obligation  of  Chris-
tians to  Marry  only  in  the  Lord"  (1779);  "An
Essay  on  the  Scripture  Doctrine  of  the  Atone-
ment" (1785);  "An  Inquiry  into  the  Ground  and
Import  of  Infant  Baptism"  (1794);  "Life  of
Samuel  Hopkins,  D.  D. '  (1806) :  "  Three  Sermons
on  the  Mosaic  Account  of  the  Creation"  (1809);
and  "Evidence  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  collected  from  the  Scriptures  "  (1816).

WEST,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fairfax
county,  Va.,  in  1739;  d.  near  Baltimore,  Md.,  30
March,  1791.  His  birthplace  was  near  Mount
Vernon,  and  he  became  intimate  with  Washington.
He  went  to  England  for  orders,  which  he  received
from  the  bishop  of  London,  24  Nov.,  1761.  He
served  two  years  in  his  native  province,  in  1761-'63
was  incumbent  of  St.  Margaret's,  Westminster
parish,  Ann  Arundel  co.,  Md.,  in  1763-'7,  of  St.
Andrew's,  St.  Mary's  county,  in  1767-72,  of  St.
George's  parish,  Harford  co.,  in  1772-'9,  and
of St. Paul's, Baltimore county, in 1779-'91,


442


WEST


WESTERN


officiating  in  connection  therewith  in  Sr.  Thomas's
parish,  ten  miles  distant.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Washington  college,  Md.,  in  1785,
was  active  in  the  work  of  settling  church  affairs,
directly  after  the  Revolution,  and  was  a  corre-
spondent of  Bishop  White,  who  valued  his  sound
judgment  and  accurate  acquaintance  with  the  im-
portant subject  of  organizing  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church  and  in  revising  the  liturgy.  He  was
secretary  of  the  convention  of  Maryland,  in  June,
1784,  and  president  in  May,  1790 ;  and  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  general  convention.

WEST,  William  Edward,  artist,  b.  in  Lexing-
ton, Ky.,  10  Dec,  1788 ;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn..  2
Nov.,  1857.  He  was  first  a  pupil  of  Thomas  Sully
in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1819  visited  Italy  to  con-
tinue his  studies.  In  1825  he  went,  to  London,
where  he  remained  until  1839.  He  returned  to  the
United  States,  going  first  to  Baltimore  in  1840,  to
New  York,  and  in  1855  to  Nashville,  Tenn.  He
excelled  especially  in  portraiture,  and  in  Europe
executed  likenesses  of  Washington  Irving,  Lord
Byron,  and  the  Countess  Guiccioli,  Percy  B.  Shel-
ley, Mrs.  Hemans,  and  many  other  well-known
persons.  His'  figure-pieces  include  "  Pride  of  the
Village,"  "  Annette  de  l'Arbre,"  "  Confessional "
(belonging  to  the  New  York  historical  society),
"The  Toilet,"  and  "Judith  and  Holofernes."

WESTCOTT,  James  Diament,  senator,  b.  in
Alexandria,  Va.,  10  May,  1802;  d.  in  Montreal,
Canada,  12  Jan.,  1880.  He  was  the  son  of  James
D.  Westcott  (1775-1841),  who  was  secretary  of  state
in  New  Jersey  in  1830-'40,  and  his  grandfather
served  in  the  Revolutionary  war  as  captain  of  ar-
tillery. At  an  early  age  he  removed  with  his  father
to  New  Jersey,  where  he  received  his  education,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1824,  and
practised  until  1829.  Afterward  he  was  a  clerk  in
the  consular  bureau  of  the  state  department  in
Washington,  and  in  1830-'4  was  secretary  of  the
territory  of  Florida,  occasionally  performing  the
duties  of  the  governor.  In  1832  he  was  a  member
of  the  territorial  legislature,  and  in  1834-'6  was
attorney-general  for  the  middle  district  of  Florida.
He  served  again  in  the  legislature,  was  a  member
of  the  convention  for  framing  a  state  constitution
in  1838  and  1839,  and  on  the  admission  of  Florida
into  the  Union  in  1845  was  elected  to  the  "U.  S.
senate  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  1  Dec,  1845,
till  3  March,  1849.  On  the  expiration  of  his  term
he  removed  to  New  York  city,  where  he  practised
law  until  1862,  when  he  went  to  Canada  and  re-
mained there  until  his  death. — His  son,  James
Diament,  jurist,  b.  in  Tallahassee,  Fla.,  18  June,
1839,  was  educated  in  his  native  town,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  entered  the  Con-
federate service  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  and
attained  the  rank  of  major.  In  1885  he  became
attorney-general  of  Florida,  Hut  resigned  this  post
a  year  later,  and  was  appointed  a  justice  of  the
supreme  court.

WESTCOTT,  Thompson,  editor,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  5  June,  1820 ;  d.  there,  8  May,  1888.
He  was  educated  at  the  English  schools  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1841.  In  1846  he  became
law-reporter  on  the  "  Public  Ledger,"  remaining
there  until  1851  and  frequently  acting  in  an  edi-
torial capacity  for  this  journal  and  for  the  "  Dollar
Newspaper."  When  the  " Sunday  Despatch  "  was
begun  in  1848  he  became  its  editor  and  served  un-
til 1884.  In  1863-'9  he  was  editor-in-chief  of  the
"  Inquirer,"  and  he  contributed  to  this  journal  until
1876.  In  1884  he  accepted  an  editorial  appoint-
ment on  the  Philadelphia  "  Record,"  which  he  held


for  several  months,  after  which  he  contributed  to
the  "  Public  Ledger"  and  toother  journals.  Mr.
Westcott  was  the  author  of  a  "  Life  of  John  Fitch,
the  Inventor  of  the  Steamboat "  (Philadelphia,
1857);  "The  Taxpayer's  Guide"  (1864);  "Names
of  Persons  who  took  the  Oath  of  Allegiance  to  the
State  of  Pennsylvania  between  the  Years  1777  and
1789,  with  a  History  of  the  'Test  Laws'  of  Penn-
sylvania" (1865);  "The  Chronicles  of  the  Great
Rebellion  against  the  United  States  of  America,"
first  published  in  the  "  Old  Franklin  Almanac  "
(1867):  "Official  Guide-Book  of  Philadelphia"
(1876);  "Centennial  Portfolio"  (1876);  "Historic
Mansions  and  Buildings  of  Philadelphia"  (1877);
and.  with  J.  Thomas  Scharf,  a  "  History  of  Phila-
delphia, 1609-1884  "  (3  vols.,  1884) ;  and  contributed
to  the  "  Sunday  Despatch  "  a  "  History  of  Philadel-
phia from  the  First  Settlements  on  the  Delaware
to  the  Consolidation  in  1854."

WESTERLO,  Eilardns,  clergyman,  b.  in  Can-
tes,  Groningen,  Holland,  in  October,  1738;  d.  in
Albany,  N.  Y„  26  Dec,  1790.  His  father,  Isaac,
was  pastor  of  the  church  in  Cantes.  After  gradu-
ation at  the  University  of  Groningen  the  son  was
licensed  to  preach,  and  in  1760  was  made  pastor  of
the  Dutch  Reformed  church  in  Albany,  where  he
remained  until  his  death,  also  supplying  quarterly
the  charge  at  Schaghticoke,  N.  Y.  He  was  influ-
ential in  procuring  a  plan  of  union  for  the  churches
of  his  denomination.  During  the  Revolution  he
sympathized  with  the  patriots,  and  delivered  the  ad-
dress of  welcome  to  Gen.  Washington  when  he  visit-
ed Albany  in  1782.  Among  his  correspondents  he
numbered  the  Rev.  Ezra  Stiles,  president  of  Yale,
to  whom  he  frequently  wrote  in  Latin  and  He-
brew. He  left  in  manuscript  an  autobiography
containing  references  to  the  years  between  1761
and  1790,  Greek  and  Hebrew  lexicons,  complete,
and  a  translation  from  the  Dutch  of  Alberthonias's
"  Catechism  "  (1790 ;  2d  ed„  1805).  In  1775  he
married  the  widow  of  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer. —
Their  son,  Rensselaer,  b.  in  Albany  in  1775 ;  d.
there  in  1851,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1795,
and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  serving
from  1  Dec,  1817,  till  3  March,  1819.

WESTERMAN,  Hans  (ves-ter-mon),  Alsatian
explorer,  b.  in  Hagenau  in  1660;  d.  in  Paris  in
1721.  He  studied  law  in  Strasburg  and  Paris,  but
early  showed  a  strong  desire  for  travel  and  visited
western  Europe,  serving  as  volunteer  against  the
Turks  for  a  few  months,  and,  after  publishing  a
narrative  of  his  travels  in  Paris,  sailed  for  Manila
as  supercargo.  He  afterward  ^ visited  the  East
Indies,  where,  to  avoid  difficulties  with  the  Span-
ish and  Portuguese  aixthorities,  he  became  a  Fran-
ciscan friar  and  received  minor  orders.  Thus  en-
abled to  visit  South  America,  he  sailed  from
Manila  for  Acapulco,  going  afterward  to  Mexico
and  Vera  Cruz,  made  an  exploration  of  the  pyra-
mids of  Tezcoco,  and  visited  the  mines  of  Pachuca
and  San  Agustin  de  las  Cuevas.  He  visited  Cuba,
Porto  Rico,  Santo  Domingo,  and  several  of  the
Lesser  Antilles,  returning  to  Paris  in  1708.  Besides
works  that  describe  his  travels  in  Europe  and  Asia,
he  wrote  "  De  Manille  a  Vera-Cruz,  a  travers  le
royaurae  de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne"  (1710);  "  Essai
sur  les  pyramides  de  Tezcoco  et  les  mines  mexi-
caines"  (1710);  and  "Voyage  aux  Indes  Occiden-
tals"  (1715).

WESTERN,  Pauline  Lucille,  actress,  b.  in
New  Orleans,  La.,  8  Jan.,  1843;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  11  Jan.,  1877.  She  made  her  first  appear-
ance on  the  stage  with  her  sister  Helen  as  "  change
artist "  at  her  father's  theatre  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
and  travelled  extensively  with  her  in  this  country.


WESTON


WESTON


443


They  were  known  as  the  "  Star  Sisters,"  and  their
principal  play  was  the  "  Three  Fast  Men."  In  1858
they  appeared  at  the  Old  Bowery  theatre  in  New
York.  On  11  Oct.,  1859,  she  married  James  Har-
rison Mead.  In  1859  or  1860  she  appeared  at  the
Hoiliday  street  theatre  in  "  East  Lynne,"  achieving
her  first  success.  In  1861-'5  she  travelled  with
a  combination  troupe,  playing  Nancy  Sykes  in
"  Oliver  Twist,"  with  Edward  L.  Davenport  as
Bill  Sykes  and  James  W.  Wallack,  Jr..  as  Fagin.
In  1865  she  played  in  Philadelphia,  appearing  in
"  Eleanor's  Victory,"  "  Lucretia  Borgia,"  "  Jane
Eyre,"  "The  Child-Stealer,"  "Mary  Tudor,"  "Cyn-
thia," besides  the  two  plays  already  mentioned.
She  appeared  in  the  principal  theatres  in  the
United  States,  and  at  the  time  of  her  death  was
playing  at  the  New  Park  theatre,  Brooklyn.

WESTON,  Edward,  electrician,  b.  in  England,
9  May,  1850.  He  showed  as  a  boy  a  decided  fond-
ness for  the  physical  sciences,  especially  electricity,
but  deferred  to  his  parents'  wishes  and  studied
medicine.  In  1870  he  determined  to  follow  his
own  special  bent,  and  came  to  this  country.  He
soon  became  chemist  to  the  American  nickel-plat-
ing company,  and  at  once  displayed  his  inventive
genius  by  introducing  improvements  into  the  art
of  nickel-plating.  Two  years  later  he  began  to
study  dynamo-electric  machinery,  with  the  ob-
ject of  utilizing  it  in  electro-metallurgy,  and  in
1873  he  reached  a  very  clear  conception  of  the  sec-
tional armature,  and  in  the  same  year  prepared  the
first  copper-coated  carbons.  In  1875  he  removed
to  Newark.  N.  J.,  and  there  engaged  in  the  manu-
facture of  dynamo-electric  machinery,  establishing
what  is  believed  to  be  the  first  factory  in  this  coun-
try that  was  devoted  exclusively  to  that  class  of
apparatus.  His  business  increased  so  rapidly  that
in  1877  it  was  organized  as  the  Weston  dynamo-
electric  machine  company,  and  in  1881  it  was  con-
solidated with  the  United  States  electric  lighting
company,  of  which  he  was  electrician  until  1888.
In  1875  he  began  experimenting  in  arc  and  incan-
descent lighting,  constructing  several  incandescent
lamps  in  1876,  and  since  that  time  he  has  steadily
developed  his  systems  of  both  these  varieties  of
electric  lighting.  In  1887  he  built  in  Newark  one
of  the  largest  private  laboratories  in  the  world,
and  he  also  possesses  a  fine  technical  library  that
contains  many  rare  books  on  electricity.  Mr.  Wes-
ton has  recently  directed  his  attention  to  the  pro-
duction of  new  and  original  forms  of  electrical
instruments  such  as  voltmeters,  ammeters,  and
electro-dynamometers  for  scientific  and  practical
work.  One  of  his  most  valuable  inventions  is  that
of  tamidine,  a  modification  of  cellulose,  which  is
extensively  used  in  incandescent  lamps.  He  was  a
charter  member  of  the  American  institute  of  elec-
trical engineers,  and  its  president  in  1888.

WESTON,  Henry  Griggs,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lynn,  Mass.,  11  Sept.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  university  in  1840,  and  at  Newton  theo-
logical institution  in  1843.  In  the  latter  year  he
was  ordained,  at  Frankfort,  Ky.,  to  the  Baptist
ministry.  After  preaching  as  a  missionary  for
several  years  in  Illinois  he  became  in  1846  pastor
of  the  Baptist  church  in  Peoria,  where  he  remained
for  thirteen  years.  He  was  then  called  to  the  pas-
torate of  the  Oliver  street  church,  New  York,  and
continued  in  this  relation  until  1868,  when  he
accepted  the  presidency  of  Crozer  theological  semi-
nary, Pa.,  which  office  he  now  holds.  He  was  for
a  time  editor  of  the  "  Baptist  Quarterly,"  and  has
also  been  president  of  the  American  Baptist  mis-
sionary union.  In  addition  to  his  duties  as  an  in-
structor, his  services  have  been  in  constant  demand


as  a  preacher.  In  1859  he  received  from  Roches-
ter university  the  degree  of  D.  D.  Dr.  Weston
has  contributed  to  periodicals,  and  is  the  author  of
a  treatise  on  the  "  Four  Gospels."

WESTON,  Mary  Catharine  North,  author,  b.
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  14  April,  1822;  d.  in  Greenwich,
Conn.,  4*  Aug.,  1882.  She  was  the  daughter  of
William  Steuben  North,  and  the  granddaughter  of
Gen.  William  North,  who  served  in  the  Revolution-
ary army  as  aide  to  Baron  Steuben.  After  receiv-
ing her  education  in  Schenectady,  she  married  the
Rev.  Daniel  C.  Weston,  D.  D.,  on  4  Oct.,  1842.  Mrs.
Weston  is  the  author  of  standard  books  of  instruc-
tion, which  were  published  under  the  auspices  of
the  Church  book  society  of  the  Protestant  Episco-
pal church.  These  include  "Jewish  Antiquities"
(1886);  "Biography  of  Old  Testament  Characters"
(1869) ;  "  Biography  of  New  Testament  Characters  "
(1871) ;  "  Catechism  on  the  Doctrines,  Usages,  and
Holy  Days  of  the  P.  E.  Church  "  (1871) ;  and  "  Old
Testament  Stories"  (1882).  There  are  memorial
windows  of  Mrs.  Weston  in  St.  Mark's  church,  New
York,  and  in  Grace  church,  Madison,  N.  J.

WESTON,  Sullivan  Hardy,  clergyman,  b.  in
Bristol,  Me.,  7  Oct.,  1816 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14
Oct.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  uni-
versity in  1841,  was  ordained  deacon  in  Trinity
church,  New  York  city,  in  1847,  and  priest  in  the
same  church  in  1852.  His  ministerial  life  was
passed  in  Trinity  parish,  of  which  he  was  an  as-
sistant minister,  in  special  charge  of  St.  John's
chapel.  He  was  elected  bishop  of  Texas  in  1852,
but  declined  the  office.  He  served  as  chaplain  to
the  7th  New  York  regiment,  and  accompanied  that
regiment  to  Washington,  in  1861,  at  the  opening  of
the  civil  war,  and  again  when  the  regiment  volun-
teered in  the  summer  of  1863.  The  degree  of  D.  D.
was  conferred  upon  him  by  Columbia  in  1861.

WESTON,  Thomas,  adventurer,  b.  in  England
about  1575 ;  d.  in  England  after  1624.  He  was  a
successful  merchant  in  London,  and  went  to  Leyden
about  1619-20  to  negotiate  with  the  merchants  of
New  Amsterdam  with  regard  to  the  proposed  emi-
gration of  a  colony  to  northern  Virginia.  For
some  reason  the  Pilgrims  showed  deference  to  his
advice,  and  articles  of  agreement  with  the  London
merchants  were  drawn  up,  embodying  conditions
that  were  proposed  by  Weston.  He  advised  them
to  rely  neither  upon  the  Dutch  nor  the  Virginia
company,  assured  them  that  he  and  others  were
ready  to  supply  ships  and  money  for  such  an  en-
terprise, and  reminded  them  that  Sir  Ferdinando
Gorges  and  others  were  moving  for  a  new  patent
in  North  Virginia,  "  Unto  which,"  says  Bradford,
"  Mr.  Weston  and  the  cheefe  of  them  began  to  in-
cline it  was  best  for  them  to  goe."  A  joint-stock
company  was  then  formed  to  continue  seven  years,
with  shares  of  ten  pounds  each,  and  John  Carver
and  Robert  Cushman  were  sent  to  England  to  col-
lect subscriptions  and  to  make  preparations.  Cush-
man conceded  certain  alterations  in  the  agreement
to  please  the  "  merchant  adventurers,"  whose  part
in  the  scheme  was  indispensable.  About  seventy
merchants  engaged  in  the  enterprise.  The  latter,
having  received  glowing  and  deceptive  accounts
of  the  English  colonists  from  Capt.  John  Smith,
looked  upon  them  as  convenient  instruments  for
the  establishment  of  a  permanent  trading-post  in
the  new  country.  But  as  time  passed  and  the
Plymouth  people  sent  little  or  nothing  to  their
English  partners,  Weston  charged  them  with  em-
ploying their  time  in  arguing  and  consulting  when
they  should  have  been  trading,  and  sold  out  his
interest  in  the  company.  He  then  organized  an
expedition  of  his  own,  and  during  the  winter  of


444


WETHERALL


WETHERILL


1621-'2  was  busy  in  London  gathering  his  com-
pany, which  was  made  of  the  roughest  material.
Before  sending  out  the  main  body  he  despatched
a  small  party  in  the  "Sparrow"  to  the  fishing-
grounds  off  the  coast  of  Maine,  whence  they  skirt-
ed the  shore  to  Cape  Ann,  crossed  to  Boston  har-
bor, and  thence  to  Plymouth.  The  main  body  of
sixty  men,  described  by  Weston  as  being  M  rude
and  profane,"  arrived  in  the  "  Charity,"  of  100
tons,  and  the  "  Swan,"  of  30  tons,  landed  at  Plym-
outh in  June,  1622,  and  remained  there  for  two
months,  consuming  the  scanty  stores,  which  they
did  nothing  to  increase.  Weston's  brother-in-law,
Richard  Greene,  the  leader  of  this  party,  died
during  the  summer,  and  was  succeeded  in  com-
mand by  one  Saunders.  Finally  this  body  deter-
mined to  establish  a  separate  colony  at  Wichagus-
cussett,  or  Wessagussett  (now  Weymouth),  near
Boston,  Mass.  The  colonists  became  almost  at
once  idle,  profligate,  and  corrupt,  and  in  the  ex-
tremity of  want  were  objects  of  contempt  for  the
Indians,  whose  aggressions  they  dared  not  resent,
and  who  determined  to  exterminate  them.  Fear-
ful that  such  an  act  would  be  avenged  by  the
Plymouth  colonists,  the  savages  decided  to  fall
upon  that  settlement  also ;  but,  before  this  plan
was  executed.  Miles  Standish  marched  to  Wessa-
gussett, killed  the  chiefs  Pecksnut  and  Wituwa-
mat,  and  took  with  him  to  Plymouth  part  of
the  wretched  colony,  which  was  then  broken  up.
Weston  arrived  soon  after  its  dispersion,  and  a  few
months  later,  in  1623,  Robert  Gorges,  who  had
been  commissioned  lieutenant-governor,  came  to
Plymouth  to  look  after  his  grant  of  land.  After
exercising  his  authority,  he  left  suddenly  for  the
coast  of  Maine  in  search  of  Weston,  whom  he
proposed  to  call  to  account  for  his  various  trad-
ing misdemeanors,  and,  meeting  him  on  the  way
thither,  engaged  in  a  heated  discussion.  Return-
ing to  Wessagussett.  Gorges  sent  a  warrant  to
Plymouth  for  the  seizure  of  Weston's  vessel  and
his  immediate  arrest,  proposing  to  put  him  upon
trial  to  answer  for  the  ill  conduct  of  his  men  at
the  settlement,  whereby  the  peace  of  the  whole
country  had  been  endangered.  Weston  argued
that  he  could  not  be  held  responsible  for  acts  done
by  others  in  his  absence,  and  could  not  answer  the
other  charges  against  him.  Gov.  Bradford  and
his  associates,  remembering  the  service  that  Weston
had  rendered  them,  convinced  Gorges  that  nothing
could  be  gained  by  prosecuting  him.  His  vessel
was  then  restored  to  him,  with  some  compensation
for  its  seizure,  and,  being  allowed  to  depart  in
peace,  he  went  to  Virginia.  The  patent  of  Gorges
gave  him  a  vague  title  to  all  the  main-land  known
as  Massachusetts,  and  he  therefore  absorbed  Wes-
sagussett, landed  his  stores,  and  built  warehouses
on  the  site  chosen  by  Weston  in  September,  1623.
In  the  following  spring  he  returned  to  England,
and  the  people  dispersed,  but  it  is  thought  that  a
few  colonists  remained  in  Wevmouth.

WETHERALL,  Sir  George  Augustus,  British
soldier,  b.  in  Penton,  Hampshire,  England,  in  1788 ;
d.  in  Sandhurst,  England,  8  April,  1868.  He  was
the  son  of  Gen.  Sir  Frederick  Wetherall,  was  edu-
cated in  the  senior  department  of  the  Royal  mili-
tary college,  and  entered  the  army  in  1803.  He
served  as  brigade-major  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
in  1807,  took  part  in  the  conquest  of  Java  as
aide-de-camp  to  his  father,  from  1822  till  1825  was
military  secretary  to  the  commander-in-chief  of
Madras,  and  in  1826  was  appointed  deputy  judge-
advocate-general  in  India.  He  served  in  Canada
during  the  insurrection  of  1837-'8,  defeated  the
rebels  at  St.  Charles  and  Point  Oliver,  and  for  his


services  was  made  a  companion  of  the  Order  of  the
Bath.  He  was  deputy  adjutant-general  in  Canada
from  1843  till  1850,  when  he  was  appointed  to
that  office  at  the  Horse  Guards,  London.  In  1854
he  was  made  adjutant-general,  which  post  he  held
till  in  1860  he  took  command  of  the  northern  dis-
trict. At  the  expiration  of  his  services  in  1865  he
was  appointed  governor  of  the  Royal  military  col-
lege at  Sandhurst.  He  became  colonel  of  the  84th
regiment  in  1854,  was  knighted  in  1856,  made  a  lieu-
tenant-general in  1857,  and  a  G.  C.  B.  in  1865.  In
recognition  of  his  services  in  suppressing  the  re-
bellion the  inhabitants  of  Montreal  presented  Gen.
Wetherall  with  a  piece  of  plate.

WETHERILL,  Charles  Mayer,  chemist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  Nov.,  1825;  d.  in  South  Beth-
lehem, Pa.,  5  March,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1845,  and  then
worked  for  a  year  at  practical  chemistry  in  the
laboratory  of  James  C.  Booth  in  Philadelphia.  In
1847  he  went  abroad  and  studied  for  eight  months
at  the  College  de  France  in  Paris,  after  which  he
followed  organic  chemistry  under  Justus  von  Lie-
big  at  the  University  of  Giessen,  where  he  received
the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  184a  During  1849-52  he
was  occupied  in  chemical  investigations  at  his  pri-
vate laboratory  in  Philadelphia,  and  gave  a  course
of  lectures  on  chemistry  before  the  Franklin  insti-
tute. Subsequently  he  held  no  public  office  until
his  appointment  as  chemist  to  the  agricultural  de-
partment in  Washington,  where  he  remained  for
about  a  year.  In  1866  he  was  chosen  to  the  pro-
fessorship of  chemistry  in  Lehigh  university,  which
chair  he  filled  until  his  death.  His  chemical  books
were  bequeathed  to  the  library  of  that  institution.
The  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  was  conferred  on
him  by  the  New  York  medical  college  in  1853.  Dr.
Wetherill  was  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society  and  other  scientific  bodies  here  and
abroad.  His  investigations  are  described  in  forty
papers  in  the  "  Journal  of  the  Franklin  Institute,
"  American  Journal  of  Science,"  and  in  the  trans-
actions of  societies  of  which  he  was  a  member.
His  only  systematic  treatise  was  on  "  The  Manu-
facture of  Vinegar"  (Philadelphia,  1860).

WETHERILL,  Samuel,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Burlington,  N.  J.,  12  Oct.,  1736;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  24  Sept.,  1816.  His  family  came  to  New  Jer-
sey from  England  in  1682,  and  his  ancestor,  Chris-
topher, gave  to  the  Quakers  the  land  on  which
their  first  meeting-house  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  was
erected.  In  early  life  Samuel  settled  in  Philadel-
phia as  a  house-carpenter  and  builder,  but  after-
ward he  entered  business,  and  was  the  first  manu-
facturer of  cloth,  jean,  and  fustian  in  Philadel-
phia. He  also  engaged  in  dyeing,  fulling,  and  in
the  manufacture  of  chemicals,  and  subsequently
was  the  first  in  the  United  States  to  make  white
lead.  Toward  the  close  of  his  life  he  abandoned
his  business,  except  the  manufacture  of  drugs  and
chemicals.  During  the  war  of  1812  his  firm  deter-
mined to  undersell  foreign  merchants  whose  goods
were  imported  to  the  ruin  of  its  business.  In  this
it  was  successful ;  but  in  1813  the  establishment  on
Twelfth  near  Race  street,  Philadelphia,  was  burned,
it  is  believed,  by  enemies  to  the  manufactory.  At
the  time  of  the  Revolution  he  actively  supported
the  cause  of  independence,  supplying  clothing
gratuitously  to  Washington's  army  at  Valley  Forge
when  it  was  most  needed ;  he  joined  with  some
other  Quakers  in  military  service  in  the  defence
of  Philadelphia.  For  these  actions  and  for  taking
the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United  States  he  was
disowned  or  excommunicated  by  the  Quaker  meet-
ing of  which  he  was  a  member. In  February,  1781,


WETHERILL


WETMORE


445


several  of  the  Quakers  who  had  been  disowned  for
similar  causes  joining  with  him,  he  founded  an  in-
dependent Friends'  meeting,  called  the  Society  of
Free  Quakers,  which  is  a  society  believing  in  de-
fensive war,  hence  sometimes  called  "Fighting"
Quakers.  This  society,  which  still  exists,  denies
the  right  of  excommunication  for  any  cause.  Mr.
Wetherill  was  clerk  or  presiding  officer  of  this
meeting  from  its  foundation  until  1810,  was  a
popular  preacher  until  his  death,  and  numbered
among  his  audience  many  persons  of  distinction.
He  was  instrumental  in  raising  a  large  sum  of
money  for  building  the  Free  Quaker  meeting-house,
obtaining  the  subscriptions  of  Benjamin  Franklin,
Robert  Morris,  John  Cadwalader,  and  others  of
note.  He  published  several  short  theological  tracts
in  defence  of  the  society.  These  are  remarkable
for  their  ability  and  forcible  expression,  but  have
long  been  out  of  print,  and  are  extremely  rare.
The  principal  one  is  "An  Apology  for  the  Relig-
ious Society  of  Free  Quakers  in  the  City  of  Phila-
delphia, showing  that  all  Churches  who  excommu-
nicate act  inconsistently  with  the  Gospel  of  Jesus."
— nis  great-grandson,  Samuel,  inventor,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  May,  1821,  is  the  son  of
John  Price  Wetherill,  who  was  vice-president  of
the  Academy  of  natural  sciences  in  his  native  city
in  1834-'53.  In  1850  Samuel  began  to  experiment
with  the  newly  discovered  product  of  zinc  ores,  and
to  determine  whether  this  could  be  substituted,  for
white  lead  as  a  paint.  His  experiments  led  to  his
engagement  with  the  New  Jersey  zinc  company
in  1850-'2,  and  in  the  latter  year  he  invented  the
"  furnace  process,"  which  consists  in  reducing  mixed
coal  and  ore  by  the  direct  action  of  heat  and  a  cold
blast  upon  a  furnace-bed  having  small  holes,  each
producing  the  reducing  flame.  Subsequently  he
invented  the  tower  process  of  separating  the  solid
impurities,  in  which  the  velocity  of  the  fan-attach-
ment, which  impels  the  products  into  the  collecting
bags,  lifts  the  white  zinc  seventy  feet  into  a  tower,
leaving  the  ashes  at  the  base.  This  was  afterward
improved  by  Mr.  Wetherill  by  causing  the  products
thus  treated  to  pass  through  a  film  of  water.  In
March,  1853,  with  Charles  J.  Gilbert  and  several
New  York  capitalists,  he  entered  into  a  contract
for  forming  the  Pennsylvania  and  Lehigh  zinc
company,  and  he  erected  works  under  his  patents,
in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  to  reduce  the  zinc  ores  in  Le-
high county.  These  works  went  into  operation  on
13  Oct.,  1853,  when  the  first  "  zinc  white "  made
in  the  United  States  was  manufactured  by  Weth-
erill's  process  in  combination  with  the  bag  process
of  collecting  that  was  previously  invented  by  Samu-
el T.  Jones.  The  works  were  conducted  by  Gilbert
and  Wetherill  in  1853-7,  and  in  that  time  deliv-
ered 4,725  tons  of  white  oxide  of  zinc.  In  1854-'9
he  conducted  a  series  of  experiments  for  the  manu-
facture of  spelter,  the  first  spelter  from  the  Lehigh
ores  being  made  by  him  in  1854  by  passing  the
vapor  of  oxide  of  zinc  through  a  bed  of  incandes-
cent coal  in  a  muffle-furnace.  Afterward  he  ex-
perimented with  vertical  retorts,  which  he  patented,
and  his  services  were  procured  for  the  manufacture
of  metallic  zinc  at  Bethlehem  under  the  Pennsyl-
vania and  Lehigh  zinc  company.  In  1857  he  sent
an  ingot  of  his  spelter  to  a  firm  of  sheet-iron  rollers,
and  they  returned  to  him  the  first  sheet  of  zinc  that
was  rolled  from  metal  extracted  from  Pennsylvania
ores.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  Mr.  Weth-
erill recruited  a  squadron  for  the  11th  Pennsylvania
cavalry,  and  entered  service  as  captain  on  19  Aug.,
1861.  He  became  major  on  1  Oct.,  1861,  and  was
mustered  out  on  30  Sept.,  1864.  He  was  brevetted
lieutenant-colonel,  U.  S.  volunteers,  on  13  March,


1865. — The  second  Samuel's  brother,  John  Price,
manufacturer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  Aug.,  1824 ;
d.  there.  17  Sept.,  1888,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1844.  and  engaged  in
the  manufacture  of  white  lead  until  1878.  He  was
identified  with  the  commercial  interests  of  Phila-
delphia, was  one  of  the  oldest  members  of  the
board  of  trade,  of  which  he  was  for  several  years
president,  was  a  member  of  the  Centennial  board
of  finance,  and  a  director  of  the  American  steam-
ship company  and  of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad
company  from  1874  till  1888.  Mr.  Wetherill  was
a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention  of
Pennsylvania  in  1872,  and  was  instrumental  in
introducing  manv  reforms.

WETMORE,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  25  Dec,  1695 ;  d.  in  Rye,  N.  Y.,  15
May,  1760.  After  graduation  at  Yale  in  1714  he
studied  theology,  and  in  November,  1718,  was  or-
dained minister  over  the  1st  Congregational  society
in  New  Haven.  In  September,  1722,  he  declared
himself  converted  to  the  Episcopal  church,  but  re-
tained his  office  for  several  months.  He  went  to
England  in  1723,  was  ordained  in  the  Chapel  royal,
St.  James's,  London,  on  25  July  of  that  year,  was
appointed  a  missionary  of  the  Society  for  propa-
gating the  gospel  in  foreign  parts,  and,  returning
to  New  York,  was  catechist  and  assistant  to  the
Rev.  William  Vesey  in  Trinity  church.  Afterward
he  became  missionary  to  Rye,  a  charge  that  in-
cluded the  villages  of  White  Plains,  Mamaroneck,
North  Castle,  and  Bedford,  besides  missionary  la-
bors in  Connecticut.  Here  he  served  from  1726
until  his  death.  He  was  spoken  of  as  "  a  gentle-
man of  extensive  usefulness ;  a  father  and  exem-
plary pattern  to  the  clergy  in  those  parts."  He
published  several  pamphlets,  including  "A  Letter
to  a  Parishioner  "  (New  York,  1730) ;  "  Quakerism,
a  Judicial  Infatuation  represented  in  Three  Dia-
logues" (1731) ;  "A  Letter  from  a  Minister  of  the
Church  of  England  to  his  Dissenting  Parishioners,
showing  the  Necessity  of  Unity  and  Peace  and  the
Dangerous  Consequences  of  separating  from  the
Established  Episcopal  Church  "  (1732);  "Eleuthe-
rius  Enervatus:  or  an  Answer  to  a  Pamphlet  by
Jonathan  Dickinson  intituled  'The  Divine  Right
of  Presbyterian  Ordination  '"  (1733);  "A  Vindica-
tion of  the  Professors  of  the  Church  of  England
in  Connecticut  against  the  Invectives  contained  in
a  Sermon  by  Noah  Hobart "  (Boston,  1747) ;  and
other  polemical  discourses. — His  son,  Timothy,  be-
came attorney-general  of  New  Brunswick.

WETMORE,  Prosper  Montgomery,  author,
b.  in  Stratford,  Conn.,  14  Feb.,  1798;  d.  in  Great
Neck,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  16  Maich,  1876.  He
removed  with  his  parents  to  New  York  city,  and
after  the  death  of  his  father  was  placed  in  a  count-
ing-house. Afterward  he  engaged  in  business  and
entered  into  partnership  with  his  brother  Robert
in  the  dry-goods  trade.  He  joined  the  11th  regi-
ment of  state  militia  in  1819,  was  made  major  in
1824,  and  colonel  in  1826,  held  several  posts  on
the  staff  of  the  governor,  and  at  one  time  was
brigade-inspector.  In  1845-9  he  was  navy-agent,
and  for  many  years  he  was  paymaster-general  of
the  state  militia.  In  1834-5  he  served  in  the  legis-
lature, was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  col-
leges and  academies,  and  advocated  the  bill  to
establish  the  school-district  libraries.  He  became
a  regent  of  the  University  of  New  York  in  1833,
was  president  of  the  American  art  union  until
1850,  was  chosen  secretary  of  the  New  York  cham-
ber of  commerce  in  1843,  and  vice-president  in
1849.  He  also  aided  in  establishing  a  line  of  steam-
ships to  Nicaragua. He  was  a  founder  of  the  Union


446


WHALLEY


WHARTON


defence  committee  in  April,  1861,  and  was  its  sec-
retary until  the  close  of  the  war.  Gen.  Wetmore
began  to  write  for  magazines  and  annuals  at  the
age  of  seventeen,  and  was  at  one  time  connected
with  the  "  New  York  Mirror."  He  was  a  popular
speaker,  and  in  1832  he  recited  a  poem,  "  Ambition,"
before  a  literary  society  of  Hamilton  college.  He
published  "  Lexington,  with  other  Fugitive  Poems  "
(New  York,  1830) ;  "  Observations  on  the  War  with
Mexico  "  (1847) ;  and  an  edition  of  the  u  Poems  of
James  Nack,"  with  a  biographical  notice  (1838).

WHALLEY,  Edward,  regicide,  b.  in  England
about  1620 ;  d.  in  Hadley,  Mass.,  about  1678.  He
became  a  merchant,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
revolution  of  1642  joined  the  parliamentary  party,
against  the  wishes  of  his  family,  who  were  royal-
ists. At  Naseby,  in  1645,  his  command  defeated
two  divisions  of  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale's  cav-
alry, and  for  bravery  he  was  made  a  colonel  by
parliament.  He  led  the  horse  at  Bristol,  Banbury,
Worcester,  and  elsewhere,  and  was  afterward  in-
trusted with  the  custody  of  the  king's  person  at
Hampton  court.  He  commanded  the  infantry  with
Gen.  George  Monk  at  Dunbar,  where  two  horses
were  shot  under  him,  and  was  afterward  left  by
Cromwell  in  Scotland  with  four  regiments.  He
sat  in  the  high  court  of  justice  that  condemned
King  Charles,  and  was  a  signer  of  his  death-war-
rant. Afterward,  as  major-general,  he  governed
five  counties,  and  after  sitting  in  Cromwell's  second
and  third  parliaments  was  given  a  seat  in  his
house  of  lords.  After  the  restoration  he  fled  to
this  country  with  William  Goffe  (q.  v.),  his  son-in
law,  and  shared  his  fortunes  from  that  time.  See
"  History  of  Three  of  the  Judges  of  King  Charles
I.,"  by  Ezra  Stiles  (Hartford,  1794).

WHAREY,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rutherford
county,  N.  C,  15  June,  1789 ;  d.  in  Goochland
county,  Va.,  29  April,  1842.  He  entered  Hamp-
den Sidney  college,  where  he  remained  for  five
years,  teaching  to  obtain  means  to  pursue  his  edu-
cation. He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1818,  and
began  his  ministry  in  Amherst  and  Nelson  coun-
ties, spending  a  part  of  his  time  as  principal  of  an
academy.  In  1819  he  made  a  missionary  tour  in
Virginia,  and  afterward  he  was  chaplain  of  Hamp-
den Sidney  for  a  year.  In  1822  he  held  a  charge
in  Cartersville,  Va.,  and  in  1824  he  was  made  pas-
tor of  the  churches  of  Bird  and  Providence  in
Goochland  county,  Va.,  where  he  served  until  his
death.  He  published  a  series  of  articles  in  the
"  Southern  Religious  Telegraph  "  on  "  Baptism,"
and  "  Sketches  of  Church  History  from  the  Birth
of  Christ  to  the  Nineteenth  Century,"  both  of  which
afterward  appeared  in  book-form.  Of  the  latter  a
new  edition  was  published  (Philadelphia,  1850).

WHARTON,  Charles  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in
St.  Marv's  county,  Md.,  5  June,  1748 ;  d.  in  Bur-
lington," N.  J.,  22  July,  1833.  The  family  planta-
tion, called  Notley  Hall,  was  presented  to  his
grandfather  by  Lord  Baltimore.  In  1760  he  was
sent  to  the  English  Jesuits'  college  at  St.  Omer's,
where  he  was  very  studious,  and  acquired  the
Latin  tongue  with  such  proficiency  as  to  converse
in  it.  He  was  ordered  deacon  in  June,  1772,  and
priest  the  following  September,  both  in  the
Roman  Catholic  church.  At  the  close  of  the
American  Revolution  he  resided  at  Worcester,  Eng-
land, as  chaplain  to  the  Roman  Catholics  in  that
city.  There  he  addressed  a  poetical  epistle  to  Gen.
Washington,  with  a  sketch  of  his  life,  which  was
published  for  the  benefit  of  American  prisoners
in  England  (Annapolis,  1779;  London,  1780).  He
returned  to  this  country  in  1783  in  the  first  vessel
that  sailed  after  the  peace. In  May,  1784,  having


adopted  the  views  of  the  Church  of  England,  he
published  his  celebrated  "  Letter  to  the  Roman
Catholics  of  Worcester"  (Philadelphia,  1784),  and
became  rector  of  Immanuel  church.  New  Castle,
Del.  At  the  general  convention  of  1785  he  was  on
the  committee  to  "draft  an  ecclesiastical  constitu-
tion for  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  the
United  States,"  also  on  the  committee  "  to  prepare
a  form  of  prayer  and  thanksgiving  for  the  Fourth
of  July,"  and  that  to  Americanize  the  "Book  of
Common  Prayer."  In  1786  he  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  philosophical  society.  After
ten  years'  further  residence  in  Delaware,  he  be-
came, in  1798,  rector  of  St.  Mary's  church,  Burling-
ton, N.  J.  In  1801  he  accepted  the  presidency  of  Co-
lumbia college,  New  York,  assuming  the  position  at
the  commencement ;  but  he  recalled  his  acceptance
and  returned  to  his  rectorship  in  Burlington,  which
he  held  till  his  death  in  1833.  He  was  always
president  of  the  standing  committee  of  the  diocese
and  a  deputy  to  the  general  convention,  and  among
the  first  in  scholarship  and  influence  of  the  clergy
of  his  church  in  the  United  States.  The  testimony
of  his  contemporaries  and  his  numerous  publica-
tions pronounced  him  an  accomplished  divine,  a
gifted  poet,  and  an  able  controversialist.  At
the  time  of  his  decease  he  was  the  senior  presbyter
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  Besides  the
works  already  mentioned,  he  published  "Reply  to
an  Address  [by  Bishop  Carroll]  to  the  Roman
Catholics  of  the  United  States "  (Philadelphia,
1785);  "Inquiry  into  the  Proofs  of  the  Divinity  of
Christ"  (1796);  and  "Concise  View  of  the  Prin-
cipal Points  of  Controversy  between  the  Protestant
and  Roman  Churches"  (New  York,  1817).  In
1813-'14  he  was  co-editor,  with  Rev.  Dr.  Aber-
crombie,  of  the  "  Quarterly  Theological  Magazine
and  Religious  Repository."  His  "Remains,"  with
a  memoir,  were  published  by  Bishop  George  W.
Doane  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1834).

WHARTON,  Gabriel  Caldwell,  soldier,  b.  in
Springfield,  Washington  co.,  Ky.,  13  June,  1839 ;  d.
in  Louisville,  Ky.,  22  Feb.,  1887.  He  was  the  son  of
a  farmer,  and  was  educated  at  the  public  schools,
the  academy  of  his  native  town,  and  the  law  de-
partment of  Louisville  university.  In  1860,  at  the
age  of  twenty-one,  he  began  the  practice  of  law  at
Springfield  with  immediate  success.  The  next
year,  at  the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  he  enlisted  in
the  10th  Kentucky  infantry  in  the  U.  S.  volunteer
army,  and  in  November  was  commissioned  major
of  that  regiment.  With  the  regiment,  Major
Wharton  shared  in  the  engagements  and  marches
of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  and  in  March,
1863,  was  promoted  to  be  lieutenant-colonel.  He
commanded  and  bore  a  gallant  part  in  the  battles
of  Chickamauga  and  Missionary  Ridge  and  the
engagements  of  the  Atlanta  campaign  in  1864,
until,  at  the  expiration  of  his  three  years'  service,
he  was  mustered  out.  He  then  resumed  his  law-
practice  at  Louisville,  and  in  1866  was  appointed
assistant  U.  S.  attorney  for  the  district  of  Ken-
tucky. On  the  appointment  of  Benjamin  II.  Bris-
tow  as  secretary  of  the  treasury,  Col.  Wharton
succeeded  to  the  district  attorneyship,  holding  that
office  for  ten  years.  In  1880  he  opened  an  office
in  Washington,  and,  after  two  years'  practice  there,
spent  some  time  in  Mexico  in  the  interest  of  a  rail-
road company.  Returning,  after  a  year's  absence,
he  resided  in  New  York  city,  where  he  soon  had  a
lucrative  practice.  He  was  on  a  visit  to  Louisville
when  he  died  while  alone  in  his  room  at  a  hotel.

WHARTON,  Jesse,  senator,  b.  in  Albemarle
county.  Va.,  about  1760;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  22
July,  1833. He  was  educated  in  his  native  state,


WHARTON


WHARTON


447


adopted  the  profession  of  law,  and  settled  in  Ten-
nessee. He  served  in  congress  in  1807-'9,  and  in
the  U.  S.  senate  in  1814-'lo,  having  been  appointed
by  the  governor  to  fill  the  place  of  George  W.
Campbell,  who  had  resigned.  In  1832  he  was
one  of  the  board  of  visitors  to  the  United  States
military  academy  at  West  Point.

WHARTON,  Thomas,  governor  of  Pennsylva-
nia, b.  in  Chester  county,  Pa.,  in  1733 ;  d.  in  Lancas-
ter, Pa.,  22  May,  1778.  He  was  the  son  of  John,
some  time  coroner  of  Chester  county,  Pa.,  whose
father,  Thomas,  of  Westmoreland,  England,  emi-

f rated  to  Pennsylvania  about  1083,  served  in  the
hiladelphia  common  council  in  1713— '18,  and  was
the  founder  of  the  Wharton  family  of  Philadelphia.
Thomas  became  a  merchant,  was  for  a  time  a  part-
ner of  Anthony  Stocker,  and  was  highly  esteemed
for  his  virtue  and  patriotism.  On  the  passage  of
the  stamp-act  he  took  a  resolute  stand  on  the  side
of  the  opposition,  and  his  name,  with  that  of  his
grandfather  and  other  members  of  the  family,
was  among  the  first  that  were  affixed  to  the  non-
importation resolutions  and  agreements  of  1765.
When  the  news  of  the  closing  of  the  Boston  harbor
reached  Philadelphia  a  public  meeting  was  held  on
20  May,  1774,  and  Thomas  Wharton  was  chosen
a  member  of  the  committee  of  correspondence.
On  22  June,  1774,  he  was  placed  on  a  committee
with  Joseph  Reed  and  John  Nixon  to  request  the
speaker  of  the  assembly  to  summon  its  members
to  meet  on  1  Aug.  and  consult  on  public  affairs.
He  was  a  deputy  to  the  convention  that  was  called
by  patriotic  citizens  of  Philadelphia,  to  meet  on  15
July,  1774,  and  was  one  of  the  twenty-five  citizens
that  formed  the  committee  of  safety  in  1775.  On
24  July,  1776,  he  became  president  of  the  council
of  safety,  in  which  the  executive  authority  of  the
government  was  temporarily  vested,  and  in  1777  he
was  elected  president  of  Pennsylvania,  which  office
he  held  till  his  death.  He  was  inaugurated  on  5
March,  with  much  display,  and  under  the  title  of
"  His  Excellency  Thomas  Wharton,  junior,  esquire,
president  of  the  supreme  executive  council  of  Penn-
sylvania, captain-general  and  commander-in-chief
in  and  over  the  same."  During  the  Revolution  he
discharged  his  duties  with  ability  and  success.  He
owned  a  country-seat  called  "  Twickenham "  in
Montgomery  county.  He  removed  to  Lancaster
with  the  executive  council  on  the  British  occupation
of  Philadelphia,  died  there,  and  was  buried  with
military  honors.  At  the  request  of  the  vestry  of  the
Evangelical  Trinity  church,  of  Lancaster,  Pa.,  his
body  was  interred  within  the  walls  of  that  edifice. —
His  brother,  John,  was  a  member  of  the  Continen-
tal navy  board  in  1778-'80,  and  built  two  ships,
the  "  Experiment "  and  the  '•  Washington,"  for
the  Pennsylvania  navy. — Thomas's  uncle,  Joseph,
merchant,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  Aug.,  1707:  d.
there  in  July,  1776,  was  a  successful  merchant,  and
the  owner  of  "  Walnut  Grove,"  a  country  place  on
Fifth  street,  near  Washington  avenue,  Philadel-
phia, on  which  the  Mischianza  of  1778  was  held.
(See  Howe,  William.)  The  house,  which  is  shown
in  the  illustration  on  page  448,  was  the  finest  of  its
day  near  that  city.  It  was  torn  down  in  1862,  to
make  room  for  a  school-house.  Joseph  Wharton
was  called  "  Duke  Wharton,"  because  of  his  stately
bearing. — Joseph's  son,  Samuel,  merchant,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  3  May,  1732 ;  d.  there  in  March,
1800,  was  a  partner  in  the  house  of  Baynton  Whar-
ton and  Morgan.  At  one  time  the  Indians  de-
stroyed nearly  £40,000  worth  of  goods,  and  as  in-
demnification the  chiefs  of  the  Six  Nations  made
over  to  the  firm  a  large  tract  of  land  at  the  treaty
of  Fort  Stanwix. The  land  bordered  on  Ohio  river


above  the  Little  Kanawha,  and  included  about  one
fourth  of  the  present  state  of  West  Virginia.  To
this  grant  the  traders  gave  the  name  of  Indiana.
Mr.  Wharton  was  sent  by  the  firm  to  England  to
solicit  confirmation  of  this  grant,  in  which  he  so
far  succeeded  that  a  day  was  appointed  for  him  to
attend  court.  Some  of  his  correspondence  with
Benjamin  Franklin  having  been  discovered  in  the
mean  time,  he  was  obliged  to  fly  for  his  life,  and
reaching  France,  was  joined  by  Dr.  Franklin.  In
1780  he  returned  to  Philadelphia.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  city  councils,  of  the  committee  of  safety
of  the  Revolution,  of  the  colonial  and  state  legisla-
tures, and  of  the  Ohio  company,  whose  plan  of
forming  a  settlement  on  Ohio  river  was  projected
by  Sir  William  Johnson,  Gov.  Franklin,  and  others.
On  9  Feb.,  1781,  he  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to
the  state,  and  he  was  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress  in  1782-'3.  In  1784  he  was  chosen  a
justice  of  the  peace  for  the  district  of  Southwark,
in  which  suburb  he  owned  a  country-seat. — An-
other son  of  Joseph,  Joseph,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  21  March,  1733  ;  d.  there,  25  Dec,  1816,  went
to  England  about  1775,  and  while  there  wrote  a
number  of  letters  on  the  attitude  of  Great  Britain
to  the  colonies.  Some  of  these  were  published  in
the  "  Pennsylvania  Journal,"  others  in  British  jour-
nals, and  attracted  so  much  attention  that  when
their  authorship  was  discovered  Wharton  was
forced  to  leave  the  country,  and  fled  to  France.
During  his  residence  abroad  he  was  much  with
Benjamin  West,  and  it  is  said  that  the  suggestion
that  West's  painting  of  "  Christ  Healing  the  Sick  "
should  be  given  to  the  Pennsylvania  hospital  in
Philadelphia  was  made  by  him.  He  corresponded
with  West  regarding  the  removal  of  the  picture  to
the  hospital,  which  was  accomplished  in  1817. —
Another  son  of  Joseph,  Robert,  mayor  of  Phila-
delphia, b.  in  Philadelphia,  12  Jan.,  1757;  d.  there,
7  March,  1834,  at  an  early  age  left  his  studies,
and  was  apprenticed  to  a  hatter.  He  entered  the
counting  -  house
of  his  brother
Charles,  a  mer-
chant of  Phil-
adelphia, but
spent  much  of  his
time  in  out-door
sports,  and  until
1818  was  presi-
dent of  the  fa-
mous fox-hunt-
ing club  of  Glou-
cesterthatwasor-
ganized  in  1766.
In  1790  he  be-
came a  member
of  the  Schuylkill
fishing  company,
of  which  he  was
governor  from
1812  till  1828.  He
was  a  member
of  city  councils
from  1792  till  1795
man  of  Philadelphia


^^^fc^r


In  1796  he  was  made  alder-
and  in  that  year  quelled  a
riot  among  the  sailors,  who  had  organized  them-
selves into  a  body  and  demanded  exorbitant  wages.
After  reading  the  riot  act  he  requested  them  to  dis-
perse, and,  being  received  with  shouts  of  defiance,
Mr.  Wharton  ordered  each  of  his  men  "  to  take  his
man,"  and  'the  sailors  were  captured  and  impris-
oned. He  quelled  the  Walnut  street  prison  riot  in
1798.  and  also  took  part  in  suppressing  others.  He
was  fifteen  times  elected  mayor  of  Philadelphia  be-


448


WHARTON


WHARTON


tween  1798  and  1834.  He  became  a  member  of  the
first  city  troop  in  1798,  captain  in  1803,  colonel  of
the  regiment  of  cavalry  in  1810,  and  was  elected
brigadier-general  of  the  state  militia.  He  was  vice-
president  of  the  Washington  benevolent  society,  of
which  he  was  an  original  member. — Robert's  broth-
er, Franklin,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23
July,  1767;  d.  in  New  York.  1  Sept.,  1818,  was  ap-
pointed colonel  commandant  of  the  U.  S.  marine
corps  under  the  administration  of  James  Madison.
Col.  Wharton  was  intrusted  with  the  management
of  an  armory  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in  which  small
arms  that  belonged  to  the  navy  and  marine  corps
were  kept  in  readiness  for  service. — Gov.  Thomas's
grandson,  Philip  Fishbourne,  artist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  30  April,  1841;  d.  in  Media,  Pa.,  28
July,  1880,  studied  at  the  Pennsylvania  academy
of  fine  arts,  and  afterward  in  Paris  and  Dresden.
His  best-known  pictures  are  "  Perdita,"  which  re-
ceived a  medal  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  of  1876,
"Eventide,"  "Uncle  Jim,"  "Over  the  Hills  and
Far  Away,"  and  "  Waiting  for  the  Parade."  He
also  painted  many  water-colors,  chiefly  scenes  in
Florida  and  Nassau. — The  first  Joseph's  grandson,
Thomas  Isaac,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17
May,  1791 ;  d.  there,  7  April,  1856,  was  graduated

at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania
in  1807,  studied
law  in  the  office
of  his  uncle,
William  Rawle,
was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  ac-
quired reputa-
tion in  his  pro-
fession and  as  a
reporter  of  the
Pennsylvania  su-
preme court.  He
served  as  captain
of  infantry  in  the  war  of  1812.  He  was  a  trustee  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1837-'56,  and  a
member  of  various  philosophical  and  historical  so-
cieties. With  Joel  Jones  and  William  Rawle  (q.  v.)
he  revised  the  civil  code  of  Pennsylvania  in  1830.
He  edited,  with  copious  notes,  the  3d  edition  of
Alexander  J.  Dallas's  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the
Courts  of  the  United  States  and  Pennsylvania  be-
fore and  since  the  Revolution"  (4  vols.,  Philadel-
phia, 1830),  and  was  associated  with  Thomas  Sar-
geant  and  others  in  editing  the  "Law  Library"
(1833),  and  with  Henry  Wheaton  in  editing  the  5th
American  edition  of  William  Selwvn's  "  Abridg-
ment of  the  Law  of  Nisi  Prius "  (1839).  He  was
the  author  of  "  Digest  of  Cases  in  the  Circuit
Court  of  the  United  States,  Third  District,  and
in  the  Courts  of  Pennsylvania"  (Philadelphia,
1822 ;  6th  ed.,  including  "  A.  Harris's  Reports,"  2
vols.,  1853) ;  "  Digested  Index  to  the  Reported
Decisions  of  the  Several  Courts  of  Law  in  the
Western  and  Southern  States"  (1824);  "Reports
of  Cases  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Pennsylvania"
(6  vols..  1836-'41) ;  "  Letter  on  the  Right  and  Power
of  the  City  of  Philadelphia  to  Subscribe  for  Stock
in  the  Pennsylvania  Railroad  Company  "  (1846) ;
and  various  addresses  and  memoirs,  including  one
on  William  Rawle,  LL.  D.  (1840).  He  also  con-
tributed to  Dennie's  "  Portfolio,"  and  was  an  editor
of  the  "  Analectic  Magazine." — Thomas  Isaac's  son,
Francis,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7  March,
1820,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1839,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843,  practised  in  Phila-
delphia for  fifteen  years,  and  was  assistant  attornev-
general  in 1845. From 1856  till 1863  he  was


professor  of  logic  and  rhetoric  in  Kenyon  college,
Ohio,  but  he  was  ordained  in  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church  in  1863,  and  became  rector  of  St.
Paul's  church  in  Brookline,  Mass.  He  was  also
professor  of  ecclesiastical  and  international  law  in
the  Cambridge  divinity-school,  and  in  Boston.  In
1885  he  was  appointed  solicitor  for  the  department
of  state,  and  examiner  of  international  claims,
which  office  he  still  holds,  and  in  1888  he  was  ap-
pointed, under  a  resolution  of  congress,  editor  of
the  Revolutionary  diplomatic  correspondence  of  the
United  States.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  by  Kenyon  college  in  1883,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  by  Kenyon  in  1865  and  by  the  University
of  Edinburgh  in  1883.  He  is  a  member  of  various
institutions  of  international  and  municipal  law.
With  Charles  E.  Lex  he  edited  the  "  Episcopal
Recorder  "  in  Philadelphia,  and  he  has  contributed
to  periodicals.  He  has  edited  several  volumes  of
law  reports,  and  is  the  author  of  "  A  Treatise  on
the  Criminal  Law  of  the  United  States  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1846  ;  6th  ed.,  3  vols.,  1868) ;  "  The  State
Trials  of  the  United  States  during  the  Administra-
tions of  Washington  and  Adams  (1849) ;  "Prece-
dents of  Indictments  and  Pleas  adapted  to  the
Use  both  of  the  Courts  of  the  United  States  and
those  of  the  Several  States  "  (1849 :  2d  ed.,  1857) ;
"  A  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Homicide  in  the  United
States"  (1855);  "  A  Treatise  on  Medical  Jurispru-
dence," with  Dr.  Moreton  Stille(1855  ;  2d  ed.,  with
additions  by  Alfred  Stille,  1860) ;  "  Treatise  on
Theism  and  Modern  Skeptical  Theories"  (1859);
"  The  Silence  of  Scripture,  a  Series  of  Lectures  "
(1867);  "A  Treatise  on  the  Conflict  of  Laws"
(Philadelphia,  1872);  "The  Law  of  Agency  and
Agents"  (1876);  and  a  "Digest  of  International
Law"  (1886). — Another  son  of  Thomas,  Henry,
lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  June,  1827;  d.
there,  11  Nov.,  1880,  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  in  1846,  studied  law  under  his
father,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1849.  In
1856  he  became  solicitor  to  the  Philadelphia  saving
fund,  and  he  was  one  of  the  three  lawyers,  includ-
ing Eli  K.  Price  and  Edward  Olmstead,  whose
opinions  upon  real  estate  were  considered  equiva-
lent to  a  judgment  of  the  supreme  court.  He  was
legal  adviser  of  the  Philadelphia  bank  and  other
corporations.  With  Asa  J.  Fish  he  edited  the
"  American  Law-Register,"  from  1852  till  1863,  and
wrote  a  "  Practical  and  Elementary  Treatise  on  the
Law  of  Vicinage  "  (Philadelphia,  1868).— Thomas
Isaac's  nephew,  Joseph,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  3  March,  1826.  His  mother,  Deborah
Fisher  (1795-1888),  was  an  approved  minister  of  the
Society  of  Friends  for  seventy  years,  belonging  to
the  branch  that  has  been  called  Hicksite.  She  was
active  in  charities  and  an  interested  friend  to  the
Indians,  defending  their  rights  in  Washington  and
visiting  their  reservations.  After  receiving  a  good
education  in  his  native  city,  the  son  entered  a
mercantile  house,  and  afterward  engaged  in  the
manufacture  of  white  lead  and  paints,  bricks,  cop;
per-mining  and  spelter,  became  owner  of  iron-',
glass-,  and  steel-works,  and  has  been  a  director  in
manufacturing,  railroad,  and  banking  corporations.
He  was  among  the  first  to  establish  the  manufac-
ture of  spelter,  nickel,  and  cobalt  in  this  country,
and  was  the  first  to  make  magnetic  needles  of  other
substance  than  steel.  He  aided  in  establishing  the
Bethlehem  iron  company,  particularly  its  steel-
forging  plant  for  government  work.  Mr.  Wharton
owns  the  deposits  of  nickel  ore  in  Lancaster  county,
Pa.,  which  he  purchased  in  1873,  and  established
his  works  in  Camden,  N.  J.  He  early  experimented
to  produce  nickel  in  a  pure  and  malleable  condi-


WHATCOAT


WHEATLEY


449


tion,  so  that  it  could  be  worked  like  iron,  and
was  the  first  to  attain  practical  success  in  this
direction.  He  sent  to  the  Centennial  exhibition
of  1876,  and  to  the  Paris  exposition  of  1878,  sam-
ples of  nickel  ores,  nickel-matte,  metallic  nickel
in  grains  and  cubes,  cast  and  wrought  nickel,  cast
cobalt,  and  electro-plating  with  nickel  and  cobalt,
which  illustrated  the  progress  in  the  metallurgical
development  of  this  substance,  and  excited  much
admiration.  Mr.  Wharton  aided  in  establishing
Swarthmore  college,  of  which  he  is  president  of  the
board  of  trustees,  endowing  its  chair  of  history  and
political  economy,  and  also  founded  the  Wharton
school  of  finance  and  economy  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends.  Mr.  Wharton  has  published  several  pam-
phlets on  the  subject  of  protection  to  home  indus-
try.—Henry's  son,  Thomas  Isaac,  author,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  Aug.,  1859,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1879,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  is  the  author  of
"A  Latter-Dav  Saint"  (New  York,  1884),  and
"Hannibal  of  "New  York"  (1886).— The  first  Jo-
seph's descendant,  Anne  Hollingsworth,  author,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  about  1845.  has  published
"  The  Wharton  Family  "  (Philadelphia,  1880) ;  "  Vi-
gilia  " ;  and  "  St.  Bartholomew's  Eve."

WHATCOAT,  Richard,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  the
parish  of  Quinton,  Gloucester  co.,  England,  23
Feb.,  1736;  d.  in  Dover,  Del.,  4  July,  1806.  His
parents  were  members  of  the  Church  of  England,
but  when  he  was  twenty-two  years  of  age  he
accepted  Methodist  views.  Until  he  was  thirty-
three  years  of  age  he  continued  in  business,  and
was  a  useful  member  of  the  Wesleyan  connection.
In  July,  1769,  he  became  a  minister,  and  was  very
successful,  having  great  ability  in  composing  diffi-
culties, but  in  1784  John  Wesley  sent  him  to  the
United  States  as  a  missionary  with  Thomas  Coke.
Coke  and  Wesley  ordained  him  a  presbyter,  an  act
on  Wesley's  part  that  occasioned  much  discussion.
When  he  came  to  this  country  he  was  forty-six
years  of  age,  and  was  a  marvellous  preacher,  able
to  move  an  audience,  according  to  the  testimony  of
Adam  Clark,  M  as  the  leaves  of  a  forest  are  moved
by  a  mighty  wind."  His  contemporaries  attributed
his  strength  chiefly  to  his  supreme  devotion.  In
the  year  1800  he  was  elected  bishop.  After  several
years  of  infirmity,  he  died  at  the  house  of  ex-Gov.
Richard  Bassett,  of  Delaware.  Bishop  Francis
Asbury  said  of  him:  "  A  man  so  uniformly  good
I  have  not  known  in  Europe  or  America."

WHEAT,  John  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  15  Nov.,  1800 ;  d.  "in  Salisbury,
N.  C,  2  Feb.,  1888.  He  was  educated  at  Asbury
college,  Baltimore,  and  established  a  private  school
in  Washington.  Having  devoted  himself  to  the
study  of  theology,  he  was  ordained  deacon  in  Alex-
andria, and  in  the  following  year  at  Baltimore  he
was  made  a  priest.  He  was  instrumental  in  found-
ing an  Episcopal  church  at  Marietta,  Ohio,  after-
ward went  to  North  Carolina,  and  subsequently  to
Tennessee,  and  for  twenty  years  labored  in  Nash-
ville and  Memphis.  He  was  also  for  a  time  in
Arkansas.  He  held  various  positions  of  influence
in  the  annual  conventions  of  the  church,  and  in
1845  was  given  the  degree  of  D.  D.  by  the  Uni-
versity of  Nashville.  He  was  an  intimate  friend
of  Henry  Clay.  His  book  on  "  Preparation  for  the
Holy  Communion  "  (New  York,  1860)  won  a  high
reputation  in  the  religious  world.

WHEATLEY,  Charles  Moore,  mineralogist,  b.

in  Essex,  England,  16  March,  1822  ;  d.  in  Phcenix-

ville,  Pa.,  6  May,  1882. He  came  to  this  country

when  a  boy,  was  educated  in  New  York  city,  and,

vol.  vi. — 29


entering  mercantile  life  in  1835,  continued  so  en-
gaged until  1845.  Mr.  Wheatley  became  in  1837
a  member  of  the  Mercantile  library,  was  a  director
in  1841-3,  and  served  as  recording  secretary  in
1844-'5.  He  then  turned  his  attention  to  mining,
and  in  1846  became  manager  of  the  Bristol  copper-
mine  in  Connecticut,  whence  in  1848  he  was  called
to  a  similar  place  at  the  Perkiomen  copper-mine
in  Pennsylvania.  From  1850  till  1857  he  was  gen-
eral manager  and  part  owner  of  the  Wheatley  sil-
ver-lead mines,  which  he  discovered  and  opened.
Subsequently  he  mined  in  Pennsvlvania  and  in
California,  but  finally  settled  in  Phcenixville,  Pa.,
where  he  established"  the  Schuylkill  copper  works
and  was  the  first  person  successfully  to  reduce
copper-ores.  Mr.  Wheatley  was  an  active  collec-
tor, and  gathered  a  valuable  library  of  books  in
geology  and  mineralogy.  He  also  accumulated  a
collection  of  more  than  6,000  minerals  and  shells,
valued  at  $25,000,  which  was  purchased  by  Edward
C.  Delavan  and  given  to  Union  college  to  be  kept  as
the  Wheatley  cabinets,  forever  subject  to  the  con-
trol of  the  University  of  New  York.  Later  he
made  an  extensive  collection  of  fresh-water  shells.
At  the  World's  fair  held  in  New  York  in  1853  he
exhibited  specimens  from  the  Wheatley  mine,  plans
of  the  mining  operations  and  drawings  of  machin-
ery, for  which  he  received  one  of  the  two  silver
medals  that  were  given.  He  discovered  a  cave  near
Port  Kennedy,  on  Schuylkill  river,  where  he  found
many  specimens  of  fossils,  an  account  of  which  was
read  before  the  American  philosophical  society  in
1871  by  Prof.  Edward  D.  Cope,  who  named  one  of
the  species  Megalonyx  Wheatleyi  in  his  honor.
The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  given  him  by  Yale  in
1858.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  New  York
lyceum  of  natural  history  in  1840,  was  its  treas-
urer in  1847-'58,  and  was  connected  with  other
scientific  associations  both  in  this  country  and
abroad.  He  published  "  Catalogues  of  the  Shells
of  the  United  States,  with  their  Localities,"  one  of
the  first  volumes  of  its  kind  that  were  ever  pub-
lished (New  York,  1842).

WHEATLEY,  Phillis,  poet,  b.  in  Africa  about
1753;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  5  Dec,  1784.  She  was
brought  here  from  Africa  in  1761,  and  her  only
recollection  of  her  early  life  was  that  of  her  heathen
mother  worshipping  the  sun  at  its  rising.  She
was  bought  from  the  slave-market  by  John  Wheat-
ley,  of  Boston,  and  soon  developed  remarkable
acquisitive  faculties.  She  became  a  member  of
his  family  and  was  educated  by  his  daughters.
In  sixteen  months  from  her  arrival  she  could
read  English  fluently,  soon  learned  to  write,  and
also  studied  Latin.  She  visited  England  in  1774,
where  she  was  cordially  received,  and  after  her
return  to  Boston  she  corresponded  with  the
Countess  of  Huntingdon,  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,
Rev.  George  Whitefield,  and  others,  and  wrote
many  poems  to  her  friends.  She  addressed  some
lines  and  a  letter  to  Gen.  Washington  on  26
Oct.,  1775,  which  were  afterward  published  in  the
"  Pennsylvania  Magazine,  or  American  Monthly
Museum,"  for  April,  1776.  In  a  reply,  under  date
of  2  Feb.,  1776,  Gen.  Washington  writes :  "I  thank
you  most  sincerely  for  your  polite  notice  of  me  in
the  elegant  lines  you  inclosed ;  and,  however  un-
deserving I  may  be  of  such  encomium  and  pane-
gyric, the  style  and  manner  exhibit  a  striking
proof  of  your  poetical  talents ;  in  honor  of  which,
and  as  a  tribute  justly  due  to  you,  I  would  have
published  the  poem  had  I  not  been  apprehensive
that,  while  I  only  meant  to  give  the  world  this
new  instance  of  your  genius,  I  might  have  incurred
the  imputation  of  vanity. This,  and  nothing  else,


450


WHEATLEY


WHEATON


determined  me  not  to  give  it  place  in  the  public
prints.  If  you  should  ever  come  to  Cambridge,  or
near  headquarters.  I  shall  be  happy  to  see  a  per-
son so  favored  by  the  muses,  and  to  whom  Nature
has  been  so  liberal  and  beneficent  in  her  dispensa-
tions." A  few  days  before  the  British  evacuated
Boston  she  visited  the  Revolutionary  camp  and
was  received  with  marked  attention  by  Washing-
ton and  his  officers.  Thomas  Jefferson  said  that
her  verses  were  beneath  criticism.  In  1775  the
Wheatley  family  was  broken  up  by  death,  and,
after  attempting  and  failing  to  support  herself,  she
married  in  1778  a  colored  man  named  Peters,  who,
according  to  different  accounts,  was  a  grocer,  law-
yer, or  barber.  This  marriage  proved  unhappy,  and
Peters  became  reduced  in  circumstances.  During
the  Revolution  they  resided  in  Wilmington,  Del.,
and  they  afterward  returned  to  Boston,  where  they
lived  in  wretched  poverty.  Among  the  attentions
that  she  received  in  London  was  a  gift  from  the  lord
mayor  of  a  copy  of  "  Paradise  Lost,"  which  was  sold
after  her  death,  and  is  now  in  the  library  of  Harvard.
Her  publications  are  "An  Elegiac  Poem  on  the
Death  of  George  Whitefield,  Chaplain  to  the  Count-
ess of  Huntingdon"  (Boston,  1770);  "Poems  on
Various  Subjects,  Religious  and  Moral,  by  Phillis
Wheatley,  Negro  Servant  to  Mr.  John  Wheatley,
of  Boston,"  to  certify  which  an  attestation  was  ad-
dressed to  the  public  and  signed  by  Gov.  Thomas
Hutchinson,  John  Hancock,  Rev.  Samuel  Mather,
John  Wheatley,  Andrew  Eliot,  and  others  (Lon-
don, 1773;  2d  ed.,  Albany,  1793;  republished  as
"  The  Negro  Equalled  by  Few  Europeans,"  2  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1801 ;  2d  ed.,  Walpole,  N.  H.,1802;
3d  ed.,  with  a  memoir,  Boston,  1834) :  and  "  Elegy
Sacred  to  the  Memory  of  Dr.  Samuel  Cooper"
(1784).  The  "Letters  of  Phillis  Wheatley"  were
printed  privately  by  Charles  Deane  from  the  "  Pro-
ceedings of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  "
(Boston,  1864).

WHEATLEY,  Sarah,  actress,  b.  in  St,  John,
New  Brunswick,  in  1790;  d.  in  New  York  city  in
July,  1854.  Her  father,  whose  name  was  Ross,
died  when  she  was  two  years  of  age.  She  made
her  first  appearance  in  New  York  at  the  Park  thea-
tre on  12  Nov.,  1805,  and  in  1806  married  Freder-
ick Wheatley,  an  actor,  and  retired  from  the  stage ;
but  on  his  failure  in  business  she  resumed  her  pro-
fession for  the  support  of  her  family  and  achieved
success.  Mrs.  Wheatley  was  noted  for  her  artistic
representation  of  old  women. — Her  son,  William,
actor,  b.  in  New  York  city,  5  Dec,  1816 ;  d.  there,
3  Nov.,  1876,  made  his  first  appearance  on  the
stage  at  the  Park  theatre,  New  York,  in  1826  as
Albert  in  "  William  Tell,"  during  the  engagement
of  Macready,  with  whom  he  travelled  through  the
United  States.  In  1842  he  was  engaged  at  the
Walnut  street  theatre  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1843
he  retired  and  visited  Nicaragua,  where  he  raised
the  first  American  flag  in  Virgin  bay.  He  re-
turned to  the  United  States,  and  in  1853  leased,
with  John  Drew,  the  Arch  street  theatre  in  Phila-
delphia, of  which  he  was  sole  manager  in  1855-'8.
Afterward  he  controlled  the  Continental  theatre
in  Philadelphia,  and  leased  Niblo's  Garden,  New
York,  of  which  he  was  manager  from  1865  till  he
retired  in  1868.  During  this  period  the  "Black
Crook "  was  first  produced.  Mr.  Wheatley's  best
characters  were  Doricourt  in  "  The  Belle's  Strata-
gem," Rover  in  "  Wild  Oats,"  Captain  Absolute
in  "The  Rivals,"  and  Claude  Melnotte  in  "The
Lady  of  Lyons."

WHEATON,  Frank,  soldier,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  8  May,  1833.  He  was  educated  in  common
schools,  became  a  civil  engineer,and  engaged  in  Cali-


fornia and  in  the  Mexican  boundary  surveys  from
1850  till  he  was  commissioned  1st  lieutenant  in  the
1st  U.  S.  cavalry,  3  March,  1855.  He  served  at  Jef-
ferson barracks,  Mo.,  and  in  Kansas  until  185(1.  and
in  the  field  against  Cheyenne  Indians  till  1857,  being
in  action  near  Fort  Kearny,  Neb.  He  was  on  the
Utah  expedition  till  August,  1858,  on  duty  with
his  regiment  in  the  Indian  territory,  and  then  on
recruiting  service  till  July,  1861,  having  been  pro-
moted captain  in  March.  He  received  permission
to  accept  the  commission  of  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  2d  Rhode  Island  volunteers  in  July,  1861,  be-
came colonel  in  the  same  month,  and  took  part  in
the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  also  serving  in  the  princi-
pal engagements  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  in-
cluding the  peninsula  and  Maryland  campaigns.
He  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
in  November,  1862,  commanding  a  brigade  during
the  operations  of  the  same  army  in  1863-'4,  and
then  a  division  of  the  6th  corps,  distinguishing
himself  in  the  operations  in  the  Shenandoah  valley
in  1864,  and  those  that  culminated  in  the  surren-
der at  Appomattox  in-  1865.  He  was  brevetted
major-general  of  volunteers  for  gallant  and  meri-
torious services  at  the  Opequan,  Fisher's  Hill,  and
Middletown,  Va.,  and  received  brevets  in  the  regu-
lar army  to  the  grade  of  major-general  for  the  bat-
tles of  the  Wilderness,  Cedar  Creek,  and  Peters-
burg, respectively.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  39th  infantry,  28  July,  1866,  was  transferred
to  the  21st  infantry  in  March,  1869,  and  promoted
colonel  of  the  2d  infantry,  15  Dec,  1874.  Since
the  war  Gen.  Wheaton  has  held  commands  in  Da-
kota, Montana,  and  Nebraska.  In  July,  1866,  he
was  presented  with  a  sword  by  his  native  state  for
gallant  services  in  the  above-mentioned  battles.

WHEATON,  Henry,  lawver,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  27  Nov.,  1785 ;  d.  in  "Dorchester,  Mass.,  11
March,  1848.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Robert
Wheaton,  a  Baptist  clergyman,  who  emigrated
from  Swansey,  Wales,  to  Salem,  Mass.,  but  subse-
quently settled  in
Rhode  Island.  Af-
ter graduation  at
Brown  in  1802,
Henry  studied  law
under  Nathaniel
Searle,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in
1805,  and  in  that
year  continued  his
studies  in  Poictiers
and  London.  On
his  return  to  this
country  he  prac-
tised law  in  Provi-
dence till  he  re-
moved in  1812  to
New  York,  where
he  edited  in  1812-
'15  the  "  National
Advocate,"  the  or-
gan of  the  adminis-
tration party.  In
this  paper  he  published  notable  articles  on  the
question  of  neutral  rights  in  connection  with  the
then  existing  war  with  England.  On  26  Oct.,
1814,  he  became  division  judge-advocate  of  the
army,  and  from  1815  till  1819  he  was  a  justice  of
the  marine  court  of  New  York  city.  From  1816
till  1827  he  was  reporter  for  the  U.  S.  supreme
court  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and  published  "  Re-
ports of  Cases  argued  and  determined  in  the  Su-
preme Court  of  the  United  States  "  (12  vols.,  New
York,  1826-7). This  was  termed  by  a  German  re-


WHEATON


WHEATON


451


viewer  "  the  golden  book  of  American  law."  Will-
iam B.  Lawrence  says :  "  The  reputation  which
Mr.  Wheaton  acquired  as  a  .reporter  was  unri-
valled. He  did  not  confine  himself  to  a  mere  sum-
mary of  the  able  arguments  by  which  the  cases
were  elucidated ;  but  there  is  scarcely  a  proposi-
tion on  any  of  the  diversified  subjects  to  which  the
jurisdiction  of  the  court  extends,  that  might  give
rise  to  serious  doubts  in  the  profession,  that  is  not
explained  not  merely  by  a  citation  of  the  authori-
ties adduced  by  counsel,  but  copious  rules  present
the  views  which  the  publicists  and  civilians  have
taken  of  the  question."  He  was  elected  a  member
of  the  convention  to  form  a  new  constitution  for
New  York  in  1821,  was  a  member  of  the  assembly
in  1823,  and  in  1825  was  associated  with  John
Duer  and  Benjamin  F.  Butler  in  a  commission  to
revise  the  statute  law  of  New  York.  He  also  took
part  in  important  cases,  and  was  the  sole  associate
of  Daniel  Webster  in  that  which  settled  the  limits
of  the  state  and  Federal  legislation  in  reference  to
bankruptcy  and  insolvency.  In  1827  he  was  ap-
pointed charge  d'affaires  in  Denmark,  being  the
first  diplomatist  that  was  sent  to  that  country
from  the  United  States.  He  served  till  1835,  dis-
playing skill  in  the  settlement  of  the  Sound  dues
that  were  imposed  by  Denmark  on  the  vessels  of
all  countries,  and  obtained  modifications  of  the
quarantine  regulations.  He  acquired  reputation
by  his  researches  in  the  Scandinavian  language
and  literature,  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the
Scandinavian  and  Icelandic  societies.  In  1835  he
was  appointed  resident  minister  to  the  court  of
Prussia,  and  he  was  promoted  to  minister- plenipo-
tentiary in  1837.  He  soon  received  full  power  to
conclude  a  treaty  with  the  Zollverein,  which  ob-
ject he  pursued  for  the  ensuing  six  years.  On  25
March,  1844,  he  signed  a  treaty  with  Germany,  for
which  he  received  high  commendation  from  Presi-
dent Tyler  and  John  C.  Calhoun,  the  secretary  of
state.  This  was  rejected  by  the  U.  S.  senate,  but
served  as  the  basis  for  subsequent  treaties.  In  1846
he  was  requested  by  President  Polk  to  resign  his
post,  but,  on  his  return  to  the  United  States  in
1847,  he  was  honored  by  public  dinners  in  New
York  and  Philadelphia,  and  immediately  chosen
lecturer  on  international  law  at  Harvard,  which
office  he  was  prevented  by  illness  from  accepting.
He  was  made  a  corresponding  member  of  the
French  institute  in  1843,  and  a  member  of  the  Royal
academy  of  Berlin  in  1846.  Harvard  gave  him  the
degree  of  A.  M.  in  1825,  and  he  received  that  of
LL.  D.  from  Brown  in  1819,  from  Hamilton  in
1843,  and  from  Harvard  in  1845.  He  delivered
many  addresses  before  literary  societies,  among
which  were  those  before  the  New  York  historical
society  on  the  "  Science  of  Public  or  International
Law  "  (New  York,  1820),  and  at  the  opening  of
the  New  York  athenaeum,  afterward  the  Society
library  (1824).  His  most  important  work  is  "  Ele-
ments of  International  Law  "  (Philadelphia,  1836 ;
2  vols.,  London,  1836  ;  3d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1845 :
French  translation,  Leipsic  and  Paris,  1848).  This
book  was  at  once  acknowledged  as  a  standard  au-
thority. At  the  instance  of  Anson  Burlingame,
minister  to  China,  it  was  translated  into  Chinese
and  published  at  the  expense  of  the  imperial  gov-
ernment (4  vols.,  Pekin,  1865).  It  was  also  trans-
lated into  Japanese.  The  6th  edition,  with  the
last  corrections  of  the  author,  was  published  by
William  Beach  Lawrence,  with  a  biographical  no-
tice (Boston,  1855).  The  8th  edition,  by  Richard
H.  Dana,  Jr..  was  published  with  notes  (Boston,
1866).  The  use  of  Mr.  Lawrence's  notes  in  the  pre-
vious editions  resulted  in  a  protracted  legal  con-


troversy, concerning  which  see  Dana.  Richard
Henry,  vol.  ii.,  page  71.  William  B.  Lawrence's
"  Commentaire  sur  les  elements  du  droit  interna-
tional et  sur  l'histoire  des  progres  du  droits  des
gens  de  Wheaton  "  was  published  (4  vols.,  Leipsic,
1868-'80).  Mr.  Wheaton's  other  publications  are
H  Considerations  on  the  Establishment  of  a  Uni-
form System  of  Bankrupt  Laws  throughout  the
United  States  "  (Washington,  1815);  "A  Digest  of
the  Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
States  from  its  Establishment  in  1789  to  1820  "
(1820-'9):  '"Life  of  William  Pinkney,"  which
was  also  published  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biogra-
phy "  (1826) ;  "  History  of  the  Northmen,  or  Danes
and  Normans,  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Con-
quest of  England  by  William  of  Normandy,"
which  Washington  Irving  said  "  evinced  through-
out the  enthusiasm  of  an  antiquarian,  the  liber-
ality of  a  scholar,  and  the  enlightened  toleration  of
a  citizen  of  the  world "  (London,  1831 ;  French
translation  by  Paul  Guillot,  Paris,  1844) ;  "  His-
toire  du  progres  des  gens  en  Europe  depuis  la
paix  de  Westphalie  jusqu'au  congres  de  Vienne,
avec  un  precis  historique  du  droit  des  gens  euro-
peens  avant  la  paix  de  Westphalie  "  (Leipsic,  1841),
written  in  unsuccessful  competition  for  a  prize
offered  by  the  French  institute  and  translated  into
English  by  William  Beach  Lawrence  as  "  A  His-
tory of  the  Law  of  Nations  in  Europe  and  America
from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Treaty  of  Washing-
ton "  (New  York,  1845) ;  and  "  An  Enquiry  into
the  Validity  of  the  British  Claim  to  a  Right  of
Visitation  and  Search  of  American  Vessels  suspect-
ed to  be  engaged  in  the  Slave-Trade"  (Philadelphia
and  London,  1842;  2d  ed.,  1858).  Mr.  Wheaton
translated  the  "  Code  of  Napoleon,"  but  the  manu-
script was  destroyed  by  fire,  and  he  also  contrib-
uted numerous  political,  historical,  and  literary
articles  to  the  "  North  American  Review "  and
other  periodicals.  A  discourse,  "  The  Value  of  a
Man,"  was  published  on  his  death  by  the  Rev.
Edward  B.  Hall  (Providence,  1848).— His  son,
Robert,  author,  b.  in  New  York  city,  5  Oct.,  1826  ;
d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  9  Oct.,  1851,  spent  his
early  life  in  Copenhagen  and  Paris,  but  left  his
school  in  the  latter  city  in  1841  to  devote  himself
to  engineering,  which  he  abandoned  in  1843,  and
attended  lectures  at  the  Sorbonne  and  the  College
de  France.  In  1847  he  came  to  this  country  with
his  father,  entered  the  Harvard  law-school,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851.  He  was  a  skil-
ful musician,  and  published  several  able  and
thoughtful  articles  in  the  "  North  American  Re-
view "  and  other  periodicals.  "  Selections  "  from
his  writings  were  published  by  his  sister,  Abby
Wheaton,  with  a  memoir  (Boston,  1854).

WHEATON,  Nathaniel  Sheldon,  clergyman,
b.  in  Washington,  Conn.,  20  Aug.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Mar-
bledale,  Conn.,  18  March,  1862.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1814,  and  after  residing  four  years  in
Maryland,  where  he  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Kemp,
was  elected  rector  of  Christ  church,  Hartford,  Conn.
While  discharging  the  duties  of  this  office  he  took
an  active  interest  in  the  plans  for  the  establish-
ment of  a  second  college  in  Connecticut,  at  least
one  vigorous  pamphlet  in  its  defence  being  from
his  pen.  He  was  one  of  the  original  corporators
of  Washington  (now  Trinity)  college,  and  was  al-
most immediately  (in  1823)  deputed  to  visit  Eng-
land in  the  interests  of  the  new  institution.  He
secured  donations  of  books  for  the  library,  and
made  purchases  of  philosophical  apparatus.  While
abroad  he  also  made  a  special  study  of  architect-
ure, which  enabled  him  to  prepare  plans,  even  to
minute  details,  for  the  new  Christ  church  in  Hart-


452


WHEDON


WHEELER


ford,  which  was  consecrated  in  1829.  At  the  time,
perhaps,  it  was  the  best  specimen  of  Gothic  archi-
tecture in  the  country.  On  the  retirement  of
Bishop  Brownell  from  the  presidency  of  Washing-
ton college  in  1831,  Dr.  Wheaton  was  chosen  his
successor.  He  labored  untiringly  for  the  good  of
the  institution,  making  liberal  gifts  and  securing
the  endowment  of  two  professorships,  besides  large
additions  to  the  general  funds.  Under  his  direc-
tion the  college  campus — the  site  that  is  now  occu-
pied by  the  state  capitol — was  carefully  laid  out
and  planted  with  trees.  In  1837  Dr.  Wheaton  ac-
cepted the  rectorship  of  Christ  church,  New  Or-
leans, La.,  where  he  remained  seven  years,  his  cour-
age and  faithfulness  being  especially  shown  in
his  unremitting  attention  to  his  duties  while  the
city  was  ravaged  by  the  yellow  fever.  Resigning
in  1844,  he  again  visited  Europe,  and  then  resided
for  a  short  time  in  Hartford,  unable,  by  reason  of
feeble  health,  to  undertake  regular  duties.  He  soon
withdrew  to  his  native  town,  where  he  resided  for
the  rest  of  his  life,  officiating  in  different  places
in  the  neighborhood  as  he  was  able.  At  his  death
he  left  to  Trinity  college  his  valuable  library,  be-
sides a  legacy  in  money,  part  of  which  was  desig-
nated as  the  nucleus  of  a  chapel  fund.  The  large
window  in  the  new  chancel  of  Christ  church,  Hart-
ford, is  in  his  memory.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Yale  in  1833.  The  journal  of  his  trav-
els abroad  in  1823-'4  was  published  in  one  volume
(Hartford,  1830),  and  he  also  issued  "  Remarks  on
Washington  College "  (anonymous)  and  a  "  Dis-
course on  the  Epistle  to  Philemon."

WHEDON,  Daniel  Denison,  author,  b.  in  Onon-
daga. N.  Y.,  20  March,  1808 ;  d.  in  Atlantic  High-
lands, N.  J.,  8  June,  1885.  After  graduation  at  Ham-
ilton college  in  1828  he  studied  law  in  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  taught  in  the  Conference  seminary,  Cazeno-
via,  N.  Y.,  in  1830-'l,  and  was  a  tutor  in  Hamil-
ton in  1831-'2.  From  1833  till  1843  he  was  pro-
fessor of  ancient  languages  and  literature  in  Wes-
leyan  university,  Middletown,  Conn.  In  1836  he
was  ordained  a  clergyman  in  the  Methodist  Epis-
copal church,  and  he  held  pastorates  in  Pitts-
field,  Mass.,  in  1843-'5,  and  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  in  1855.
From  1845  till  1852  he  was  professor  of  logic,
rhetoric,  and  history  in  the  University  of  Michi-
gan, where  he  served  as  president  of  the  faculty  in
1847-8.  From  1856  till  1884  he  was  editor  of  the
"  Methodist  Quarterly  Review,"  and  he  was  also
general  editor  of  the  publications  of  the  Methodist
book  concern.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  by  Emory  and  Henry  college,  Emory,  Va.,
in  1847,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Wesleyan  univer-
sity in  1868.  In  addition  to  single  sermons  and
contributions  to  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra  "  and  other

f>eriodicals,  he  published  "  Public  Addresses,  Col-
egiate  and  Popular"  (Boston,  1856):  "Commen-
tary on  Matthew  and  Mark  "  (New  York,  1860) ;
"  The  Freedom  of  the  Will,  as  a  Basis  of  Human
Responsibility,  elucidated  and  maintained  in  its
Issue  with  the  Necessitarian  Theories  of  Hobbes,
Edwards,  the  Princeton  Essayists,  and  Other  Lead-
ing Advocates  "  (1864) ;  "  Commentary  on  the  New
Testament"  intended  for  popular  use  (5  vols.,
1860-75) :  and  "  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testa-
ment "  (7  vols.,  1880-'6).  Two  additional  volumes
of  his  collected  writings  appeared  in  1886.

WHEELER,  Andrew  Carpenter,  journalist,
b.-in  New  York,  4  July,  1835.  He  began  his  career
in  journalism  as  a  reporter  on  the  New  York
"  Times,"  under  Henry  J.  Raymond,  but  soon
afterward  went  to  the  west.  After  several  years
he  settled  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  as  city  editor  of  the
"  Sentinel." Soon  after  the  opening  of  the  civil


war  he  became  a  war-correspondent  for  several
eastern  and  western  papers.  At  the  close  of  hos-
tilities he  returned  to  the  east  and  served  on  the
New  York  "  Leader,"  and  then  on  the  "  World."
With  the  latter  paper  he  has  been  connected  ever
since,  excepting  an  interval  of  a  few  years.  On
the  "  World  "  he  first  adopted  the  pen-name  "  Nvin
Crinkle."  He  is  best  known  as  a  dramatic  and
musical  critic,  in  which  capacity  he  has  served  on
most  of  the  New  York  papers.  He  has  written
"  The  Chronicles  of  Milwaukee  "  (Milwaukee,  1861),
and  "  The  Twins,"  a  comedy,  which  was  produced
by  Lester  Wallack  in  1862.

WHEELER,  Charles  Stearns,  scholar,  b.  in
Lincoln,  Me.,  19  Dec,  1816;  d.  in  Leipsic,  Ger-
many, 13  June,  1843.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1837,  served  as  tutor  there  in  1838-'42,  and
in  the  latter  year  went  to  Leipsic  to  study,  but  died
after  eighteen  months'  residence.  He  published  an
edition  of  Herodotus,  with  notes  that  evince  remark-
able learning  (2  vols.,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1843).

WHEELER,  David  Hilton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  19  Nov.,  1829.  He  was  graduated
at  Rock  River  theological  seminary,  Mount  Mor-
ris, 111.,  in  1851,  was  professor  of  ancient  languages
in  Cornell  college,  Iowa,  in  1853-'5,  and  assumed
the  chair  of  Greek  in  1857,  which  he  held  till  1861.
He  edited  the  "  Carroll  County  Republican  "  in
1855-'7,  and  at  the  same  time  was  county  superin-
tendent of  public  schools.  In  1861-'6  he  was  U.  S.
consul  at  Geneva,  Switzerland.  He  was  professor
of  English  literature  in  Northwestern  university
in  1867-'75,  edited  the  "  Methodist,"  in  New  York
city,  for  the  subsequent  seven  years,  and  became
president  of  Alleghany  college,  Pa.,  in  1883,  hold-
ing office  till  1887.  Cornell  college  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1867,  and  Northwestern  univer-
sity that  of  LL.  D.  in  1881.  He  has  written  for
publication  since  1855,  is  the  author  of  "  Brig-
andage in  South  Italy "  (2  vols.,  London,  1864),
and  "By- Ways  of  Literature"  (New  York,  1883),
and  has  translated,  from  the  Italian,  Celesia's  "  Con-
spiracy of  Fieschi "  (1866).

WHEELER,  Dora,  artist,  b.  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,
12  March,  1858.  She  is  a  daughter  of  Mrs.  Candace
Wheeler,  who  is  well  known  for  her  interest  in  the
development  of  art  needle-work  in  the  United
States.  She  studied  with  William  M.  Chase  in
New  York,  and  William  Adolphe  Bouguereau  and
others  in  Paris.  Though  devoting  herself  mainly
to  decorative  designing,  she  has  also  painted  sev-
eral pictures.  Among  these  are  a  series  of  por-
traits of  English  and  American  authors,  includ-
ing Thomas  Bailey  Aldrich,  James  Russell  Lowell,
Walt  Whitman,  Charles  Dudley  Warner,  John
Burroughs,  Austin  Dobson,  and  Walter  Besant.

WHEELER,  George  Montague,  soldier,  b.  in
Grafton.  Mass.,  9  Oct.,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1866,  and  assigned
to  the  corps  of  engineers.  From  October,  1866,
till  September,  1868.  he  was  assistant  engineer  on
the  survey  of  Point  Lobos  and  vicinity,  and  in  the
construction  of  the  defences  of  Fort  Point,  San
Francisco  harbor,  Cal.  He  was  promoted  1st  lieu-
tenant on  7  March,  1867.  and  in  September,  1868,
became  engineer  on  the  staff  of  the  commanding
general  of  the  Department  of  California.  In  1869
he  was  sent  to  make  a  geographical  reconnoissance
in  central  Nevada,  and  in  1871  he  took  the  field
with  a  force  of  surveyors  and  scientists.  His  or-
ganization assumed  the  title  of  the  "  Geographical
survey  of  the  territory  of  the  United  States  west  of
the  100th  meridian,"  of  which  he  became  superin-
tending engineer.  Money  was  annually  granted
by  congress  for  the  continuance  of  his  work,  and  a


WHEELER


WHEELER


453


large  force  was  regularly  employed.  This  survey
had  for  its  primary  object  the  making  of  geo-
graphic maps,  but  it  gave  a  prominent  place  to
geology,  and  gathered  valuable  material  in  the
departments  of  zoology  and  ethnology.  Lieut.
Wheeler  continued  this  work  until  March,  1879,
when  the  survey  was  abolished  and  the  U.  S.  geo-
logical survey  was  organized.  (See  King,  Clar-
ence, and  Powell,  John  W.)  Since  that  time  he
has  been  engaged  in  the  preparation  of  the  mate-
rial that  has  been  gathered,  much  of  which  has
been  published  in  his  annual  reports,  beginning
with  1871,  and  also  in  a  series  of  quarto  volumes
published  by  the  engineer  department  of  the  U.  S.
army.  Capt.  Wheeler  was  a  delegate  to  the  3d
International  conference  and  exhibition  held  at
Vienna  in  1885,  concerning  which  he  made  a  re-
port to  the  U.  S.  government.  He  was  promoted
captain  on  30  March,  1879,  and,  owing  to  illness,
retired  from  active  service  on  15  June,  1888.

WHEELER,  John  Hill,  historian,  b.  in  Mur-
freesboro',  N.  C.,  6  Aug.,  1806  ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  7  Dec,  1882.  His  ancestors  were  early
settlers  of  North  Carolina  and  direct  descendants
of  Admiral  Sir  Francis  Wheeler.  John  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbian  university,  Washington,  D.  C,
in  1826,  and  at  the  law  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  North  Carolina  in  1828.  He  became  a
member  of  the  North  Carolina  legislature  in  1837,
and  in  1831  secretary  of  the  board  of  commission-
ers under  the  treaty  with  Prance  to  decide  on  the
claims  of  American  citizens  for  spoliations  under
the  Berlin  and  Milan  treaties.  He  became  super-
intendent of  the  branch  U.  S.  mint  at  Charlotte,
N.  C,  in  1836,  and  held  office  till  1841.  He  was
chosen  treasurer  of  North  Carolina  in  1842,  and  at
the  expiration  of  his  term  began  his  "  History  of
North  Carolina,"  to  which  he  devoted  himself  for
ten  years  (Philadelphia,  1851).  In  1854-'7  he  was
U.  S.  minister  to  Nicaragua.  As  soon  as  William
Walker  established  his  authority  there,  Mr.  Wheeler
acknowledged  his  government.  He  resigned  that
post  in  1857,  settled  in  Washington,  D.  C,  where
in  1859-'61  he  was  employed  in  the  statistical  bu-
reau. Later  he  returned  to  North  Carolina,  but
he  took  no  active  part  in  the  civil  war.  In  1863  he
was  sent  by  the  legislature  to  England  for  material
for  an  enlarged  edition  of  his  "  History  of  North
Carolina."  His  later  life  was  passed  in  Washing-
ton in  collating  the  debates  of  congress,  and  in
statistical  labors.  His  other  writings  include  "  A
Legislative  Manual  of  North  Carolina"  (1874):
"  Reminiscences  and  Memoirs  of  North  Carolina  "
(Columbus,  Ohio,  1884) ;  and  he  edited  Col.  David
Fanning's  "  Autobiography  "  (Richmond,  Va.,
1861). — His  brother,  Junius  Brutus,  soldier,  b.  in
Murfreesboro',  N.  C,  21  Feb.,  1830 ;  d.  in  Lenoir,
N.  C,  15  July,  1886,  was  educated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  North  Carolina,  volunteered  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  Mexican  war,  and  participated  in
every  battle  from  Vera  Cruz  to  the  city  of  Mexico.
He  was  promoted  lieutenant  in  1847.  but  resigned
at  the  end  of  the  war,  entered  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  and  was  graduated  in  1855.  He  was
transferred  to  the  topographical  engineers  in  1856,
became  1st  lieutenant  on  1  July,  1860,  was  assist-
ant professor  of  mathematics  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1859-'61,  and  principal  assistant  pro-
fessor there  in  1861-'3.  He  became  a  captain  in
the  engineer  corps  in  March,  1863,  chief  engineer
of  the  Department  of  the  Susquehanna  in  June  and
September  of  that  year,  and  chief  engineer  of  the
Army  of  the  Arkansas  from  September,  1863,  till
May,  1864.  He  participated  in  engagements  at
Elkins  Ferry, Prairie D'Ane,  the  occupation  of


Camden,  and  the  battle  of  Jenkins  Ferry,  on  the
Saline  river,  30  April,  1864,  for  which  he  was
brevetted  major,  U.  S.  army.  In  March,  1865,  he
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  for
meritorious  service  during  the  civil  war.  He  was
chief  engineer  of  the  military  division  of  the
Missouri  in  May  and  June,  1865,  commanded  the
engineer  depot  at  Jefferson  Barracks,  Mo.,  in  July
and  December  of  that  year,  was  assistant  engineer
on  the  Mississippi  levees  in  1865-6,  and  superin-
tendent engineer  of  harbor  improvements  in  1866.
He  became  major  of  engineers,  U.  S.  army,  in  1866,
and  was  then  professor  of  mining  and  civil  en-
gineering at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  which  post
he  held  till  his  retirement  in  1885.  ne  wrote  a
valuable  series  of  military  text-books  that  were
adopted  by  the  U.  S.  war  department,  and  pub-
lished under  the  titles  "  Civil  Engineering  "  (New
York,  1877);  "Art  and  Science  of  War"  (1878):
"Elements  of  Field  Fortifications"  (1882);  and
"  Military  Engineering  "  (2  vols.,  1884-'5).

WHEELER,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Augusta,
Ga.,  10  Sept.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1859,  and  assigned  to  the
dragoons.  After  a  year's  service  at  the  cavalry
school  for  prac-
tice at  Carlisle,
Pa.,  he  received
the  full  rank
of  2d  lieuten-
ant, but  on  22
April,  1861,  re-
signed and  en-
tered the  Con-
federate army.
He  was  made
colonel  of  the
19th  Alabama
infantry  on  4
Sept.,  1861,  and
served  princi-
pally in  the  west.
At  Shiloh  he
commanded  a
brigade  and  cov-
ered the  Con-
federate retreat
from  the  field.
In  July,  1862,  he  was  transferred  to  a  cavalry  com-
mand, and  engaged  in  raiding  western  Tennessee.
During  the  Kentucky  campaign  of  that  year  he
had  charge  of  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg's  cavalry,  and
fought  at  Green  River  and  Perryville.  He  com-
manded the  rear-guard  of  the  Confederate  army
when  it  retreated  into  Tennessee,  and  on  30  Oct.,
1862,  was  promoted  brigadier-general.  At  Mur-
freesboro' he  was  in  charge  of  the  cavalry,  and
thereafter  he  was  continuously  active  in  contesting
Gen.  William  S.  Rosecrans's  advance,  also  attacking
his  flanks,  raiding  in  the  rear,  and  destroying  his
trains.  On  19  Jan.,  1863,  he  received  his  commission
as  major-general,  and  opposed  the  National  advance
on  Chattanooga.  He  commanded  the  cavalry  at
Chickamauga,  and  after  the  battle  crossed  Tennes-
see river  and  fell  upon  Rosecrans's  line  of  com-
munications, defeating  the  force  that  was  sent
against  him  and  destroying  over  1,200  wagons,  with
stores.  On  this  raid  he  succeeded  in  damaging
National  property  to  the  value  of  $3,000,000,  but,
after  losing  600  men,  was  driven  back  to  northern
Alabama.  Subsequently  he  took  part  in  the  siege
of  Knoxville  and  covered  Bragg's  retreat  from
Mission  ridge  and  Lookout  mountain.  During  the
winter  and  spring  he  continually  harassed  the  Na-
tional troops,  and,  on  the  advance  of  Gen.  William


454


WHEELER


WHEELER


T.  Sherman's  army  toward  Atlanta,  he  opposed
every  movement  and  fought  almost  daily,  often
with  his  men  dismounted.  During  July  27-30  he
fought  the  raiding  force  of  Gen.  George  Stoneman,
Gen.  Kenner  Garrard,  and  Gen.  Edward  M.  McCook,
and  captured  many  prisoners,  including  Gen.  Stone-
man,  and  all  the  artillery  and  transportation.  On
9  Aug.,  1864,  he  was  sent  by  Gen.  John  B.  Hood  to
capture  the  National  supplies,  burn  bridges,  and
break  up  railways  in  the  rear  of  Gen.  Sherman's
army.  Passing  through  northern  Georgia,  he  went
into  eastern  Tennessee  as  far  as  the  Kentucky  line,
and  thence  through  middle  Tennessee  back  into
northern  Alabama.  During  this  raid,  which  lasted
one  month,  he  was  continuously  engaged  and  ruined
much  property.  He  was  unsuccessful  in  destroying
Sherman's  communications,  and  was  finally  driven
back  by  the  National  cavalry.  When  the  Confed-
erate commander  became  convinced  of  the  impossi-
bility of  arresting  Sherman's  advance,  Wheeler  was
sent  in  front  of  the  army  to  prevent  the  National
troops  from  raiding  and  foraging.  Pie  then  en-
gaged in  the  defence  of  Savannah,  and  for  his
defence  of  Aiken  received  the  thanks  of  the  legis-
lature of  South  Carolina.  Gen.  Wheeler  received
his  promotion  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-general  on
28  Feb.,  1865,  and  continued  in  charge  of  the  cav-
alry under  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston  until  the  sur-
render in  April,  1865.  The  death  of  Gen.  James
E.  B.  Stuart,  on  11  May,  1864,  made  him  senior
cavalry  general  of  the  Confederate  armies.  After
the  war,  he  studied  law,  which  profession  and  the
occupation  of  cotton-planting  he  followed  until
1880,  when  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, and  took  his  seat  on  5  Dec,  1881 ;  but  his
place  was  successfully  contested  by  William  M.
Lowe,  and  he  was  unseated,  3  June,  1882.  He  was
re-elected  to  the  same  congress  on  the  death  of
Mr.  Lowe,  a  few  months  later,  and  has  served  since
4  March,  1885.  In  January,  1888,  he  was  appointed
a  regent  of  the  Smithsonian  institution.

WHEELER,  Nathaniel,  inventor,  b.  in  Water-
town,  Conn.,  7  Sept.,  1820.  He  was  educated  in
the  public  schools,  began  life  as  a  carriage  manu-
facturer, and  continued  in  that  business  till  about
1848.  In  1850  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  Allan
B.  Wilson,  who  was  engaged  in  perfecting  a  sewing-
machine,  but  needed  aid  in  patenting  his  invention
and  introducing  it  to  the  public.  Wilson  induced
Mr.  Wheeler  to  join  in  that  enterprise,  and  in  1852
the  machine  was  patented  in  the  firm-name  of
Wheeler  and  Wilson.  In  1853  the  Wheeler  and
Wilson  manufacturing  company  was  founded.  Mr.
Wheeler's  knowledge  of  machinery  and  his  ability
as  an  organizer  enabled  him  to  expand  the  sewing-
machine  manufacture  from  the  little  factory  that
could  make  but  one  machine  a  day  to  an  establish-
ment that  has  facilities  for  producing  600  machines
a  day.  Since  1850,  as  president  of  the  Wheeler  and
Wilson  sewing-machine  company,  he  has  created  a
market  for  more  than  1,200,000  sewing-machines.
He  has  served  six  sessions  in  the  senate  and  house
of  the  Connecticut  legislature,  and  has  taken  out
patents  for  various  inventions  in  sewing-machines,
railway-cars,  heating  and  ventilation  of  buildings,
and  wood  finishing.

WHEELER,  Orlando  Belina,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  Lodi,  Mich.,  29  Nov.,  1835.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Michigan  in  1862,  after
taking  both  the  scientific  and  classical  courses,  and
in  1801-'2  was  acting  assistant  in  the  astronomical
observatory  of  that  institution  under  Dr.  Francis
Brilnnow.  After  his  graduation  he  entered  the
service  of  the  U.  S.  lake  survey  as  assistant  engi-
neer, which  office  he  held  until  1882. Meanwhile


he  was  detailed  to  serve  as  assistant  astronomer
under  Prof.  Asaph  Hall  in  1874,  on  the  expedition
to  Siberia  to  observe  the  transit  of  Venus,  and  in
1878  he  served  similarly  with  the  total  eclipse  ex-
pedition in  Colorado,  and  in  1882  he  accompanied
the  party  under  Lieut.  Samuel  M.  Very,  U.  S.  navy,
that  was  sent  to  Patagonia  to  observe  the  transit
of  Venus.  The  degree  of  C.  E.  was  conferred  on
him  by  the  University  of  Michigan  in  1879,  and  he
is  a  member  of  scientific  societies.  Since  1884  he
has  been  U.  S.  assistant  engineer  under  the  Mis-
souri river  commission.  His  writings,  principally
reports,  have  appeared  in  the  annual  volumes  of
the  chief  of  engineers  of  the  U.  S.  army,  and  of
the  superintendent  of  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory.

WHEELER,  Samuel,  blacksmith,  b.  in  Wecca-
co,  Philadelphia  co.,  Pa.,  in  1742 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  10  May,  1820.  During  the  Revolution
he  served  in  the  American  army.  His  reputation
as  a  blacksmith  reached  Gen.  Washington,  who
one  day  sent  for  him  and  told  him  he  wished  a
chain  made  to  place  across  Hudson  river  at  West
Point,  to  arrest  the  British  ships.  Wheeler  said
he  could  make  it,  but  not  away  from  his  forge.
"  Then,"  said  Washington,  -"  I  cheerfully  give  you
dismissal  from  the  army.  Badly  as  we  want  men,
we  cannot  afford  to  keep  such  a  man  as  you."
Wheeler  made  the  chain ;  it  was  moved  in  links
through  New  Jersey,  hung  across  the  river,  and  did
good  service.  He  made  a  cannon  out  of  bars  of
iron,  by  welding,  which  was  used  at  the  battle  of
the  Brandywine,  and  was  the  wonder  and  admira-
tion of  the  American  officers.  It  was  without
hoops,  lighter  than  brass  ordnance,  had  a  longer
range,  and  was  more  accurate  in  its  effect.  Napo-
leon I.  took  it  as  a  model,  and  had  cannon  for  his
flying  artillery  manufactured  after  its  pattern,  it
having  been  captured  at  the  Brandywine,  and  sent
to  London,  where  it  was  exhibited  in  the  Tower.
Wheeler  also  made  many  improvements  in  me-
chanics, among  which  were  scale-beams  that  would
weigh  a  ton,  and  could  be  turned  by  a  12^-cent
piece ;  hay-scales,  hoisting-machines,  screws,  and
lanterns  for  light-houses.  He  also  adopted  a  suc-
cessful mode  for  laying  the  stone  for  light-houses,
and  superintended  the  building  of  that  at  Cape
Henlopen,  Del.,  and  that  at  Castle  Williams,  Gov-
ernor's island,  New  York  harbor.

WHEELER,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  England
about  1620;  d.  in  Concord,  Mass.,  16  Dec,  1686.
He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1642,  settled  in
Concord,  Mass.,  and  participated  in  King  Philip's
war,  in  which  he  was  wounded.  In  July,  1675,  he
was  appointed  a  military  escort  to  Capt.  Edward
Hutchinson,  of  Boston,  who  was  commissioned  by
the  council  to  treat  with  the  sachems  in  the  Nip-
muck  country.  His  "  Narrative  "  of  this  expedi-
tion, a  pious  and  quaintly  worded  document,  is
preserved  in  the  "  Collections  "  of  the  New  Hamp-
shire historical  society.

WHEELER,  William  Adolphus,  philologist,
b.  in  Leicester,  Mass.,  14  Nov.,  1833 ;  d.  in  Rox-
bury.  Mass.,  28  Oct.,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1853,  taught  for  several  years,  and,  re-
moving to  Cambridge,  Mass.,  assisted  Dr.  Joseph
E.  Worcester  in  the  preparation  of  his  Dictionary.
For  several  years  afterward  he  engaged  in  similar
work,  contributed  to  the  quarto  edition  of  Noah
Webster's  Dictionary  (Springfield,  Mass.,  1864),  and
prepared  for  it  an  "Explanatory  and  Pronouncing
Vocabulary  of  the  Names  of  Noted  Fictitious  Per-
sons and  Places,  including  Familiar  Pseudonyms,
Surnames,  etc,"  which  was  also  issued  separately
(Boston,  1865).  He  became  connected  with  the
Boston  public  library  in  1866,  and  afterward  super-


WHEELER


WHEELOCK


455


intendent  of  the  catalogue  department.  He  was  a
careful  and  laborious  student  of  Shakespeare,  and
made  collections  for  a  cyclopaedia  of  Shakespearian
literature.  Among  his  other  works  are  revisions
of  the  school  editions  of  Webster's  Dictionary,  an
abridgment  of  that  work,  and  editions  of  the  Rev.
Charles  Hole's  '-Brief  Biographical  Dictionary"
(New  York,  1866);  "Mother  Goose's  Melodies,"
with  antiquarian  and  philological  notes  (1869) ;  and
a  "  Dickens  Dictionary  "  (1873).  He  left  in  manu-
script an  index  to  anonymous  literature  entitled
"Who  Wrote  It?"

WHEELER,  William  Almon,  statesman,  b.
in  Malone,  Franklin  co.,  N.  Y.,  30  June,  1819 ;  d.
there,  4  June,  1887.  He  studied  at  the  University
of  Vermont  for  two  years,  but  was  compelled  by
the  death  of  his  father  to  leave  college  without

being  graduated.
He  then  began  the
study  of  law  un-
der Asa  Hascall  in
Malone,  N.  Y.,  was
admitted  to  the
bar  in  1845,  and
succeeded  Mr.  Has-
call as  IT.  S.  dis-
trict attorney  of
Franklin  county,
which  post  he  held
till  1849.  At  that
time  his  political
sympathies  were
with the Whig

Sarty,  by  which
e  was  chosen  to
the  assembly  in
1849,  but  in  the
early  part  of  the  Fremont  canvass  in  1856  he  sup-
ported the  newly  formed  Republican  party,  re-
maining in  it  until  his  death.  An  affection  of  the
throat  compelled  him  to  abandon  the  practice  of
law-  in  1851,  and  from  that  year  till  1866  he  was
connected  with  a  bank  in  Malone.  He  became
president  of  the  Northern  New  York  railroad  com-
pany about  the  same  time,  and  for  twelve  years
was  supervisory  manager  of  the  line  from  Rouse's
Point  to  Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.  He  was  a  member
and  president  pro  tempore  of  the  state  senate  in
1858-'9,  and  was  chosen  to  congress  in  1860  as  a
Republican;  but,  after  serving  one  term,  returned
to  his  railroad  and  banking  interests.  He  was
president  of  the  New  York  constitutional  con-
vention in  1867,  returned  to  congress  in  1869,  and
served  continuously  till  1877.  During  that  time
he  was  chairman  of  the  committees  on  the  Pacific
railroad  company  and  commerce,  a  member  of
those  on  appropriations  and  southern  affairs,  and
was  the  first  in  either  house  to  cover  his  back-pay
into  the  treasury,  after  the  passage  of  the  back-
salary  act.  He  was  also  the  author  of  the  famous
"  compromise  "  in  the  adjustment  of  the  political
disturbances  in  Louisiana,  by  which  William  Pitt
Kellogg  was  recognized  as  governor,  and  the  state
legislature  became  Republican  in  the  senate  and
Democratic  in  the  house.  In  1876  he  was  nomi-
nated for  the  vice-presidency  by  the  Republican
national  convention,  and  he  took  his  seat  as  pre-
siding officer  of  the  senate  in  March,  1877.  On
the  expiration  of  his  term  in  1881  he  returned  to
Malone,  and  did  not  again  enter  public  life.  Mr.
Wheeler  was  a  man  of  most  excellent  character
and  of  great  liberality.

WHEELOCK,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Clare-
mont,  N.  H.,  14  Dec.  1812;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  21  Jan.,  1865. He  was  educated  in  the  com-


mon schools  of  New  Hampshire  and  New  York
and  became  a  farmer  and  provision-dealer  in
Oneida  county,  N.  Y.  Immediately  after  the  fall
of  Fort  Sumter  he  abandoned  business  and  de-
voted his  time  to  raising  recruits,  pledging  himself
to  provide  for  their  families.  In  the  summer  of
1861  he  had  thus  given  or  pledged  $5,000,  about
half  of  his  possessions.  Soon  afterward  he  raised
the  97th  New  York  regiment,  of  which  he  became
colonel  on  10  March,  1862,  and  subsequently  he  en-
gaged actively  in  the  war  in  the  Army  of  "the  Po-
tomac, being  taken  prisoner  at  the  second  battle  of
Bull  Run,  and  serving,  after  his  exchange,  till  his
death  from  disease.  On  19  Aug.,  1864,  he  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.

WHEELOCK,  Eleazar,  educator,  b.  in  Wind-
ham, Conn.,  22  April,  1711 ;  d.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,
24  April,  1779.  His  great-grandfather,  Rev.  Ralph
Wheelock  (1600-'83).  an  eminent  non-conformist
clergyman,  came  to  New  England  in  1637,  was  a
founder  of  the  1st  church  in  Dedham,  Mass.,  in
1638,  and  thence  removed  to  Medfield,  where  he
was  a  large  land-owner  and  a  representative  to  the
general  court.  Ralph's  son,  Eleazar,  commanded  a
cavalry  company  against  the  Indians,  and  the  lat-
ter's  son,  Ralph,  was  a  farmer.  The  second  Ralph's
son,  Eleazar,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1733,  hav-
ing been  educated  with  the  proceeds  of  a  legacy
that  had  been  left  by  his  grandfather,  Capt.  Elea-
zar, for  that  purpose.  He  then  studied  divinity,
and  in  1735  was  ordained  over  the  2d  church  in
Lebanon,  Conn.,  where  he  labored  thirty-five  years.
In  the  year  of  his  settlement  there  was  a  great  re-
vival of  religion  in  his  flock.  During  its  progress
he  encountered  opposition  both  from  those  that
were  more  conservative  than  he  and  from  the  more
radical,  yet  he  entered  into  his  work  with  zeal,
preaching  in  one  year  "  a  hundred  more  sermons
than  there  are  days  in  the  year."  Several  years
later,  his  salary  being  insufficient  for  his  support,
he  began  to  take  pupils  into  his  house,  and  in  1743
he  received  thus  Samson  Occom  (q.  v.),  a  Mohican
Indian,  whom  he  educated.  He  now  conceived
the  plan  of  an  Indian  missionary  school,  and  by  1762
he  had  more  than  twenty  youths  under  his  charge,
chiefly  Indians.  They  were  supported  by  the  con-
tributions of  benevolent  persons,  and  the  school
received  the  name  of  Moor's  Indian  charity-school,
from  Joshua  Moor,  a  Mansfield  farmer,  who  gave  it
a  house  and  two  acres  of  land  in  Lebanon,  in  1754.
In  1766,  Occom  and  Rev.  Nathaniel  Whitaker
went  to  England,  and  by  their  exertions  an  en-
dowment of  about  £10,000  was  obtained,  most  of
which  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  board  of  trus-
tees, of  which  William  Legge  (q.  v.),  Earl  of  Dart-
mouth, was  president.  It  was  afterward  deter-
mined to  remove  the  school  to  a  new  location,  and
to  add  to  it  a  seminary  where  scholars  might  be
trained  in  the  classics,  philosophy,  and  literature.
Mr.  Wheelock  received  offers  of  land  from  various
towns,  but  finally  selected  Dresden  (now  Hanover),
N.  H.,  both  because  of  the  healthful  ness  of  the
region,  and  because  of  the  large  landed  endow-
ment that  was  proffered  by  John  Wentworth,  the
royal  governor.  A  charter  was  obtained  from
George  III.,  through  Gov.  Wentworth,  in  which
Wheelock  was  named  as  founder  and  president  of
the  college,  with  the  privilege  of  naming  his  suc-
cessor, and  also  as  a  trustee.  The  college  was
named  for  Lord  Dartmouth,  though  he  and  the
other  trustees  of  the  Indian  school  were  opposed
to  its  establishment,  and  the  institutions  therefore
remained  nominally  separate  till  1849.  In  August,
1770,  Wheelock  removed  to  Hanover,  which  was
then  a  wilderness,  and,  after  directing  the  clearing


456


WHEELOCK


WHEELWRIGHT


of  a  few  acres  and  the  building  of  one  or  two  log-
cabins,  was  joined  by  his  sons  and  pupils,  who  at
first  dwelt  in  booths  of  hemlock  boughs  and  slept
on  beds  of  the  same.  The  first  winter  was  severe,
the  buildings  were  not  far  enough  advanced  to
afford  perfect  shelter,  and  great  fortitude  was
necessary  in  both  teachers  and  students.  Four
pupils  were  graduated  at  the  first  commencement
in  1771,  but  in  the  year  of  the  founder's  death  the
number  had  increased  to  seventeen.  Dr.  Wheelock
was  afflicted  with  asthma  for  many  years,  yet  he
continued  to  preach,  and,  when  unable  to  walk,  was
repeatedly  carried  to  the  college  chapel.  His  pop-
ularity as  a  pulpit  orator  was  inferior  only  to  that
of  George  Whitefield,  and  his  scholarship  was  ad-
vanced for  his  time.  The  University  of  Edinburgh
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1767.  The  pros-
pects of  the  Indian  school  that  was  the  germ  of
Dartmouth  college  were  blighted  by  the  Revolu-
tion, in  which  many  tribes  adhered  to  the  mother
country,  yet  the  Oneidas  were  kept  from  doing  so
probably  through  its  means,  and  many  frontier
settlements  were  thus  saved  from  pillage  and  mur-
der. Dr.  Wheelock  published  a  "  Narrative  of  the
Indian  School  at  Lebanon,"  with  several  continua-
tions (1762-'75),  and  various  sermons.  See  a  "  Me-
moir," with  extracts  from  his  correspondence,  by
Rev.  David  McOlure  and  Rev.  Elijah  Parish  (New-
buryport,  Mass.,  1811). — His  son,  John,  educator,
b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,  28  Jan.,  1754 :  d.  in  Hano-
ver, N.  H,  4  April,  1817,  entered  Yale  in  1767,  but
accompanied  his  father  to  New  Hampshire  in  1770,
and  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  with  the  first
class  in  1771.  He  was  a  tutor  in  1772-'4,  a  mem-
ber of  the  Provincial  congress  in  the  latter  year,
and  in  1775  a  delegate  to  the  assembly.  In  the
spring  of  1777  he  was  appointed  a  major  in  the
service  of  the  state  of  New  York,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing November  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant-
colonel  in  the  Continental  army.  He  was  sent  by
Gen.  John  Stark  on  an  expedition  against  the  In-
dians in  1778,  and  then  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
Horatio  Gates  till  he  was  recalled  to  Hanover  by
his  father's  death  in  1779.  In  the  same  year  he
was  chosen  to  succeed  his  father  in  the  presidency  of
the  college,  though  he  was  but  twenty-five  years  old,
and  in  1782  he  was  given  the  chair  of  civil  and  eccle-
siastical history.  In  1783  the  trustees  sent  him  to
Europe  to  raise  funds,  where  by  the  good  offices
of  Benjamin  Franklin  and  John  Adams,  and  by
letters  of  introduction  from  Washington  and  the
French  minister,  he  was  moderately  successful.
In  England  he  made  arrangements  concerning  the
interrupted  income  of  the  college,  and  procured
philosophical  instruments  and  other  donations ;
but  on  his  return  he  was  shipwrecked  off  Cape
Cod,  and  lost  the  box  that  contained  his  money  and
papers.  During  President  Wheelock's  administra-
tion of  thirty-six  vears  the  college  was  in  a  flourish-
ing condition.  Under  him  the  present  Dartmouth
hall  was  built  in  1786,  and  the  medical  department
was  established  in  1798.  In  1815,  in  consequence
of  questions  of  religious  opinion  and  differences
with  the  trustees,  he  was  removed  from  office  by
the  latter,  and  this  act  occasioned  a  violent  con-
troversy. The  public  in  general  sided  with  Dr.
Wheelock,  and  trie  legislature,  asserting  their  right
to  alter  the  charter,  reorganized  the  college  in
1816  as  Dartmouth  university,  with  a  new  board
of  trustees.  These  reinstated  Dr.  Wheelock  in
1817,  but  he  died  a  few  months  later.  Meanwhile
the  old  board  began  suit  for  the  recovery  of  the
college  property.  They  lost  their  case  in  the  state
supreme  court,  but  won  it  on  appeal  to  the  U.  S.
supreme  court,  and  the  new  charter  and  board  of


trustees  went  out  of  existence.  In  this  case,  which
is  called  the  "  Dartmouth  college  case,"  Daniel
Webster  laid  the  foundation  of  his  reputation  as  a
constitutional  lawyer. Dr.  Wheelock  had  received


the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1789.
He  left  half  his  estate  to  Princeton  theological
seminary.  He  published  an  "  Essay  on  the  Beau-
ties and  Excellences  of  Painting,  Music,  and  Po-
etry "  (1774) ;  "  Eulogy  on  Prof.  John  Smith.  D.  D.*'
(1809) ;  and  "  Sketches  of  the  History  of  Dartmouth
College"  (1816). — His  only  daughter,  Maria  Mal-
leville,  married  Dr.  William  Allen,  president  of
Bowdoin  college.  The  illustration  is  a  view  of  the
Wilson  library,  the  finest  of  the  present  buildings
of  Dartmouth  college.

WHEELOCK,  Joseph  A.,  journalist,  b.  in
Bridgstone,  Nova  Scotia,  8  Feb.,  1831.  He  was
educated  at  Sackville  academy,  New  Brunswick,
and  in  1850  became  a  resident  of  Minnesota.  For
the  next  few  years  he  was  engaged  in  various
clerical  employments,  and  in  1856  he  became  edi-
tor of  the  "  Real  Estate  and  Financial  Advertiser,"
a  weekly  newspaper  in  St.  Paul.  In  1858  and  1859
he  was  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the  St.  Paul  "  Pio-
neer." In  1860  and  1861  he  was  commissioner  of
statistics  of  Minnesota.  In  the  latter  year,  with  oth-
ers, he  founded  the  St.  Paul  "  Press,"  and  in  1862
became  its  editor.  Since  that  time  he  has  been
editor  of  the  St.  Paul  "  Press  "  and  the  "  Pioneer
Press." In  1871-5  he  was  postmaster  at  St.  Paul.

WHEELOCK,  Julia  Susan,  hospital  nurse,  b.
in  Avon,  Ohio,  7  Oct.,  1833.  She  was  taken  to  Erie
county,  Pa.,  in  1837,  and  in  1855  went  to  Michigan,
where  she  was  educated  in  Kalamazoo  college.  In
September,  1862,  she  was  summoned  from  Ionia,
Mich.,  where  she  was  teaching,  to  the  bedside  of
her  brother,  who  had  been  wounded  at  the  second
battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  after  his  death  she  con-
tinued to  serve  in  hospitals  till  the  end  of  the  war.
In  1865-'73  she  held  a  clerkship  in  the  U.  S.  treas-
ury department,  and  on  28  May,  1873,  she  married
Parter  C.  Freeman,  with  whom  she  has  since  re-
sided in  Middleville,  Mich.,  and  Springfield,  Mo.
Her  journal  was  published  as  •*  The  Boys  in  White :
the  Experience  of  a  Hospital  Agent  in  and  around
Washington  "  (New  York,  1870).

WHEELWRIGHT,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lincolnshire,  England,  about  1592 ;  d.  in  Salis-
bury, Mass.,  15  Nov.,  1679.  He  was  graduated  at
Cambridge  in  1614,  and,  entering  the  ministry  of
the  established  church,  was  vicar  of  Bilsby,  near
Alford,  but  he  became  a  Puritan,  and  in  1636
emigrated  to  Boston  to  escape  persecution.  He
was  made  pastor  of  a  church  at  Mount  Wollaston
(now  Braintree),  and  his  sympathy  with  the  re-
ligious opinions  of  his  sister-in-law,  Anne  Hutchin-
son, caused  dissensions,  which  were  increased  by  a
sermon  that  he  delivered  in  Boston  on  the  occasion
of  a  fast  that  had  been  appointed  by  the  general
court  in  January,  1637. A  majority  of  the  con-


WHEELWRIGHT


WHEILDON


457


gregation  approved  it,  but  he  was  tried  by  the
general  court  and  pronounced  guilty  of  sedition
and  contempt,  "  for  that  the  court  had  appointed
the  fast  as  a  means  of  reconciliation  of  differences,
and  he  purposely  set  himself  to  kindle  them."  In
November,  1(337,  he  was  banished,  and  in  1638,
with  a  company  of  friends,  he  founded  Exeter,
N.  H.,  and  became  its  pastor.  Five  years  later,  as
the  town  came  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Massachu-
setts, he  obtained  a  grant  of  land  from  Sir  Ferdi-
nando  Gorges,  in  Wells,  Me.,  and  removed  thither
with  part  of  his  church.  In  1644  his  sentence  of
banishment  was  revoked,  on  his  admission  that  he
had  been  partially  in  the  wrong,  and  in  1646  he
returned  to  Massachusetts,  where  he  was  for  six
years  pastor  at  Hampton.  About  1657  he  returned
to  England,  where  he  was  well  received  by  Oliver
Cromwell,  who  had  been  his  fellow-student  and
friend ;  but  in  1660  he  came  again  to  this  country,
and  after  1662  he  was  pastor  at  Salisbury.  The
genuineness  of  an  Indian  deed  to  Mr.  Wheelwright,
dated  1629,  has  been  the  subject  of  much  contro-
versy. He  published  "  Mercurius  Americanus "
in  answer  to  Thomas  Wilde's  "  Rise,  Reign,  and
Ruin  of  the  Familists,  Libertines,  etc.,  in  New
England  "  (London,  1645),  and  his  "  Vindication  "
(1654).  The  sermon  that  caused  his  banishment
is  in  the  possession  of  the  Massachusetts  historical
society,  and  was  published  in  its  "  Collections,"
edited  by  Charles  Deane  (1867).  His  "  Writings,
with  a  Paper  on  the  Genuineness  of  the  Indian
Deed  of  1629,  and  a  Memoir,"  by  Charles  H.  Bell,
have  been  published  by  the  Prince  society  (Bos-
ton, 1876). — His  descendant,  William,  capitalist,
b.  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  in  1798 ;  d.  in  London,
England,  26  Sept.,  1873,  was  apprenticed  to  a
printer,  but  early  entered  the  merchant  marine,

and  when  he  was
nineteen  years  old
commanded  a  bark
that  was  bound  to
Rio  Janeiro.  In  1823
he  was  in  charge  of
the  "  Rising  Em-
pire," which  was
wrecked  near  the
mouth  of  La  Plata
river,  and  on  his
arrival  in  Buenos
Ayres  he  became
supercargo  on  a  ves-
sel bound  for  Valpa-
raiso. Thencefor-
ward his  home  was
in  South  America.
In  1824-'9  he  was
U.  S.  consul  at  Gua-
yaquil, Ecuador,
and  in  the  latter  year  removed  to  Valparaiso.  In
1829  he  established  a  line  of  passenger  vessels  be-
tween Valparaiso  and  Cobija,  and  in  1835  began
his  efforts  to  establish  a  line  of  steamers  on  the
west  coast.  He  was  three  years  in  obtaining  the
necessary  concessions  from  the  Pacific  coast  coun-
tries. Chili  granted  him  her  permission  in  August,
1835,  but  the  more  northern  countries  were  slow  to
see  the  advantages  of  his  plan.  In  1838,  after  vain-
ly endeavoring  to  enlist  American  capital  in  his  en-
terprise, he  went  to  England,  where  he  was  more
successful.  His  scheme  embraced  the  adoption
of  the  route  across  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  and
the  result  was  the  formation  of  the  Pacific  steam
navigation  company,  with  a  capital  of  £250,000.
In  1840  he  accompanied  his  new  steamers,  the
"  Chili "  and  "  Peru,"  through  the  Straits  of  Ma-


gellan. He  was  received  with  unbounded  enthu-
siasm at  Valparaiso  and  Callao,  but  the  steamers
were  laid  up  for  three  months  on  account  of  lack
of  coal,  and  to  supply  them  Wheelwright  began
to  operate  mines  in  Chili,  which  proved  very  pro-
ductive. He  met  with  trouble  at  every  step,  and
it  was  not  until  1845  that  his  plan  was  com-
pleted by  the  extension  of  his  line  to  Panama.  The
Pacific  steam  navigation  company,  of  which  he
was  the  founder,  operated  fifty-four  steamers  in
1876.  Mr.  Wheelwright  suggested  in  1842,  and
afterward  built,  a  railroad  from  Santiago  to  Val-
paraiso. In  1849-'52  he  constructed  the  railroad
from  the  port  of  Caldera,  which  he  created,  to
Copiapo,  and  in  1855  he  planned  a  railway  from
Caldera  across  the  Andes  to  Rosario,  on  the  Parana,
934  miles.  This  was  opened  from  Rosario  to  Cor-
doba, in  the  Argentine  Republic,  in  1870,  but  its
completion  was  postponed  for  years  by  the  action
of  the  government,  which  rescinded  its  conces-
sions on  Wheelwright's  refusal  to  negotiate  a  loan
of  $30,000,000,  which  he  suspected  was  to  be  di-
verted to  the  construction  of  iron-clads,  from  its
ostensible  purpose  of  building  the  road.  In  1872
he  completed  a  railway,  thirty  miles  long,  from
Buenos  Ayres  to  the  harbor  of  Ensenada,  on  the
Atlantic  coast,  whose  great  advantages  as  a  port
he  had  long  urged.  Wheelwright  also  constructed
the  first  telegraph  line,  the  first  gas  and  water
works,  and  the  first  iron  pier  in  South  America.
He  gave  for  benevolent  purposes  during  his  life
about  $600,000,  and  left  one  ninth  of  his  estate
(about  $100,000)  to  found  a  scientific  school  in
Newburyport.  His  full-length  portrait  was  placed
in  the  Merchants'  exchange  at  Valparaiso  by  his
friends,  and  a  bronze  statue  of  him  has  been
erected  by  the  board  of  trade  in  the  same  city.
He  published  "  Statements  and  Documents  rela-
tive to  the  Establishment  of  Steam  Navigation
in  the  Pacific "  (London,  1838)  and  "  Observa-
tions on  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  "  (London,  1844).
His  life  was  written  by  Juan  B.  Alberdi,  minis-
ter of  the  Argentine  Republic  to  England  and
France,  under  the  title  of  "  La  Vida  y  los  traba-
jos  industriales  de  William  Wheelwright  en  la
America  del  Sud "  (Paris,  1876 ;  English  trans-
lation, with  introduction  by  Caleb  Cushing,  Bos-
ton, 1877).  See  also  "  Biographical  Sketch  of
William  Wheelwright,  of  Newburyport,  Mass.."  by
Capt.  John  Codman  (Philadelphia,  1888).— Will-
iam's cousin,  John  Tyler,  lawyer,  b.  in  Rox-
bury,  Mass.,  28  Feb.,  1856,  is  the  son  of  George  W.
Wheelwright.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1876,  and  at  the  law-school  in  1878,  and  practised
his  profession  in  Boston.  Mr.  Wheelwright  was  a
founder  of  the  Harvard  "  Lampoon  "  in  1876,  and
has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  "  Life."  He  is
the  author  of  dramatic  sketches,  which  have  been
read  in  public  by  George  Riddle ;  "  Rollo's  Jour-
ney to  Cambridge,"  with  Frederick  J.  Stimson  (Bos-
ton, 1880);  "The  King's  Men,"  with  Mr.  Stimson,
John  Boyle  O'Reilly,  and  Robert  Grant  (New  York,
1882) ;  and  «  A  Child  of  the  Century  "  (1886).

WHEILDON,  William  Willder,  author,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  17  Oct.,  1805.  His  father  was  a
native  of  Birmingham,  England.  The  son  was
apprenticed  to  Nathaniel  Greene,  a  printer,  at
Haverhill,  Mass.,  in  1820,  and  in  the  next  year  re-
moved with  Greene  to  Boston,  where  he  became
foreman  in  the  office  of  his  newspaper,  the  "  Ameri-
can Statesman."  and  its  assistant  editor.  In  May,
1827,  he  established  at  Charlestown  the  "Bunker
Hill  Aurora,"  of  which  he  continued  as  editor  and
publisher  till  September,  1870.  Since  1850  he  has
resided  in  Concord,  Mass. Mr.  Wheildon  has  held


458


WHELAN


WHELAN


various  local  public  offices.  His  paper,  the  "Au-
rora," was  begun  under  the  favor  of  Edward
Everett,  whose  personal  friend  the  editor  was  for
many  years.  Besides  occasional  poems,  Mr.  Wheil-
don's  publications  include  "  Letters  from  Nahant "
(Charlestown,  1848) ;  "  Memoir  of  Solomon  Wil-
lard.  Architect  and  Superintendent  of  the  Bunker
Hill  Monument,"  which  he  prepared  as  chairman
of  a  committee  of  the  Monument  association
(Boston,  1865)  :  "  Contributions  to  Thought,"  a
volume  of  lectures  and  essays  (Concord,  1874)  ;
"  New  History  of  the  Battle  of  Bunker  Hill "
(1875) ;  "  Siege  and  Evacuation  of  Boston  and
Charlestown  *  (1876) ;  "  Sentry  or  Beacon  Hill :
the  Beacon  and  the  Monument  of  1635  and  1790"
(Concord,  1877) ;  "  Paul  Revere's  Signal  Lanterns  "
(1878);  and  "Curiosities  of  History"  (1880).  He
made  the  climate  of  the  arctic  regions  a  subject
of  special  study,  and  in  1860  read  a  paper  before
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science  on  an  "  Atmospheric  Theory  of  the  Open
Polar  Sea,"  which  was  followed  by  others  on  the
subject,  the  last  being  "  Remarks  on  the  Last
Circular  of  Dr.  Peterman  "  (Portland,  1873).

WHELAN,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1745 ;  d.  in  Maryland  in  1809.  He  was  a
member  of  the  order  of  Franciscans,  and  served  as
a  chaplain  on  one  of  the  French  ships  of  Admiral
De  Grasse's  fleet  in  the  war  of  the  American  Revo-
lution. Gen.  Lafayette,  it  is  claimed,  strongly
recommended  Mr.  Whelan  to  the  kindness  of  the
authorities  of  New  York  state  before  he  returned
to  France,  and  he  soon  afterward  became  the  first
regularly  settled  priest  in  the  city  of  New  York.
Having  disagreed  with  his  congregation,  he  was
dismissed  in  February,  1787,  and  was  subsequently
sent  by  Bishop  Carroll  on  a  mission  to  Kentucky,
being  the  first  missionary  of  the  Roman  Catholic
church  in  that  state.

WHELAN,  James,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Kilkenny,
Ireland,  8  Dec,  1823;  d.  in  Zanesville,  Ohio,  18
Feb.,  1878.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States
with  his  parents  in  1833,  in  1839  entered  the  Do-
minican novitiate  in  Springfield,  Ky.,  and  took  the
vows  in  1842.  He  finished  his  course  of  philosophy
and  theology  in  the  Dominican  convent  at  Somer-
set, Ohio,  and  was  ordained  a  priest  on  2  Aug.,
1846.  He  was  engaged  in  missionary  duties  in
Somerset  and  its  neighborhood  until  1852,  when
he  was  elected  president  of  St.  Joseph's  college,
Perry  co.,  Ohio.  In  1854  he  was  made  provincial
of  the  Dominican  province,  which  included  all  the
United  States  except  the  Pacific  coast.  Having
been  nominated  coadjutor  to  Bishop  Miles,  of
Nashville,  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Marcopolis
in  partibus  on  8  May,  1859.  He  became  bishop  of
Nashville  on  the  death  of  Dr.  Miles  on  21  Feb.,
1860,  and  at  once  began  to  enlarge  the  cathedral,
established  an  academy  and  boarding-school,  and
founded  schools  and  an  orphan  asylum.  Having
obtained  permission  to  pass  through  the  lines  to
visit  Bishop  Spalding  at  Louisville,  he  was  ac-
cused, on  his  return,  of  making  remarks  in  the
National  lines  which  the  Confederates  thought  had
influenced  the  movements  of  the  National  army.
The  reproaches  of  which  he  was  the  object  on  Ihe
occasion,  combined  with  his  inability  to  find  a
remedy  for  the  evils  around  him,  affected  his
mind.  In  1864  he  resigned  his  see  and  retired  to
St.  Joseph's  convent  for  a  time.  He  published
"  Catena  Aurea,  or  a  Golden  Chain  of  Evidences
demonstrating,  from  Analytical  Treatment  of  His-
tory, that  Papal  Infallibility  is  no  Novelty,"  which
is  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  learned  and  exhaust-
ive treatises  on  this  question  (1871).


WHELAN,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  County  Wex-
ford, Ireland,  in  1800;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  5  Feb.,
1871.  He  received  a  classical  education  in  his
native  county,  volunteered  for  missionary  duty  in
the  United  States,  finished  his  theological  course
in  the  diocesan  seminary  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  and
was  ordained  by  Bishop  England  in  1830.  He  was
given  charge  of  the  eastern  part  of  North  Caro-
lina, and  in  1833  was  transferred  to  Locust  Grove
church,  a  mission  that  embraced  northeastern
Georgia,  where  he  remained  until  1850.  He  ad-
ministered the  diocese  of  Savannah  from  1859  till
1861,  and  as  administrator  took  part  in  the  eighth
provincial  council  of  Baltimore,  where  he  was  of-
fered the  vacant  see,  but  declined.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  general  chaplain  at  all  the  stations
in  Georgia  from  Anderson  to  Tybee.  In  this  capa-
city his  devotion  to  the  National  prisoners  was
very  marked,  especially  at  Andersonville,  where
he  shared  with  them  all  he  possessed,  even  to  his
wearing-apparel.  He  was  engaged  in  administer-
ing the  sacraments  to  the  sick  at  Fort  Pulaski
when  it  was  taken,  and  was  sent  a  prisoner  to  the
north.  He  was  confined  in  Fort  Lafayette  for
some  time,  and,  on  his  release,  returned  to  Georgia.

WHELAN,  Richard  Vincent,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  28  Jan.,  1809;  d.  there,  7  July,
1874.  He  was  educated  in  Mount  St.  Mary's  col-
lege, Emmitsburg,  and  afterward  studied  theology
in  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  Paris.  He  was
ordained  a  priest
in  1832,  and  after
his  return  to  the
United  States  was
appointed  pastor
of  Harper's  Ferry,
at  the  same  time
attending  neigh-
boring missions.
He  was  nominat-
ed second  bish-
op of  Richmond
on  19  Dec,  1840,
and  consecrated
at  Baltimore  by
Archbishop  Eccle-
son  on  21  March,
1841.  There  were
but  6,000  Roman
Catholics  and  six  ~t~
priests  inVirginia,
and,  in  order  to  increase  the  number  of  the  latter,
he  appealed  for  help  to  the  societies  for  the  propa-
gation of  the  faith  in  Europe,  receiving  a  liberal
response.  He  founded  schools  at  Martinsburg.  In
order  to  continue  the  supply  of  priests  for  his  dio-
cese, he  purchased  land  near  Richmond  and  erected
a  theological  seminary.  He  established  missions  at
Witheville,  Summersville,  Kingwood,  and  Lynch-
burg. In  1846  he  went  to  Wheeling,  where  Roman
Catholics  were  increasing  in  numbers,  and  labored
as  a  simple  priest  on  this  mission.  Feeling  that  his
personal  supervision  was  required  to  build  up  the
church  in  western  Virginia,  he  removed  there,  and
never  returned.  He  erected  a  cathedral  at  Wheel-
ing, founded  schools,  and  opened  an  ecclesiastical
seminary  in  his  own  house,  in  which  he  trained
young  men  for  the  priesthood.  He  attended  the
seventh  provincial  council  of  Baltimore  in  1849.
In  1850  the  bishopric  of  Wheeling  was  created,
and  Dr.  Whelan  was  made  its  first  bishop.  His
efforts  to  develop  Roman  Catholicism  in  this  dis-
trict involved  him  in  heavy  debt,  and  in  1857  he
went  to  seek  assistance  in  Europe,  where  he  ob-
tained aid  that  enabled  him  to  labor  with  renewed


/YCOUo~^J 7. (AjhA&~^


WHELPLEY


WHIPPLE


459


energy.  He  began  a  college  at  Wheeling  in  1866,
and  opened  several  academies.  lie  was  present  at
the  Vatican  council  in  1869-'70,  and  addressed  that
body  on  some  of  the  most  important  questions  be-
fore it.  He  opposed  the  definition  of  the  dogma
of  papal  infallibility,  but  submitted  to  the  decision
of  the  council,  declaring  that  his  opposition  did
not  arise  from  disbelief  in  its  truth,  but  from  the
fact  that  he  believed  its  definition  at  the  time  in-
opportune. At  the  beginning  of  the  administra-
tion of  Bishop  Whelan  the  diocese  of  Wheeling
contained  two  churches  and  two  priests,  and  was
without  Roman  Catholic  schools  or  institutions  of
any  kind.  At  his  death  there  were  48  churches,
40  stations  where  religious  services  were  held,  and
29  priests.  It  contained  six  academies  for  girls,
four  convents,  a  hospital,  an  orphan  asylum,  and  a
college.  The  Roman  Catholic  population  had  in-
creased from  less  than  1,000  to  18,000.

WHELPLEY,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stock-
bridge,  Mass.,  in  1766 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14
July,  1817.  His  parents  removed  to  a  farm  in
Stockbridge  from  Wilton,  Conn.  The  son  studied
theology  under  Dr.  Stephen  West,  was  ordained
to  the  Baptist  ministry  in  1792,  and  preached  in
Stockbridge  and  West  Stockbridge  till  he  took
charge  of  an  independent  church  in  Green  River,
N.  J.  In  1798-1809  he  was  at  the  head  of  an  acad-
emy in  Morristown,  N.  J.,  and  in  1806  he  was  re-
ceived into  the  ministry  of  the  Presbyterian  church.
In  1809  he  opened  a  school  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  but  in
the  latter  part  of  the  year  failing  health  forced  him
to  go  to  Savannah,  Ga.,  where  he  supported  him-
self by  teaching.  He  returned  to  Newark  in  1811,
and  in  1814  went  to  New  York,  where  he  had  charge
of  a  school  for  a  short  time,  till  his  health  failed
utterly.  Mr.  Whelpley  was  the  author  of  "  Com-
pend  of  History  from  the  Earliest  Times  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1808 ;  new  ed.,  2  vols.,  New  York,  1855) ;
"Letters  on  Capital  Punishment  and  War,"  ad-
dressed to  Gov.  Caleb  Strong  (1816) ;  and  "  The
Triangle :  a  Series  of  Numbers  upon  Three  Theo-
logical Points  enforced  from  Various  Pulpits  in
New  York,"  a  defence  of  the  so-called  New  Eng-
land theology  (New  York,  1817),  besides  single  ser-
mons, orations,  and  addresses.  He  also  wrote  oc-
casional poems,  including  an  ode  on  the  death  of
George  Washington,  which  was  sung  in  Morris-
town  at  a  commemorative  service. — His  son,  Philip
Melancthon,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,
22  Dec,  1792 ;  d.  on  Schooley's  mountain,  N.  J.,
17  July,  1824,  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian
church  in  New  York  city  from  1815  till  his  death.
He  acquired  reputation  as  a  pulpit  orator,  and  pub-
lished several  occasional  sermons. — Philip  Melanc-
thon's  son,  James  Davenport,  physician,  b.  in  New
York  city,  23  Jan.,  1817;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  15
April,  1872.  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1837,  and
entered  the  service  of  the  geological  survey  of
Pennsylvania  under  Henry  D.  Rogers,  where  he
continued  for  two  years.  He  was  graduated  at
the  medical  department  of  Yale  in  1842,  and  re-
mained in  New  Haven  until  1846,  engaging  in  the
study  of  science  and  in  literary  pursuits.  Dr.
Whelpley  then  settled  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  where
he  began  to  practise  medicine ;  but  failing  health
soon  compelled  him  to  relinquish  that  profession.
In  1847  he  removed  to  New  York  city,  where
he  became  editor  and  one  of  the  owners  of  the
"  American  Whig  Review,"  to  which  he  had  been
a  contributor  since  1845.  While  thus  engaged  he
formed,  about  1849.  a  project  of  establishing  a
commercial  colony  in  Honduras,  and  in  further-
ance of  this  enterprise  spent  two  years  in  San
Francisco,  purchasing  and  editing  one  of  the  daily


papers  there.  His  arrangements  were  disturbed
by  the  presence  of  the  filibuster,  William  Walker,
and  on  going  to  Honduras  he  was  detained  by
Walker  for  nearly  a  year  and  impressed  into  the
service  as  a  surgeon,  during  which  time  he  suffered
great  privation.  Finally  he  escaped  to  San  Fran-
cisco, whence  he  returned  early  in  1857  to  the  east
and  again  devoted  himself  to  literary  and  scientific
pursuits.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  to  whose  transac-
tions and  to  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science  "
he  contributed  papers,  principally  on  physics  and
metallurgy,  giving  the  results  of  his  researches.
The  most  important  of  these  is  "  Idea  of  an  Atom
suggested  by  the  Phenomena  of  Weight  and  Tem-
perature" (1845),  in  which  he  anticipated  Michael
Faraday's  ideas  as  set  forth  in  his  "  Thoughts  on
Ray  Visions  "  (1846) ;  and  he  was  also  the  author
of  "  Letters  on  Philosophical  Induction  "  and  "  Let-
ters on  Philosophical  Analogy,"  which  discuss  fun-
damental principles  in  scientific  methods.

WHIPPLE,  Abraham,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  16  Sept.,  1733 ;  d.  in  Marietta,
Ohio,  29  May,  1819.  Early  in  life  he  commanded
a  vessel  in  the  West  Indian  trade,  but  during  the
old  French  war  in  1759-'60  he  became  captain  of
the  privateer  "  Gamecock,"  and  captured  twenty-
three  French  vessels  in  a  single  cruise.  In  June,
1772,  he  commanded  the  volunteers  that  took  and
burned  the  British  revenue-schooner  "  Gaspe  "  in
Narragansett  bay.  This  was  the  first  popular
uprising  in  this  country  against  a  British  armed
vessel.  In  June,  1775,  Rhode  Island  fitted  out  two
armed  vessels,  of  which  Whipple  was  put  in  com-
mand, with  the  title  of  commodore.  A  few  days
later  he  chased  a  tender  of  the  British  sloop  "  Rose  "
off  the  Conanicut  shore,  capturing  her  after  sharp
firing.  In  this  engagement  Whipple  fired  the  first
gun  of  the  Revolution  on  the  water.  He  was  ap-
pointed captain  of  the  "Columbus"  on  22  Dec,
1775,  and  afterward  of  the  schooner  "Providence,"
which  captured  more  British  prizes  than  any  other
American  vessel ;  but  she  was  finally  taken,  and
Whipple  was  placed  in  command  of  a  new  frigate
of  the  same  name,  in  which,  when  Narragansett  bay
was  blockaded  by  the  British  in  1778,  he  forced  his
way,  in  a  dark  and  stormy  night,  through  the  ene-
my's fleet  by  pouring  broadsides  into  it  and  sinking
one  of  their  tenders.  At  that  time  he  was  bound
for  France  with  important  despatches  that  related
to  a  treaty  between  the  United  States  and  that
government,  and  after  a  successful  voyage  he  re-
turned in  safety  to  Boston.  In  July,  1779,  while
commanding  the  "  Providence "  as  senior  officer,
and  with  two  other  ships,  he  attacked  a  fleet  of
English  merchantmen  that  were  under  convoy  of
a  ship-of-the-line  and  some  smaller  cruisers.  He
captured  eight  prizes,  and  sent  them  to  Boston.
The  value  of  these  ships  exceeded  $1,000,000.  In
1780  he  went  to  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  an  endeavor
to  relieve  the  city,  which  at  that  time  was  besieged
by  the  British ;  but  he  was  captured  and  held  a
prisoner  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  subse-
quently became  a  farmer  at  Cranston,  R.  I.,  but  in
1788  he  connected  himself  with  the  Ohio  company,
and  settled  at  Marietta.

WHIPPLE,  Amiel  Weeks,  soldier,  b.  in  Green-
wich, Mass.,  in  1818 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  7
May,  1863.  He  studied  at  Amherst,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1841,  was
engaged  immediately  afterward  in  the  hydro-
graphic  survey  of  Patapsco  river,  and  in  1842  in
surveying  the  approaches  to  New  Orleans  and  the
harbor  of  Portsmouth,  N.  H.  In  1844  he  was  de-
tailed as  assistant  astronomer  upon the north-


460


WHIPPLE


WHIPPLE


eastern  boundary  survey,  and  in  1845  he  was  em-

Bloyed  in  determining  the  northern  boundaries  of
'ew  York,  Vermont,  and  New  Hampshire.  In
1849  he  was  appointed  assistant  astronomer  in  the
Mexican  boundary  commission,  and  in  1853  he
had  charge  of  the  Pacific  railroad  survey  along
the  35th  parallel.  In  1856  he  was  appointed
engineer  for  the  southern  light-house  district  and
superintendent  of  the  improvements  of  St.  Clair
flats  and  St.  Mary's  river.  At  the  opening  of  the
civil  war  he  at  once  applied  for  service  in  the  field,
and  was  assigned  as  chief  topographical  engineer
on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Irvin  McDowell.  In  this  ca-
pacity he  was  the  author  of  the  first  maps  of  that
part  of  Virginia  that  were  issued  during  the  war,
and  performed  creditable  service  at  the  first  battle
of  Fredericksburg.  Upon  the  second  advance  of
the  army  he  was  attached,  as  chief  topographical
engineer,  to  the  staff  of  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,
but,  being  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, was  recalled  in  May,  1862,  and  assigned  to
the  command  of  the  defences  of  Washington  south
of  Potomac  river.  His  service  here  was  so  well
performed  that  he  received  in  orders  the  thanks
of  the  president  of  the  United  States.  His  division
was  assigned  in  October,  1862,  to  the  9th  corps,
and  took  part  in  the  movement  down  the  eastern
base  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  upon  the  skirts  of  Lee's  re-
treating army.  At  Waterloo  his  division  was  at-
tached to  the  3d  army  corps,  and  he  led  it  at  the
battle  of  Fredericksburg.  At  the  battle  of  Chan-
cellorsville  it  was  much  exposed,  and  suffered  more,
probably,  in  that  engagement  than  any  other  divis-
ion of  the  army.  He  was  shot  on  Monday,  4  May,
1863,  when  the  battle  was  practically  at  an  end.
and,  living  three  days,  was  appointed  major-general
of  volunteers  for  gallantry  in  action.  He  had  re-
ceived the  brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  the
Manassas  campaign,  colonel  for  Fredericksburg,
brigadier-general  for  Chancellorsville,  and  major-
general  for  services  during  the  war — all  in  the
regular  army. — His  son,  Charles  William,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1868.
and  is  now  chief  ordnance  officer  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Missouri,  with  the  rank  of  captain.

WHIPPLE,  Edwin  Percy,  author,  b.  in  Glou-
cester, Mass.,  8  March,  1819 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
16  June,  1886.  His  father,  Matthew,  who  died
while  Edwin  was  an  infant,  is  said  to  have  had
"  strong  sense  and  fine  social  powers."  His  mother.
Lydia  Gardiner,  was  of  a  family  in  Gardiner,  Me.,
noted  for  its  mental  gifts.  She  early  removed  to
Salem,  Mass.,  where  her  son  was  educated  at  the
English  high-school.  Here  he  was  noted  for  his
precocity,  and  took  high  rank.  At  fourteen  years
of  age  he  published  articles  in  a  Salem  newspaper,
and  at  fifteen,  on  leaving  school,  he  became  a  clerk
in  the  Bank  of  general  interest.  In  1837  he  was
employed  in  the  office  of  a  large  broker's  firm  in
Boston,  and  soon  afterward  he  was  appointed  su-
perintendent of  the  news-room  and  of  the  Mer-
chants' exchange  in  State  street.  He  was  an  active
member  of  the  Mercantile  library  association,  and
one  of  a  club  of  six  that  was  an  offshoot  from  it,
and  held  its  sessions,  known  as  "  The  Attic  Nights,"
for  literary  exercises  and  debate.  There  his  com-
mand of  the  weapons  of  debate — his  skill  in  intel-
lectual fence  and  readiness  of  repartee,  sustained
by  large  stores  of  information  and  a  subtle  critical
faculty — made  him  an  acknowledged  leader.  In
1840  he  delivered  a  poem  before  the  Mercantile
library  association,  portraying  the  manners  and
satirizing  the  absurdities  of  the  day.  He  was  intro-
duced to  the  general  public  by  a  critical  article,  or
rather  panegyric,  from  his  pen,  on  Macaulay,  pub-


lished in  the  "  Boston  Miscellany  "  for  February,
1843,  which  drew  from  the  great  essayist  a  compli-
mentary letter.  The  paper  glows  with  enthusiasm,
leading  occasionally  to  exaggeration,  but  manifests
a  critical  insight,  and
a  sweep,  energy,  and
vividness  of  style,  that
indicate  the  advent  of
a  new  force  in  litera-
ture. In  October  of
the  same  year  he  gave
a  lecture  before  the
Mercantile  library  as-
sociation on  "  The
Lives  of  Authors,"  af-
ter which  he  was  con-
tinually sought  for  as
a  lecturer,  till  he  aban-
doned the  platform.
He  is  said  to  have  ad-
dressed more  than  a
thousand  audiences  in
the  northern  and  mid-
dle states,  from  Ban-
gor to  St.  Louis.  The
lectures,  which  embraced  a  wide  range  of  topics,
biographical,  critical,  and  social,  were  of  a  philo-
sophic cast,  and  abounded  in  fine  analysis,  shrewd
observation,  and  acute  insight,  relieved  by  apt
anecdote,  epigrammatic  wit,  and  poignant  satire.
Besides  lecturing  before  lyceums,  he  addressed,
on  many  occasions,  the  literary  societies  of  col-
leges, as  Brown,  Dartmouth,  Waterville.  and  Am-
herst ;  and  in  1850  was  the  Fourth-of-July  orator
before  the  city  authorities  of  Boston.  Mr.  Whip-
ple was  an  early  and  frequent  contributor  to  Amer-
ican reviews,  and  wrote  numerous  articles  for
the  magazines  and  public  journals.  Some  of  his
best  writing  is  to  be  found  in  "  Every  Saturday,"
a  weekly  paper  of  which  he  was  at  one  time  edi-
tor, in  pithy,  thoughtful  papers,  condensing  with
rare  skill  the  results  of  years  of  observation,  read-
ing, and  reflection.  His  first  published  book  was
"  Essays  and  Reviews  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1848-'9).
Among  the  best  of  its  papers  are  those  on  "  Byron,"
"  English  Poets  of  the  Nineteenth  Century,"
"  South's  Sermons,"  "  Henry  Fielding,"  and  "  Rufus
Choate."  The  portraiture  of  the  great  New  Eng-
land advocate — one  of  those  rare  and  unique  men
whose  elusive  genius  seems  to  defy  characterization,
and  baffle  all  attempts  to  label  it  and  put  it  into
any  moral  pigeon-hole — is  one  of  the  happiest  ex-
amples of  the  writer's  acute  and  discriminating
analysis.  Choate  he  pronounces  "  a  kind  of  Mira-
beau-Peel,"  who  "combines  a  conservative  intellect
with  a  radical  sensibility " ;  whose  emotions,  like
well-trained  troops,  are  "impetuous  by  rule."  "A
fiery  and  fusing  imagination  lies  at  the  centre  of
his  large  and  flexible  nature,  and  is  the  chief  source
of  his  power."

Mr.  Whipple's  next  work  was  "  Literature  and
Life"  (1849).  a  thin  volume  containing  his  lectures
on  "  Authors,"  "  Wit  and  Humor,"  "  The  Ludicrous
Side  of  Life,"  "  Genius,"  and  others.  In  1871  a  new
edition  was  published,  containing  several  addition-
al papers.  In  1860  he  resigned  his  post  in  the
Merchants'  exchange  in  order  to  devote  himself
exclusively  to  literary  pursuits.  In  1866  appeared
his  "Character  and  Characteristic  Men,"  a  work
composed  of  lectures  and  essays,  in  which  the
various  qualities  that  make  up  the  complex  web  of
character,  and  the  subtle  essence  that  constitutes
the  individuality  of  great  mon,  are  detected  with
penetrating  vision  and  set  forth  in  vivid  language.
The  last  paper,  on  "Washington  and  the  Pnn-


WHIPPLE


WHIPPLE


461


ciples  of  the  American  Revolution,"  is  a  republica-
tion of  the  Fourth-of-July  address  already  noticed.
In  1871  was  published  "Success  and  its  Con-
ditions," the  key-note  of  which  is  that  "  virtue  is
an  aid  to  insight,"  and  which  enforces  and  illus-
trates the  truth  that  sham,  in  a  large  sense,  is  never
successful.  In  1872  Mr.  Whipple  became  literary
editor  of  the  "  Globe,"  then  a  new  daily  paper  in
Boston,  but  resigned  the  place  in  the  next  year.
In  1876  the  "  Literature  of  the  Age  of  Elizabeth,"
a  series  of  critical  essays  originally  delivered  at
the  Lowell  institute,  was  published.  In  this  work,
which  is  a  discussion  of  the  merits  and  defects  of
the  English  dramatists,  with  also  critical  estimates
of  Sidney,  Raleigh,  Bacon,  and  Hooker,  Mr.  Whip-
ple's genius  reaches  high-water  mark.  In  1877  he
wrote  for  the  "  North  American  Review  "  a  paper
on  George  Eliot,  which  she  and  Mr.  Lewes  declared
to  be  the  most  satisfactory  criticism  on  her  writings
that  had  then  appeared.  In  1878  Mr.  Whipple  and
James  T.  Fields  compiled  and  edited  the  "  Family
Library  of  British  Poetry."  After  Mr.  Whipple's
death  was  published  his  "  Recollections  of  Eminent
Men,  with  other  Papers,"  with  an  introduction  by
Cyrus  A.  Bartol  (Boston,  1887).  In  this  volume
are  vivid  portraitures  of  Rufus  Choate,  Louis
Agassiz,  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  John  L.  Motley,
Charles  Sumner,  and  George  Ticknor  ;  and  to  these
are  added  a  paper  on  Matthew  Arnold,  who  is
praised  for  the  expansiveness,  fertility,  and  subtlety
of  his  intellect,  his  felicitous  critical  phrases  and
definitions,  and  the  exquisite  beauty  of  his  style,
but  severely  censured  for  his  "moral  and  intellect-
ual superciliousness "  as  a  critic ;  and  papers  on
Barry  Cornwall  and  some  of  his  contemporaries,
and  on  the  private  life  of  George  Eliot,  who  "  al-
lowed her  understanding  to  adopt  opinions  which
her  deepest  reason  and  affections  repudiated."  In
the  same  year  with  the  latter  work  was  published
*'  American  Literature  and  other  Papers,"  with  a
brief  introduction  by  the  poet  Whittier.  The  vol-
ume contains  five  essays ;  the  centennial  review  of
"  American  Literature,"  published  in  "  Harper's
Magazine  "  in  1876,  a  masterpiece  of  condensation
and  of  apt  and  discriminating  criticism ;  "  Daniel
Webster  as  a  Master  of  English  Style,"  which  had
been  prefixed  to  a  collection  of  that  statesman's
principal  speeches  published  in  1879 ;  and  papers
on"  Emerson  and  Carlyle,"  "  Emerson  as  a  Poet,"
and  the  "  Character  and  Genius  of  T.  Starr  King."
The  last  collection  of  Mr.  Whipple's periodical

?apers  was  "  Outlooks  on  Societv,  Literature,  and
olitics  "  (Boston,  1888).

Mr.  Whipple  was  one  of  the  very  few  men  who
have  made  the  most  of  their  natural  gifts.  Though
chiefly  self-educated  in  the  popular  sense  of  the
term,  his  mental  training  and  equipment  were  such
as  most  college  graduates  might  envy.  He  was
chiefly  distinguished  for  his  critical  faculty.  En-
dowed by  nature  with  a  rare  degree  of  acuteness,
penetration,  judgment,  and  sympathy,  he  devel-
oped and  strengthened  these  faculties  by  ceaseless
training  and  discipline,  which  made  him  a  mas-
ter in  his  chosen  calling.  Uniting  a  keen  insight,
that  was  "  almost  a  species  of  mental  clairvoyance,"
with  the  power  of  logical  analysis,  a  tenacious
memory  with  a  playful  imagination,  and  a  grave
spirit  with  a  lively  sensibility  to  the  comic,  he  in-
stinctively discriminated  between  the  essential  and
the  accidental,  the  wheat  and  the  chaff,  in  letters,
and  set  forth  the  reasons  for  his  discrimination
with  a  force  and  clearness  that  carried  conviction
to  his  readers.  Pure  and  sensitive,  however,  as  was
his  literary  taste,  his  distinctive  excellence  was  not
so  much  his  judgment  upon  the  quality  of  a  book


as  a  more  or  less  cunning  work  of  art,  as  the  reve-
lation which  he  saw  in  it  of  the  genius  and  charac-
ter of  the  author.  Like  Sainte-Beuve,  he  sought  to
detect  the  man  in  his  writing,  his  spiritual  physi-
ognomy, his  originality  and  independence  or  sla-
very as  a  thinker,  the  atmosphere  in  which  he  lived,
and  the  experiences  of  which  the  work  was  the  •
product.  Few  critics  have  been  influenced  less  by
their  idiosyncrasies  and  predilections,  by  the  secret
leanings  which  "  haunt  every  man  as  his  shadow,"
and  warp  the  mind  from  absolute  rectitude.  Rare-
ly blind  to  faults,  he  had  a  quick  and  keen  eye  for
excellence,  and  when  he  erred  it  was  on  the  side  of
leniency,  never  on  that  of  excessive  severity.  Con-
scientious in  all  his  statements,  he  carefully  weighed
his  words,  and  never  sacrificed  the  truth  to  epi-
gram and  brilliant  effect.  Few  writers  have  been
more  painstaking.  He  was  as  fastidious  and  self-
exacting  when  writing  an  ephemeral  article  for  a
newspaper  as  when  preparing  a  paper  for  a  review,
often  throwing  into  the  fire  three  or  four  draughts
in  succession,  because  they  did  not  satisfy  his
critical  judgment.  His  style  is  said  to  have  been
formed  on  Macaulay's  ;  but  he  was  no  copyist  or
imitator.  If,  as  some  will  think,  it  is  sometimes
oratorical,  and  sometimes  injured  by  an  excess  of
antithesis  and  anecdote,  the  faults  are  accounted
for  by  the  fact  that  some  of  his  most  characteristic

S reductions  were  written  for  delivery  as  lectures,
[r.  Whipple  had  fine  conversational  powers.  He
had  an  inexhaustible  fund  of  anecdote  and  illus-
tration from  history  and  literature,  ready  for  in-
stant use,  and  the  felicity  of  his  citations  was  only
equalled  by  that  of  his  original  wit.  "  The  effete  of
society,"  "  the  gentleman  of  wealth  and  pleasure,"
"  the  organ  of  distaste  "  (said  of  a  certain  journal),
were  some  of  his  current  sayings.  Of  Walt  Whit-
man's "  Leaves  of  Grass  "  he  said :  "  It  has  every
leaf  except  the  fig-leaf."  He  had  an  even  tempera-
ment, and  was  noticeably  free  from  envy,  jealousy,
irritability,  and  other  faults  that  too  often  deform
the  literary  character.  His  married  life  was  a  con-
tradiction to  the  popular  notion  concerning  the
hymeneal  infelicity  of  literary  men.  In  1847  he
married  Miss  Charlotte  Hastings,  in  whom  he
found  at  all  times  an  intellectual,  congenial,  and
sympathetic  companion.  Personally  Mr.  Whipple
was  of  spare  figure  and  below  medium  stature,  with
a  face  of  remarkable  mobility  and  expressiveness,
the  large,  lustrous  eyes  glowing  with  interest  as  he
talked  on  favorite  inspiring  themes.

WHIPPLE,  Henry  Benjamin,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Adams,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  Feb.,  1822.
He  prepared  for  college,  but,  on  account  of  feeble
health,  turned  his  attention  to  mercantile  pursuits,
and  took  an  active  interest  in  politics  for  several
years.  Upon  deciding  to  study  for  the  ministry,
he  followed  a  theological  course  under  Dr.  Will-
iam D.  Wilson,  who  was  afterward  professor  in
Cornell  university.  He  was  ordered  deacon  in
Trinity  church,  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  17  Aug.,  1849,  and
ordained  priest  in  Christ  church,  Sackett's  Harbor,
N.  Y..  16  July,  1850,  both  by  Bishop  De  Lancey.
In  the  same  year  he  became  rector  of  Zion  church,
Rome,  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  seven  years.  In
the  spring  of  1857  he  removed  to  Chicago,  111.,  and
assumed  the  rectorship  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy
Communion  in  that  city.  This  position  he  held
until  his  election  to  the  episcopate.  He  was  con-
secrated the  first  bishop  of  Minnesota  in  St.
James's  church,  Richmond,  Va.,  13  Oct.,  1859.  In
1860  he  took  an  active  part  in  organizing  the  Sea-
bury  mission,  out  of  which  has  grown  Seabury
divinity-school ;  St.  Mary's  Hall,  a  school  for  girls ;
and  Sliattuck  school  for  boys— all  at  Faribault,


462


WHIPPLE


WHIPPLE


r^  .<Tb,  Gm-W-v-A^-VvLu


Minn.  Having  many  Indians  within  his  jurisdic-
tion and  in  the  neighboring  territories,  he  has  de-
voted his  energies  largely  to  their  improvement,
education,  and  evangelization.  He  is  known
among  the  tribes  as  "  Straight  Tongue." He  is  one

of  the  origi-
nal members
of  the  Pea-
body  educa-
tion fund.
For  many
years  he  has
been  a  recog-
nized authori-
ty on  all  ques-
tions  relating
to  the  vexed
Indian  prob-
lem, and  he  is
often  consult-
ed by  the
U.  S.  govern-
ment in  such
matters.  He
is  a  member
of  the  govern-
ment commis-
sion for  the  consolidation  of  Indian  tribes  that  are
capable  of  civilization,  and  has  been  able  to  do
much  in  this  direction.  In  northern  Minnesota
1,500  Christian  Chippewa  Indians  are  gathered  on
White  Earth  reservation  engaged  in  agriculture
and  cattle-raising.  He  attended  the  third  Pan-
Anglican  council  at  Lambeth  palace  in  1888,  and
took  part  in  the  funeral  services  of  Bishop  Harris,
of  Michigan,  in  Westminster  abbey.  One  of  the
principal  buildings  in  Faribault  college  is  called
Whipple  Hall  in  his  honor.  Racine  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1859.  He  has  written  much  for
the  press  and  periodicals  on  the  Indian  question,  and
has  also  published  sermons,  addresses,  and  charges.
WHIPPLE,  John  Adams,  inventor,  b.  in
Grafton,  Mass.,  10  Sept.,  1822.  While  a  boy  he  was
an  ardent  student  of  chemistry,  and  on  the  intro-
duction of  the  daguerreotype  process  into  this  coun-
try he  was  the  first  to  manufacture  the  chemicals
that  were  used  in  it.  His  health  having  become
impaired  through  this  work,  he  devoted  his  atten-
tion exclusively  to  photography,  in  connection  with
which  he  made  many  useful  inventions  and  im-
provements. He  prepared  his  plates  and  brought
out  his  pictures  by  steam,  invented  crayon  daguer-
reotypes, and  crystalotypes,  or  daguerreotypes  on
glass,  and,  with  the  aid  of  the  fifteen-inch  equa-
torial telescope  of  the  Harvard  college  observatory,
under  the  direction  of  Prof.  William  C.  Bond,
took  a  daguerreotype  of  the  moon's  surface,  for
which  he  was  complimented  by  the  Royal  academy
of  arts  and  sciences  of  London,  and  on  17  July,
1850,  photographed  Alpha  Lyra,  which  is  said  to
have  been  the  first  successful  experiment  in  stellar
photography.  He  received  the  prize  medal  at  the
World's  fair,  London,  and  a  silver  medal  at  the
Crystal  palace,  New  York.

WHIPPLE,  Squire,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Wor-
cester county,  Mass.,  16  Sept.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  15  March,  1888.  He  earned  sufficient  money
by  teaching  to  educate  himself  at  Hartwick  semi-
nary and  Fairfield  academy,  and  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1830.  Having  acquired  a  fond-
ness for  mechanical  pursuits  as  a  boy  in  his  father's  I
cotton-factory,  he  now  turned  his  attention  to  civil
engineering,  and  was  successively  a  rod-man  and  \
leveller  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad.  In
1840  he  designed  and  built  the  first  model  of  a  I


scale  for  weighing  canal-boats,  and  subsequently
he  built  the  first  weigh-lock  scale  on  the  Erie  canal.
He  began  his  career  as  a  bridge-builder  in  1840  by
designing  and  patenting  an  iron-bridge  truss.
During  the  next  ten  years  he  built  several  bridges
on  the  Erie  .canal  and  the  New  York  and  Erie
railroad.  In  1852-'3  he  built  a  wrought-  and  cast-
iron  bridge  over  the  Albany  and  Northern  railroad,
and  by  his  work  acquired  the  title  of  the  "  father
of  iron  bridges."  He  obtained  a  patent  for  his
lift  draw-bridge  in  1872,  and  in  1873-'4  built  the
first  one  over  the  Erie  canal  at  Utica.  Since  that
time  the  Whipple  iron  bridges  have  stood  in  the
foremost  rank.  He  possessed  a  fine  cabinet  of
models,  instruments,  and  apparatus,  mostly  made
by  himself,  illustrating  the  different  branches  of
physical  and  mechanical  science.  Mr.  Whipple
was  elected  an  honorary  member  of  the  American
society  of  civil  engineers  in  1868.  He  was  the
author  of  "The  Way  to  Happiness"  (Utica,  1847),
and  a  "Treatise  on  Bridge-Building"  (1847;  en-
larged ed.,  New  York,  1873).

WHIPPLE,  William,  signer  of  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence,  b.  in  Kittery,  Me.,  14  Jan.,
1730;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N,  H.,  28  Nov.,  1785.
His  father,  William,  a  native  of  Ipswich,  Mass.,
was  bred  as  a  maltster,  but,  removing  to  Kittery,
engaged  in  a  seafaring  life  for  several  years.  The
son  was  educated  at  a  public  school  in  his  native
town,  and  afterward  became  a  sailor,  having  com-
mand of  a  vessel  before  he  was  twenty-one  years  of
age.  He  engaged  in  the  European,  West  India,
and  African  trade,  and  *—<—-

brought  large  numbers  ft™  ffiff/y^^t/

of  negro  slaves  to  this  /'

country,  but  afterward,  during  the  Revolution,
liberated  those  that  belonged  to  him.  In  1759  he
abandoned  the  sea  entirely  and  entered  into  busi-
ness in  Portsmouth  with  his  brother  Joseph,  which
connection  lasted  till  about  two  years  previous  to
the  Revolution.  At  an  early  period  of  the  contest
between  the  colonies  and  Great  Britain  he  took  a
decided  part  in  favor  of  the  former.  He  was
elected  a  delegate  from  New  Hampshire  to  the
Continental  congress  in  1775,  taking  his  seat  in
May.  was  re-elected,  23  Jan.,  1776,  took  his  seat  on
29  Feb.  following,  and  signed  the  Declaration  of
Independence  in  July.  He  was  re-elected  to  con-
gress in  1778,  and  declined  to  be  chosen  ;i irtiin.
but  was  a  member  of  the  state  assembly  in  1780-'4.
He  was  commissioned  a  brigadier  -  general  in
1777,  commanded
a  brigade  of  New
Hampshire  troops
at  the  battles  of
Saratoga  and  Still-
water, and.  after
the  surrender  of
Burgoyne,  signed
the  articles  of  ca-
pitulation with
Col.  James  Wil-
kinson '  on  behalf
of  Gen.  Horatio
Gates.  Gen.  Whip-
ple was  afterward
selected  as  one  of
the  officers  under

whose  charge  the  British  troops  were  conducted  to
their  place  of  encampment  on  Winter  hill,  near
Boston.  In  1778  he  participated  in  Gen.  Sullivan's
expedition  to  Rhode  Island,  having  command  of
the  detachment  of  militia  from  New  Hampshire,
but  the  expedition  failed  of  success,  and  he  resigned
his  military  appointment,  20  June,  1782. In  1780  he


WHIPPLE


WHISTLER


463


was  appointed  a  commissioner  of  the  board  of  ad-
miralty, which  post  he  declined.  He  was  state  su-
perintendent of  finances  in  1782-'4,  appointed  judge
of  the  supreme  court,  20  June,  1782,  and  justice  of
the  peace  and  quorum  throughout  the  state  in  De-
cember, 1784,  and  acted  in  this  capacity  till  his  death.
WHIPPLE,  William  Denison,  soldier,  b.  in
Nelson,  Madison  co.,  N.  Y.,  2  Aug.,  1826.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1851,  and  became  2d  lieutenant  in  the  3d  infantry
on  9  Sept.  of  that  year.  After  six  years  of  un-
eventful service  in  New  Mexico,  he  participated  in
the  Gila  expedition  against  the  Apaches  in  1857,
the  Navajo  expedition  of  1858.  and  the  defence  of
Port  Defiance,  N.  M.,  in  1860.  He  became  1st
lieutenant  in  December,  1856,  and  on  the  opening
of  the  civil  war  was  on  quartermaster's  duty  at
Indianola,  Tex.  After  the  capture  of  the  U.  S.
property  he  escaped  through  the  enemy's  lines,  was
commissioned  captain  and  assistant  adjutant-gen-
eral, and  in  that  capacity  was  present  at  the  battle
of  Bull  Run  and  at  the  headquarters  of  the  De-
partments of  Pennsylvania  and  Virginia,  respect-
ively, to  June,  1862,  when,  becoming  lieutenant-col-
onel and  additional  aide-de-camp,  he  was  on  duty
in  the  Middle  Department  and  8th  army  corps,  and
as  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Cadwallader.  He  was  ap-
pointed brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  17  July,
1863,  and  assigned  as  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  George
H.  Thomas,  being  present  during  the  operations
near  Chattanooga,  the  siege  of  Atlanta,  the  battles
of  Missionary  Ridge,  Resaca,  Kenesaw  Mountain,
and  Nashville  and  at  the  headquarters  of  the  De-
partment of  the  Cumberland  in  1853-'o.  He  re-
ceived the  brevets  of  brigadier-  and  major-general
in  the  regular  army  on  13  March,  1865,  for  gallant
service  in  the  Atlanta  campaign  and  battles  before
Nashville.  Since  the  war  Gen.  Whipple  has  been
on  duty  as  assistant  adjutant-general  at  the  head-
quarters of  the  principal  military  divisions,  and  in
1873-81  as  aide-de-camp  to  the  general  of  the
army.  He  was  promoted  colonel  in  the  adjutant-
general's  department,  28  Feb.,  1887.

WHISTLER,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Ulster,  Ireland,
about  1756;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  3  Sept.,  1829.
He  ran  away  from  home  when  a  boy,  enlisted  in
the  British  army,  and  served  under  Gen.  Burgoyne
during  the  war  of  the  Revolution.  Upon  his  re-
'  turn  to  England  he  was  honorably  discharged,  and
soon  afterward,  forming  an  attachment  for  a
daughter  of  Sir  Edward  Bishop,  a  friend  of  his
father,  he  eloped  with  her,  and,  coming  to  this
country,  settled  at  Hagerstown,  Md.  He  shortly
afterward  entered  the  U.  S.  army,  served  in  the
ranks,  and  was  severely  wounded  in  the  disastrous
campaign  against  the  Indians  in  1791.  He  was
promoted  captain,  1  July,  1797,  and  in  the  sum-
mer of  1803  was  sent  with  his  company  of  the  1st
infantry  from  Detroit  to  the  head-waters  of  Lake
Michigan,  where,  before  the  close  of  the  year,  he
completed  Fort  Dearborn  on  the  site  of  the  city  of
Chicago.  Having  attained  the  brevet  rank  of  ma-
jor, he  was  appointed  in  1815  military  store-keeper
at  Newport,  Ky.,  and  afterward  at  Jefferson  bar-
racks, near  St.  Louis,  where  he  remained  till  his
death. — His  son,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Mary-
land in  1780 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  4  Dec.,
1863,  was  appointed  a  lieutenant  of  infantry,  8
June,  1801,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Maguaga,
Mich.,  9  Aug.,  1812.  He  was  promoted  captain  in
December,  1812,  major  of  the  2d  infantry,  28
April,  1826,  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  7th  infantry,
21  July,  1834,  and  colonel  of  the  4th  infantry,  15
July,  1845.  He  retired  from  the  service  on  9  Oct.,
1861. At  his  death  he  was  the  oldest  army  officer


in  the  United  States,  with  the  exception  of  Gen.
Winfield  Scott.— William's  son,  Joseph  Nelson
Garland,  soldier,  b.  in  Green  Bay,  19  Oct.,  1822,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1846,  and  entered  the  army  as  2d  lieutenant  of  the
8th  infantry,  but  six  months  later  was  transferred
to  the  3d  infantry.  He  served  in  the  war  with
Mexico,  being  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,
the  principal  battles  of  the  campaign  that  followed,
and  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  was  pro-
moted 1st  lieutenant  in  "June,  1852,  in  1861  was
captured  in  Texas  by  the  Confederates  and  paroled
as  a  prisoner  of  war,  and  promoted  captain  in  May,
1861.  He  was  then  on  duty  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  as  assistant  instructor  of  infantry  tactics
till  March,  1863.  His  services  in  the  volunteer
army  date  from  May,  1863,  when  he  was  made  colo-
nel of  the  2d  New  York  artillery.  He  served  in  the
Richmond  campaign,  participating  in  the  battles
of  Spottsylvania,  North  Anna,  Tolopotomy,  Cold
Harbor,  and  the  assaults  on  Petersburg,  where  he
was  wounded  during  the  siege.  From  July,  1864,
till  September,  1865,  he  commauded  a  brigade  in
the  defences  of  Washington.  In  December,  1865,
he  was  mustered  out  as  brevet  brigadier-general
of  volunteers.  In  September,  1866,  he  was  trans-
ferred to  the  31st  infantry,  and  in  March,  1869,  to
the  22d  infantry.  In  February,  1874,  he  was  pro-
moted lieutenant-colonel  of  the  5th  infantry,  and
in  May,  1883.  he  became  colonel  of  the  15th  in-
fantry. At  the  time  of  his  retirement,  19  Oct.,
1886,  he  was  in  command  at  Fort  Buford,  Dak. —
William's  brother,  George  Washington,  engineer,
b.  in  Fort  Wayne,
Ind.,  19  May,
1800;  d.  in  St.
Petersburg,  Rus-
sia, 7  April,  1849,
was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1819,
appointed  a  2d
lieutenant  in  the
corps  of  artillery,
and  was  after- .
ward,  till  1821,
employed  on  top-
ographical duty
and  part  of  the
time  at  Fort  Co-
lumbus. From  2
Nov.,  1821,  till  30
April,  1822,  he
was  assistant  pro-
fessor at  the  U.  S.
military  academy,
and  he  was  em-
ployed in  1822-6  in  connection  with  the  commis-
sion that  was  engaged  in  tracing  the  international
boundary  between  Lake  Superior  and  the  Lake  of
the  Woods.  He  was  made  1st  lieutenant  in  Au-
gust, 1829,  and  was  on  topographical  duty  almost
continually  till  31  Dec,  1833,  when  he  resigned
from  the  army.  With  Jonathan  Knight,  William
Gibbs  McNeill,  and  Ross  Winans,  he  examined
the  railroads  of  England  on  behalf  of  the  direc-
tors of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad,  and  after-
ward engaged  in  the  construction  of  that  road,
the  Boston  and  Albany,  and  other  railroads.  In
1834  Lieut.  Whistler  became  engineer  to  the  pro-
prietors of  locks  and  canals  at  Lowell,  and  from
1834  till  1837  he  gave  much  of  his  time  to  the  re-
production, for  the  Boston  and  Albany  railroad,  of
a  locomotive  that  was  imported  from  the  works  of
George  and  Robert  Stephenson,  at  Newcastle,  Eng-


&&£&*..


464


WHISTLER


WH1TAKER


land.  In  1837  he  removed  to  Stonington,  Conn.,
to  take  charge  of  the  Stonington  railroad,  and
from  1840  till  1842  he  was  chief  engineer  of  the
Boston  and  Albany  railroad,  with  his  headquarters
at  Springfield,  Mass.  In  1842  he  went  to  Russia
to  act  as  engineer  for  the  contemplated  railroad
to  unite  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow.  Not  only  was
the  road  to  be  built,  but  the  iron  for  the  track,  the
locomotives,  cars,  and  everything  appertaining  to
the  road  were  to  be  manufactured  under  his  super-
vision. In  addition  to  the  construction  of  railroads,
he  was  also  employed  to  build  extensive  dock-yards
at  St.  Petersburg,  and  to  improve  the  Russian  har-
bors and  rivers.  In  1847,  in  recognition  of  his  ser-
vices, the  Emperor  Nicholas  conferred  upon  Lieut.
Whistler  the  decoration  of  the  Order  of  St.  Anne.
He  is  buried  at  Stonington,  Conn.,  but  a  monument
was  erected  to  his  memory  in  Greenwood  cemetery
by  American  engineers.  —  George  Washington's
son,  George  William,  engineer,  b.  in  New  London,
Conn  ,  in  1822 ;  d.  in  Brighton,  England,  24  Dec,
1869,  began  the  practice  of  his  profession  as  a  civil
engineer  under  nis  father  in  1840.  He  was  con-
nected with  various  railroads  in  this  country,  and
was  superintendent  of  the  Erie,  and  New  York  and
New  Haven  railroads.  In  the  winter  of  1856  he
went  to  Russia  to  take  charge  of  the  St.  Petersburg
and  Moscow  railroad  under  the  Winans  contract,
and  he  continued  there,  with  the  exception  of  a
short  interval,  till  the  spring  of  1869,  when  he  re-
signed in  consequence  of  impaired  health.  He  was
specially  noted  for  his  knowledge  of  railway  ma-
chinery and  for  executive  ability  in  the  manage-
ment of  railways. — Another  son,  James  Abbott
McNeill,  artist,  b.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  in  1834,  was
educated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy,
studied  for  two  years
under  Charles  Gabriel
Gleyre  in  Paris,  and
in  1863  settled  in  Lon-
don. He  holds  pecu-
liar theories  on  art,
which  have  been  the
subject  of  much  criti-
cism. In  many  of  his
later  works  especially
he  has  made  interest-
ing experiments  in
color,  and  he  frequent-
ly succeeds  in  pro-
ducing extraordinary
results  with  few  and
subdued  colors.  There
is  at  times,  however,
a  sacrifice  of  form  to
color  impressions  in  his  "  arrangements  "  and  "  noc-
turnes." His  more  important  paintings  are  "  White
Girl "  (1862) ;  "  Coast  of  Brittany,"  "  Last  of  Old
Westminster,"  and  "  Westminster  Bridge  "  (1863) ;
u  Princesse  des  Pays  de  la  Porcelaine  "  (1865) ;  "  At
the  Piano  "  (1867) ;  "  Portrait  of  my  Mother  "  (an
"Arrangement  in  Gray  and  Black  ),  and  portrait
of  Thomas  Carlyle  (1872) ;  "  Gold  Girl."  "  Nocturne
in  Blue  and  Gold,"  and  "  Nocturne  in  Blue  and
Green"  (1878);  "Harmony  in  Gray  and  Green"
<1881);  "Nocturne,  in  Blue  and  Silver,"  "Blue
Girl,"  and  "Entrance  to  Southampton  Water"
(1882);  "Great  Fire  Wheel"  (1883);  "Harmony
in  Brown  and  Black  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Arrangement
in  Black "  (Lady  Archibald  Campbell)  and  "  Ar-
rangement in  Gray  and  Green  "  (Miss  Alexander),
both  exhibited  at  Munich  in  1888.  His  skill  in
etching  has  gained  for  him  a  position  among  etch-
ers that  is  even  higher  than  that  which  he  holds


f(LYtt)f.\/A\MtV


as  a  painter.  Among  his  works  in  this  branch  of
art  are  a  series  of  plates  on  London,  Venice,  and
Brussels.  He  has  published  "Ten  O'Clock"  (Bos-
ton, 1888).  See  an  article  by  William  C.  Brownell,
in  "Scribner's  Monthly"  for  August,  1879,  and
Frederick  Wedmore's  "Four  Masters  of  Etching"
(London,  1883).

WH1TAKER,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in
Cambridge,  England,  in  1585  ;  d.  in  Henrico  count v,
Va.,  after  1613.  His  father,  Rev.  William  Whitaker,
was  master  of  St.  John's  college,  Cambridge.  Alex-
ander was  graduated  at  that  university,  took  orders
in  the  Church  of  England,  and  for  several  years
was  rector  of  a  parish  in  the  north  of  England.
He  settled  in  Henrico  county,  Va.,  in  1611,  and
during  the  same  year  built  one  church,  laid  the
foundations  of  another,  and  "  impaled  a  fine  par-
sonage with  a  hundred  acres  of  land,  calling  it
Rock  Hall."  His  letters,  in  which  he  expresses  his
great  surprise  that  more  of  the  English  clergy
did  not  engage  in  missionary  work,  testify  also  to
his  usefulness  and  energy.  He  baptized  Pocahon-
tas, and  subsequently  officiated  at  her  marriage
to  John  Rolfe.  (See  Powhatan.)  Mr.  Whitaker
published  "  Good  News  from  Virginia,"  which  was
one  of  the  first  books  that  were  written  in  that
colony  (London,  1613).

WHITAKER,  Epher,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fair-
field, Cumberland  co.,  N.  J.,  27  "March.  1820.  He
was  graduated  at  Delaware  college  in  1847  and  at
Union  theological  seminary  in  1851,  and  since  that
date  has  been  pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church,
Southold,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.  He  has  been  stated
clerk  of  the  Long  Island  presbytery  since  1851,
moderator  of  the  synod  of  New  York  and  New
Jersey  in  1860  and  in  1861,  has  been  a  councillor
of  the  Long  Island  historical  society  since  1862,
and  is  a  vice-president  of  the  Suffolk  county  his-
torical society  and  a  founder  of  Southold  academy.
He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Yale  in  1867,
and  of  D.  D.  from  Delaware  college  in  1877.  Dr.
Whitaker  has  contributed  constantly  to  the  maga-
zines for  fifty  years,  and  his  writings  in  book-form
include  "  New  Fruits  from  an  Old  Field "  (New
York,  1865) ;  "  A  Collection  of  Original  Hymns  "
(printed  privately,  1872) ;  "  History  of  Southold
from  1640  till  1740  "  (1881) ;  "  Old  Town  Records"
(1882) ;  and  "  Bi-Centennial  Celebration  of  Suffolk
County,  N.  Y."  (Babylon,  L.  I.,  1883).

WHITAKER,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  on
Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  22  Feb.,  1732 ;  d.  in  Wood-
bridge,  Va.,  21  Jan.,  1795.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1752,  and  from  that  year  until  1761
was  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  at  Chelsea,
near  Norwich,  Conn.  He  was  then  deputed  by
the  Connecticut  branch  of  the  Scotch  society  for
the  advancement  of  learning  to  visit  England,
Scotland,  and  Wales,  to  obtain  donations  for  the
establishment  of  an  institution  for  the  educa-
tion and  christian ization  of  the  North  American
Indians.  He  was  accompanied  by  Rev.  Samson
Occom.  an  educated  Indian  of  the  Mohegan  tribe.
The  mission  met  with  favor  in  both  Scotland  and
England,  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  then  secretary
of  American  affairs,  generously  promoting  their
object  by  his  benefactions.  George  III.,  it  is  said,
contributed  £400  to  the  cause.  Dr.  Whitaker  re-
turned with  an  endowment  of  £11,000,  which  was
devoted  to  "  Moor's  Indian  charity-school."  (See
Whkklock.  Eleazar.)  After  his  return  from  Eu-
rope, Dr.  Whitaker  was  pastor  in  Salem  for  many
years,  officiating  in  what  was  known  as  the  Taber-
nacle church,  which  he  built  and  owned.  He  was
an  ardent  Whig,  zealously  supporting  the  cause
of  the  colonists  during  the  Revolution. He  sub-


WHITAKER


WHITCHER


465


sequently  removed  to  Maine,  and  finally  to  Vir-
ginia, where  he  passed  his  later  life.  Many  of  his
sermons  were  published  and  extensively  circulated
throughout  New  England.  They  include  two  "Dis-
courses on  Reconciliation "  (London,  1768),  and
two  "Discourses  on  Toryism"  (Newburyport,  Mass.,
1777). — His  grandson,  Daniel  Kimball,  editor,  b.
in  Sharon,  Conn.,  13  April,  1801 ;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, La.,  10  April,  1881,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1820,  studied  law,  and,  removing  to  South
Carolina,  became  the  partner  of  John  Lyde  Wilson,
of  that  state.  He  practised  with  success,  but  his
taste  was  for  literature,  and  he  became  the  founder
and  editor  of  several  periodicals  that  included  the
"  Southern  Literary  Journal,"  "  Whitaker's  Maga-
zine," and  the  "  Southern  Quarterly  Review,"  which
he  founded  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1841,  and  con-
ducted successfully  until  the  civil  war.  He  re-
moved to  New  Orleans  in  18G6,  where  he  founded
and  edited  for  many  years  the  "New  Orleans  Month-
ly Review."  He  was  corresponding  secretary  of
the  New  Orleans  academy  of  sciences.  Mr.  Whit-
aker  united  with  the  Roman  Catholic  church  in
1878. — His  wife,  Mary  Scrimzeour,  author,  b.  in
Beaufort  district,  S.  C,  22  Feb.,  1820,  is  the
daughter  of  Rev.  Samuel  Furman,  of  South  Caro-
lina. She  was  educated  in  Edinburgh,  contributed
her  first  poems  to  the  Scottish  press  under  the
auspices  of  Thomas  Campbell,  and  was  favorably
reviewed  by  the  critics  of  that  city.  She  married
in  1837  John  Miller,  a  Scotch  attorney,  who  died
three  months  afterward.  Mrs.  Miller  then  returned
to  this  country,  and  in  1849  married  Mr.  Whitaker.
Her  publications  include  many  magazine  articles,
a  collection  of  "  Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1850),  and
"  Albert  Hastings,"  a  novel  (1868). — Their  daugh-
ter, Lily  C,  poet,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  about
1850,  was  educated  in  New  Orleans,  contributed  to
the  "  Southern  Quarterly,"  under  her  father's  di-
rection, and  has  written  for  the  New  Orleans  press.
She  has  published  "  Donata,  and  other  Poems "
(New  Orleans,  1880).

WHITAKER,  Ozi  William,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
New  Salem,  Mass.,  10  May,  1830.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Middlebury  college,  Vt.,  in  1856,  was  prin-
cipal of  the  high-school  in  North  Brookfield,  Mass.,
for  nearly  four  years,  and  then  entered  the  Gen-
eral theological  seminary,  New  York,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1863.  He  was  ordered  deacon  in
Grace  church,  Boston,  Mass.,  15  July,  1863,  by
Bishop  Eastburn,  ordained  priest  in  St.  Stephen's
chapel,  Boston,  7  Aug.,  1863,  by  the  same  bishop,
went  at  once  to  Nevada,  and  was  made  rector  of
St.  John's,  Gold  Hill.  He  returned  to  the  east
in  1865,  and  became  rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,
Englewood,  N.  J.  Mr.  Whitaker  went  to  Nevada
again  in  1867,  and  became  rector  of  St.  Paul's
church,  Virginia  City.  He  was  elected  missionary
bishop  of  Nevada  by  the  general  convention  in
New  York  in  1868,  and  consecrated  in  St.  George's
church,  New  York,  13  Oct.,  1869.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,  in  the
same  year.  Bishop  WThitaker  was  elected  assistant
bishop  of  Pennsylvania  and  translated  in  1886.
Upon  the  death  of  Bishop  Stevens,  11  June,  1887,
he  became  bishop  of  Pennsylvania.  He  attended
the  third  Pan-Anglican  council  in  London  in  1888.
He  has  published  occasional  sermons.

WHITAKER,  Walter  C,  soldier,  b.  in  Shelby
county,  Ky.,  in  August,  1823 ;  d.  in  Lyndon,  Ky.,
9  July,  1887.  He  received  his  education  at  Bethany
college,  West  Virginia,  under  the  presidency  of
Alexander  Campbell,  and  had  begun  the  study  of
law,  when,  at  the  opening  of  the  war  with  Mexico,
he  entered  the  regiment  of  Kentucky  volunteers  as
vol.  vi. — 30


a  lieutenant  and  served  with  gallantry.  At  the
end  of  the  war  he  resumed  his  legal  studies,  and
soon  afterward  he  opened  an  office  at  Shelbyvillc,
Ky.,  devoting  himself  chiefly  to  criminal  law,  in
which  he  won  reputation.  He  also  carried  on  a
large  farm,  and  took  an  active  part  in  politics.  He
was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1861,  when
Kentucky  was  invaded  by  the  Confederate  army,
which,  early  in  September,  took  possession  of  Co-
lumbus. He  offered  the  resolution,  which  was
almost  unanimously  adopted,  "that  the  governor
be  requested  to  call  out  the  military  force  of  the
state  to  expel  and  drive  out  the  invaders."  This
resolution  terminated  the  sham  neutrality  the
state  had  undertaken  to  uphold.  Soon  afterward
Senator  Whitaker  entered  the  military  service  as
colonel  of  the  6th  Kentucky  infantry,  which  was
mustered  in  early  in  September,  and  moved  to
meet  Gen.  Simon  B.  Buckner's  advance  to  Mul-
draugh's  hill.  From  that  time  till  the  close  of  the
war  his  service  was  constant.  He  took  an  active
part  in  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  in  which  his  regiment
lost  103  killed  or  wounded,  and  also  in  the  battle
of  Stone  river,  and  on  25  June,  1863,  he  was  com-
missioned brigadier -general  of  volunteers.  At
Chickamauga  his  brigade  was  in  the  reserve  corps
that  marched  upon  the  field  at  the  critical  moment
and  repelled  the  assault  of  the  enemy  on  the
National  right.  At  the  capture  of  Lookout  Moun-
tain he  was  wounded,  but  he  continued  on  the  field.
He  was  subsequently  in  all  the  engagements  of  the
Atlanta  campaign  and  the  battle  of  Nashville,
and  was  promoted  brevet  major-general  for  gal-
lant services.  At  the  end  of  the  war  he  returned
to  the  practice  of  his  profession  at  Louisville,  and
became  connected  with  some  of  the  most  famous
criminal  trials  in  that  region.  He  was  a  man  of
marked  individuality  of  manner  and  character,
and  of  an  impetuous  temper,  which  involved  him
in  numerous  personal  difficulties,  and  led  to  his
becoming  for  a  time  an  inmate  of  an  insane  asylum.
But  in  his  later  years  he  fully  recovered  his  health,
and  had  his  share  of  legal  practice.

WHITCHER,  Frances  Miriam,  author,  b.  in
Whitestown,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  1  Nov.,  1811;  d.
there,  4  Jan.,  1852.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Lewis
Berry.  While  only  two  years  old,  and  ignorant  of
the  alphabet,  she  learned  to  recite  long  pieces  of
poetry,  and  she  began  very  early  to  make  rhymes,
one  of  her  earliest  efforts  being  a  parody  on  "  My
Mother."  She  was  educated  in  the  village  schools,
and  in  1846  became  a  contributor  to  "  Neal's  Sat-
urday Gazette."  She  sent  to  the  latter  publication
many  poems,  and '"  Widow  Bedott's  Table-Talk."
her  best-known  work:  and  to  "Godey's  Lady's
Book"  "Aunt  Maguire"  and  "Letters  from  Tim-
berville."  She  also  wrote  for  other  journals.  On
6  Jan.,  1847,  she  married  the  Rev.  Benjamin  W.
Whitcher,  a  clergyman  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  and  in  the  following  spring  she  removed
with  her  husband  to  Elmira,  N.  Y.  Wrhile  Mrs.
W7hitcher  was  at  the  height  of  her  fame  as  a  hu-
morous author,  and  while  her  writings  were  every-
where in  demand,  she  was  assailed  with  vitupera-
tion and  personal  insult  by  those  who  fancied  that
they  had  unwittingly  served  as  models  for  her
sketches.  So  high  ran  the  tide  of  angry  feeling  in
Elmira  that  it  soon  became  apparent  that  Mr.
Whitcher's  usefulness  as  a  clergyman  would  find
fewer  obstacles  in  some  other  parish.  In  the  au-
tumn of  1850  Mrs.  Whitcher  returned  to  Whites-
town,  and  soon  afterward  she  began  to  suffer  se-
verely from  the  disease  that  caused  her  death.
Before  leaving  Elmira  she  had  begun  the  story  of
"  Mary  Elmer,"  and  continued  it  in  her  old  home,


466


WHITCOMB


WHITE


but  died  before  it  was  completed.  In  addition  to
her  literary  ability,  Mrs.  Whitcher  was  a  clever
caricaturist,  and  illustrated  the  "  Table  Talk "
when  it  first  appeared  in  the  "Gazette."  After
her  death  her  writings  were  collected  in  two  vol-
umes: "The  Widow  Bedott  Papers,  with  an  In-
troduction by  Alice  B.  Neal "  (New  York,  1855),
and  "  Widow  Spriggins,  Mary  Elmer,  and  Other
Sketches,  by  Mrs.  P.  M.  Whitcher ;  Edited,  with
Memoir,  by 'Mrs.  M.  L.  Ward  Whitcher"  (1867).

WHITCOMB,  James,  senator,  b.  near  Windsor,
Vt,  1  Dec,  1795;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  Oct.,
1852.  His  father  removed  to  Ohio  and  settled  near
Cincinnati  when  James  was  quite  young.  The  boy
prepared  himself  to  enter  Transylvania  university,
where  he  maintained  himself  by  teaching  during
his  vacations.  On  leaving  college  he  entered  a  law-
office,  and  in  1822  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Fay-
ette county,  Ky.,  where  he  practised  for  two  years.
He  then  removed  to  Bloomington,  Ind.,  where  he
soon  made  a  reputation  in  his  profession,  and  in
1826  was  appointed  prosecuting  attorney  of  his
circuit.  In  discharging  the  duties  of  this  office  he
travelled  over  a  large  extent  of  country,  and  be-
came acquainted  with  many  men  of  note.  In  1830
and  1833  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  where
he  did  much  to  stay  the  progress  of  the  "  internal
improvement "  fever  that  was  then  at  its  highest
point.  In  October,  1836,  he  was  appointed  a  com-
missioner of  the  general  land-office.  He  was  re-
appointed by  President  Van  Buren,  and  continued
to  serve  until  the  end  of  the  latter's  term.  Early
in  1841  he  returned  to  Indiana  and  opened  a  law-
office  in  Terre  Haute.  Business  came  quickly,  and
he  soon  acquired  a  lucrative  practice.  He  was
nominated  for  governor  in  1843  by  the  Democrats,
and  elected  by  2,013  majority.  In  1846  he  was  re-
elected bv  nearly  4,000  majority.  When  he  entered
office  Indiana  was  loaded  down  with  a  debt  upon
which  no  interest  had  been  paid  for  years ;  when
he  left  office  the  debt  had  been  adjusted,  and  the
public  credit  was  restored.  He  also,  by  his  efforts,
created  a  public  sentiment  that  demanded  the
establishment  of  benevolent  and  reformatory  insti-
tutions, and  he  awakened  the  people  to  the  impor-
tance of  establishing  common  schools  and  provid-
ing a  fund  for  their  maintenance.  During  his  term
of  office  he  raised  five  regiments  of  infantry  that
represented  the  state  in  the  Mexican  war.  The
legislature  of  1849  elected  him  to  the  U.  S.  senate
for  the  full  term,  beginning  in  March  of  that  year,
but  he  was  unable,  owing  to  feeble  health,  to  dis-
charge his  senatorial  duties  as  he  wished,  and  died
of  a  painful  disease  when  he  had  served  little  more
than  half  his  term.  In  1843  he  wrote  a  pamphlet
entitled  "  Facts  for  the  People,"  which  is  considered
by  many  one  of  the  most  effective  arguments
against  a  protective  tariff  that  has  ever  been
written.  As  a  lawyer  Gov.  Whitcomb  ranked  high.
It  was  his  custom  in  presenting  a  case  to  the  jury
first  to  give  his  opponent's  side  of  the  question,
that  he  might  the  easier  demolish  it  afterward.
Thomas  A.  Hendricks  said :  "  Gov.  Whitcomb  .  .  .
declared  what  he  believed  to  be  the  truth,  and
trusted  to  its  influence  upon  men's  minds  to  bring
them  into  common  action.  He  led  legislators  be-
cause it  was  safest  for  them  to  follow.  His  manner
was  grave  and  serious,  his  voice  was  full  and  mu-
sical, and  his  delivery  almost  without  gesture."

WHITCOMB,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster,
Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  about  1720;  d.  in  1812.  He
was  colonel  of  Massachusetts  troops  in  the  cam-
paign against  Crown  Point  in  1755.  in  which  he
served  with  credit.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revo-
lution he  was  not  called  into  service  on  account  of


his  advanced  age,  but  the  soldiers  of  his  regiment
were  so  greatly  attached  to  him  that  they  resolved
not  to  enlist  under  any  other  officer,  and  the
veteran,  failing  to  move  them  from  their  purpose
by  appeals  to  their  patriotism,  proposed,  as  an
inducement  to  them  to  remain  in  the  army,  to  join
them  in  the  ranks.  Col.  Brewer,  however,-who  had
been  appointed  Whitcomb's  successor,  relinquished
the  command,  and  the  latter  continued  with  the
regiment  at  Boston  until  he  was  chosen  brigadier-
general  on  the  Continental  establishment.  5  June,
1776,  having  previously  been  promoted  to  the  same
rank  by  the  Provincial  congress.  On  the  13th  of
the  same  month  he  was  made  major-general  in  the
Massachusetts  service,  but  he  was  soon  after  per-
mitted to  retire  from  the  army.

WHITE,  Albert  Smith,  senator,  b.  in  Bloom-
ing Grove,  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Oct.,  1803 ;  d.  in
Stockwell,  Tippecanoe  co.,  Ind.,  4  Sept.,  1864.  He
was  graduated  at  Union  in  1822,  in  the  class
with  William  H.  Seward.  After  studying  law  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1825,  and  soon  after-
ward removed  to  Indiana.  In  March,  1829,  he
opened  an  office  in  Lafayette,  where,  and  in  the
neighboring  town  of  Stockwell,  he  resided  until
his  death.  During  the  session  of  1828-'9  he  re-
ported the  proceedings  of  the  Indiana  legislature
for  an  Indianapolis  journal,  the  first  work  of  the
kind  that  .had  been  done  in  the  state.  In  1830-'l
he  was  assistant  clerk  of  the  Indiana  house  of  rep-
resentatives, and  from  1832  till  1835  he  served  as
its  clerk.  In  1832  he  was  a  candidate  for  congress
in  opposition  to  Edward  A.  Hannegan,  but  was  de-
feated. Four  years  later  he  was  elected,  serving
from  4  Sept.,  1837,  till  3  March,  1839.  The  year
before  he  had  been  an  elector  on  the  Whig  ticket.
In  1839  Mr.  White  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
as  the  successor  of  Gen.  John  Tipton.  There  were
three  candidates,  and  he  was  not  chosen  until  the
36th  ballot.  In  the  senate  he  opposed  the.  annexa-
tion of  Texas,  as  well  as  every  other  measure  that
tended  to  extend  the  area  of  slavery.  He  was  also
active  in  securing  grants  of  land  to  aid  in  the  ex-
tension of  the  Wabash  and  Erie  canal.  On  the
expiration  of  his  senatorial  term  in  1845  he  re-
sumed the  practice  of  law,  but  soon  abandoned  it
to  become  actively  engaged  in  the  construction  of
railroads.  He  was  president  of  the  Indianapolis
and  Lafayette  road  from  its  organization  until
1856,  and  for  three  years  was  also  at  the  head  of
the  Wabash  and  Western  railway.  In  1860  Mr.
White  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  and
served  from  4  July,  1861,  till  3  March,  1863.  He
was  made  chairman  of  a  select  committee  whose
duty  it  was  to  consider  the  question  of  compen-
sated emancipation,  and  reported  a  bill  appropri-
ating $180,000,000  to  pay  loyal  owners  for  their
slaves,  and  $20,000,000  to  aid  in  the  colonization
of  the  freedmen.  This  measure  was  recommended
and  supported  by  Mr.  Lincoln  with  all  the  influ-
ence of  his  office.  In  presenting  the  bill,  Mr.  White
accompanied  it  with  an  elaborate  report  on  slavery
as  a  social  and  political  problem.  Ho  contended
that  the  white  and  black  races  should  be  separated,
and  the  latter  colonized  in  the  equatorial  regions
of  America.  He  also  assured  the  south  that  if  his
proposition  were  not  accepted,  their  slaves  would
ultimately  be  taken  from  them  without  compensa-
tion. Mr.  White,  at  the  close  of  his  term,  failed
to  secure  a  renomination,  mainly  on  account  of  his
action  on  this  question.  He  was  named  by  the
president  one  of  three  commissioners  to  adjust
the  claims  of  citizens  of  Minnesota  and  Dakota
against  the  government  for  Indian  depredations.
On  the  death  of  Caleb  B.  Smith,  7  Jan.,  1864,  Presi-


WHITE


WHITE


467


dent  Lincoln  appointed  Mr.  White  U.  S.  judge  for
the  district  of  Indiana,  but  he  lived  to  discharge
the  duties  of  the  office  only  a  few  months.

WHITE,  Alexander,  legislator,  b.  in  Rappa-
hannock county,  Va.,  in  1738  ;  d.  in  Woodville,  in
the  same  county,  in  September,  1804.  He  was  re-
markable for  his  eloquence  and  patriotism  and  took
an  active  part  in  the  political  agitation  that  pre-
ceded the  Revolution.  He  sat  as  a  delegate  in  the
Continental  congress  in  1786-'88,  was  elected  a
representative  from  Virginia  in  the  1st  congress,
and  re-elected  to  the  2d,  serving  from  4  March,
1789,  till  2  March,  1793.

WHITE,  Alexander,  merchant,  b.  in  Elgin,
Scotland,  13  March,  1814 ;  d.  in  Lake  Forest,  III.,
18  March,  1872.  He  was  one  of  the  early  settlers
of  Chicago,  where  he  arrived  in  the  spring  of  1837.
Until  1857  he  was  a  merchant,  being  the  first
dealer  in  Chicago  in  fine-art  goods.  From  1857
till  1867  he  was  engaged  in  real  estate  investments,
establishing  the  great  auction  sales  that  have
played  an  important  part  in  the  city's  develop-
ment. Retiring  from  business  in  1867  to  devote
himself  to  the  collection  of  flowers  and  paintings,
he  purchased  an  estate  at  Lake  Forest,  which  he
made  among  the  most  artistic  in  the  west.  In
1859  he  built  in  his  Chicago  residence  the  first
private  art-gallery  in  Illinois,  exhibiting  his  paint-
ings for  the  benefit  of  the  city.  In  1866  he  sold
this  collection  at  auction,  and  in  1869  he  opened
a  gallery  at  his  residence  at  Lake  Forest  with  160
works  of  art.  Returning  from  Europe  with  a  third
collection  when  the  great  fire  of  1871  occurred,
his  losses  induced  him  to  sell  his  treasures  at  auc-
tion the  same  year  in  New  York  city.  His  artistic
taste  found  further  expression  in  the  cultivation
of  flowers,  especially  of  camelias  and  orchids,  his
collection  being  recognized  as  the  most  complete
in  the  northwest.

WHITE,  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.  in  Franklin,
Robertson  co.,  Tenn.,  16  Oct.,  1816.  He  was  taken
to  Alabama  when  five  years  of  age,  and  educated
there  and  at  the  University  of  Tennessee,  but  he
volunteered  in  the  Creek  and  Seminole  war  in
1836,  and  therefore  was  not  graduated.  He  subse-
quently studied  law  with  his  father,  John  White
(1784-1842),  who  was  one  of  the  circuit  and  su-
preme court  judges  of  Alabama.  On  his  admission
to  the  bar  in  1838  he  practised  at  first  as  the  asso-
ciate of  his  father,  and  afterward  (1841-'55)  as  the
partner  of  Lewis  E.  Parsons  at  Talladega.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Union  Whig  after  an  ex-
citing contest  in  a  Democratic  district,  and  served
from  1  Dec,  1851,  till  3  March,  1853.  In  1856  he
removed  to  Selma,  and  in  1860  he  supported  Bell
and  Everett  for  president  and  vice-president.  He
earnestly  opposed  secession,  but  decided  to  act
with  his  state  when  that  event  became  inevitable.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  a  member  of  the
convention  to  frame  a  new  constitution  for  Ala-
bama, and  he  was  elected  to  the  general  assembly
of  the  state  in  1872.  In  the  following  year  he  was
chosen  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  and  served
from  1  Dec,  1873,  till  4  March,  1875.  In  the  lat-
ter year  he  was  appointed  an  associate  justice  of
the  U.  S.  court  for  the  territory  of  Utah.  After
holding  the  office  for  a  brief  term  he  returned  to
Alabama,  and  in  1875  removed  to  Dallas,  Tex.,
where  he  practises  his  profession.

WHITE,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  London,
England,  about  1579 ;  d.  there,  27  Dec,  1656.  He
was  educated  at  Douay  college,  France,  where  he
was  ordained  priest  in  1605.  After  his  return  to
England  in  1606  he  was  arrested,  with  sixteen
other  priests,  and  sentenced  to  perpetual  banish-


ment. He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  on  2  Feb.,
1609,  returned  to  England  at  the  risk  of  his  life,
and  was  engaged  in  missionary  duties  there  until
1619.  He  was  subsequently  professor  of  theology
and  Hebrew  in  Valladolid  and  Seville,  and  of  di-
vinity in  Douay  and  Liege.  In  1633  he  was  chosen
by  the  Jesuit  general,  Mutius  Vitelleschi,  to  ac-
company Lord  Baltimore  to  this  country,  with
some  other  Jesuits.  After  landing  he  devoted
himself  to  the  conversion  of  the  Piscataway  and
Patuxent  Indians,  as  well  as  to  those  in  the  neigh-
borhood of  the  new  settlements.  He  returned  to
Europe  subsequently,  and  brought  back  more  mis-
sionaries. Father  White  learned  the  language  of
the  Indians,  and  compiled  a  grammar,  vocabulary,
and  catechism.  They  were  all  supposed  to  be  lost,
until  Father  William  McSherry  discovered  the
catechism  in  the  Jesuit  archives  at  Rome.  Father
White  was  summoned  to  sit  in  the  first  colonial
assembly  of  Maryland ;  but  his  request  to  be  ex-
cused from  taking  part  in  secular  affairs  was
granted.  The  "Extracts  from  the  Letters  of  the
Missionaries,"  appended  to  his  "Relatio  Itineris
in  Marylandiam,"  give  some  very  interesting  de-
tails about  his  labors  and  success  among  the  In-
dians of  Patapaco,  Piscataway.  and  Patuxent.  In
1644  he  was  seized  by  a  band  of  Claiborne's  sol-
diers and  sent  in  irons  to  England,  where  he  was
imprisoned  on  a  charge  of  violating  the  law  con-
cerning "  missionary  popish  priests."  After  great
suffering  he  was  released  and  banished  from  the
country.  He  petitioned  his  superiors  to  be  allowed
to  go  to  Maryland ;  but  his  request  being  refused,
on  the  ground  of  his  age  and  infirmities,  he  re-
turned to  England  under  an  assumed  name,  and
was  there  engaged  in  missionary  duties.  Further
accounts  of  him  are  vague  and  uncertain,  although
the  place  and  date  of  his  death  are  given  in  the
official  records  of  the  Jesuit  order.  He  wrote
"  Relatio  Itineris  in  Marylandiam,"  which,  with
"  Declaratio  coloniae  Domini  Baronis  de  Balti-
moro"  and  "Excerpta  ex  Diversis  Litteris  Mis-
sionariorum  ab  anno  1635  ad  annum  1638,"  has
been  published,  accompanied  by  a  translation,  by
the  Maryland  historical  society  (Baltimore,  1874).

WHITE,  Andrew  Dickson,  educator,  b.  in
Homer,  N.  Y.,  7  Nov.,  1832.  He  was  of  New  Eng-
land parentage,  studied  one  year  at  Hobart  col-
lege, N.  Y.,  and  passed  the  remainder  of  his  col-
legiate course  at
Yale,  where  he
was  graduated  in
1853.  After  grad-
uation he  spent
about  two  years
in  Europe,  chiefly
at  Paris  and  Ber-
lin, in  the  prosecu-
tion of  historical
studies.  He  was
also  attache  to  the
American  legation
in  St.  Petersburg
for  six  months,
and  travelled  on
foot  through  many
of  the  historical  lo-
calities of  the  con-
tinent, especially
in  northern  and
western  France.
He  returned  home  in  1856,  studied  history  for  one
year  at  Yale,  and  in  1857  was  elected  professor  of
history  and  English  literature  in  the  University  of
Michigan. In  1862  he  resigned  in  consequence  of


^ul^JXodc^


468


WHITE


WHITE


impaired  health,  returned  to  Syracuse,  where  he
had  formerly  resided,  was  elected  to  the  state  senate
for  that  place,  and  was  re-elected  in  1864.  While
state  senator  he  introduced  bills  that  codified
the  school  laws,  created  the  new  system  of  normal
schools,  and  incorporated  Cornell  university.  In
1867  he  became  first  president  of  Cornell,  which
post  he  filled  until  failing  health  compelled  him
to  retire  in  1885.  He  visited  Europe  in  1867-'8
for  the  purpose  of  examining  into  the  organiza-
tion of  the  principal  schools  of  agriculture  and
technology  and  of  purchasing  books  and  apparatus
for  his  university  at  the  request  of  its  trustees.  In
January,  1871,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  U.  S.
commissioners  to  Santo  Domingo,  and  aided  in
preparing  the  report  of  the  commission.  He  was
president  of  the  Republican  state  convention  of
New  York  in  October,  1871,  and  was  U.  S.  minister
to  Germany  from  1879  till  1881.  From  his  own
resources  President  White  contributed  about  $100,-
000  to  the  equipment  of  Cornell  university,  and
on  19  Jan.,  1887,  he  endowed  the  new  school  of
history  and  political  science  in  that  institution
with  his  historical  library  numbering  30,000  vol-
umes, besides  10,000  valuable  pamphlets  and  many
manuscripts,  all  of  which  cost  him  more  than
$100,000.  As  a  permanent  tribute  to  him  the
board  of  college  managers  decided  to  designate
the  new  school  as  "The  President  White  school
of  history  and  political  science."  Besides  con-
tributions to  periodicals,  he  has  published  "  Out-
lines of  a  Course  of  Lectures  on  History  "  (Detroit,
1861);  "A  Word  from  the  Northwest"  (London.
1863),  in  response  to  strictures  in  the  American
"Diary"  of  Dr.  William  Howard  Russell:  "Syl-
labus of  Lectures  on  Modern  History"  (Ithaca,
1876);  "The  Warfare  of  Science"  (New  York,
1876);  " The  New  Germany "  (1882) ;  "On  Studies
in  General  History  and  in  the  History  of  Civiliza-
tion "(1885);  and  "A  History  of  the  Doctrine  of
Comets"  (1886). — His  cousin,  Edwin,  artist,  b.
in  South  Hadley,  Mass.,  21  May,  1817 ;  d.  in  Sara-
toga Springs,  N.  Y.,  7  June,  1877,  began  to  paint
when  he  was  a  boy,  was  elected  an  associate  of
the  National  academy  in  1848.  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  became  a  full  academician.  In  1850,  and
again  in  1869,  he  went  abroad,  and  studied  in
Paris,  Rome,  Florence,  and  Dusseldorf.  He  re-
turned to  the  United  States  in  1875,  and  opened  a
studio  in  New  York.  He  executed  a  large  num-
ber of  paintings,  most  of  them  historical.  These
include  "  Washington  resigning  his  Commission,"
which  was  bought  by  Maryland  for  $6,000.  and
now  in  Annapolis;  "Milton's  Visit  to  Galileo";
"  Requiem  of  De  Soto  " ;  "  Pocahontas  informing
Smith  of  the  Conspiracy  of  the  Indians " ;  "  Old
Age  of  Milton"  (1848);  and  "First  Printing  of
the  Bible."  Among  his  portraits  are  those  of
Elihu  Burritt  and  S.  Wells  Williams.  He  be-
queathed his  "  Antiquary "  to  the  Metropolitan
museum  (New  York),  "  Leonardo  da  Vinci  and  his
Pupils"  (1868)  to  Amherst  college,  and  an  unfin-
ished picture  of  the  signing  of  the  compact  on  the
"Mayflower"  to  Yale.  The  New  York  historical
society  owns  his  "  Murillo  sketching  the  Beggar-
Boy  "(1865);  the  Museum  of  fine  arts,  Boston,"  his
"Interior  of  the  Bargello,  Florence"  (1875);  and
his  "  Age's  Revery  "  (1847)  is  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy.  West  Point.

WHITE,  Anthony  Walton,  soldier,  b.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  7  July,  1750;  d.  there,  10  Feb.,
1803.  He  was  descended  from  Anthony  White,  a
royalist,  who,  after  the  execution  of  Charles  I.,  re-
moved to  Bermuda  and  became  Connected  with
the  government  of  the  islands,  of  which  his  son,


Anthony,  and  grandson,  Leonard,  were  chief  jus-
tices. Leonard's  son,  Anthony,  removed  to  this
country  and  mar-
ried Elizabeth,
daughter  of  Gov.
Lewis  Morris,  of
New  Jersey.  Their
son,  Anthony  Wal-
ton, received  hised-
ucation  under  the
immediate  direc-
tion of  his  father,
who  was  a  man  of
great  wealth  and
the  holder  of  sev-
eral important  of-
fices. Until  the
age  of  twenty-five
his  time  was  em-
ployed in  study
and  in  assisting  his
father  in  the  man-
agement of  his
large  estates.  In
October.  1775,  he
obtained  a  com-
mission as  major  and  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Wash-
ington. On  9  Feb.,  1776,  he  was  commissioned  by
congress  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d  battalion
of  New  Jersey  troops,  and  he  was  actively  engaged
in  the  service  at  the  north  till  1780,  being  succes-
sively appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th  regi-
ment of  light  dragoons  in  the  Continental  army,
13  Feb.,  1777,  lieutenant-colonel  commandant  of
the  1st  regiment,  10  Dec,  1779,  and  colonel,  16
Feb.,  1780.  At  this  time  he  was  ordered  by  Wash-
ington to  take  command  of  all  the  cavalry  in  the
southern  army,  and  upon  his  own  personal  credit
equipped  two  regiments,  with  which  to  operate
against  Lord  Cornwallis  in  South  Carolina.  On  6
May,  1780,  with  the  remnant  of  Maj.  Benjamin
Huger's  cavalry,  he  crossed  Santee  river  and  cap-
tured a  small  party  of  British ;  but  while  waiting
at  Lanneau's  ferry  to  recross  the  river  he  was  sur-
prised and  defeated  by  Col.  Bannastre  Tarleton,
and  he  and  many  of  his  troops  were  taken  prison-
ers. In  1781  he  was  ordered  to  join  the  army  un-
der Lafayette  in  Virginia,  and  on  his  march  to  that
state  had  several  successful  encounters  with  Col.
Tarleton.  He  was  present  with  Gen.  Anthony
Wayne  in  the  movement  of  that  commander  before
Savannah  on  21  May,  1782 ;  and,  on  the  evacuation
of  that  place,  returned  to  Charleston,  S.  G,  where
he  became  security  for  the  debts  of  the  officers  and
men  of  his  regiments,  who  were  in  want  of  almost
all  the  necessaries  of  life.  These  debts  he  was  sub-
sequently obliged  to  pay  at  enormous  sacrifices  of
his  own  property,  and,  on  returning  to  the  north  at
the  close  of  the  war,  his  financial  ruin  was  com-
pleted by  entering  into  speculation  at  the  persua-
sion of  military  friends.  In  1793  he  removed  from
New,  York,  where  he  had  resided  for  about  ten  years,
to  his  native  town,  and  in  the  following  year  was
appointed  by  President  Washington  general  of  cav-
alry in  the  expedition  against  the  western  insur-
gents. Gen.  White  died  at  a  comparatively  early
age,  and  was  buried  in  the  grounds  of  Christ  church,
in  his  native  place.  See  "  Memoir  of  Brig.-Gen.
Anthony  Walton  White,"  by  Anna  M.  W.  Wood-
hull  (Newark.  1882).

WHITE,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Randolph,
Vt.,  28  Dec,  1795 ;  d.  in  Crawfordsville.  Ind.,  29
Oct.,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1821,  studied  at  Andover  in  1821-'3,  and  was  pas-
tor of  the  Congregational  church  in  Thetford,  Vt.,


WHITE


WHITE


469


in  1825-'9,  and  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at
Cazenovia,  N.  Y.,  in  1829-'33.  From  1834  till  1841
he  was  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Owego,
N.  Y.,  and  from  1841  till  1861  he  was  president
of  Wabash  college,  Crawfordsville,  Ind.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Union  in  1840.
Besides  many  sermons,  he  published  "Essays  in
Literature  and  Ethics"  (Boston,  1853).

WHITE,  Charles  Abiathar,  geologist,  b.  in
North  Dighton,  Mass.,  26  Jan.,  1826.  He  removed
to  Iowa  in  1839,  and  was  graduated  at  Rush
medical  college  in  1863.  Three  years  later  he  be-
came state  geologist  of  Iowa,  which  appointment  he
held  until  1870,  and  in  1807-73  he  was  professor
of  natural  history  in  the  Iowa  state  university.  In
1873  he  was  called  to  the  same  chair  in  Bowdoin,  but
he  resigned  two  years  later,  and  during  1874  was
geologist  and  palaeontologist  to  the  U.  S.  geographi-
cal and  geological  surveys  west  of  the  100th  me-
ridian under  Lieut.  George  M.  Wheeler.  He  then
passed  to  the  service  of  the  survey  under  Maj.  John
W..  Powell  in  1875,  and  in  1876  to  that  under  Fer-
dinand V.  Hayden,  with  whom  he  remained  until
1879.  Dr.  White  had  charge  of  the  palaeontologi-
cal  collections  in  the  U.  S.  national  museum  in
1879-'82,  and  in  1881  was  detailed  to  act  as  chief
of  the  artesian  wells  commission  upon  the  Great
Plains  under  the  auspices  of  the  U.  S.  agricultural
department.  Since  1882  he  has  been  connected
with  the  U.  S.  geological  survey,  first  as  geologist,
and  since  1883  as  palaeontologist  in  charge  of  the
division  of  mesozoic  invertebrates.  His  knowl-
edge of  his  specialty  has  gained  for  him  a  reputa-
tion as  an  authority  that  is  unequalled  in  certain
branches  of  fossil  life.  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Iowa  college,  and  he  holds  an
honorary  curatorship  in  the  U.  S.  national  muse-
um. He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  was
president  of  the  Biological  society  of  Washington
in  1883-'4,  and  was  elected  a  vice-president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science  in  1888.  His  writings  include  nearly  200
papers,  of  which  the  most  important  are  included
in  the  reports  of  the  various  surveys  with  which  he
has  been  connected,  also  a  work  on  the  cretaceous
invertebrates  of  Brazil,  which  were  collected  by  the
Imperial  geological  commission,  under  the  direc-
tion of  the  late  Charles  F.  Hartt,  to  form  vol.
vii.  pf  the  "Archives  of  the  Brazilian  National
Museum  "(Rio  de  Janeiro,  1887).  See  "  Annotated
Catalogue  of  the  Published  Writings  of  Charles
Abiathar  White,  1860-1885,"  by  John  B.  Marcou
(Washington,  1885).

WHITE,  Charles  Ignatius,  R.  C.  clergyman,
b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1807;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  1  April,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  St.
Mary's  college,  Baltimore,  in  1823,  and  became  a
Roman  Catholic  priest.  He  was  at  the  time  of
his  death,  and  had  been  for  twenty  years  preceding,
the  pastor  of  St.  Matthew's  church  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C.  He  edited  the  "  Catholic  Almanac  "  in
1834-'57,  and  founded  and  edited  the  "  Religious
Cabinet "  in  1842,  a  monthly  magazine,  which  was
replaced  in  1843  by  the  "  United  States  Catholic
Magazine."  This  again  was  replaced  in  1849  by  a
weekly  paper,  the  "Catholic  Mirror."  He  trans-
lated and  edited  Jaime  Lucio  Balmes's  "Protestant-
ism and  Catholicity  compared  in  their  Effects  on
the  Civilization  of  Europe  "  (New  York,  1850) ;  also
Chateaubriand's  "Genius  of  Christianity"  (1856);
and  wrote  a  "  Life  of  Mrs.  Eliza  A.  Seton  "  (1853).

WHITE,  Daniel  Appleton,  jurist,  b.  in  the
part  of  Methuen  which  is  now  Lawrence,  Mass.,  7
June.  1776;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  30  March,  1861.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1797,  was  teacher


of  the  Medford  grammar-school  in  1797-'9  and
Latin  tutor  in  Harvard  in  1799-1803.  He  began
the  study  of  law  at  Cambridge,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1804,  and  engaged  in  practice  in  New-
buryport,  where  he  resided  till  January.  1817,  when
he  removed  to  Salem.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature  in  1810-15,  was  chosen
to  congress  in  1814,  but  declined  to  serve,  and  was
elected  judge  of  probate  of  Essex  county,  Mass..
which  office  he  held  for  thirty-eight  years.  He
was  for  many  years  an  active  member  of  the  Essex
institute,  to  which  he  gave  8,000  volumes,  and  of
the  Massachusetts  historical  society.  Judge  White
was  the  author  of  a  "Eulogy  on  George  Washing-
ton" (Haverhill,  1800);  "  View  of  the  Jurisdiction
of  the  Court  of  Probate  in  Massachusetts"  (Sa-
lem, 1822) ;  "  Eulogy  on  Nathaniel  Bowditch  "
(1822);  and  "New  England  Congregationalism,  in
its  Origin  and  Purity  "  (1861);  and  aided  John
Pickering  in  preparing  his  edition  of  Sallust  (1805).
See  a  memoir  of  Judge  White  by  James  Walker,
written  for  the  Massachusetts  historical  society
(1863),  and  also  one  by  George  W.  Briggs  for  the
Essex  institute  (1864).

WHITE,  David  Nye,  journalist,  b.  in  Ware-
ham,  Mass.,  22  Aug.,  1805;  d.  in  Sewickley,  Pa.,  1
April,  1888.  He  was  descended  from  Peregrine
White,  and  his  father,  Ebenezer,  served  through
the  Revolutionary  war.  He  removed  with  his
parents  to  Ohio  soon  after  the  war  of  1812;  was  a
printer  in  Canton,  Ohio,  and  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in
December,  1827,  removed  to  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  in
1841  purchased  the  Pittsburg  "  Gazette,"  of  which
he  was  also  editor.  He  was  opposed  to  slavery,
and,  despairing  of  accomplishing  anything  to  bene-
fit the  slaves  through  the  existing  political  parties,
he  published  a  call  in  1855  for  a  county  conven-
tion to  form  a  new  party.  The  call  had  few  sign-
ers, but,  when  the  convention  met,  every  district  in
the  county  was  represented  by  a  duly  elected  dele-
gate. A  ticket  was  nominated,  and  from  this
beginning,  it  is  claimed,  sprang  the  Republican
party.  Mr.  White  was  collector  of  internal  revenue
of  the  23d  district  of  Pennsylvania  for  four  years,
a  member  of  the  state  house  of  representatives
three  years,  and  a  delegate  at  large  to  the  Consti-
tutional convention  of  1873-'4.

WHITE,  Edward  Douglas,  statesman,  b.  in
Tennessee  in  March,  1795;  d.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  18  April,  1847.  He  removed  with  his  father,
James,  who  was  subsequently  appointed  judge  of
western  Louisiana,  to  Attakapas  parish,  La.,  in
1799.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Ten-
nessee, studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  to  practise  at  Donaldsonville,  but,  on  being
appointed  to  a  judgeship  in  New  Orleans,  he  re-
moved thither.  He  was  elected  to  congress  for
three  consecutive  terms,  and  served  from  7  Dec.,
1829,  till  15  Nov.,  1834,  when,  having  been  elected
governor,  he  resigned.  He  was  governor  of  Louisi-
ana in  1834-'8.  afterward  removed  to  a  sugar-
plantation  near  Thibodeaux.  and  was  again  elected
as  a  Whig  to  congress,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1839,
till  3  March,  1843.  He  was  on  the  steamer  "  Lion-
ess "  when  she  was  set  on  fire  by  an  explosion  of
gunpowder,  19  May,  1833,  and  narrowly  escaped
death. — His  son,  Edward  Douglas,  jurist,  b.  in
Lafourche  parish,  La.,  3  Nov.,  1845,  was  educated
at  Mt.  St.  Mary's  college,  Emmitsburg.  Md.,  and
the  Jesuit's  college  in  New  Orleans.  During  the
civil  war  he  served  in  the  Confederate  army.  He
then  studied  and  practised  law,  was  a  state  senator
in  1874-'8.and  judge  of  the  Louisiana  supreme  court
in  1878-'80.  and  on  29  May,  18S8,  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  for  the  term  beginning  on  4  March,  1889.


470


WHITE


WHITE


WHITE,  Emerson  Elbridge,  educator,  b.  in
Mantua,  Portage  co.,  Ohio,  10  Jan.,  1829.  He  was
educated  at  Ewinsburg  academy  and  the  University
of  Cleveland,  taught  in  the  former  institution,
and  was  afterward  an  instructor  of  mathematics
in  Cleveland  university,  and  principal  of  the  Cen-
tral high-school  in  that  city.  He  became  super-
intendent of  the  public  schools  of  Portsmouth,
Ohio,  in  1856,  state  commissioner  of  common
schools  in  1863,  and  was  president  of  Purdue  uni-
versity, Lafayette,  Ind..  in  1876-'83,  and  since  that
time  has  been  superintendent  of  schools  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio.  He  was  president  of  the  Ohio  teach-
ers' association  in  1863,  of  the  National  superin-
tendents' association  in  1866,  of  the  National  edu-
cation association  in  1872,  and  of  the  National
council  of  education  in  1884-'6.  Mr.  White  was
editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Ohio  Educational
Monthly  "  from  1861  till  1875,  and  of  the  "  National
Teacher"  from  1870  till  1875,  writer  of  the  memo-
rial to  congress  on  the  National  bureau  of  educa-
tion, and  author  of  the  accompanying  bill  that
was  introduced  by  James  A.  Garfield,  and  subse-
quently passed.  He  has  published  several  school
text-books,  and  a  work  entitled  "  Elements  of
Pedagogy." — His  nephew,  Emory  Calvin,  trav-
eller, b.  in  Monterey,  Allegan  co.,  Mich.,  15  Oct.,
1858,  was  educated  at  Michigan  university  and  at
Purdue  university,  where  he  taught  for  three
years.  He  then  became  superintendent  of  schools
at  Albion,  Ind.,  but  resigned  in  order  to  accept
the  presidency  of  the  American  college  at  Callao,
Peru.  After  filling  this  post  for  a  time,  he  relin-
quished it  for  the  sake  of  studying  the  ruins  of
the  Incas,  among  which  he  spent  three  years,  ex-
cavating, photographing,  and  surveying.  He  then
traversed  the  upper  Amazon,  visited  Bolivia,  Chili,
Brazil,  the  Argentine  Republic,  and  Spain,  in
search  of  further  information  regarding  the  Inca
and  pre-Inca  races,  returning  to  the  United  States
in  1886,  and  is  writing  histories  of  Peru,  Chili,  the
Argentine  Republic,  and  Brazil.

WHITE,  Francis  J.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1842;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  29  Aug.,  1875.
He  was  the  eldest  son  of  James  H.  White,  who
was  at  one  time  judge  of  the  superior  court  of
New  York.  Francis  received  a  good  education,
and  early  in  life  contributed  articles  to  magazines.
At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war  he  joined  the  10th
New  York  regiment,  participated  in  the  battle  of
Bull  Run,  and  was  subsequently  on  the  peninsula
with  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler.  He  then  served
under  Fremont,  and  in  October,  1861,  at  the  head
of  his  "prairie  scouts,"  recaptured  Lexington,  Mo.
In  the  autumn  of  1861  he  was  transferred  to  the
Army  of  the  Mississippi,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1862
he  followed  Porter,  the  guerilla  chief,  for  thirteen
days  and  routed  his  band.  At  one  period  of  the
war  he  was  provost-marshal  and  judge-advocate-
general  in  central  Missouri,  and  in  the  closing
years  of  the  contest  he  was  governor  of  the  eastern
shore  of  Maryland.  He  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  13  March,  1865,  and  was
offered  a  captaincy  in  the  regular  army,  which  he
declined.  After  serving  a  short  time  in  Texas,  he
removed  to  St.  Louis,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  elected  to  the  legislature.  He  subse-
quently went  to  California,  where  he  resided  till
his  death,  which  was  the  result  of  disease  contracted
during  the  war.

WHITE,  George  Leonard,  educator,  b.  in  Ca-
diz, Cattaraugus  co..  N.  Y„  20  Sept.,  1838.  He  was
the  son  of  a  blacksmith,  and  while  attending  school
assisted  his  father  in  the  shop.  When  he  was  four-
teen years  old  his  father's  health  gave  way,  and  the


support  of  the  family  devolved  upon  him  and  his
sisters.  He  conducted  his  father's  business,  but
studied  in  leisure  hours,  removed  to  Chillicothe,
Ohio,  and  began  to  teach.  In  1862  he  enlisted  in
the  73d  Ohio  regiment,  and  fought  at  Fredericks-
burg, Chancellorsville,  Gettysburg,  Lookout  Valley,
and  Lookout  Mountain.  At  the  close  of  the  war
he  entered  the  employ  of  the  Freedmen's  bureau,
but  in  1868  he  resigned  to  give  his  entire  time  to
the  work  of  Fisk  university.  Mr.  White  had  heard
the  simple  negro  songs  that  came  into  being  dur-
ing the  days  of  slavery,  and  he  resolved  to  form  a
band  of  his  best  voices  to  sing  these  songs  in  the
large  cities  of  the  north  in  aid  of  the  university.
His  means  were  limited,  but,  embarking  his  all
in  the  enterprise,  he  left  Nashville  with  his  jubilee
singers  on  6  Oct.,  1871.  By  May,  1872,  he  had  re-
mitted to  the  college  $20,000.  The  troupe  was
everywhere  received  with  enthusiasm,  and  a  sec-
ond tour  netted  as  much  as  the  first.  Early  in
1874  they  went  to  Europe,  where  a  like  reception
met  them.  They  sang  before  Queen  Victoria  and
nearly  every  crowned  head  on  the  continent,  and
returned  with  a  gain  of  $50,000.  The  total  sum
that  was  realized  to  the  institution  was  $155,000.
With  the  funds  thus  acquired  twenty-five  acres  on
a  commanding  eminence  near  Nashville  have  been
purchased,  and  a  fine  building  has  been  erected,
which  has  been  called  Jubilee  Hall.

WHITE,  George  Savage,  clergyman,  b.  in
Bath,  England,  in  1784 ;  d.  after  1839.  He  studied
at  Chestnut  college,  and  was  ordained  a  clergy-
man of  the  Church  of  England  at  Lady  Hunt-
ingdon's chapel,  Brighton,  in  1809.  He  afterward
came  to  this  country  and  was  a  minister  in  Rhode
Island.  His  publications  include  "Christian  Me-
morial: containing  God's  Abundant  Grace  and
Providential  Kindness  to  the  Author,"  and  "  Me-
moir of  Samuel  Slater,  the  Father  of  American
Manufactures"  (2d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1846).

WHITE,  Harry,  soldier,  b.  in  Indiana  county,
Pa.,  12  Jan.,  1834.  He  received  a  collegiate  edu-
cation, studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1855,
and  practised  at  Indiana,  Pa.,  till  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war,  when  he  entered  the  National
service  as  major  of  the  67th  Pennsylvania  infantry.
While  in  the  army  he  was  elected  a  state  senator,
serving  in  the  winter  of  1862-'3.  He  afterward
returned  to  his  command,  was  captured  by  the
Confederate  troops,  and  retained  as  a  prisoner
sixteen  months,  but  escaped  and  reached  the  Na-
tional lines  near  Atlanta  in  October,  1864.  He
returned  to  his  command,  served  till  the  end  of  the
war,  was  promoted  to  a  colonelcy,  and  was  bre-
vetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  2  March,
1865.  He  was  re-elected  to  the  senate  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1865,  and  served  by  successive  elec-
tions till  1874,  being  speaker  at  the  close  of  the  term
of  1871.  In  1872  he  was  elected  a  delegate-at-
large  to  the  State  constitutional  convention,  and  he
served  in  congress  from  Pennsylvania  in  1877-'81,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Republican.

WHITE,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wilbraham,
Mass.,  3  Aug.,  1790 :  d.  in  Garland,  Me.,  8  Dec,
1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Bangor  theological
seminary  in  1823.  ordained  over  the  Congregation-
al church  at  Brooks  and  Jackson,  Me.,  19  Oct.,
1825,  and  was  pastor  in  various  towns  in  that  state
and  New  Hampshire  till  7  Nov.,  1858.  He  published
"  Early  History  of  New  England,  illustrated  with
Numerous  Early  Incidents"  (Concord,  1841).

WHITE,  Henry  Clay,  educator,  b.  in  Balti-
more. Md.,  30  Dec,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Virginia  in  1870.  and  was  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  in  the  Maryland  institute,  Bal-


WHITE


WHITE


471


tiraore,  and  then  in  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,
Md.,  in  1871-'2.  In  the  same  year  he  was  science
lecturer  in  the  Peabody  institute,  Baltimore,  and  in
the  latter  year  he  was  appointed  professor  of  chem-
istry in  the  University  of  Georgia,  which  post  he  still
holds.  Since  1880  he  has  been  state  chemist  of
Georgia.  In  1881-'2  he  was  president  of  the  Asso-
ciation of  official  chemists  of  the  United  States,
and  in  1888  he  became  chief  chemist  of  the  Georgia
state  experimental  station.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  Ph.  D.  from  the  University  of  Virginia  in
1877,  and  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science.  Dr.  White  has
published  scientific  addresses,  reports  on  the  chem-
istry of  the  cotton-plant  and  on  commercial  fer-
tilizers, "The  Complete  Chemistry  of  the  Cotton-
Plant"  (Macon,  1873),  and,  with  William  Gibbs
McAdoo,  "Elementary  Geology  of  Tennessee"
(Nashville,  1874).

WHITE,  Horace,  journalist,  b.  in  Colebrook,
N.  H.,  10  Aug.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at  Beloit
college,  Wisconsin,  in  1853.  In  1837  his  father,
who  was  a  physician,  removed  to  Beloit  with  his
family.  After  his  graduation  he  engaged  in
journalism.  He  was  for  many  years  connected
with  the  Chicago  "  Tribune,"  and  from  1864  till
1874  was  its  editor  and  one  of  its  chief  proprietors.
Conjointly  with  Edwin  L.  Godkin  he  has  since
1883  edited  the  New  York  "  Evening  Post."  Mr.
White  has  edited  Frederic  Bastiat's  "  Sophismes
economiques"  (Chicago,  1869),  and  Luigi  Cossa's
"  Scienza  delle  finanze  "  (New  York,  1888).

WHITE,  Hugh,  soldier,  b.  in  Dauphin  county,
Pa.,  in  1737;  d.  in  1822.  He  was  a  captain  in  the
Pennsylvania  line  from  19  April,  1775,  till  1778,
when  he  was  promoted  to  a  colonelcy.  He  was  one
of  the  first  commissioners  of  Lycoming  county,
and  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania  assembly  in
1795,  1796,  and  1803.  He  served  as  colonel  of
Pennsylvania  troops  in  1812. — His  son,  Robert
Gray,  jurist,  b.  in  Selinsgrove,  Pa.,  21  Jan,  1807 ;
d.  in  Millsboro',  Pa.,  6  Sept.,  1875.  was  graduated
at  Jefferson  college  in  1826,  studied  law,  and  prac-
tised in  Tioga  county.  Pa.  He  was  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  of  1838,  treasurer
of  Tioga  county  in  1841  and  1843,  and  elected
president-judge  of  the  4th  judicial  district  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1851  and  1861.  retiring  in  1871.

WHITE,  Israel  Charles,  geologist,  b.  in  Mo-
nongalia county,  W.  Va.,  1  Nov.,  1848.  He  was
graduated  at  West  Virginia  university  in  1872,  and
took  a  graduate  course  in  geology  and  chemistry  in
1875-'6  in  Columbia  school  of  mines.  In  1875  he
was  appointed  assistant  on  the  second  geological
survey  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  remained  until
1884,  and  since  that  year  he  has  been  connected
with  the  U.  S.  geological  survev.  He  was  called
to  the  chair  of  geology  in  the  West  Virginia  uni-
versity in  1877,  and  still  retains  that  appointment.
Prof.  White  was  the  first  geologist  to  harmonize
the  Pennsylvania  and  Ohio  coal-measures,  and  in
1882  he  recognized  as  belonging  to  the  Salina  for-
mation rocks  in  Montour  and  Columbia  counties
that  had  previously  been  classified  either  with  the
Clinton  or  Lower  Helderberg  groups.  He  was  also
the  first  to  apply  the  anticlinal  idea  to  the  success-
ful location  of  natural  gas  and  oil  wells,  and  an-
nounced his  theory  in  1885.  Prof.  White  is  a
member  of  the  American  philosophical  society
and  a  fellow  oi  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science,  and  has  published  papers
in  their  transactions  and  in  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  Science."  He  is  also  the  author  of  nine
volumes  of  the  reports  of  the  geological  survey
of  Pennsylvania.


WHITE,  James,  pioneer,  b.  in  Iredell  county,
N.  C,  in  1737 ;  d.  in  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  in  1815.  He
served  as  a  soldier  during  the  Revolution,  and  re-
ceiving his  pay  from  North  Carolina  in  a  land-war-
rant, located  it,  in  the  summer  of  1787,  on  the
northern  bank  of  the  Holston  river  about  four
miles  below  the  mouth  of  the  French  Broad.  Here
he  erected  a  fort,  built  a  grist-mill,  and  began  a
settlement.  The  place  was  then  on  the  extreme
frontier,  and  a  treaty  with  the  Cherokees  being
held  there  in  1791,  it  attracted  the  attention  of
Gov.  William  Blount,  who  at  once  decided  to  make
it  the  capital  of  the  southwest  territory.  It  was
laid  out  into  lots,  named  Knoxville,  and  soon  at-
tracted to  itself  a  population,  whose  purchase  of
his  property  made  White  a  wealthy  man.  In  Sep-
tember, 1793,  the  fort,  which  contained  300  stand
of  U.  S.  muskets,  and  a  large  amount  of  ammuni-
tion, was  threatened  with  attack  from  a  body  of
1,500  Cherokees.  In  the  absence  of  Gov.  Blount
and  Gen.  Sevier,  White  assumed  command  of  the
forty  settlers,  and  prepared  for  a  desperate  resist-
ance. The  Indians  came  within  eight  miles  of  the
fort,  and  then,  alarmed  by  the  near  approach  of
Sevier  and  his  riflemen,  suddenly  retreated.  Mr.
White  was  a  member  of  the  territorial  legislature,
one  of  those  that  founded  the  state  of  "  Franklin  "
(see  Sevier,  John),  served  as  territorial  delegate  in
congress  in  1794-'5,  and,  on  the  admission  of  Ten-
nessee into  the  Union  in  1796,  was  elected  to  the
state  senate,  and  soon  afterward  chosen  the  speaker
of  that  body.  He  held  this  position  till  December,
1797,  when  he  resigned  to  make  place  for  ex-Gov.
William  Blount,  who,  for  alleged  treason,  had  been
expelled  from  the  U.  S.  senate.  In  November,
1813.  as  brigadier-general  of  Tennessee  volunteers,
he  led  a  successful  attack  on  the  Creek  Indians  at
Hillabee  Town. — His  son,  Hugh  Lawson,  b.  in
Iredell  county,  N.  C,  30  Oct.,  1773 ;  d.  in  Knox-
ville, Tenn..  10  April,  1840,  had  meagre  facilities
for  education.  At
the  age  of  fourteen
he  accompanied  his
family  to  the  remote
backwoods,  and
there  soon  after-
ward began  the
study  of  law  in  a
small  log  office.  A
war  with  the  Chero-
kees breaking  out
when  he  was  seven-
teen years  old,  he
volunteered  as  a  pri-
vate under  Gen.  Se-
vier, and  was  with
him  when  he  gave
that  nation  its  last
crushing  defeat  at
the  battle  of  Eto-
wah. Young  White
doubtless  decided
that  battle,  for  in  the  crisis  of  the  fight  he  levelled
his  rifle  upon  their  leading  chief.  King  Fisher,  and
mortally  wounded  him.  whereupon  the  savages
scattered  in  all  directions.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  went  to  Philadelphia  to  study  the  classics
and  mathematics,  and  read  law  in  the  office  of
James  Hopkins  in  Lancaster,  Pa.  Then  he  re-
turned to  Knoxville  and  began  practice.  For  a
short  time  he  was  private  secretary  to  Gov.  Blount.
At  the  age  of  twenty-eight  he  was  appointed  a
justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Tennessee,  which
office  he  held  for  six  years,  and  until  he  received
the  appointment  of U.  S.  district  attorney. In


-Mfryfatr-


472


WHITE


WHITE


1809  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  dur-
ing the  same  year  he  was  again  appointed  to  the
bench  of  the  supreme  court.  In  1820  he  was  again
chosen  a  state  senator,  and  he  served  in  this
capacity  till  1825.  During  the  session  of  1807  he
compiled  the  land  laws  of  the  state,  and  in  1817
he  drafted  the  act  against  duelling.  In  1815  he
was  elected  president  of  the  Bank  of  Tennessee  at
Knoxville.  In  1822,  with  Judge  Burnett,  of  Ohio,
he  had  been  chosen  by  Kentucky  to  adjust  the  mili-
tary land  claims  of  Virginia.  In  October,  1825,
Judge  White  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to
succeed  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson,  who  had  resigned.
The  first  important  effort  of  Judge  White  in  the
senate  was  on  the  Panama  mission,  in  which  he  op-
posed the  measure  on  constitutional  grounds.  He
delivered  an  able  speech,  16  April,  1826,  on  the
apportionment  of  the  judiciary.  He  opposed  a
general  system  of  internal  improvements  by  the
government,  favored  a  protective  tariff,  prevented
the  recharter  of  the  U.  S.  bank,  and  ardently
supported  the  action  of  President  Jackson.  He
served  many  years  on  the  committee  of  Indian
affairs  as  its  chairman,  and  urged  the  policy  of  re-
moval of  the  Indians  west  of  the  Mississippi.  On
16  Feb.,  1835,  Judge  White  made  his  speech  in
favor  of  limiting  executive  patronage,  which  was
regarded  as  an  attack  upon  the  administration.
This  effort  was  followed  by  an  able  argument
against  Thomas  H.  Benton's  proposition  to  ex-
punge from  the  record  resolutions  of  censure  that
had  been  passed  against  the  president.  Judge
White  had  voted  against  these,  and  had  then  de-
fended the  conduct  of  the  president,  but  regarded
it  as  unconstitutional  to  obliterate  the  record.  He
was  in  favor  of  so  amending  the  resolution  as  to
declare  the  resolutions  of  censure  "  rescinded,  re-
pealed, reversed,  and  declared  null  and  void."
From  this  time  the  breach  between  him  and  the
executive  became  impassable.  The  convention  that
had  assembled  at  Baltimore,  20  May,  1836,  nomi-
nated Martin  Van  Buren  unanimously  for  presi-
dent. The  fifteen  votes  of  Tennessee  were  cast  by
a  single  citizen  of  the  state,  who  happened  to  be
in  the  city ;  not  a  single  delegate  had  been  sent
by  Tennessee.  Both  branches  of  the  assembly  of
that  state,  on  16  and  17  Oct.,  1835,  pronounced  in
favor  of  Mr.  White,  and  he  accepted  the  nomina-
tion for  president.  In  the  elections  of  1824  and
1828  Gen.  Jackson  had  practically  the  entire  vote
of  the  state,  and  the  contest  was  now  between  him
and  Judge  White,  who  carried  the  state  by  a  ma-
jority of  nearly  10,000.  He  also  secured  the  elec-
toral vote  of  Georgia.  In  the  course  of  three  years
the  enemies  of  the  judge  gained  the  legislature  and
passed  resolutions  of  instructions  that  he  could  not
in  conscience  obey,  and  he  therefore  resigned  his
seat.  In  the  following  year  the  Whigs,  under  the
lead  of  Gen.  Harrison,  placed  Judge  White  upon
their  electoral  ticket,  but  his  failing  health  did  not

Sermit  him  to  make  the  canvass.  "  A  Memoir  of
udge  White,  with  Selections  from  his  Speeches
and  Correspondence,"  was  issued  by  Nancy  N.
Scott,  one  of  his  descendants  (Philadelphia.  1856).
WHITE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stanton,  St.
John,  Oxfordshire,  England,  in  1575 ;  d.  in  Dor-
chester, England,  21  July,  1648.  He  was  a  kins-
man of  Bishop  John  White,  whom  Queen  Eliza-
beth deprived  of  the  see  of  Winchester  on  account
of  his  Romanizing  tendencies.  The  younger  John
was  educated  at  Winchester  and  at  Oxford,  where
he  became  a  perpetual  fellow  in  1595,  and  in  1606
was  appointed  rector  of  Holy  Trinity  church,
Dorchester,  which  post  he  held  for  forty  years.
In  1624  he  projected  the  new  colony  of  Massa-


chusetts for  those  who  could  not  conscientiously
conform  to  the  discipline  and  ceremonies  of  the
Church  of  England,  and  in  1630  he  succeeded
in  establishing  at  Mattapan,  Mass..  which  they  re-
named Dorchester,  a  party  of  140  Puritans  from
Dorsetshire  and  the  neighboring  counties.  He
became  one  of  the  assembly  of  divines  in  1643,
and  rector  of  Lambeth  in  1645.  He  was  known  as
the  "  Patriarch  of  Dorchester."  Edward  Everett
says  of  him :  "  Like  Robinson  in  reference  to
Plymouth,  John  White  never  set  foot  on  the  soil
of  Massachusetts,  but  he  was  the  most  efficient  pro-
moter of  the  undertaking,  which  resulted  in  the
settlement  not  merely  of  our  ancient  town,  but  of
the  colony."  See  "Dorchester  in  1630-1776,  and
1855,"  Edward  Everett's  "  Orations  and  Speeches  "
(3  vols.,  Boston,  1859).  White  published  "The
Planter's  Plea,  or  the  Grounds  of  Plantations  Ex-
amined" (London,  1630);  "A  Way  to  the  Tree  of
Life"  (1647);  and  "Commentary  on  the  Three
First  Chapters  of  Genesis"  (1656).

WHITE,  John,  English  lawyer,  b.  in  Pembroke-
shire, Wales,  in  1590;  d.  in  London,  England,  29
Jan.,  1645.  He  was  educated  at  Jesus  college,  Ox-
ford, actively  engaged  against  the  royalists,  and
in  1640  became  member  of  parliament  for  South-
ward In  that  body  he  was  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  religion,  and,  says  Lord  Clarendon,  "  was
notoriously  affected  against  the  church."  He  drew
up  the  first  charter  of  the  Massachusetts  colony  in
1628,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  crown  with  pow-
ers of  government  in  1629.  He  is  buried  in  Tem-
ple Court,  London,  and  on  his  tomb  is  inscribed :

"  Here  lies  a  John,  a  burning,  shining  light,
Whose  name  and  words  and  actions  all  were
White."
He  owed  his  name  of  "Century  White"  to  his
book,  "  The  First  Century  of  Scandalous,  Malig-
nant Priests"  (London.  1643).  He  also  wrote
"  Speech  concerning  the  Trial  of  Twelve  Bishops  "
(1641);  "Speech  concerning  Episcopacy"  (1641);
and  "  The  Looking-Glass  "  (1643  or  1644).

WHITE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Watertown,
Mass.,  in  1677;  d.  in  Gloucester,  Mass.,  17  Jan.,
1760.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1698,  after-
ward was  chaplain  at  Fort  Saco,  and  on  21  April,
1703,  became  minister  of  Gloucester,  Mass.,  which
pastorate  he  retained  till  his  death.  He  published
"  New  England's  Lamentation  for  the  Decay  of
Godliness  (Boston,  1734;  London,  1735),  and  a
"Funeral  Sermon  on  John  Wise"  (1725).

WHITE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  England;  d.  in
Virginia  about  1780.  He  was  of  Irish  parentage,
and  became  a  surgeon  in  the  British  navy,  but,
leaving  the  service,  he  came  with  his  family  to  this
country  and  settled  in  Philadelphia.  He  entered
the  Revolutionary  army  as  a  captain,  and  was  soon
promoted  colonel  of  the  4th  Georgia  battalion.  It
is  claimed  that  during  the  siege  of  Savannah,  with
a  small  body  of  men,  by  a  successful  stratagem,
he  made  prisoners  of  Capt.  French  and  111  British
regulars  on  Ogeechee  river,  about  twenty-five  miles
from  Savannah,  and  also  the  crews  of  five  vessels,
forty  in  number,  and  130  stand  of  arms.  He  was
wounded  at  the  assault  of  Spring-hill  redoubt,  9
Oct.,  1779,  and  obliged  to  retire  from  the  army.

WHITE,  John,  member  of  congress,  b.  in  Ken-
tucky in  1805 ;  d.  in  Richmond.  Ky.,  22  Sept.,  1845.
He  received  an  academical  education,  studied  lav/,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  at  Rich-
mond, Ky.  He  served  by  successive  elections  in
congress  from  7  Dec,  1835,  till  3  March,  1845,  and
was  speaker  of  the  27th  congress.  He  was  then
appointed  judge  of  the  19th  judicial  district  of
his  native  state,  but  soon  died  by  his  own  hand.


WHITE


WHITE


473


WHITE,  John  Blake,  artist,  b.  near  Eutaw
Springs,  S.  C.,2  Sept.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,
24  Aug.,  1859.  He  began  the  study  of  law  in  Co-
lumbia, S.  C,  but  in  1800  went  to  England  with
Washington  Allston.  After  four  years  of  study
with  Benjamin  West,  he  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1804.  The  following  year  he  proceeded
to  Boston  to  practise  his  art,  but,  not  finding  suffi-
cient encouragement,  he  returned  to  Charleston
and  finished  the  study  of  law.  In  this  profession
he  achieved  success,  and  was  repeatedly  elected  to
the  legislature  of  South  Carolina.  Although  prac-
tising art  only  as  an  amateur,  he  produced  several
creditable  historical  paintings,  among  which  are
"Battle  of  Eutaw  Springs "  (1804) ;  "Battle  of
Fort  Moultrie "  (1806);  "Battle  of  New  Orleans "
(1816) ;  and  "  Marion  inviting  the  British  Officer  to
Dinner  "  and  "  Mrs.  Motte  presenting  the  Arrows  "
(1836).  He  received  from  the  South  Carolina  insti-
tute in  1840  a  gold  medal  for. the  best  historical
Sainting,  was  elected  an  honorary  member  of  the
fational  academy  in  1847,  and  was  also  the  recipi-
ent of  numerous  other  honors.  Among  his  por-
traits are  those  of  Charles  C.  Pinekney,  Keating  L.
Simmons,  John  C.  Calhoun,  and  Gov.  Henry  Mid-
dleton.  He  was  also  noted  for  his  literary  attain-
ments, and  was  the  author  of  the  dramas  "  Foscari,
or  the  Venetian  Exile  "  (1805) ;  "  Mysteries  of  the
Castle"  (1806);  "Modern  Honor"  (1812);  "Tri-
umph of  Liberty,  or  Louisiana  preserved  "  (1819) ;
and  "  Intemperance  "  (1839).  He  has  been  regarded
as  the  pioneer  of  literature  and  art  in  the  south. —
His  son,  Edward  Brickell,  architect,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, 29  Jan.,  1806 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10  May,
1882,  entered  the  IT.  S.  military  academy  in  1822,  and
was  graduated  four  years  later.  He  served  in  the
army  for  ten  years,  resigning  in  1836,  and  during
that  time  was  frequently  detached  for  engineering
duties.  Settling  in  Charleston,  he  followed  suc-
cessfully his  profession  as  an  engineer,  being  en-
gaged in  the  building  of  various  railroads.  He  erect-
ed also  numerous  residences,  built  Trinity  church
in  Charleston,  and  designed  the  monument  to  Col.
William  Washington,  at  Eutaw  Springs,  and  that
to  William  O.  Simms,  in  Charleston.  He  entered
the  Confederate  army,  and  served  thoughout  the
war.  In  1865  he  removed  to  New  York,  where  he
remained  until  his  death. — Another  son,  Octavius
Augustus,  physician,  b.  in  Charleston,  8  Feb.,  1826,
was  graduated  at  the  College  of  South  Carolina  in
1846,  and  at  South  Carolina  medical  college  two
years  later.  He  began  and  continued  the  practice
of  medicine  with  success,  until  the  opening  of  the
civil  war,  when  he  received  the  commission  of  sur-
geon in  the  Confederate  army.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  removed  to  New  York,  where  he  has  since
resided.  He  is  a  member  of  the  New  York  acade-
mv  of  medicine,  and  other  medical  societies.  Dr.
White  first  introduced  the  practice  of  superficial
incisions  within  the  os  uteri  for  the  relief  of  stenot-
ic dysmenorrhcea.  He  also  invented  the  "  hyster-
otome,"  an  instrument  for  practising  safe  incision
within  the  neck  of  the  womb;  also  novel  instru-
ments for  the  cure  of  hernia  and  varicocele,  and  a
new  form  of  laryngoscope.  His  contributions  to
medical  literature  include  "  New  Method  of  operat-
ing for  Radical  Cure  of  Hernia  "  (1851) ;  "  Transfu-
sion, with  Successful  Results,  in  Cases  of  Flooding  "
(1853) ;  "  A  New  and  Safe  Treatment  in  Stenotic
Dysmenorrhcea  "  1855) ;  "  Bradycsote  Treatment
of  Yellow  Fever"  (1858) ;  "  Report  on  the  Yellow-
Fever  Epidemic  of  Wilmington,  N.  C."  (1862):
"  Varicocele  and  its  Radical  Cure "  (New  York,
1872) ;  "  Report  on  the  Yellow-Fever  Epidemic  in
Savannah,  Ga."  (1876) ;  and  "  Observations  on  the


Pulse,  introducing  an  Original  Instrument  of  Pre-
cision (the  Hemarumascope)  for  the  Demonstra-
tion of  Arterial  and  Venous  Currents  "  (1877).

WHITE,  John  Silas,  educator,  b.  in  Wrentham,
Mass..  3  Feb.,  1847.  He  served  as  a  private  in  the
42d  Massachusetts  infantry  during  the  last  year  of
the  civil  war,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1870,
was  sub-master  of  the  Boston  Latin-school  in  that
year,  master  of  the  same  in  1871-4,  and  then  found-
ed Brooks  academy,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  of  which  he
was  head-master  in  1874-'80.  From  the  latter
year  he  has  been  head-master  of  Berkeley  school,
New  York  city,  and  since  1888  president  of  the
Berkeley  lyceum  association.  From  June,  1873,
till  September,  1874,  Mr.  White  was  on  a  tour  of
observation  from  the  Boston  Latin-school,  visiting
schools  in  Europe  and  studying  school  systems,
and  was  correspondent  of  the  Boston  "  Daily  Ad-
vertiser" on  educational  topics.  In  1879  iie  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Trinity.  He
has  contributed  occasionally  to  periodicals,  and
has  published  "Boys'  and  Girls'  Plutarch  "  (New
York,  1883) ;  "  Boys'  and  Girls'  Herodotus  "  (1884) ;
and  "  Boys'  and  Girls'  Pliny  "  (1885).

WHITE,  John  Williams,  educator,  b.  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  5  March,  1849.  He  was  graduated
at  Ohio  Wesleyan  university  in  1868,  was  profes-
sor of  Greek  and  Latin  at  Willoughby  college  in
1868-'9,  held  a  similar  professorship  at  Baldwin
university  in  1869-'71,  and  from  1871  till  1874
was  professor  of  Greek  in  the  same  institution.
He  visited  Europe  in  1871-'2,  was  tutor  in  Greek
at  Harvard  in  1874-'7,  and  assistant  professor  from
1877  till  1884,  when,  on  the  death  of  Prof.  Evan-
gelinus  A.  Sophocles,  he  was  appointed  full  pro-
fessor of  Greek.  He  received  the  degrees  Ph.  D.
and  A.  M.  from  Harvard  in  1877.  He  is  also  one
of  the  two  editors  of  "College  Series  of  Greek
Authors,"  is  a  member  of  American  and  foreign
learned  societies,  and  member  of  the  committee  in
charge  of  the  American  school  of  classical  studies
at  Athens.  Prof.  White  published  "  (Edipus  Ty-
ranwus  of  Sophocles "  (1873) :  "  First  Lessons  in
Greek  "  (1876) ;  "  First  Four  Books  of  Xenophon's
Anabasis "  and  "  Selections  from  Xenophon  and
Herodotus,"  as  joint  editor  with  William  W.  Good-
win (1877) ;  and  "  Greek  and  Latin  at  Sight  "  and
"Schmidt's  Rhythmic  and  Metric  of  the  Classical
Languages"  (Boston,  1877);  "Stein's  Summary  of
the  Dialect  of  Herodotus  "  (1880) ;  and  the  "  Realia
of  Greek  Literature  "  (1882).

WHITE,  Joseph  M,  congressman,  b.  in  Frank-
lin county.  Ky.,  10  May,  1781 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
19  Oct.,  1839.  He  was  carefully  educated,  studied
law,  and  settled  in  Pensacola,  Fla.,  where  he  gained
success  by  his  familiarity  with  French  and  Span-
ish, which  enabled  him  to  obtain  clients  from  set-
tlers of  both  these  nationalities.  He  was  chosen
to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1824,  and  served  till
3  March,  1837,  but  was  defeated  at  the  next  elec-
tion. During  his  career  in  congress  he  was  known
as  an  eloquent  speaker  and  debater.  He  published
"New  Collection  of  Laws,  Charters,  etc.,  of  Great
Britain,  France,  and  Spain,  relating  to  the  Conces-
sions of  Lands  with  the  Laws  of  Mexico,"  etc.
(2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1839).

WHITE,  Julius,  soldier,  b.  in  Cazenovia,  Madi-
son co.,  N.  Y.,  29  Sept.,  1816.  He  removed  to  Illi-
nois in  1836,  and  has  resided  in  that  state  and  in
Wisconsin,  where  he  has  engaged  in  commercial
pursuits.  In  1849  he  was  a  member  of  the  Wis-
consin legislature.  He  was  made  collector  of  cus-
toms at  Chicago,  111.,  in  the  spring  of  1861,  but  re-
signed that  office  on  his  appointment  as  colonel  of
the  37th Illinois  volunteers,  then  known  as  the


474


WHITE


WHITE


Fremont  rifle  regiment.  He  commanded  it  dur-
ing Gen.  John  C.  Fremont's  expedition  to  south-
west Missouri  in  the  autumn  of  18(51,  and  was
afterward  placed  at  the  head  of  a  brigade,  accom-
panying Gen.  Samuel  R.  Curtis  into  Arkansas
during  the  succeeding  winter.  He  participated  in
the  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  and  his  appointment  of
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  dated  from  that
battle,  9  June,  1862.  He  was  then  assigned  to  the
Department  of  the  Shenandoah,  and  was  subse-
quently ordered  to  report  to  Gen.  John  E.  Wool.
He  was  at  Martinsburg  in  September,  1862,  and,
when  that  town  became  untenable,  retired  to  Har-
per's Ferry,  where  he  volunteered  to  serve  as  sec-
ond in  command  under  his  inferior  officer,  Col.
Dixon  S.  Miles,  who  was  in  charge  of  that  post.
When  Harper's  Ferry  was  surrendered,  on  15  Sept.,
1862,  to  Gen.  Ambrose  P.  Hill,  he  became  a  pris-
oner of  war,  but  was  released  on  parole.  He  was
then  placed  under  arrest  by  the  U.  S.  government,
and,  at  his  own  request,  a  court  of  inquiry  was
called,  which  found  that  he  acted  with  capability
and  courage.  He  resigned  in  1864,  and  on  18
March,  1865,  was  brevetted  major-general  of  volun-
teers. He  has  since  been  in  business  in  Illinois.

WHITE,  Peregrine,  the  first  white  child  born
in  New  England,  b.  on  the  "  Mayflower,"  in  Cape
Cod  harbor,  20  Nov.,  1620 ;  d.  in  Marshfield,  Mass.,
22  July,  1704.  His  father,  William,  and  his  moth-
er, Susanna,  were  passengers  in  the  "  Mayflower."
Peregrine  became  a  citizen  of  Marshfield,  Mass.,
where  the  court  gave  him  200  acres  of  land  in
"  consideration  of  his  birth."  He  was  of  "  vigor-
ous and  comely  aspect,"  and  filled  several  minor
civil  and  military  offices  in  that  town.  During
his  early  life  he  is  described  as  "  extravagant,"  but
"  much  reformed  in  his  later  years,  and  died  hope-
fully." Peregrine's  father  died  shortly  after  his
arrival  in  this  country,  and  two  months  afterward
his  mother,  Susanna,  married  Edward  Winslow.
Theirs  was  the  first  English  marriage  in  New  Eng-
land. She  was  therefore  the  first  mother  and  the
first  bride  in  the  country ;  her  husband,  Edward
Winslow,  was  its  first  provincial  governor;  and
her  son  by  her  second  marriage,  Josiah  Winslow,
was  the  first  native  governor  of  the  colony.

WHITE,  Phillips,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  New  Hampshire  about  1730;  d.
there  after  1783.  He  was  chosen  to  the  Continent-
al congress  in  1782,  taking  his  seat  3  Dec.  of  that
year.  The  only  record  of  his  appearance  in  that
body  is  his  vote  on  the  motion  made  by  Edmund
Rutledge  in  January,  1783.  "  that  congress  having,
on  20  Dec,  1782,  directed  the  secretary  of  foreign
affairs  to  transmit  to  the  executive  authority  of
Rhode  Island  an  authenticated  state  of  the  several
applications  for  foreign  loans,  and  the  result  there-
of, it  be  resolved  that  the  foregoing  motion  be
postponed."  On  the  question  of  commitment  Mr.
White  voted  in  the  affirmative.

WHITE,  Pliny  Holton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Springfield,  Conn.,  6  Oct.,  1822 ;  d.  in  Coventry,
Vt.,  24  April,  1869.  He  adopted  the  profession  of
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Windham  county,
Vt.,  in  1843,  and  practised  there  till  1853.  He  was
editor  of  the  Brattleborough.  Vt.,  "  Eagle "  "in
1851-2,  and  of  the  "  Express"  at  Amherst,  Mass.,
in  1857-'8. In  February, 1859,  he  was  ordained

fastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  at  Coventry,  Vt.
Ie  was  a  member  of  the  Vermont  legislature  in
1862-'3,  chaplain  of  the  senate  in  1864-'6,  and  at
the  time  of  his  death  president  of  the  Vermont
historical  society.  He  contributed  frequently  to
the  newspapers,  and  is  the  author  of  a  "  History
of  Coventry  "  (Irasburg,  Vt.,  1858).


WHITE,  Richard  Grant,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  22  May,  1821 ;  d.  there,  8  April,  1885.
His  ancestor,  John  White,  came  from  England
in  1636,  and  was  a  settler  of  Cambridge,  Mass.,
and  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  his  grandfather,  Calvin
(1763-1853),  was  rector  of  St.  James's  parish  in
Derby,  Conn.,  but
afterward  became
a  Roman  Catho-
lic, although  he
did  not  enter  the
priesthood  of  that
church.  He  was  a
Tory  and  just  es-
caped hanging  by
the  mob  because
he  "  refused  to
shout  '  Property
and  liberty  ! '  "
Richard  Grant's
father,  Richard
Mansfield  White,
intended  his  son
for  the  church,  but
after  his  gradua-  /O  •.  /l
tion  at  the  Univer- Arl ( i  § I  *  §i

sity  of  the  city  of  U  MAM*  ■  ^/\tUidX/J\MJUL>
New  York  in  1839

he  studied  medicine  and  afterward  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1845.  His  literary  tendencies
drew  him  from  law,  and  he  soon  became  a  contrib-
utor to  the  New  York  "Courier  and  Enquirer."
where  his  musical,  dramatic,  and  art  criticisms  at-
tracted attention.  From  1845  till  1859  he  was  con-
nected with  this  journal,  and  he  served  as  its  editor
in  l854-'9.  He  was  a  founder  in  1846-'7of  "  Yankee
Doodle,"  and  also  a  founder  in  1860  of  the  "  World."
from  which  he  withdrew  in  1861.  During  the  civil
war  he  wrote  a  series  of  letters  to  the  London
"Spectator,"  signed  "A  Yankee,"  which  were  of
much  service  to  the  National  cause.  For  nearly
twenty  years  he  was  chief  of  the  U.  S.  revenue
marine  bureau  in  the  district  of  New  York,  which
post  he  resigned  in  1878.  He  wrote  for  magazines,
contributed  articles  to  cyclopaedias,  and  edited  the
"Illustrated  Record  of  the  New  York  Exhibi-
tion of  the  Industry  of  all  Nations"  (1854),  and
"  Poetrv.  Lvrical,  Narrative,  and  Satirical  of  the
Civil  War"  (1866).  On  the  publication  of  John
Payne  Collier's  folio  manuscript  emendations  of
Shakespeare  (1852),  Mr.  White  contributed  a  series
of  papers  to  "  Putnam's  Magazine,"  in  which  he  de-
nied the  value  of  the  emendations.  The  acumen
and  style  of  these  articles  elicited  general  admira-
tion, and  their  subtile  and  vigorous  criticism  gave
him  a  place  among  the  most  learned  Shakespearian
scholars.  His  publications  are  an  "  Appeal  from
the  Sentence  of  the  Bishoo  [Onderdonk]  of  New
York "  (New  York,  1845) ;  "  Biographical  and
Critical  Hand -Book  of  Christian  Art"  (1853);
"  Shakespeare's  Scholar "  (1854) ;  "  The  Works  of
William  Shakespeare,"  an  annotated  edition  (12
vols.,  Boston,  1857-65);  "Essay  on  the  Author-
ship of  the  Three  Parts  of  Henry  the  Sixth"
(Cambridge,  1859);  "National  Hymns,"  an  essay,
with  selections  from  the  hymns  written  for  a  prize
of  $600  offered  by  a  national  committee,  which
was  not  awarded' (New  York,  1861);  "Memoirs
of  William  Shakespeare,  with  an  Essay  toward
the  Expression  of  his  Genius,  and  Account  of
the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  English  Drama"
(Boston,  1865) ;  "  The  New  Gospel  of  Peace  accord-
ing to  St.  Benjamin,"  an  anonymous  political  sat-
ire (Cambridge,  1866) :  "  Words  and  their  Uses,  a
Study  of  the  English  Language  "  (New  York,  1870 ;


WHITE


WHITE


475


revised  ed ,  1872) ;  "  The  American  View  of  the
Copyright  Question  "  (1880) ;  "Every- Day  English"
(1881):  "England  Without  and  Within  "  (1881) ;
"  The  Riverside  Edition  of  the  Works  of  William
Shakespeare"  (3  vols.,  Cambridge,  1883);  "The
Fate  of  Mansfield  Humphrey,"  a  novel  (1884);
and  a  series  of  articles  on  the  "  Failure  of  the
Public  School  System  in  the  United  States."  His
last  literary  labor  was  the  gathering  of  several
Shakespeare  articles  that  had  appeared  in  periodi-
cals, which  were  completed  and  published  after
his  death,  under  the  title  of  "  Studies  in  Shake-
speare" (Boston,  1885).  The  part  that  is  devoted
to  glossaries  and  lexicons  is  of  special  interest  to
scholars. — His  son,  Stanford,  architect,  b.  in  New
York  city,  9  Nov..  1853.  was  educated  in  his  native
city  in  public  schools  and  under  private  tutors.
He  studied  architecture  under  Charles  D.  Cam-
brill  and  Henry  H.  Richardson,  and  was  chief  as-
sistant of  that  firm  when  they  built  Trinity  church,
Boston.  During  1878-'80  he  studied  in  Europe,
and  in  1881  he  entered  into  partnership  with
Charles  F.  McKim  and  William  R.  Mead.  Mr.
White  has  made  all  of  the  designs  for  the  archi-
tectural work  of  the  statues  by  Augustus  St.  Gau-
dens,  notably  the  pedestal  of  the  Farragut  monu-
ment in  Madison  square,  New  York  city  (see  illus-
tration), and  that  of  the  Lincoln  statue  in  Chicago.
He  has  furnished  many  designs  for  book-covers,
and  those  of  the  "Century"  and  "  Scribner's  Maga-


zine" were  by  him.  The  University  of  the  city  of
New  York  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in
1882.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Tile  club,  the  Ameri-
can institute  of  architects,  and  other  artistic  and
professional  organizations.

WHITE,  Samuel,  senator,  b.  in  Wilmington,
Del.,  in  1770  ;  d.  there,  4  Nov.,  1809.  He  was  care-
fully educated,  early  engaged  in  local  politics,  and
from  1801  until  his  death  was  U.  S.  senator  from
Delaware,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Federalist.
During  the  trial  of  Timothy  Pickering  before  that
body  in  1809,  on  the  charge  of  the  embezzlement
of  public  funds,  Mr.  White  defended  him  in  the
words  :  "  The  accused  is  not  in  default,  but  under
the  awful  visitation  of  God ;  and,  as  he  is  deranged,
our  proceedings  scarcely  deserve  the  name  of  a
mock  trial."  Wilson  Cary  Nicholas,  then  congress-
man from  Virginia,  called  out :  "  I  will  not  submit
to  hear  our  proceedings  called  by  the  name  of  a
mock  trial."  Whereupon  Mr.  White  at  once  re-
plied: "  It  is  a  mock  trial,  and  I  am  ready  to  give
the  gentleman,  if  he  is  offended,  satisfaction  at  any
time  or  place." The  sentiment  in  favor  of  duel-


ling was  so  strong  at  that  time  that  it  does  not  ap-
pear on  the  records  that  the  president  of  the  sen-
ate administered  any  rebuke  to  the  contestants.
Mr.  White  had  a  national  reputation  as  a  marks-
man, and  performed  remarkable  feats  in  shooting.
He  ardently  opposed  slavery,  and  was  a  popular  and
influential  member  of  the  Federalist  party.

WHITE,  Stephen  Van  Culen,  banker,  b.  in
Chatham  county,  N.  C,  1  Aug.,  1831.  His  father
was  a  Quaker  and  opposed  to  slavery,  and  as  he  de-
clined to  do  police  duty  to  prevent  negroes  hold-
ing meetings  at  night  after  the  Nat  Turner  insur-
rection, was  compelled  to  leave  the  state.  He
moved  his  family  by  wagon  to  Greene  (now  Jersey)
county.  111.,  when  Stephen  was  six  weeks  old,  and
engaged  in  farming.  The  son  was  graduated  at
Knox  college.  111.,  in  1854,  studied  law  in  St.  Louis
with  Benjamin  Gratz  Brown  and  John  A.  Kasson,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  4  Nov.,  1856,  and  began
practising  in  Des  Moines.  He  soon  acquired  high
rank  as  a  lawyer,  and  was  retained  in  many  im-
portant cases  before  the  U.  S.  court.  In  1861,  in
the  case  of  the  United  States  vs.  Hill,  he  success-
fully defended  the  only  treason  case  that  was  ever
tried  in  Iowa,  and  in  1863  he  saved  to  investors  many
millions  of  dollars,  which  the  state  courts  had  re-
pudiated, by  a  successful  argument  in  the  U.  S.
supreme  court  in  the  case  of  Gelpke  vs.  Dubuque,
involving  the  constitutionality  of  municipal  bonds
issued  in  aid  of  railroads.  In  1864  he  was  acting
U.  S.  district  attorney  for  Iowa,  and  attended  to
all  the  civil  and  criminal  business  of  the  govern-
ment. In  1865  he  removed  to  New  York  and  en-
gaged in  banking,  and  in  1882  he  organized  the
banking-firm  of  S.  V.  White  and  Co.  He  was
elected  representative  in  congress  from  Brooklyn
in  1886,  and  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  com-
mittee on  post-offices  and  post-roads.  Mr.  White
has  been  noted  as  a  banker  for  his  large  and  bold
operations  in  the  interest  of  the  Delaware,  Lacka-
wanna, and  Western  railroad.  He  has  long  been
a  member  and  trustee  of  Plymouth  church,  is  an
expert  astronomer,  owns  a  private  observatory,  and
on  the  organization  of  the  American  astronomical
society,  in  1883,  was  elected  its  first  president.

WHITE,  Thomas,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Montreal,  7  Aug.,  1830 ;  d.  in  Ottawa,  21  April,
1888.  His  father,  a  native  of  Ireland,  carried  on
business  as  a  merchant  in  Montreal  for  many  years.
The  son  was  educated  at  the  high- school  of  that
city,  afterward  engaged  for  several  years  in  mer-
cantile pursuits,  and  then  became  attached  to  the
editorial  staff  of  the  Quebec  "  Gazette."  In  1853,
with  Robert  Romaine,  he  established  the  Peter-
borough "  Review,"  with  which  he  remained  con-
nected till  1860,  when  he  entered  upon  the  study
of  law  at  Cobourg.  In  1864,  with  his  brother  Rich-
ard, he  became  proprietor  of  the  "  Spectator "  at
Hamilton,  where  he  remained  till  1870.  He  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  Ontario  legisla-
ture in  1867,  and  for  the  Dominion  parliament
three  times,  being  first  elected  for  Cardwell  in
1878.  He  was  re-elected  in  1882.  and  again  in
February,  1887.  In  1885  Mr.  White  became  a
member  of  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald's  cabinet,  with
the  portfolio  of  minister  of  the  interior,  and  soon
afterward  he  visited  the  northwest  in  his  official
capacity,  instituted  an  inquiry  into  the  causes  of
the  insurrection  under  Louis  Riel,  and  arranged
for  the  restoration  of  the  functions  of  government,
which  had  been  temporarily  suspended.  He  was
managing  editor  at  one  time  of  the  Montreal  "  Ga-
zette," representative  for  several  years  of  the  Mon-
treal board  of  trade  in  the  Dominion  board,  mem-
ber for  three  years  of  the  executive  committee  of


476


WHITE


WHITE


the  Dominion  board,  and  represented  that  body  '
for  five  years  in  the  National  board  of  trade  of  the
United  States.  He  was  in  favor  of  such  special
trade  relations  between  different  parts  of  the  Brit-
ish empire  as  would  strengthen  the  bond  of  union
between  the  mother  country  and  the  colonies.  He
was  one  of  the  most  popular  members  of  the  cabi-
net, and  was  highly  regarded  even  by  his  political
opponents. — His  brother,  Richard,  b.  in  Montreal,
14  May,  1834,  established  with  Thomas  the  Peter-
borough "Review"  in  1853,  purchased  the  Hamil-
ton "  Daily  Spectator  "  in  1864,  and  in  1870  the
Montreal  "  Gazette,"  the  oldest  newspaper  in  the
Dominion.  He  is  the  managing  director  of  the
"Montreal  Gazette"  printing  company.  In  addi-
tion to  the  daily  and  weekly  editions  of  the  "  Ga-
zette," the  company  publishes  the  "  Legal  News,"
the  "  Montreal  Law  Reports,"  the  "  Montreal  Medi-
cal and  Surgical  Journal,"  and  the  "  Educational
Record."  Mr.  White  is  actively  connected  with
various  financial  and  industrial  associations,  has
been  a  member  of  the  city  government  of  Montreal,
and  during  the  prevalence  of  small-pox  in  that  city
did  much  to  alleviate  the  condition  of  the  people
and  to  stop  the  progress  of  the  epidemic.

WHITE,  William,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  4  April,  1748;  d.  there,  17  July,  1836.
His  father,  Col.  Thomas  White,  removed  to  Phila-
delphia from  Maryland  in  1745,  and  married  Esther,

widow  of  John
Neuman,  and
daughter  of
Abraham  Hew-
lings,  of  Bur-
lington, N.  J.,
7  May,  1747.
There  were  two
children  of  this
marriage,  Will-
iam, and  Mary,
who  became  the
wife  of  Robert
Morris.  Will-
iam entered  the
English  depart-
mentof  the  Col-
lege and  acad-
emy of  Phila-
delphia at  the
age  of  seven,
and  at  ten  the
Latin-school.  He  was  graduated  in  1765,  and  soon
began  his  theological  studies,  which  he  completed
in  1770.  In  October  of  this  year  iie  sailed  for  Eng-
land to  obtain  holy  orders,  bringing  such  testimo-
nials that,  although  he  was  several  months  under
the  required  age,  he  obtained  from  the  archbishop
of  Canterbury  a  faculty  allowing  him  to  be  ordained.
He  was  ordered  deacon  in  the  Chapel  royal,  St.
James's  palace,  Westminster,  23  Dec,  1770,  by  Dr.
Young,  bishop  of  Norwich,  acting  for  the  bishop  of
London,  who  had  episcopal  oversight  of  allthe  colo-
nies, and  was  ordained  priest  in  the  chapel  of  Ful-
ham  palace,  25  April,  1772,  by  the  bishop  of  Lon-
don. He  sailed  for  this  country,  where  he  arrived
on  13  Sept.,  and  soon  afterward  became  assistant
minister  of  Christ  and  St.  Peter's  churches.  On  11
Feb.,  1773,  he  married  Marv,  daughter  of  Capt.
Henry  Harrison,  mayor  of  Philadelphia.  With-
in a  few  years  he  became  rector  of  the  united
parishes  of  Christ,  St.  Peter's,  and  St.  James's.  The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  given  him  by  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1782,  it  being  the  first  honorary
degree  of  that  college.  All  the  clergy  of  Philadel-
phia sided  with  the  colonies  during  the  Revolution,


fa/£fi?£.'(Z,m  -Zt^/fe


none  more  zealously  than  Dr.  White.  Upon  the
occupation  of  Philadelphia  by  the  British  forces,
he  removed  in  September,  1777,  to  Harford  county,
Md.,  but  he  returned  after  the  evacuation,  and  re-
sumed his  duties.  Then  began  the  long  and  try-
ing struggle  to  sustain  the  life  of  the  church,  in
which  he  took  an  active  part.  Almost  despairing
of  success  in  obtaining  the  episcopate,  which  was
essential  to  the  reorganization  of  the  church,  Dr.
White,  in  August,  1782,  put  forth  a  pamphlet  with
the  title  "  The  Case  of  the  Episcopal  Churches  Con-
sidered" (Philadelphia,  1782),  in  which  he  advo-
cated the  appointment  of  superintendents,  with
similar  powers,  to  take  the  place  of  bishops  in  the
government  of  the  church.  This  plan,  which  found
favor  largely  in  the  middle  and  southern  states,  was
bitterly  opposed  by  the  clergy  of  Connecticut,  and
negotiations  for  peace  having  advanced  to  the  point
of  probability,  the  pamphlet  was  withdrawn  from
circulation,  and  the  plan  was  abandoned.  On  27
March,  1784,  the  clergy  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia,
and  lay  representatives  from  its  parishes,  met  in
Dr.  White's  study  to  take  steps  for  the  organiza-
tion of  the  church  in  Pennsylvania,  which  meet-
ing resulted  in  the  assembling.of  a  council  in  Christ
church,  26  May,  1784,  the  first  council  in  which
laymen  had  been  represented.  Proposals  were
sent  out  to  the  churches  in  other  states  to  meet  in
general  convention,  Dr.  White's  letters  helping
largely  in  bringing  about  this  result.  The  first
meeting  of  that  body  was  held  in  New  York  in
October,  1784,  though  delegates  were  sent  only  on
the  authority  of  their  several  parishes.  On  Tues-
day, 27  Sept.,  1785,  clerical  and  lay  deputies  from
several  states  met  in  Christ  church,  Philadelphia,
and  organized  as  a  general  convention,  of  which
Dr.  White  was  chosen  president.  Steps  were  taken
at  once  by  the  appointment  of  committees  to  draft
a  constitution  for  the  church,  and  to  prepare  a
schedule  of  necessary  alterations  in  the  liturgy.
Dr.  White  made  the  original  draft  of  the  constitxi-
tion,  and  also  prepared  an  address  to  the  arch-
bishops and  bishops  of  the  Church  of  England,
asking  for  the  episcopate  at  their  hands.  He  was
also  largely  instrumental  in  giving  shape  to  the
liturgy  and  offices  of  the  Prayer-Book  which  were
to  be  submitted  to  the  authorities  of  the  Church  of
England  with  the  address.  At  the  convention  of
the  diocese  of  Pennsylvania  in  1786  he  was  elected
its  first  bishop,  and  sailed  for  England  in  com-
pany with  Dr.  Samuel  Provoost.  of  New  York,  seek-
ing consecration,  arriving  in  London,  29  Nov.,
1786.  After  many  delays,  and  the  passage  of  a
special  enabling  act  by  parliament,  he  was,  with
Dr.  Provoost,  at  last  consecrated  in  the  chapel  of
Lambeth  palace,  4  Feb.,  1787,  by  the  archbishops
of  Canterbury  and  York,  and  the  bishops  of  Bath
and  Wells,  and  Peterborough.  He  reached  Phila-
delphia again  on  Easter  Sunday,  7  April,  1787,  and
entered  upon  his  trying  duties,  not  the  least  of
which  concerned  the  recognition  of  the  consecra-
tion of  Bishop  Seabury,  in  all  of  which  his  mild
temper  and  broad  charity  were  effective  in  restor-
ing peace  and  harmony  to  the  councils  of  the
church.  He  was  appointed  chaplain  to  congress
in  1787,  which  office  he  held  till  1801.  Besides  his
episcopal  duties,  he  was  foremost  in  many  public
charities  and  enterprises,  and  held  the  presidency
of  the  Philadelphia  Bible  society,  dispensary,  Prison
society,  Asylum  for  the  deaf  and  dumb,  and  In-
stitution for  the  blind.  He  died  at  the  advanced
age  of  eighty-eight,  after  living  to  see  the  church
in  the  states  thoroughly  organized  and  rapidly
growing,  and  consecrating  eleven  bishops.  His  re-
mains were  buried  in  the  church-yard  of  Christ


WHITE


WHITEFIELD


477


church,  but  in  December,  1870,  were  removed  and
placed  beneath  the  floor  of  the  chancel.  The
centennial  anniversary  of  his  consecration  was  ap-
propriately celebrated  in  Lambeth  palace,  Lon-
don, and  in  Christ  church,  Philadelphia.  Besides
the  "  Pastoral  Letters "  of  the  house  of  bishops
(1808-1835),  five  addresses  to  the  trustees,  pro-
fessors, and  students  of  the  General  theological
seminary  (1822-9),  and  episcopal  charges,  Bishop
White  published  "  Lectures  on  the  Catechism "
(Philadelphia,  1813) ;  "  Comparative  View  of  the
Controversy  between  the  Calvinists  and  the  Armin-
ians''  (2  vols.,  1817) ;  "  Memoirs  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  Church  in  the  United  States  of  America  "
(1820  ;  2d  ed.,  with  continuation,  New  York,  1835) ;
and  "  Commentary  on  Questions  in  the  Ordination
Offices  "  and  "  Commentary  on  Duties  of  Public
Ministry  "  (1  vol.,  1833).  His  "  Opinions  on  Inter-
changing with  Ministers  of  Non-Episcopal  Com-
munions, Extracted  from  his  Charges,  Addresses,
Sermons,  and  Pastoral  Letters,"  appeared  in  1868.
See  his  life  by  Rev.  Dr.  Bird  Wilson  (Philadelphia,
1839).  Portraits  of  Bishop  White  have  been  painted
by  Gilbert  Stuart,  Thomas  Sully,  and  Henry  In-
man.  The  accompanying  vignette  is  copied  from
a  drawing  by  James  B.  Longacre.

WHITE,  William,  Canadian  official,  b.  in  Lon-
don, England,  6  Jan.,  1830.  He  was  educated  at
Burlington  House  school.  Hammersmith,  and  en-
tered the  English  civil  service  in  1846,  but  resigned
in  1854,  and  the  same  year  entered  the  Canadian
post-office  department.  He  became  its  secretary
in  1861  and  deputy  postmaster-general  in  July,
1888.  Mr.  White  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
royal  commission  to  inquire  into  the  organization
of  the  Canadian  civil-service  commission  in  June,
1880.  He  is  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th  battalion,
and  commanded  the  Canadian  team  at  the  matches
of  the  National  rifle  association  at  Wimbledon,
England,  in  1884,  when  it  won  the  Kolopore  cup.
He  has  published  "  Post-Office  Gazetteer  of  Cana-
da" (Ottawa,  1872),  and  "Annals  of  Canada"  in
the  "  Canadian  Monthly  Magazine."

WHITE,  William  Charles,  dramatist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass..  in  1777;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  2
May,  1818.  He  was  the  son  of  a  merchant,  but
left  the  counting-room  for  the  stage  in  1796,  ap-
pearing as  Norval  in  the  Federal  street  theatre,
Boston,  Mass.  At  the  same  time  he  produced  a
tradegy  called  "  Orlando,"  but,  meeting  with  small
encouragement,  turned  his  attention  to  law,  and
opened  an  office  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1800.  He
returned  to  the  stage  for  a  few  months  in  the  same
year,  but  finally  abandoned  it  in  1801,  and  for  a
short  time  was  an  editor  of  the  "  National  ^Egis."
In  1811  he  became  county  attorney.  He  published
and  produced  the  plays  "The  Country  Cousin"
(Boston,  1810),  and  "The  Poor  Lodger"  (1810).
He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Compendium  of  the  Laws
of  Massachusetts  "  (3  vols.,  1810).

WHITE,  William  N.,  horticulturist,  b.  in  Wal-
ton, N.  Y.,  in  1819;  d.  in  Athens,  Ga.,  14  July,
1867.  He  settled  in  Athens,  Ga.,  where  he  became
a  bookseller,  and  for  many  years  previous  to  his
death  edited  the  "  Southern  Cultivator,"  the  only
agricultural  paper  that  sustained  itself  during  the
civil  war.  Mr.  White  was  an  authority  in  practi-
cal agriculture  and  all  matters  relating  to  farm-
ing. He  published  "  Gardening  for  the  South,  or
the  Kitchen  and  Fruit  Garden  "  (New  York,  1856),
and  "Scientific  Gardening"  (1866).

WHITEAVES,  Joseph  Frederick,  Canadian
naturalist,  b.  in  Oxford,  England,  26  Dec,  1835.
He  began  the  study  of  zoology  when  about  twenty
years  of  age,  and  later  that  of  the  invertebrate


palaeontology  of  the  Jurassic  rocks  in  the  immedi-
ate vicinity  of  his  native  city.  He  published  some
of  the  results  of  his  investigations  in  palaeontology
in  the  "  Report  of  the  British  Association  for  the
Advancement  of  Science"  for  1860,  and  in  the
"Annals  and  Magazine  of  Natural  History  "  (Lon-
don, 1861).  He  removed  to  Canada  in  1861,  from
1863  till  1876  was  scientific  curator  and  recording
secretary  to  the  Natural  history  society  of  Mon-
treal, and  contributed  many  articles  on  Canadian
zoology  and  paleontology  to  its  journal,  the  "  Ca-
nadian Naturalist  and  Geologist."  During  1867-'73
he  prosecuted  five  deep-sea  dredging  expeditions  in
the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  the  last  three  under  the
auspices  of  the  department  of  marine  and  fisheries
of  the  Dominion  government.  Large  numbers  of
marine  invertebrates  were  collected  by  him,  among
•them  several  species  that  had  not  previously  been
found  in  America.  He  published  articles  descrip-
tive of  the  result  of  these  investigations  in  the  re-
ports of  the  department  of  marine  and  fisheries,  in
the  "Canadian  Naturalist,"  the  "Annals  and  Maga-
zine of  Natural  History "  of  London,  and  the
"American  Journal  of  Science."  He  first,  joined
the  geological  survey  of  Canada  in  1874.  was  elected
palaeontologist  and  zoologist  to  the  survey  in  1876,
and  subsequently  became  one  of  the  assistant  di-
rectors. He  has  published  illustrated  monographs
on  the  invertebrate  fossils  of  the  upper  cretaceous
rocks  of  Vancouver  and  adjacent  islands,  on  those
of  the  middle  cretaceous  rocks  of  the  Queen  Char-
lotte islands,  of  the  Guelph  formation  of  western
Canada,  of  the  Laramie  and  cretaceous  rocks  of  the
Bow  and  Belly  river  districts,  and  on  the  fossil
fishes  of  the  Devonian  rocks  of  eastern  Canada.
In  addition  to  annual  reports  of  the  survey,  he
has  contributed  papers  to  the  transactions  of  vari-
ous learned  societies.

WHITEFIELD,  George  (whit'-field),  clergy-
man, b.  in  Gloucester,  England,  27  Dec,  1714;  d.
in  Newburyport.  Mass..  30  Sept.,  1770.  His  father,
an  innkeeper,  died,  leaving  the  son  an  infant  of
two  years  in  charge  of  the  mother,  who  sent  him
to  the  public  school.  When  fifteen  years  old  he  re-
fused to  attend  school  longer,  going  to  work  in
the  hotel.  At  this  period  he  composed  sermons
and  in  other  ways  exhibited  the  bent  of  the  future
orator,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen  he  embraced  an
opportunity  to  enter  Pembroke  college,  Oxford^as
a  servitor.  He  had  already  entered  on  a  life  of
religious  zeal  and  self-denial,  and  he  now  sought
the  counsels  of
Charles  Wesley,
and  adopted  the
rules  of  the
Methodists.  He
visited  the  sick
inthealmshouse
and  the  prison-
ers in  the  jail,
and  reclaimed
some  to  a  life  of
piety.  The  bish-
op of  Glouces-
ter, on  20  June,
1736,  ordained
him  deacon  be-
fore he  had  taken
his  degree.  He
returned  to  Ox-
ford, was  gradu-
ated and  re-
mained to  continue  his  studies  and  his  ministrations
among  the  prisoners,  leaving  in  August  to  officiate
for  two  months  as  chaplain  of  the  Tower  of  London.


4^^k^


478


WHITEFIELD


WHITEHEAD


He  preached  also  in  Bristol  and  elsewhere,  affecting
great  audiences  to  tears  and  repentance.  Already
certain  of  the  clergy  began  to  close  their  pulpits  to
him  on  account  of  his  teachings  of  the  new  birth
and  his  religious  enthusiasm  and  association  with
dissenters,  while  his  admirers  offered  him  profitable
charges  in  London  or  Bristol.  At  the  summons  of
John  and  Charles  Wesley,  who  were  in  this  country,
he  sailed  on  10  Jan.,  1738,  for  Georgia,  arriving  in
Savannah  on  18  May.  He  saw  the  need  of  the
colony  for  material  aid,  and  especially  for  an  or-
phan house,  as  many  settlers  had  died  from  the
effects  of  the  climate,  leaving  destitute  families,
and  to  raise  a  fund  for  this  purpose,  as  well  as  to
receive  priest's  orders,  on  8  Sept.  he  left  Savannah
for  England.  The  doctrines  of  regeneration  and
justification  by  faith  and  the  ecstatic  sentiments
in  his  recently  published  "  Journals "  caused  the
clergy  who  had  formerly  been  friendly  to  White-
field  to  withhold  their  countenance.  Only  four
pulpits  in  London  were  still  open  to  him.  His
powers  of  eloquence  drew  large  assemblages,  and
in  the  Countess  of  Huntingdon  and  her  aristocratic
friends  he  found  influential  patrons.  He  was  or-
dained priest  in  January,  1739.  The  trustees  of
Georgia  presented  him  with  the  living  of  Savan-
nah and  granted  him  500  acres  of  land  as  a  site
for  the  orphan  house.  Going  to  Bristol,  he
preached  in  the  prison,  when  the  churches  were  re-
fused to  him,  and  on  28  Feb.  began  to  address  con-
gregations of  colliers  (which  sometimes  numbered
20,000  persons)  in  the  open  air,  at  Kingswood,
where  Wesley  followed  him  and  founded  the  first
Methodist  church  and  school.  From  that  time
most  of  Whitefield's  sermons  were  delivered  to
out-door  meetings.  Every  newspaper  reviled  him,
ministers  denounced  him  from  their  pulpits,  and
no  fewer  than  fifty  pamphlets  were  published  in
condemnation  or  defence  of  his  teachings  in  the
year  1739.  Wherever  he  preached  in  England  or
Wales  he  made  a  collection  for  his  orphan  school.
On  25  Aug.,  1739,  he  took  passage  for  Philadel-
phia. Instead  of  going  to  Georgia,  he  remained  in
that  city,  preaching  in  the  churches  and  from  the
court-house  steps  in  a  way  that  wonderfully  re-
vived the  religious  life  of  that  place.  Thence  he
went  to  New  York  city,  where  the  Episcopal  pul-
pits were  denied  him,  but  other  denominations
welcomed  him,  and  for  the  first  time  he  held  ser-
vices in  dissenting  meeting-houses.  In  a  few
weeks  he  returned  to  Philadelphia  and  set  out  for
his  parish  in  Georgia,  preaching  in  every  village
on  the  way,  and  reaching  Savannah  on  20  Jan.,
1740.  His  collections  for  the  orphan  house
amounted  to  £2,530,  besides  many  gifts  in  kind.
He  gathered  about  forty  children  in  a  hired  house,
and  in  March  began  the  building  of  the  orphanage,
which  he  named  Bethesda.  He  returned  to  Phila-
delphia in  April,  and  in  August,  complying  with
a  request  from  Benjamin  Colman,  William  Cooper,
and  other  Boston  ministers,  he  made  a  tour  into
New  England,  where  he  met  with  a  cordial  recep-
tion, except  from  the  conservative  part  of  the
clergy,  who  condemned  his  emotional  methods,
and  began  the  long  controversy  with  the  Revival-
ists or  New  Lights.  Churches  were  not  large
enough  to  hold  his  auditors,  and  he  therefore  spoke
on  the  common.  He  preached  in  other  towns,
made  large  collections,  returned  to  Savannah  in  De-
cember, and  early  in  1741  sailed  for  England.  On
25  Nov.,  1741,  he  married  in  Wales  a  widow  named
Elizabeth  James,  who  proved  an  uncongenial  wife.
His  influence  in  England  was  less  than  when  he
worked  in  harmony  with  the  other  Methodists,
and  was  further  impaired  by  his  writings,  espe-


cially an  assault  on  the  theological  principles  of
Archbishop  John  Tillotson.  He  gathered  a  con-
gregation in  opposition  to  Charles  Wesley's  at
Bristol,  and  in  London  preached  in  a  large  edifice
that  his  friends  built,  called  the  Tabernacle.  In
August,  1744,  he  embarked  for  this  country,  landed
in  Maine,  and  on  reaching  Boston  opened  a  series
of  services  at  6  a.  m.,  with  2,000  or  more  hearers.
Afterward  he  went  to  Savannah,  but  finding  his
health  failing,  visited  the  Bermuda  islands  in
March,  1748.  Thence,  in  July,  he  went  back  to
England,  where  he  became  chaplain  to  Lady  Hunt-
ingdon, and  preached  in  her  chapel  to  the  nobility
and  others.  He  revisited  Scotland  in  1750,  spent
the  winter  of  1750-'l  in  London,  made  a  short
visit  to  Ireland,  where  he  was  badly  used,  and
went  to  Savannah  in  October,  1751.  He  returned
to  England  in  1752,  made  his  fifth  voyage  to  this
country  by  way  of  Lisbon  in  1754,  and  labored
energetically,  with  astonishing  results.  He  re-
turned to  England  again  in  1755,  success  attend-
ing his  labors  everywhere  during  1755-'60.  His
health  was  much  impaired  for  two  years.  White-
field  embarked  for  the  sixth  time  for  America  in
1 763,  returned  to  England  in  -1765,  where  he  spent
the  next  four  years,  laboring  according  to  his  abil-
ity and  state  of  health,  in  consecrating  new
chapels  provided  by  Lady  Huntingdon,  and  striv-
ing to  promote  peace  and  concord  in  the  Method-
ist body.  He  made  his  seventh  and  last  visit  to
this  country  in  September,  1769,  and  for  a  time
preached  with  his  accustomed  energy  in  Georgia
and  New  England ;  but  death,  from  an  attack  of
asthma,  came  suddenly  at  the  last.  Whitefield's
coffin  may  still  be  seen

"  Under  the  church  on  Federal  street."
He  was,  with  the  aid  of  Lady  Huntingdon,  the
founder  of  the  Calvinistic  Methodists.  He  preached
about  18,000  times,  yet  only  eighty-one  of  his
sermons  have  been  printed,  and  these  are  for
the  greater  part  the  productions  of  his  immature
years.  His  voice  was  so  clear  that  congregations
of  25,000  people  could  distinctly  hear  his  ser-
mons in  the  open  air,  and  his  elocution  and  gest-
ures formed  the  model  of  orators  and  actors  in  his
day.  His  two  journals  of  his  ''Voyage  from  Lon-
don to  Savannah,"  extending  from  28  Dec,  1737,
till  7  May,  1738,  were  printed  without  his  leave
by  friends  (London,  1738).  Subsequently  he  pub-
lished the  "Journal  from  his  Arrival  at  Savannah
to  his  Return  to  London,"  and  the  "  Journal  from
his  Arrival  at  London  to  his  Departure  from
thence  on  his  Way  to  Georgia,"  which  was  supple-
mented by  a  "Continuation  of  the  Journal  during
the  Time  he  was  detained  by  the  Embargo  "  (1739).
The  "  First  Two  Parts  of  his  Life,  with  his  Jour-
nals," appeared  in  a  revised  and  abridged  form
(1756).  His  "Letters,  Sermons,  Controversies,  and
Tracts"  were  published  (6  vols.,  1771-'2).  Chief
among  his  many  biographies  are  "  Memoirs  of  the
Life  of  the  Rev.  George  Whitefield,"  by  his  friend
the  Rev.  Dr.  John  Gillies  (1772);  "Sermons,"  with
memoir  by  Samuel  Drew  (1833) ;  "  Life  and  Times
of  Whitefield,"  by  the  Rev.  Robert  Philip  (1838) ;
and  a  "  Life,"  by  the  Rev.  Luke  Tverman  (2  vols.,
1876).  See  also  "The  History  of  the  Religious
Movement  of  the  Eighteenth  Century,  called  Meth-
odism." by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Abel  Stevens  (1861).

WHITEHEAD,  Cortlnndt,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
New  York  city,  30  Oct.,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1863,  ordered  deacon  at  the  close  of  a  three
years'  theological  course  in  the  Philadelphia  divin-
ity-school, on  21  June,  1867,  in  Trinity  church,
Newark,  N.  J.,  by  Bishop  Odenheimer,  and  or-
dained priest  in  St.  Mark  s  chapel,  Black  Hawk,


WHITEHEAD


WHITEHOUSE


479


Col.,  7  Aug.,  1868,  by  Bishop  Randall.  After  serv-
ing as  a  missionary  in  Colorado  three  years  he
returned  to  the  east,  and  became  rector  of  the
Church  of  the  Nativity,  South  Bethlehem,  Pa.,
where  he  remained  until  his  elevation  to  the  epis-
copate. He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Union  college  in  1880.  During  his  rectorship  at
Bethlehem  he  was  assistant  secretary  of  the  diocese
of  central  Pennsylvania  for  eleven  years,  and  twice
a  deputy  to  the  general  convention  from  that  dio-
cese. He  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Pittsburg  in
Trinity  church,  Pittsburg,  25  Jan.,  1882.  Bishop
Whitehead  attended  the  third  Pan- Anglican  coun-
cil in  London  in  1888.

WHITEHEAD,  William  Adee,  historian,  b.  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  19  Feb.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Perth  Amboy,
N.  J.,  8  Aug.,  1884.  He  left  school  in  his  thir-
teenth year  and  entered  a  bank,  but  afterward  be-
came a  surveyor,  and  in  1828  made  a  survey  of  the
island  of  Key  West,  Pla.  He  then  engaged  in
commercial  pursuits  there,  and  was  U.  S.  collector
of  customs  from  1830  till  1838,  when  he  removed
to  New  York  and  became  a  stock-broker.  He  was
connected  with  the  New  Jersey  railroad  and  trans-
portation company  from  1849  till  1871,  except  in
1855-'9,  when  he  was  treasurer  of  the  New  York
and  Harlem  railroad,  and  in  1871  he  became  treas-
urer of  the  American  trust  company  of  New  Jersey,
at  Newark.  He  was  a  commissioner  of  public
schools  in  the  latter  city  in  1859-'71,  and  in  1872
was  president  of  the  city  board  of  education.  He
was  a  founder  and  president  of  the  Newark  library
association,  and,  on  the  organization  of  the  New
Jersey  historical  society  in  1845,  became  its  corre-
sponding secretary,  which  office  he  held  till  his
death.  He  was  also  a  member  of  numerous  other
historical  and  antiquarian  societies.  Of  the  "  Col-
lections "  of  the  State  historical  society  he  is  au-
thor of  vol  i.,  "  East  Jersey  under  the  Proprietary
Governments  "  (New  York,  1846) ;  vol.  iv.,  "  Papers
of  Lewis  Morris,  Governor  of  New  Jersey,"  with  a
memoir  and  notes  (1852) ;  and  vol.  v.,  "  Analytical
Index  to  the  Colonial  Documents  of  New  Jersey,
in  the  State  Paper  Office  in  England  "  (1858).  He
edited,  in  part,  vol.  vi.,  "  Records  of  the  Town  of
Newark  "  (1864),  and  wrote  the  supplement  to  that
volume,  entitled  "  Historical  Memoir  on  the  Cir-
cumstances leading  to  and  connected  with  the
Settlement  of  Newark  "  (1866).  His  other  writings
include  "  Biographical  Sketch  of  William  Frank-
lin "  (1848) ;  "  Contributions  to  the  Early  History
of  Perth  Amboy"  (1856):  and  numerous  papers  in
the  "  Proceedings "  of  the  New  Jersey  historical
society,  all  the  volumes  of  which  were  edited  by
Mr.  Whitehead  during  his  secretaryship.

WHITEHILL,  Robert,  congressman,  b.  in
Pequea,  Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  29  July,  1738;  d.  in
Lauther  Manor,  Cumberland  co.,  Pa.,  8  April,
1813.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
and  in  1770  purchased  from  the  proprietaries  of
Pennsylvania  two  tracts  of  land  in  Lauther  Manor,
where  in  1771  he  erected  the  first  stone  house.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Philadelphia  convention  of
July,  1776,  which  approved  the  Declaration  of  In-
dependence and  adopted  a  state  constitution  and
bill  of  rights,  and  also  of  the  convention  that  rati-
fied the  U.  S.  constitution,  and  the  one  that  adopted
the  state  constitution  of  1790.  He  served  often  in
either  branch  of  the  legislature,  holding  a  seat  in
the  lower  house  during  the  stormy  sessions  of
1798-1800,  and  subsequently  being  speaker  of  the
senate  during  the  impeachment  trial  of  the  judges
of  the  state  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania.  He
was  a  member  of  four  successive  congresses,  serv-
ing from  2  Dec,  1805,  till  3  March,  1813.


WHITEHORNE,  James,  artist,  b.  in  Walling-
ford,  Rutland  co.,  Vt.,  22  Aug.,  1803 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  31  March,  1888.  He  began  to  study  at
the  National  academy  about  1826,  was  elected  an
associate  member  in  1829,  and  an  academician  in
1833.  In  1838-'44  he  was  recording  secretary  of
the  academy.  He  devoted  himself  to  portrait-
painting,  executing  a  large  number  of  works,  nota-
bly the  portrait  of  Silas  Wright  that  is  now  in  the
city-hall,  New  York.  He  made  also  the  design  for
the  well-known  mezzotint  engraving,  "  Henry  Clay
addressing  the  Senate,"  published  about  1846.

WHITEHOUSE,  Henry  John,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  New  York  city,  19  Aug.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Chicago,
111.,  10  Aug.,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1821,  and  at  the  Protestant  Episcopal  gen-
eral theological  seminary,  New  York  city,  in  1824.
He  was  ordained
deacon  by  Bishop
William  White  in
St.  James's  church,
Philadelphia,on26
Aug.,  1827,  and  im-
mediately entered
upon  his  ministry
in  Reading,  Pa.,
from  which  in  1830
he  was  called  to
St.  Luke's  parish,
Rochester,  N.  Y.,
where  he  remained
fifteen  years,  at-
taining wide  rep-
utation as  a  pas-
tor and  preacher;
was  rector  of  St.
Thomas's  church,
New  York  city,
from  1844  till  1851,
when  he  was  elect-
ed assistant  bishop  of  Illinois,  to  which  see,  on  the
death  of  Bishop  Philander  Chase,  he  succeeded  on
20  Sept.,  1852.  While  in  England  in  1867,  Bishop
Whitehouse  delivered  the  opening  sermon  before
the  first  Pan-Anglican  conference  at  Lambeth
palace,  by  invitation  of  the  archbishop  of  Canter-
bury, and  it  was  due  to  the  advice  of  Bishop  White-
house  that  invitations  were  extended  to  the  Ameri-
can bishops.  Oxford  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
and  Cambridge  that  of  LL.  D.,  while  Columbia  had
given  him  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1865.  Bishop  White-
house  was  one  of  the  most  accomplished  prelates  of
the  Episcopal  church,  possessing  versatility  of  tal-
lent  with  great  learning.  He  was  a  brilliant  orator
and  conversationalist.  "  Not  one  in  ten  thousand,''
says  Bishop  Henry  W.  Lee,  of  Iowa,  in  his  memo-
rial sermon,  "  had  such  ready  command  of  words
and  such  precision  of  diction  as  mark  his  written
and  spoken  productions."  His  views  had  great
weight  in  the  house  of  bishops,  and  among  foreign
communions  his  influence  did  much  to  secure
greater  consideration  for  his  own  church.  In  the
Cheney  case,  which  precipitated  the  formation  of
the  Reformed  Episcopal  church  (see^  Cheney,
Charles  Edward),  he  defended  the  church's  stand-
ard of  baptismal  doctrine.  He  was  the  first  bishop
of  his  church  to  advocate  the  adoption  in  this
country  of  the  cathedral  system,  which  he  did  in
his  first  diocesan  address.  Though  highly  cultured
and  deeply  learned,  he  left  no  published  works  other
than  his  annual  addresses  contained  in  the  journals
of  the  diocese  of  Illinois  from  1853  to  1873.

WHITEHOUSE,  James  Horton,  designer,  b.
in  Handsworth,  Staffordshire,  England,  28  Oct..
1833. He  was  educated  at  King  Edward's  school.


-tJlfetAA^U&^^&b^


480


WH1TELEY


WHITELOCKE


in  Birmingham,  and  came  to  this  country  in  his
youth.  He  soon  found  employment  as  a  designer
and  engraver  in  the-house  of  Tiffany  and  Co.,  with
whom  he  has  since  remained  continuously.  Many
of  the  best-known  art-pieces  of  silver- ware  that
have  been  produced  in  this  country  were  designed
by  him,  among  them  the  Bryant  vase,  which  was
presented  to  the  poet  on  his  eightieth  birthday,  and
is  to  be  seen  in  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art  in
New  York  city,  also  the  silver  casket  presented  to
Bishop  Horatio  Potter  on  25  Nov.,  1879,  the
twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  his  consecration.  The
elaborate  design  of  the  latter  was  wrought  by
the  repousse  process,  the  golden  enrichments  are
carved  by  hand,  and  the  damaskeening  was  richer
and  costlier  than  any  similar  work  ever  produced
in  this  country. The  third  seal  of  the  United  States,

which  is  now  in
use  in  Washing-
ton, was  designed
by  him.  (See  illus-
tration.) The  first
seal  was  made
under  President
Washington's  im-
mediate direction,
while  the  second
was  a  failure.  Mr.
Whitehouse  has
designed  numer-
ous national  med-
als, as  well  as  most
of  the  U.  S.  corps
badges  that  were  made  during  the  civil  war,  also
the  beautiful  memorial  brasses  in  the  tower  of  St.
James's  church,  Lenox  hill,  New  York  city.  He
is  a  recognized  authority  on  art,  and  is  frequently
consulted  in  the  technicalities  of  art-work,  the  va-
rious applications  of  art,  and  on  heraldry.

WHITELEY,  Richard  Henry,  congressman,
b.  in  Ireland,  22  Dec,  1830.  He  was  taken  to
Georgia  in  1836,  and  engaged  in  the  manufacturing
business  in  early  boyhood,  but  in  I860,  having
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  opposed
secession,  but  served  in  the  Confederate  army  in
1861-'5.  In  1867  he  was  chosen  as  a  Republican
to  the  State  constitutional  convention,  and  in  the
following  year  he  was  a  Republican  candidate  for
congress  and  was  appointed  solicitor-general  of  the
southwestern  circuit.  In  February,  1870,  he  was
elected  U.  S.  senator,  but  not  admitted  to  a  seat.
Meanwhile  he  and  his  Democratic  opponent  had
teen  contesting  the  congressional  election  of  1868,
and  the  seat  was  finally  awarded  to  Mr.  Whiteley
in  February,  1871,  at  the  close  of  the  session.  He
served  from  this  time  till  1875,  and  was  a  defeated
candidate  for  the  two  following  congresses.

WHITELEY,  Robert  Henry  Kirkwood,  sol-
dier, b.  near  Cambridge,  Md.,  15  April,  1809.  He
was  appointed  from  Delaware  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1830,  and,
being  assigned  to  the  2d  artillery,  served  in  various
arsenals  and  garrisons,  including  that  of  Fort  Moul-
trie, S.  C,  in  1832-'3,  during  the  threatened  nullifi-
cation troubles.  He  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant,
28  Dec,  1835,  brevetted  captain,  19  July,  1836,  for
gallant  conduct  in  the  Florida  war,  and  in  1838  was
transferred  to  the  ordnance.  He  was  promoted
captain  in  1842,  and  commanded  successively  the
arsenal  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  that  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
the  New  York  ordnance  depot,  and  the  arsenal  at
San  Antonio,  Tex.,  till  the  last-named  was  seized  by
the  state  on  its  secession  in  1861.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  in  charge  of  the  New  York  arsenal  till
1862,  and  then  of  Alleghany  arsenal,  Pa.,  which


latter  post  he  held  till  his  retirement  from  active
service  on  14  April,  1875.  He  became  major,  3
Aug.,  1861,  lieutenant-colonel,  1  June,  1863,  and
colonel,  6  April,  1866,  and  on  13  March,  1865,  was
brevetted  colonel  and  brigadier-general.

WHITELOCKE,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in
England  about  1757;  d.  after  1808.  He  entered
the  army,  and  by  promotions  became  colonel  in
1793.  When  in  that  year  the  planters  in  the
French  part  of  Santo  Domingo  petitioned  the  Brit-
ish government  for  a  protectorate,  the  governor  of
Jamaica  received  orders  to  occupy  the  island,  and
despatched,  on  9  Sept.,  1793.  an  expedition  of  700
men  under  command  of  Col.  Whitelocke.  He
landed  on  19  Sept.  at  Jeremie,  but  was  routed  in
an  attack  on  Tiburon.  After  receiving  re-enforce-
ments, he  took  St.  Marc,  Logane,  and  Arcahay,
and  made  a  second  attack  on  Tiburon,  by  which
nearly  the  whole  western  coast,  except  Port  au
Prince,  became  subject  to  his  control.  Assisted
by  an  auxiliary  force  from  the  Spanish  part  of  the
island,  he  besieged  Port  de  Paix  on  the  northern
coast,  and,  after  vainly  trying  to  bribe  the  com-
mander, Gen.  Lavaux,  to  surrender,  retired ;  but,
after  the  arrival  of  re-enforcements  from  Jamaica,
he  soon  gained  advantages,  and  on  14  June,  1794,
occupied  Port  au  Prince.  He  was  afterward  in
India,  Egypt,  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and,
being  promoted  lieutenant-general,  he  was  chosen
commander-in-chief  of  the  British  army  on  the
river  Plate.  Gen.  Beresford  had  capitulated  in
Buenos  Ayres,  12  Aug.,  1806,  and  the  re-enforce-
ments under  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty,  arriving  too
late,  had  occupied  Montevideo,  1  Feb.,  1807.
Whitelocke  arrived  in  Montevideo  in  April,  1807,
with  6,000  men,  and,  with  the  forces  of  Auchmuty
and  the  remnants  of  Beresford's  army,  he  soon  had
a  body  of  12.000  disciplined  men  under  his  com-
mand. Leaving  a  garrison  of  2,000  in  Montevideo*
he  marched  with  the  rest  to  Maldonado,  and,  es-
corted by  the  fleet  under  Admiral  Popham,  landed
on  28  June,  1807,  in  Ensenada,  to  the  south  of
Buenos  Ayres.  On  his  march  he  was  attacked  in
the  Pass  of  Riachuelo,  1  July,  by  the  Spanish  army
under  Santiago  De  Liniers,  and  routing  and  out-
flanking the  latter,  he  could  have  easily  occupied
the  capital,  but  tarried  on  the  battle-field.  During
the  night  the  mayor  of  the  city,  Alzaga.  intrenched
the  streets  and  gathered  the  routed  troops,  so  that
Liniers  found  the  defence  prepared  and  refused  to
surrender  the  city,  when  he  was  summoned  by
Whitelocke  to  do  so  on  3  July.  The  latter  pre-
pared everything  for  storming  the  city,  and  early
on  the.  5th  led  his  army  in  eight  columns  to  the
assault.  The  resistance  was  terrible  in  the  barri-
caded streets  and  houses,  and,  after  struggling  the
whole  day,  he  retired  with  the  loss  of  1,100  killed
and  1,500  prisoners.  On  6  July  the  assault  was
renewed,  but  by  noon  the  British  forces  were
beaten  and  surrounded,  with  a  loss  of  2,000,  and
Whitelocke  offered  to  capitulate.  He  was  forced
to  submit  to  humiliating  conditions,  to  evacuate
the  southern  border  of  the  river  within  forty-eight
hours,  and  to  return  the  city  of  Montevideo  within
two  months  in  the  state  in  which  it  was  captured.
The  capitulation  was  ratified  on  7  July,  and  com-
plied with  by  the  British  commander,  who  left  Mon-
tevideo on  1  Sept.  with  the  last  of  his  forces.  On
his  arrival  in  England  he  was  court-martialed  and
sentenced  to  be  severely  censured,  and  retired  from
service.  The  "  Proceedings  of  the  General  Court-
Martial  and  Defence  of  Gen.  John  Whitelocke"
were  published  (2  vols.,  London,  1808.)  See  also
"  Narrative  of  the  British  Expedition  to  La  Plata
under  Gen.  Crawford  "  (1808).


WHITESIDE


WHITFIELD


481


WHITESIDE,  Jenkin,  senator,  b.  in  Lancas-
ter, Pa,,  in  1782;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  25  Sept.,
1822.  He  removed  to  Tennessee,  and  became  a
lawyer  of  note  in  the  early  history  of  that  state,
giving  special  attention  to  the  law  of  real  estate,
and  acquiring  a  large  property.  On  the  resigna-
tion of  Daniel  Smith  from  the  U.  S.  senate,  Mr.
Whiteside  was  elected  to  fill  the  vacancy,  and
served  from  26  May,  1809,  till  1  Sept.,  1811,  when
he  resigned  and  returned  to  the  practice  of  his
profession.  He  was  a  man  of  vigorous  mind,  but
of  uncouth  and  rugged  manners.

WHITESIDE,  Peter,  patriot,  b.  in  Puten,
England,  in  1752 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  De-
cember, 1828.  He  came  to  Philadelphia,  and  was
for  many  years  one  of  the  foremost  merchants  in
that  city,  becoming  the  partner  of  Robert  Morris.
He  was  a  friend  of  Washington,  and  at  the  opening
of  the  Revolution  declined  the  post  of  aide-de-camp
on  his  staff.  During  the  struggle  he  advanced  a
large  part  of  his  fortune  to  procure  shoes  for  the
Continental  army.  Subsequently  Washington  sent
him  on  a  mission  to  France  to  arrange  for  better
commercial  intercourse  between  that  country  and
the  United  States.  About  the  time  that  John
Fitch  and  James  Rumsey  were  trying  their  experi-
ments on  steam  navigation,  Whiteside  and  two
friends  constructed  a  side-wheel  steamboat  in  Phila-
delphia, and  tried  it  successfully  on  Schuylkill
river.  With  Robert  Morris,  and  his  brother,
William  Whiteside,  a  wealthy  tea-merchant,  he
sent  out  the  first  trading-ship  from  this  hemisphere
to  the  East  Indies,  the  three  realizing  jointly
$30,000  from  the  venture.  In  his  house  in  Phila-
delphia he  often  entertained  Washington,  the
French  exiles,  and  other  men  of  eminence.

WHITFIELD,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1597;  d.  in  Winchester,  England,  after
1651.  His  father,  an  eminent  lawyer,  had  destined
him  for  the  same  profession,  and  after  leaving  the
university  he  was  entered  at  the  Inns  of  court,  but
he  subsequently  took  orders  and  was  minister  of
Ockham,  Surrey,  where  he  also  maintained  another
clergyman  out  of  his  private  income,  that  he  might
devote  himself  to  missionary  labors  in  the  adja-
cent country.  He  was  much  beloved  by  the  Non-
conformists, whom  he  protected  from  persecution,
and  finally,  after  twenty  years  in  the  established
church,  he  publicly  joined  them,  and  resigned  his
charge  on  being  prosecuted  for  a  refusal  to  read
the  "  Book  of  Lawful  Sunday  Sports."  Disposing
of  his  personal  estate,  he  came  to  this  country  with
Gov.  Theophilus  Eaton  in  1637,  accompanied  by
many  of  his  former  parishioners,  and  began  the
settlement  of  Guilford,  Conn.,  the  site  of  which  he
purchased  from  the  Indians.  The  place  was  named

for  Guilford
in  Surrey,  the
native  place
of  many  of
colon-
.  In  1650
returned
England,
and,  says  Cot-
ton Mather,
u  at  the  time
of  parting,
the  whole
town  accom-
panied him
unto  the  water-side  with  a  springtide  of  tears."  On
his  return  he  became  pastor  at  Winchester,  England,
where  he  probably  remained  until  his  death.  Mr.
Whitfield's  residence  in  Guilford,  known  as  the
vol.  vi. — 31


•^


:


"  old  stone  house,"  is  shown  in  the  illustration.  It
was  built  about  1639  to  serve  both  as  a  dwelling
and  a  fortification.  According  to  tradition,  the
stone  of  which  it  is  built  was  brought  by  Indians
on  hand-barrows  across  a  swamp  from  Griswold's
lodge,  about  eighty  rods  distant.  The  walls  are
three  feet  thick.  The  house  was  kept  in  its  origi-
nal form  till  1868,  when  it  underwent  considerable
renovation.  Whitfield  was  the  author  of  "Helps
to  stir  up  to  Christian  Duties"  (London,  1634);
"  The  Light  appearing  more  and  more  toward  the
Perfect  Day,  or  a  Farther  Discovery  of  the  Present
State  of  the  Indians  in  New  England"  (1651);  and
"  Strength  out  of  Weakness,  or  a  Glorious  Mani-
festation of  the  Further  Progresse  of  the  Gospel
among  the  Indians  in  New  England  "  (1652).  The
last  two  works  were  reissued  in  Joseph  Sabin's  re-
prints (New  York,  1865).

WHITFIELD,  James,  R.  C.  archbishop,  b.  in
Liverpool,  England,  3  Nov.,  1770;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  19  Oct.,  1834.  His  father  died  when  James
was  seventeen  years  old,  and  the  boy  left  England
for  Italy  with  his  mother,  who  was  in  delicate
health.  He  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in  the
latter  country  and  in  France,  adding  largely  to  the
fortune  that  his  father  bequeathed  him.  After  the
issue  of  the  decree  of  Napoleon  ordering  the  im-
prisonment of  such  Englishmen  as  happened  to  be
in  France,  he  was  arrested  and  detained  at  Lyons,
where  he  became  intimate  with  Dr.  (afterward
Archbishop)  Marechal,  and  his  thoughts  turned
toward  the  priesthood.  He  began  a  course  of
theology  under  the  guidance  of  his  friend,  and  was
ordained  a  priest  in  1809.  Some  time  afterward  he
returned  to  England,  and  was  appointed  parish
priest  of  Cosby.  He  continued  in  this  post  until
1817,  when,  on  the  invitation  of  Archbishop  Mare-
chal, he  went  to  the  United  States.  He  was  ap-
pointed pastor  of  St.  Peter's  church,  Baltimore,
and  in  1825,  by  a  special  dispensation  from  Rome,
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  The  same  year  he
was  partly  instrumental  in  placing  the  institution
of  the  Colored  Sisters  Oblate  of  St.  Francis  in  a
prosperous  condition,  and  began  to  take  a  practical
interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  negroes.  When  Arch-
bishop Marechal  became  feeble,  Dr.  Whitfield
headed  the  list  of  proposed  coadjutors.  He  was
nominated  bishop  of  Apollonia  in  partibus  on  8
Jan.,  1828,  but  the  brief  did  not  arrive  in  the
United  States  until  after  the  death  of  Archbishop
Marechal,  and  Dr.  Whitfield  was  consecrated  arch-
bishop on  25  May  of  the  same  year.  He  was  also
appointed  administrator  of  the  see  of  Richmond.
He  spent  his  large  private  fortune  in  building
churches,  supplying  priests,  and  erecting  institu-
tions of  education  and  charity.  When  this  re-
source failed  him  he  appealed  for  help  to  the
Society  for  the  propagation  of  the  faith,  to  the
king  of  France,  and  to  ecclesiastics  and  lay-
men of  that  country.  Some  of  the  letters  that
he  wrote  on  these  occasions  have  an  important
bearing  on  the  history  of  the  Roman  Catholic
church  in  the  United  States.  In  reply  to  his  first
appeal  he  received  32,000  francs,  besides  large  sums
for  the  support  of  St.  Mary's  college.  He  began
to  build  the  Baltimore  orphan  asylum,  and  made
a  visitation  of  every  part  of  Maryland  and  Virginia
where  Roman  Catholics  resided.  In  the  diocese  of
Richmond,  which  extended  over  7,000  square  miles,
he  found  only  three  priests.  He  at  once  renewed
his  appeals  to  Europe  for  help,  and  the  response
that  he  received  enabled  him  to  remedy  this  state
of  things.  He  held  the  first  provincial  council  of
his  suffragan  bishops  at  Baltimore  on  4  Oct.,  1829.
Its  deliberations  were  directed  by  him,  and,  at  his


482


WHITFIELD


WHITING


'a^ncS


Jrtxf*


w^


suggestion,  thirty-eight  decrees,  regulating  the  con-
duct of  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy  of  the  United
States,  the  tenure  of  church  property,  and  other
important  interests,  were  adopted. In 1834  he

built  St.  James's
church,  Balti-
more, entirely
from  his  private
means.  He  assist-
ed in  procuring
the  incorporation
of  St.  Mary's  col-
lege, Emmits-
burg,  founded  the
Mary  Marthian
society  for  the  re-
lief of  the  poor,
as  well  as  other
charitable  insti-
tutions, finished
the  Baltimore  ca-
thedral, the  tower
of  which  he  de-
signed, and  erect-
ed an  episcopal
mansion.  In  1833  he  convened  the  second  provin-
cial council  at  Baltimore.  In  this  council  the  mode
of  episcopal  election  was  fixed,  boundaries  of  dio-
ceses were  arranged,  and  steps  were  taken  for  the
evangelization  of  the  Indians  and  negroes  of  Liberia.
WHITFIELD,  Robert  Parr,  palaeontologist,
b.  in  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.,  27  May,  1828.  He  is
of  English  parentage,  and  was  educated  at  home
and  at  public  schools.  In  1835  he  went  with  his
family  to  England,  but  he  returned  in  1841,  learned
the  trade  of  making  spindles,  and  had  charge  of  a
factory  of  telegraphic  and  philosophic  instruments
in  Utica,  N.  Y.  In  1856  he  was  appointed  assist-
ant to  James  Hall,  state  geologist  of  New  York,
and  in  1870  he  became  first  assistant  curator,  with
charge  of  the  geology  and  palaeontology  in  the
New  York  state  museum  in  Albany,  and  much  of
the  work  on  the  palaeontology  of  the  state  natural
history  and  regent's  report  of  the  New  York  state
cabinet  was  done  by  him.  In  1872  he  began  teach-
ing geology  in  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  at
Troy,  and  in  1875  he  was  given  the  professorship
of  that  branch,  which  he  held  until  1878.  In  June.
1877,  he  was  appointed  curator  of  the  geological
department  of  the  American  museum  of  natural
history  in  New  York  city,  which  office  he  still
fills.  Wesleyan  university  conferred  on  him  the
degree  of  A.  M.  in  1882,  and  he  has  been  since
1874  a  fellow  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science.  Prof.  Whitfield  has  de-
scribed a  large  number  of  new  fossils,  and  has  been
very  successfid  in  studying  the  internal  struct-
ure of  fossil  brachiopoda.  many  of  which  are  pub-
lished in  the  New  York  state  palaeontology.  He
has  also  reported  on  specimens  gathered  by  the
exploration  under  Clarence  King,  the  palaeontology
of  the  Black  Hills,  and  fossils  from  the  geological
surveys  of  Ohio,  Wisconsin,  Indiana,  and  other
states,  and  is  now  engaged  on  the  palaeontology  of
New  Jersey.  The  value  of  his  work  is  greatly  en-
hanced by  the  drawings  of  fossils  that  he  has  made.
His  publications,  which  include  nearly  thirty  me-
moirs, besides  frequent  papers,  have  appeared  in
reports  of  the  state  surveys  with  which  he  has  been
connected,  and  in  the  "  Bulletins  of  the  American
Museum  of  Natural  History,"  of  which  six  numbers
under  his  editorship  have  been  issued  since  1881.

WHITING,  Daniel  Powers,  soldier,  b.  in  Troy,
N.  Y.,  31  July,  1808.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1832,  and  assigned  to  the  7th


infantry,  with  which  he  served  in  various  garrisons,
becoming  1st  lieutenant,  8  June,  1836,  and  captain,
18  April,  1845.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  was
engaged  at  Fort  Brown,  Monterey,  Vera  Cruz,  and
Cerro  Gordo,  where  he  was  brevetted  major.  After
serving  against  the  Seminoles,  on  the  frontier,
and  in  the  Utah  expedition  in  1859,  he  attained
full  rank  on  20  Dec,  1860.  He  was  in  command
of  Fort  Garland,  Col.,  in  1861-'2,  became  lieuten-
ant-colonel, 15  Feb.,  1862,  served  on  a  board  of
examination  at  Annapolis,  Md.,  in  1862-'3,  and  on
4  Nov.,  1863,  was  retired  "  for  disability,  result-
ing from  long  and  faithful  service,  and  from  sick-
ness and  exposure  in  the  line  of  duty."  He  has
published  "  The  Army  Portfolio,"  a  series  of  litho-
graphed views  illustrating  the  Mexican  war  (Wash-
ington, 1849).  It  was  intended  to  continue  the
series,  but  Col.  Whiting's  sketches  were  lost  on  a
steamboat  that  sank  in  the  Mississippi  river.

WHITING,  George  Elbridge,  musician,  b.  in
Holliston,  Mass.,  14  Sept.,  1842.  He  went  to  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  and  there  founded
the  Beethoven  society.  In  1862  he  settled  in  Bos-
ton, and  later  in  New  York,  where  he  studied  with
George  W.  Morgan.  Afterward  he  went  to  Liver-
pool, and  became  the  pupil  of  William  T.  Best,
and  he  subsequently  studied  also  in  Berlin  under
Robert  Radecke  and  others.  After  filling  various
engagements  in  Albany  and  Boston,  he  became,  in
1874,  organist  of  the  Music  hall  in  the  latter  city,
and  he  was  also  for  a  time  head  of  the  organ  de-
partment in  the  New  England  conservatory  of
music.  In  1878  he  became  organist  of  the  Music
hall  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  head  of  the  organ  de-
partment in  the  College  of  music,  but  after  five
years  he  returned  to  his  old  post  in  the  New  Eng-
land conservatory.  His  compositions  include  a
mass  in  C  minor  (1872) ;  a  mass  in  F  minor  (1874) ;
"  Dream  Pictures  "  (1874) ;  "  The  Tale  of  the  Vi-
king" (1878):  "Leonora"  (1880),  three  cantatas;
some  pieces  for  orchestra ;  and  several  songs.  He
has  also  composed  music  for  the  organ,  and  has  pub-
lished "  The  Organist "  (Boston,  1870),  and  "  The
First  Six  Months  on  the  Organ  "  (Boston,  1871).

WHITING,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster,
Mass.,  about  1790 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  16  Sept.,
1851.  His  father,  John  (1759-1810),  fought  in  the
Revolution,  and  at  his  death  was  colonel  of  the
5th  infantry.  The  son  became  a  clerk  in  the  dry-
goods  store  of  Amos  Lawrence  in  Boston,  but  on
20  Oct.,  1808,  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  a  cornet  of
light  dragoons.  He  rose  to  be  2d  lieutenant  in
1809  and  1st  lieutenant  in  1811,  became  aide  to
Gen.  John  P.  Boyd,  and  served  with  credit  in  the
capture  of  Fort  George,  Upper  Canada,  27  May,
1813.  He  was  afterward  aide  to  Gen.  Alexander
Macomb  in  1815,  promoted  captain  in  1817,  and  in
1821  transferred  to  the  1st  artillery.  After  1835
he  served  in  the  quartermaster's  department,  and
on  6  July,  1846,  he  joined  the  army  of  Gen.  Zaehary
Taylor  as  chief  quartermaster.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  on  23  Feb.,  1847,  for
gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  in  the  battle  of
Buena  Vista.  He  was  elected  a  regent  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Michigan  in  1848.  Gen.  Whiting  was
the  author  of  "  Ontway.  the  Son  of  the  Forest :  a
Poem  "  (New  York,  1822) :  "  Sannillac :  a  Poem,"
with  notes  by  Lewis  Cass  and  Henry  R.  School-
craft (Boston,  1831);  "The  Age  of  Steam";
and  "  Life  of  Zebulon  M.  Pike "  in  Sparks's
"American  Biography."  He  was  co-author  of
■•  Historical  and  Scientific  Sketches  of  Michigan"
(Detroit,  1834),  and  edited  George  Washington's
"  Revolutionary  Orders  issued  during  the  Years
1778,  1780,  1781  and  1782 ;  selected  from  the  MSS.


WHITING


WHITING


483


of  John  Whiting,"  his  father  (New  York,  1844).—
His  son,  Henry  Macomb  (1821-'53),  also  served  in
the  Mexican  war  in  the  artillery,  receiving  the  bre-
vet of  1st  lieutenant  for  gallantry  at  Buena  Vista.

WHITING,  Nathan,  soldier,  b.  in  Windham,
Conn.,  4  May,  1724 :  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  9
April,  1771.  His  father,  Samuel,  who  was  first
minister  of  Windham,  died  during  the  son's  in-
fancy, and  the  boy  was  brought  up  chiefly  by  his
sister  Mary  and  her  husband,  Rev.  Thomas  Clap,
who  became  president  of  Yale  in  1740.  Nathan
was  graduated  at  that  college  in  1743,  studied
there  for  two  years  longer,  and  then  became  a
merchant  in  New  Haven,  but  accompanied  the
Connecticut  troops  to  the  siege  of  Louisburg
in  1745  as  an  ensign,  and  in  the  same  year  was
commissioned  lieutenant.  He  then  formed  a
business  partnership  with  Thomas  Darling,  but
at  the  beginning  of  the  French  war  of  1755  he
was  appointed,  in  March  of  that  year,  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  2d  Connecticut  regiment.  His
command  formed  part  of  the  garrison  of  Fort
Edward,  and  on  8  Sept.  he  was  with  Col.  Ephriam
Williams  when  the  latter  was  surprised  by  the
French  and  Indians  near  Lake  George.  On  the
death  of  Williams  the  command  devolved  on
Whiting,  who  led  the  retreat  with  much  skill  and
coolness.  He  was  promoted  colonel  in  1756,  and
served  throughout  the  war.  Col.  Whiting  was  a
representative  in  the  Connecticut  general  assembly
in  1769  and  1770,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was
a  candidate  for  the  upper  house.  President  Timo-
thy Dwight  says  of  him :  "  He  was  an  exemplary
professor  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  for  refined
and  dignified  manners  and  nobleness  of  mind  has
rarely  been  excelled."  His  portrait  is  in  the  rooms
of  the  Connecticut  historical  society  at  Hartford.
— His  elder  brother,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Windham,
Conn.,  20  Feb.,  1706 ;  d.  there,  28  Aug.,  1786,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1726,  and  entered  the  minis-
try, but,  removing  to  Newport,  R.  I.,  entered  the
military  service  of  that  colony,  became  captain,
and  in  1761  had  risen  to  the  rank  of  colonel.  He
participated  in  several  campaigns  against  the
French,  and  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Lake
George  in  1758.  He  afterward  returned  to  Wind-
ham, and  was  made  judge  of  probate  there  in  1775.

WHITING,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Lincolnshire,  England.  20  Nov.,  1597 ;  d.  in  Lynn.,
Mass.,  11  Dec,  1679.  His  father,  John,  was  mayor
of  his  native  city.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Cam-
bridge in  1616,  entered  the  ministry,  and  officiated
at  Lynn,  in  Norfolk,  and  in  Skirbeck,  near  his
native  place,  but,  after  two  prosecutions  for  non-
conformity, he  emigrated  to  this  country,  where
he  was  the  first  minister  of  Lynn,  Mass.,  serving
from  8  Nov.,  1636,  till  his  death.  He  was  a  close
student  and  an  accomplished  Hebrew  and  Latin
scholar.  "  In  his  preaching,"  says  Cotton  Mather,
"  his  design  was  not  to  please  but  to  profit ;  to  bring
forth,  not  high  things,  but  fit  things."  He  pub-
lished "  Oratio  quam  Comitiis  Cantab.  Americanis  "
(1649) :  -  Treatise  on  the  Last  Judgment  "  (1664) ;
and  a  volume  of  sermons  on  "  Abraham  Interced-
ing for  Sodom  "  (1666).  His  second  wife  was  the
daughter  of  Oliver  St.  John,  chief  justice  of  Eng-
land under  Cromwell,  and  their  son,  Samuel  (1633-
1713),  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1653  and  be-
came the  first  minister  of  Billerica,  Mass.  An
"  Elegy  on  the  Rev.  Samuel  Whiting,  of  Lynn,"  by
Benjamin  Tompson,  "  ye  renowned  poet  of  New
England,"  is  printed  in  Cotton  Mather's  "Mag-
nalia."  See  also  "  Memoirs  of  Rev.  Samuel  Whit-
ing and  of  his  Wife,  Elizabeth  St.  John,  with  Refer-
ence to  some  of  their  English  Ancestors  and  Ameri-


can Descendants,"  by  William  Whiting,  LL.  D.
(printed  privately,  Boston,  1871). — His  descendant,
William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Concord,  Mass.,  3  March,
1813;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  29  June,  1873,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1833,  and,  after  teaching
at  Plymouth  and  Concord,  studied  law  in  Boston
and  at  Harvard  law-school,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1838.  He  then  began  practice  in  Boston,
where  he  soon  attained  eminence  at  the  bar,  and
was  engaged  in  many  important  cases.  In  1862
he  became  solicitor  of  the  war  department  in
Washington,  where  he  served  three  years.  In  1868
he  was  a  presidential  elector,  and  in  1872  he  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  but  he  died
before  he  could  take  his  seat.  Colby  university
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1872.  He  left
$5,000  to  Harvard  for  a  scholarship.  Mr.  Whiting
was  for  five  years  president  of  the  New  England
historic-genealogical  society.  His  principal  work
is  "  The  War  Powers  of  the  President  and  the
Legislative  Powers  of  Congress  in  Relation  to  Re-
bellion, Treason,  and  Slavery  "  (Boston,  1862 ;  10th
ed.,  with  large  additions,  1863  ;  43d  ed.,  1871).  In
this  he  formulated  views  that  he  had  urged  at  the
opening  of  the  civil  war,  namely,  that  the  U.  S.
government  had  full  belligerent  rights  against  the
inhabitants  of  seceded  states,  and  without  going
beyond  the  constitution  could  confiscate  their
property,  emancipate  their  slaves,  and  treat  them
as  public  enemies.  These  opinions  were  at  first
received  with  caution  by  most  public  men,  but
they  were  finally  sanctioned  and  adopted  by  the
government.  The  book  had  a  large  sale  in  this
country  and  abroad.  Besides  this,  he  published
various  pamphlets,  chiefly  legal  arguments  be-
fore the  U.  S.  courts,  and  a  "Memoir  of  Rev.
Joseph  Harrington,"  prefixed  to  a  volume  of  his
sermons  (Boston,  1854),  and  was  the  author  of  the
privately  printed  memoir  of  his  ancestor,  Samuel,
mentioned  above.

WHITING,  William  B.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Troy,  N.  Y.,  13  Nov.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.,
16  Dec,  1883.  He  was  appointed  a  midshipman
in  the  navy,  2  Feb.,  1829,  and  cruised  on  the  Pacific
station  in  1831-'4,  principally  engaged  on  surveys.
He  became  a  passed  midshipman,  4  June,  1836,
served  on  coast-survey  duty  in  1837-'43,  in  the
frigate  "  Macedonian,"  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  on
surveying  duty  in  1843-'5,  and  at  the  naval  ob-
servatory at  Washington  in  1845-'50,  during  which
he  drew  plans  of  the  defences  of  Vera  Cruz  pre-
liminary to  the  expedition  of  the  navy  and  Gen.
Winfield  Scott's  army.  He  was  again  on  the  coast
survey  in  1851-'2,  and  cruised  in  the  sloop  "  Van-
dalia,"  1852-'6,  measuring  the  coasts  of  China  and
Japan.  He  was  placed  on  the  reserved  list  by  the
notorious  retiring  board  of  1855  because  his  entire
service  had  been  in  surveying  duty  rather  than  the
military  duties  of  the  naval  profession.  He  was
then  attached  to  the  U.  S.  naval  observatory  at
Washington  until  1871,  where  he  rendered  valua-
ble services  in  astronomical  work.  In  recognition
of  his  scientific  attainments,  he  was  promoted  to
commander  and  captain  in  1867,  and  to  commo-
dore in  1871.  After  this  last  promotion  he  was
relieved  from  active  duty.

WHITING,  William  Danforth,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  May,  1823.  He  entered  the
navy  as  a  midshipman,  1  March,  1841,  and  served
in  the  sloop  "  Levant  "  in  1846-7.  at  the  capture
of  Monterey,  Cal.,  when  the  American  flag  was
first  hoisted  on  that  shore,  7  July,  1846.  He  at-
tended the  naval  academy  in  1847-8,  was  gradu-
ated, and  became  a  passed  midshipman,  10  Aug.,
1847. He  was  promoted  to  master,  1  May,  1855,


484


WHITING


WHITMAN


and  to  lieutenant,  14  Sept.,  1855,  and  was  attached
to  the  steam  frigate  "  Niagara  "  when  the  first
Atlantic  cable  was  laid  in  1857.  He  was  execu-
tive of  the  sloop  "  Vandalia  "  at  the  capture  of
Port  Royal  in  1861,  and  commanded  the  steamer
"  Wyandotte  "  on  the  South  Atlantic  blockade  and
in  the  Potomac  flotilla.  Lieut.  Whiting  was  pro-
moted to  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,  and
in  the  gun-boat  "Ottawa"  participated  in  the  at-
tacks on  the  defences  of  Charleston,  engaged  Bat-
tery Gregg  and  Fort  Wagner,  and  assisted  in  the
capture  of  the  lower  end  of  Morris  island  in
1863-4.  In  1864-'5  he  commanded  the  " Savan-
nah," in  the  Eastern  Gulf  station.  He  was  com-
missioned a  commander,  25  July,  1866,  had  the
steamer  "  Tioga  "  on  the  coast  of  Maine  and  in  the
Gulf,  was  at  the  New  York  navy-yard  in  1867-9
and  1871-'2,  and  commanded  the  sloop  "  Sara-
toga "  and  the  monitor  "  Miantonomoh "  in  the
North  Atlantic  squadron  in  1869-70.  He  was
promoted  to  captain,  19  Aug.,  1872,  and  command-
ed the  steam  sloop  "  Worcester,"  flag-ship  of  the
North  Atlantic  squadron,  in  1871-'5.  In  the  first
year  of  that  cruise  he  took  out .  contributions  of
food  and  clothing  from  the  American  people  for
the  relief  of  the  French  sufferers  "in  the  Franco-
Prussian  war.  Owing  to  the  want  of  means  to
transport  these  contributions  to  the  needed  dis-
tricts in  the  east  of  France,  the  stores  were  taken
to  Liverpool  and  London,  where  a  favorable  mar-
ket realized  a  much  larger  sum  of  money  than
that  which  was  expended  for  the  purchase  of  these
stores  in  this  country.  The  American  relief  com-
mittee in  France  also  urged  that  the  money  was
more  needed  than  contributions  in  any  other
shape.  He  was  present  at  New  Orleans  during  the
political  excitement  owing  to  the  overthrow  of  the
Packard  government,  and  won  the  confidence  of
the  citizens  by  wise  measures,  contributing  to  allay
the  excitement.  On  11  June,  1878,  he  was  ap-
pointed chief  of  bureau  of  navigation  and  office
of  detail,  with  the  rank  of  commodore.  Failing
health  and  almost  total  blindness  resulting  from
exposure  incidental  to  the  service  compelled  him
to  be  relieved  from  this  duty,  12  Oct.,  1881,  from
which  date  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list,  with
the  rank  of  commodore,  by  special  act  of  congress.
WHITING,  William  Henry  Chase,  soldier,
b.  in  Mississippi  about  1825 ;  d.  on  Governor's
island,  New  York  harbor,  10  March,  1865.  His
father,  Levi,  a  native  of  Massachusetts,  was  an
officer  of  the  regular  army  from  1812  until  his
death  in  1852,  when  he  was  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  1st  artillery.  The  son  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1845  at  the  head  of  the
class  in  which  were  Charles  P.  Stone,  Fitz-John
Porter,  and  Gordon  Granger.  He  was  assigned  to
the  engineer  corps,  and  engaged  in  the  construc-
tion of  forts  and  internal  improvements  in  the
west  and  south,  becoming  a  captain,  13  Dec,  1858.
He  resigned  on  20  Feb.,  1861,  entered  the  Confed-
erate service,  and  in  June  and  July  of  that  year
was  chief  engineer,  with  the  rank  of  major,  of  the
Army  of  the  Shenandoah,  under  Gen.  Joseph  E.
Johnston.  He  was  promoted  brigadier-general  on
27  Aug.,  1861,  and  commanded  the  brigade  whose
timely  arrival  won  the  battle  of  Bull  Run  for  the
Confederates.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  West
Point,  Va.,  7  May,  1862,  was  made  a  major-general
in  1863,  and  buiit  Fort  Fisher,  N.  C,  of  which  he
took  command  in  the  autumn  of  1864.  He  de-
fended the  fort  during  the  unsuccessful  attack  by
Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  and  the  successful  one
by  Gen.  Alfred  H.  Terry  (q.  v.),  and  on  its  cap-
ture was  severely  wounded  and  taken  prisoner.


WHITMAN,  Bernard,  clergyman,  b.  in  East
Bridgewater,  Mass.,  8  June,  1796 ;  d.  in  Waltham,
Mass.,  5  Nov.,  1834.  He  early  decided  to  enter  the
ministry,  and  earned  money  to  defray  his  expenses
by  working  in  factories.  He  entered  Harvard  in
1818,  but  was  rusticated  for  a  breach  of  discipline
in  1819,  and,  on  joining  a  lower  class  at  the  expira-
tion of  a  year,  asked  and  received  an  honorable  dis-
missal. He  then  taught  and  studied  theology  till

1824,  when  he  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  on  15
Feb..  1826,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  2d  church
in  Waltham,  Mass.,  where  he  remained  till  his  early
death  from  consumption.  This  church  had  just
dismissed  an  orthodox  clergyman,  who  had  carried
with  him  a  large  part  of  the  congregation,  and
thus  Mr.  Whitman  was  led  to  a  bold  exposition  of
Unitarian  views  which  he  had  adopted  some  time
before.  His  published  sermon  on  "  Denying  the
Lord  Jesus  "  (Boston,  1827)  went  through  several
editions,  was  widely  circulated,  and  placed  him  in
the  front  rank  of  the  defenders  of  his  faith.  He
was  also  successful  as  a  lecturer  on  temperance.
His  works  include  "  Two  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Moses
Stuart  on  the  Subject  of  Religious  Liberty  "  (1831) ;
"Village  Sermons"  (1832) ;  and  "  Friendly  Letters
to  a  Universalist  on  Divine  Rewards  and  Punish-
ments" (1833). — His  brother,  Jason,  b.  in  Bridge-
water,  Mass.,  30  April,  1799 ;  d.  in  Lexington,
Mass.,  25  Jan.,  1848,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in

1825,  studied  theology,  and  was  pastor  of  Unita-
rian churches  at  Saco,  Me.,  in  1830-'4,  at  Portland
in  1835-'45,  and  at  Lexington  from  1845  till  his
death.  For  one  year,  in  1834-'5,  he  was  general
secretary  of  the  American  Unitarian  association.
Besides  numerous  sermons,  he  published  memoirs
of  his  brother,  Bernard  (Boston,  1837),  and  their
father,  Deacon  John  Whitman,  who  lived  to  the
age  of  107  years  (1843);  "The  Young  Man's  As-
sistant in  Efforts  at  Self  -  Cultivation "  (1838);
"  Young  Lady's  Aid  to  Usefulness  "  (3d  ed..  1845) ;
"  Discourses  on  the  Lord's  Prayer  "  (1847) ;  and,
with  William  E.  Greely,  "A  Brief  Statement  of
the  Unitarian  Belief  "  (1847).  See  a  sketch  of  his
life  contained  in  a  volume  of  his  sermons  (1849).

WHITMAN,  Ezekiel,  jurist,  b.  in  East  Bridge-
water,  Mass.,  9  March,  1776;  d.  there,  1  Aug.,
1866.  He  lost  his  parents  in  early  life  and  was
brought  up  by  his  uncle,  Rev.  Levi  Whitman,  of
Wellfleet,  who  opposed  his  desire  to  go  to  sea  and
induced  him  to  prepare  for  Brown  university,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1795  after  supporting
himself  during  his  course  by  teaching.  He  then
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Plymouth
county  in  1799,  and  removed  to  the  district  of
Maine,  where  he  practised  in  Turner,  and  after
1807  in  Portland.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  Feder-
alist candidate  for  congress  in  1806,  but  was  elected
two  years  later,  and  served  in  1809-'ll.  In  the
election  of  1810  he  and  William  Widgery  had  each
1,639  votes,  and  at  a  second  trial  the  latter  was
successful.  Mr.  Whitman  then  devoted  himself  to
his  large  practice  and  was  a  member  of  the  execu-
tive council  of  Massachusetts  in  1815-'16  and  of
the  Constitutional  convention  of  1819.  In  1817-'23
he  was  again  in  congress.  On  the  admission  of
Maine  to  the  Union  he  became  a  judge  of  its  court
of  common  pleas,  serving  from  1822  till  1841,  and
in  1841-'8  he  was  chief  justice  of  the  state.  In
1852  he  retired  to  his  native  place.  Judge  Whit-
man was  one  of  the  last  of  the  "  old-school  "  law-
yers in  his  state.  He  presided  in  court  with  much
dignity,  and  his  judicial  opinions,  which  were  re-
ported by  John  Shepley  in  volumes  xxi.-xxix.  of
"  Maine  Reports."  are  characterized  by  simplicity
and  directness  of  application. In  congress  he  at-


WHITMAN


WHITMAN


485


tacked  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  severely  for  his  course
in  Florida,  spoke  earnestly  against  striking  out  the
clause  to  prohibit  slavery  from  the  bill  to  admit
Missouri  to  the  Union,  took  an  active  part  in  dis-
cussions on  the  tariff,  and  in  1818  spoke  in  favor
of  a  bankrupt  law.  He  was  the  author  of  a  pam-
phlet, "  Genealogy  of  the  Descendants  of  John
Whitman  "  (printed  privately,  Portland,  1832).

WHITMAN,  Marcus,  pioneer,  b.  in  Rushville,
Ontario  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  Sept.,  1802;  d.  in  Waiilatpu,
Ore.,  29  Nov.,  1847.  He  was  educated  under  pri-
vate tutors,  studied  in  Berkshire  medical  institu-
tion, Pittsfield,  Mass.,  and  in  1834  was  appointed
by  the  American  board  a  missionary  physician  to
Oregon.  Dr.  Whitman,  Rev.  Henry  N.  Spaulding,
and  their  young  wives,  set  out  in  1836,  and,  jour-
neying slowly  westward,  crossed  the  Rocky  moun-
tains by  the  South  Pass  through  which  John  G.
Fremont's  party  penetrated  six  years  later.  Mrs.
Whitman  and  Mrs.  Spaulding  were  the  first  white
women  to  cross  the  mountains.  On  2  Sept.  the
party  arrived  at  Fort  Walla  Walla.  Whitman  had
insisted  on  bringing  one  wagon  with  him  despite
assertions  that  the  route  was  impassable  for  wheels,
and  by  thus  opening  a  wagon-road  he  led  the  way
for  emigration.  The  Hudson  bay  company's  offi-
cers at  Fort  Hall,  whose  interest  it  was  that  no
American  settlers  should  be  allowed  to  enter  Ore-
gon, and  who  had  turned  away  many  trains  of  in-
tending emigrants,  had  vainly  tried  to  dissuade
him  from  his  attempt.  After  several  years'  resi-
dence in  the  country,  Dr.  Whitman,  seeing  that
the  purpose  of  the  British  was  to  discourage  Amer-
ican colonization  of  the  territory  by  spreading  re-
ports of  its  inaccessibility  and  at  the  same  time  to
fill  it  with  English  emigrants,  resolved  to  visit
Washington  and  lay  the  matter  before  the  U.  S.
government.  In  October,  1842,  the  rejoicing  at  the
English  fort  at  Walla  Walla  over  the  approach  of
a  large  party  of  English  colonists,  and  the  knowl-
edge that  the  Webster-Ashburton  treaty  was  then
under  consideration,  impelled  him  to  lose  no  time,
and  he  set  out  within  twenty-four  hours  for  the
east  on  horseback  after  much  opposition  from  his
associates.  With  him  were  one  companion  and  a
guide,  with  three  pack-mules.  On  3  Jan.,  1843,
they  reached  Bent's  fort,  on  Arkansas  river,  after
undergoing  many  hardships,  and  soon  afterward
Whitman  arrived  at  St.  Louis,  where  he  learned
that  the  Ashburton  treaty  had  been  ratified  already
and  that  it  left  the  Oregon  question  unsettled.  On
3  March  he  was  in  Washington,  where  the  infor-
mation that  he  gave  the  government  served  to
show  how  valuable  Oregon  was  notwithstanding
the  efforts  of  .interested  persons  to  prove  that  it
was  inaccessible.  Had  it  not  been  for  him  the
United  States  might  have  given  up  Oregon  to
England  as  comparatively  worthless.  He  was  also
earnest  in  his  endeavors  to  show  how  easily  it  could
be  reached,  and  on  his  return  in  1843  he  led  back
a  train  of  200  wagons  to  the  valley  of  the  Colum-
bia. Others  followed  in  great  numbers,  and  this
"army  of  occupation"  went  far  toward  securing
Oregon  to  this  country.  Four  years  later,  Dr.
Whitman,  with  his  wife,  two  adopted  children,  and
ten  others,  was  massacred  by  the  Cayuse  Indians.
See  "  Oregon :  the  Struggle  for  Possession,"  by
William  Barrows  (Boston,  1884).

WHITMAN,  Sarah  Helen,  poet,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  in  1803 ;  d.  there,  27  June,  1878.  She
was  the  daughter  of  Nicholas  Power,  of  Provi-
dence, and  in  1828  married  John  W.  Whitman,  a
Boston  lawyer,  after  whose  death  in  1833  she  re-
turned to  her  native  city  and  devoted  herself  to
literature. Mrs.  Whitman  was  well  known  for  her


conversational  powers.  She  was  an  admirer  of  Ed-
gar A.  Poe,  with  whom,  about  1848,  she  entered  into
a  conditional  engagement  of  marriage.  Though  it
was  broken  off  soon  afterward,  her  friendly  feeling
for  Poe  did  not  cease,  and  inspired  several  of  her
poems,  notably  the  elegy  "  Resurgamus."  Mrs.
Whitman  contributed  to  magazines  prize  essays  on
literary  topics,  including  critical  articles  on  Euro-
pean writers,  and  many  poems,  which  have  been
admired  for  their  tenderness,  melody,  and  philo-
sophic spirit.  She  published  in  book-form  a  collec-
tion of  these,  entitled  "  Hours  of  Life,  and  other
Poems"  (Providence,  1853),  and  "Edgar  A.  Poe
and  his  Critics,"  in  which  she  defended  her  friend's
character  from  harsh  aspersions  (New  York,  1860).
She  was  often  called  on  for  occasional  poems,  and
one  of  these  she  read  at  the  unveiling  of  the  statue
of  Roger  Williams  in  Providence  in  1877.  Parts
of  her  "  Fairy  Ballads,"  "  The  Golden  Ball,"  "  The
Sleeping  Beauty,"  and  "  Cinderella "  (1867)  were
written  by  her  sister,  Anna  Marsh  Powek.  After
Mrs.  Whitman's  death  a  full  collection  of  her
"  Poems  "  appeared  (Boston,  1879).

WHITMAN,  Walt,  or  Walter,  poet,  b.  in  West
Hills,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  31  May,  1819.  He  was
educated  in  the  public  schools  of  Brooklyn  and
New  York  city,  and  learned  printing,  working  at
that  trade  in  summer  and  teaching  in  winter.  Sub-
sequently he  also
acquired  skill  as
a  carpenter.  For
brief  periods  he  ed-
ited newspapers  in
New  Orleans  and
in  Huntington,
L.  I.  In  1847-'8
he  made  long
pedestrian  tours
through  the  Unit-
ed States,  gener-
ally following  the
courses  of  the
great  western  riv-
ers, and  also  ex-
tended his  jour-
ney through  Can-
ada. His  chief
work,  "  Leaves  of
G  rass  "  (N  ew  York,
1855),  is  a  series  of
poems  dealing  with  moral,  social,  and  political  prob-
lems, and  more  especially  with  the  interests  involved
in  19th  century  American  life  and  progress.  In  it
he  made  a  new  and  abrupt  departure  as  to  form,
casting  his  thoughts  in  a  mould  the  style  of  which
is  something  between  rhythmical  prose  and  verse,
altogether  discarding  rhythm  and  regular  metre,
but  uttering  musical  thoughts  in  an  unconventional
way  which  is  entirely  his  own.  Expecting  the  op-
position and  abuse  with  which  his  volume  was  as-
sailed, he  speaks  of  it  as  a  sortie  on  common  liter-
ary use  and  wont,  on  both  spirit  and  form,  adding
that  a  century  may  elapse  before  its  triumph  or
failure  can  be  assured.  For  thirty  years  Whitman
has  been  correcting  and  adding  to  this  work,  and
he  says  that  he  looks  upon  "Leaves  of  Grass"
"  now"  finished  to  the  end  of  its  opportunities  and
powers,  as  my  definitive  carte  visite  to  the  coming
generations  of  the  New  World,  if  I  may  assume  to
say  so."  In  the  war  Whitman's  brother  was
wounded  on  the  battle-field,  which  led  to  the  poet's
at  once  hastening  to  join  him  in  the  camp,  where
he  afterward  remained  as  a  volunteer  army  nurse
at  Washington  and  in  Virginia  in  1862-'5.  His
experiences  during  this  service  are  vividly  recorded


^^&.MOu.


Cl+y^


486


WHITMARSH


WHITMORE


in  "  Drum-Taps  "  (1865)  and  u  Memoranda  during
the  War"  (1867).  His  fatigue  and  night-watching
in  1864  brought  on  a  serious  illness,  from  which  he
has  never  entirely  recovered.  In  1870  he  published
a  volume  of  prose  essays  called  "  Democratic  Vis-
tas," a  new  edition  of  which  has  been  issued  by
Walter  Scott  (London,  1888),  with  a  preface  writ-
ten by  Whitman  in  April  of  the  same  year.  In
this  volume  he  explains  that  he  uses  the  word
"Democrat"  in  its  widest  sense  as  synonymous
with  the  American  form  of  government.  From
1865  till  1874  Whitman  held  a  government  clerk-
ship in  Washington.  In  February,  1873,  the  lin-
gering effects  of  his  nursing  fatigues  and  illness
during  the  war  culminated  in  a  severe  paralytic
attack.  He  left  Washington  for  Camden,  N.  J.,
and  was  recovering  when  in  May  of  the  same  year
his  mother  died  somewhat  suddenly  in  his  pres-
ence. This  shock  caused  a  relapse.  He  abandoned
Washington  and  has  continued  to  reside  at  Cam-
den. Mr.  Whitman  has  been  called  "the  good
gray  poet."  His  admirers,  especially  in  England,
have  been  extravagant  in  their  praise  of  his  works,
comparing  him  with  the  best  of  the  classic  writers,
and  in  this  country  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  said  on
the  appearance  of  " Leaves  of  Grass " :  "I  find  it
the  most  extraordinary  piece  of  wit  and  wisdom
that  America  has  yet  contributed.  ...  I  find  in-
comparable things  incomparably  said."  On  the
other  hand,  the  peculiar  form  of  his  writings  pre-
vents their  popularity,  and  their  substance  has
been  widely  regarded  as  of  no  value.  "  Leaves  of
Grass  "  has  even  been  condemned  for  indecency  on
account  of  its  outspokenness,  and  when  a  complete
edition  of  the  work  was  published  (Boston,  1881)
the  Massachusetts  authorities  objected  to  its  sale
in  that  state  on  the  ground  of  immorality.  Be-
sides the  works  already  mentioned,  Whitman  has
published  "  Passage  to  India  "  (1870) ;  "  After  All,
not  to  Create  Only  "  (1871) ;  "  As  Strong  as  a  Bird
on  Pinions  Free  "  (1872) ;  "  Two  Rivulets,"  includ-
ing "  Democratic  Vistas  "  and  "  Passage  to  India  "
(1873) ;  "  Specimen  Days  and  Collect "  (1883) ;  "  No-
vember Boughs  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Sands  at  Seventy  "
(1888).  A  selection  of  his  poems,  by  William  M.  Ros-
setti,  was  published  (London,  1868).  Besides  the
complete  edition  of  "  Leaves  of  Grass  "  that  has  been
mentioned,  another,  edited  by  Prof.  Edward  Dow-
den,  has  since  been  issued  (Glasgow,  Scotland).
A  popular  selection,  with  introduction  by  Ernest
Rhys,  was  published  by  Walter  Scott  (London,
1886).  See  "  The  Good  Gray  Poet,  a  Vindication,"
by  William  D.  O'Connor  (New  York,  1866),  and
"  Notes  on  Walt  Whitman  as  Poet  and  Person,"
by  John  Burroughs  (1866).

WHITMARSH,  Caroline  Snowden,  author,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  1  June,  1827.  At  the  age  of  five
she  was  hurried  home  from  the  Ursuline  convent  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  by  the  mob  that  destroyed
it,  and  afterward,  being  a  delicate  child,  attended
school  but  little.  She  has  written  and  compiled
about  twenty-three  volumes,  chiefly  religious  and
educational.  In  1870  she  married  James  Guild,
of  Roxbury.  Her  books  include  "  Violet "  (Bos-
ton, .1855);  "Daisy"  (1856);  "Never  mind  the
Face "  (New  York,  1856) ;  and  the  "  Summer-
House  Series  "  on  scientific  subjects  (7  vols.,  Bos-
ton, 1859-'64).  She  has  compiled  "  Hymns  for
Mothers  and  Children"  (2  series,  Boston,  1860);
"  Hymns  of  the  Ages,"  the  first  series  with  Mrs.
Anne  E.  Guild  (3  series,  1859-'64) ;  and  "  Prayers
of  the  Ages  "  (1867). — Mr.  Guild's  first  wife,  Anne
(1826-'68),  whose  maiden  name  was  Gore,  was  a  co-
worker of  Miss  Whitmarsh,  and  the  author  of
"  Grandmother  Lee's  Portfolio  "  (Boston,  1857).


WHITMER,  David,  Mormon  elder,  b.  in  Har-
risburg,  Pa.,  7  Jan.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Richmond.  Mo.,
25  Jan.,  1888.  He  moved  to  Ontario  county,  N.  Y.,
when  a  youth,  and  in  1829  was  engaged  in  farm-
ing near  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  when  Oliver  Cowdery,
the  village  school-master,  told  him  that  he  in-
tended to  visit  Joseph  Smith  and  examine  the
alleged  discovery  of  golden  plates  that  bore  upon
their  face  curious  inscriptions  that  no  one  could
read.  In  June,  1829.  Cowdery  and  Smith  called
upon  Whitmer,  and,  by  instruction  from  an  angel
of  the  Lord,  as  claimed  by  Smith,  requested  Whit-
mer to  go  into  the  woods  near  by.  On  reaching  a
secluded  spot  they  all  engaged  in  prayer,  when
suddenly  a  very  brilliant  light  filled  the  space
around  them.  A  moment  later  an  angel  appeared,
and  also  a  table  on  which  were  several  golden
plates  that  they  were  told  to  examine.  They
were  commanded  to  bear  witness  of  their  experi-
ence to  the  world.  This  they  have  done  by  prefix-
ing a  statement  to  each  copy  of  the  "  Book  of
Mormon,"  where  it  is  stated  that  they,  "  through
the  grace  of  God  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  have
seen  the  plates  which  contain  this  record,  which
is  the  record  of  the  people  of  Nephi."  In  June,
1838,  Mr.  Whitmer  withdrew  from  the  Mormon
church,  taking  with  him  the  original  manuscript
of  the  "  Book  of  Mormon,"  and  settled  in  Richmond,
Mo.,  where  he  resided  until  his  death,  a  useful  and
respected  member  of  the  community.  In  1887  he
issued  "  An  Address  to  all  Believers  in  Christ,"  in
which,  among  his  reasons  for  withdrawing  from
the  Mormon  church,  were  the  ordaining  of  high-
priests  in  1831,  the  compiling  of  a  book  of  doc-
trines and  covenants  in  1835,  the  publication  of
many  revelations  that  were  made,  the  organiza-
tion of  a  band  of  Danites  in  1838  at  Far  West,  and
the  revelations  that  favored  polygamy.  He  claimed
to  "believe  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  as  it  is
taught  in  the  New  Testament  and  the  •  Book  of
Mormon,'  the  same  gospel  being  taught  in  both
these  books."  In  the  "  Book  of  Mormon  "  is  a  posi-
tive command  that "  not  any  man  among  you  have
save  it  be  one  wife ;  and  concubines  shall  he  have
none;  for  I  the  Lord  delight  in  the  chastity  of
woman."  He  was  a  faithful  believer  in  Mormon-
ism  to  the  end,  declaring  during  the  last  fevi.
hours  of  his  life  :  "  I  want  to  say  to  you,  the  Bible
and  the  record  of  the  Nephites  [the  'Book  of
Mormon ']  i6  true,  so  you  can  say  that  you  have
heard  me  bear  my  testimony  on  my  death-bed."  He
was  the  last  of  "  the  three  witnesses  "  to  the  divine
authenticity  of  the  record  of  the  Nephites.  See
"  Early  Days  of  Mormonism,"  by  James  Harrison
Kennedy  (New  York,  1888).

WHITMORE,  Edward,  British  soldier,  b.  in
England  in  1691 ;  d.  off  Plymouth,  Mass.,  10  Dec,
1761.  He  was  probably  a  son  of  Arthur  Whit-
more,  of  York,  England.  He  served  in  the  war  of
the  Austrian  succession,  and  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  36th  regiment  in  1747.  He  was  pro-
moted in  July,  1757,  colonel  of  the  22d  regiment,
and  next  year  was  made  brigadier-general.  He  was
at  the  siege  of  Louisburg  in  1758,  and,  after  the  sur-
render of  the  town,  was  left  there  as  military  gov-
ernor. On  a  voyage  to  Boston  in  December,  1761.
the  ship  put  into  Plymouth  harbor  to  seek  shel-
ter from  contrary  winds,  and  Gen.  Whitmore,  go-
ing on  deck  at  midnight,  accidentally  fell  over-
board and  was  drowned.  His  body  was  taken  up
next  morning  near  the  "  Gurnet."  and  carried  to
Boston  in  the  same  vessel.  On  Wednesday,  16
Dec,  he  was  buried  with  military  pomp  in  the
king's  chapel.  See  Richard  Brown's  "  History  of
the  Island  of  Cape  Breton  "  (London,  1869) ;  Francis


WHITMORE


WHITNEY


487


Parkraan's  "  Montcalm  and  Wolfe  "  (Boston,  1885) ;
and  William  H.  Whitmore's  "  Old  State-House  Me-
morial "  (Boston,  1887).

WHITMORE,  William  Henry,  genealogist,  b.
in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  6  Sept.,  1836.  He  is  the
son  of  a  Boston  merchant,  was  educated  in  the
public  schools  of  that  city,  and  has  devoted  the
leisure  of  his  business  life  to  antiquarian  research
and  authorship.  For  eight  years  he  was  a  member
of  the  Boston  common  council,  of  which  he  be-
came president  in  1879,  and  he  is  a  trustee  of  the
Boston  public  library.  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Harvard  and  Williams  in
1867.  About  1868  he  was  one  of  the  patentees  of
a  machine  for  making  cube-sugar,  and  in  1882  he

gatented  one  for  making  hyposulphite  of  soda,
[is  "  Ancestral  Tablets  "  (Boston,  1868)  is  an  in-
vention of  great  use  to  genealogists,  being  a  set  of
pages  cut  and  arranged  to  admit  the  insertion  of  a
pedigree  in  a  condensed  form.  He  was  a  founder
of  the  "  Historical  Magazine "  in  1857,  of  the
Prince  society  in  1858,  and  of  the  Boston  antiqua-
rian society  in  1879,  to  which  the  Bostonian  socie-
ty succeeded.  Mr.  Whitmore  has  been  an  editor
of  the  "  New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical
Register,"  in  which  many  of  his  papers  first  ap-
peared, and  "  The  Heraldic  Journal,"  which  he  es-
tablished in  1863.  He  has  edited  "  The  Poetical
Works  of  Winthrop  Mackworth  Praed  "  (New  York,
1860);  "The  Hutchinson  Papers,"  with  William
Appleton  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1865),  "  Dunton's  Let-
ters" (1867),  and  the  "Andros  Tracts"  (3  vols.,
1868-'74),  the  last  three  being  for  the  Prince  socie-
ty ;  and  the  "  Records  "  of  the  Boston  record  com-
mission, which  he  established  in  1875  (19  vols.,
with  others  ready  for  the  press) ;  and  he  was  co-
editor  of  "  Sewall's  Diary,"  writing  all  the  local
notes  (Boston,  1875-'82).  He  prepared  the  "  Laws
of  Adoption,"  his  codification  being  passed  by  the
legislature  almost  unchanged  in  1876 ;  a  "  Revis-
ion of  the  City  Ordinances,"  with  Henry  W.  Put-
nam (1882) ;  and  a  "  Report  on  the  State  Seal,"
which  was  accepted  by  the  legislature  in  1885.
He  reprinted  in  fac-simile  the  "  Laws  of  Massa-
chusetts of  1672  "  (Boston,  1887).  Mr.  Whitmore
has  contributed  to  various  magazines,  native  and
foreign,  and  is  the  author  of  many  genealogies,  the
most  important  of  which  are  the  families  of  Tem-
ple, Lane,  Norton,  Winthrop,  Hutchinson,  Usher,
Ayres,  Payne,  Whitmore,  Lee,  Dalton,  and  Wil-
cox. His  other  works  comprise  "  Handbook  of
American  Genealogy"  (Albany,  1862),  reprinted
with  additions  as  "The  American  Genealogist"
(1868) ;  "  The  Cavalier  Dismounted,"  an  essay
(Salem,  1864);  the  *  Elements  of  Heraldry "  (Bos-
ton, 1866)  ;  "Massachusetts  Civil  List,  1636-1774"
(Albany,  1870)  ;  "  Copp's  Hill  Epitaphs"  (Albanv,
1878);  "History  of  the  Old  State-House,"  issued
by  the  city  of  Boston  (1882) ;  and  "  Life  of  Abel
Brown,"  the  engraver  (Boston,  1884).

WHITNEY,  Adeline  Dutton  Train,  author,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  15  Sept.,  1824.  She  is  the
daughter  of  Enoch  Train,  founder  of  a  line  of
packet-ships  between  Boston  and  Liverpool,  and
a  sister  of  George  Francis  Train.  She  was  edu-
cated chiefly  in  Boston,  and  at  the  age  of  nine-
teen married  Seth  D.  Whitney,  of  Milton,  Mass.
Mrs.  Whitney  has  patented  a  set  of  "  Alphabet
Blocks,"  which  are  now  in  general  use.  Besides
contributing  to  magazines  for  the  young,  she  is
the  author  of  "  Footsteps  on  the  Seas,"  a  poem
(Boston,  1857);  "Mother  Goose  for  Grown  Folks"
(New  York,  1860  ;  revised  eds.,  Boston,  1870
and  1882);  "Boys  at  Chequasset"  (Boston,  1862);
"Faith  Gartney's  Girlhood"  (1868); "The  Gay-


worthys"  (1865);  "A  Summer  in  Leslie  Gold-
thwaite's  Life  "  (1866) ;  "  Patience  Strong's  Out-
ings" (1868);  "Hitherto"  (1869);  "We  Girls"
(1870);  "Real  Folks"  (1871):  "Pansies,"  poems
(1872) ;  "  The  Other  Girls  "  (1873) ;  "  Sights  and
Insights  "  (1876) ;  "  Just  How :  a  Kev  to  the  Cook-
Books  "  (1878) ;  "  Odd  or  Even  "  (1880) ;  "  Bonny-
borough  "  (1885) ;  "  Homespun  Yarns  "  and  "  Hol'v-
Tides  "  (1886) ;  and  "  Daffodils  "  and  "  Bird-Talk  "
(1887). The  last  three  are  volumes  of  verse.

WHITNEY,  Anne,  sculptor,  b.  in  Watertown,
Mass.,  2  Sept.,  1821.  She  was  educated  by  private
tutors,  and  early  manifested  a  love  for  poetry  and
sculpture,  the  latter  becoming  gradually  an  absorb-
ing pursuit.  Her  poetical  writings  were  collected
in  a  volume  entitled  "  Poems  "  (New  York,  1859).
In  the  same  year  she  opened  a  studio  in  her  na-
tive place,  and  subsequently  making  several  vis-
its to  Europe,  studied  there  four  years,  producing
two  of  her  best  works  during  that  time.  On  her
return  in  1873  she
established  a  studio
in  Boston,  where  she
has  since  remained.
She  has  executed
portraits  and  ideal
works  in  groups,
busts,  medallions,
and  statues,  includ-
ing a  statue  of  Sam-
uel Adams,  of  which
two  copies,  one  in
bronze  and  one  in
marble,  are  respect-
ively in  the  capitol
at  Washington  and
in  Boston  (1863) ;
"Roma" (1865);  "Af-
rica," a  colossal  re-
cumbent figure  of  a
woman,  illustrating
the  civil  war  in  the
United  States  (1873);
a  statue  of  Harriet
Martineau,  belong-
ing to  Wellesley  college  (1883);  and  the  fountain
of  "  Leif  Erikson  "  (1886).  The  last  was  unveiled
in  Boston,  29  Oct.,  1887,  and  the  statue  above  the
fountain  represents  the  Norse-Icelandic  discoverer
of  America  as  a  man  of  physical  beauty  and  vigor,
in  the  costume  of  the  ancient  Scandinavian  war-
rior. (See  the  accompanying  illustration.)

WHITNEY,  Asa,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Townsend,
Mass.,  1  Dec,  1791;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  4  June,
1874.  His  opportunities  for  education  were  meagre,
and,  after  spending  several  years  in  his  father's
blacksmith-shop,  he  went  in  1812  to  New  Hamp-
shire, and  soon  became  so  capable  as  a  machinist
that  his  employer  sent  him  to  Brownsville,  N.  Y.,
to  superintend  the  erection  of  machinery  in  a  cot-
ton-factory. Here  he  remained  till  1830,  carrying
on  a  business  in  machine-  and  forge-works,  when
he  was  appointed  assistant  superintendent  of  the
Mohawk  and  Hudson  railroad,  and  became  super-
intendent the  following  year.  Resigning  this  post
in  1839,  he  was  elected  canal  commissioner  of  New
York  state,  and  for  two  years  superintended  the  en-
largement and  management  of  the  Erie  canal  and
its  branches.  In  1842  he  removed  to  Philadelphia
and  entered  into  the  manufacture  of  locomotives
with  Matthew  W.  Baldwin,  but  withdrew  from
the  partnership  in  two  years.  Soon  afterward  he
became  president  of  the  Morris  canal  company,  for
which  he  applied  special  machinery  to  a  series  of
inclined  planes  worked  by  steam,  by  which  means


488


WHITNEY


WHITNEY


its  boats  could  pass  elevations.  He  took  out  pat-
ents on  22  May,  1847,  for  the  corrugated  plate  car-
wheel,  and  the  curved  corrugated  plate  wheel,  and
began  their  manufacture  with  his  son  George  as
partner.  On  25  April,  1848,  he  patented  his  pro-
cess for  annealing  car-wheels.  It  consisted  in  pla-
cing the  wheels,  soon  after  they  were  cast,  in  a  heated
furnace,  where  they  were  subjected  to  a  further
gradual  increase  of  temperature,  and  were  then
slowly  cooled  for  three  days.  The  discovery  of  this
process  of  annealing,  as  applied  to  chilled  cast-iron
wheels,  marked  an  era  in  the  history  of  railroads.
It  enabled  them  with  safety  to  increase  both  loads
and  speed.  Previous  to  this  discovery  it  was  im-
possible to  cast  wheels  with  solid  hubs,  and  there-
fore impossible  to  secure  them  rigidly  to  the  axle.
Now  the  whole  wheel  was  easily  cast  in  one  piece,
and  capable  of  being  forced  securely  upon  the  axle
at  a  pressure  of  forty  tons.  Over  ten  million  car-
wheels  are  now  in  use  in  this  country,  and  this
principle  of  annealing  is  applied  in  some  form  to
every  wheel  that  is  made  of  chilled  cast-iron.  On
19  March,  1850,  he  patented  the  tapered  and  ribbed
corrugated  wheel.  For  many  years  he  made  from
50,000  to  75,000  car-wheels  per  annum.  The  busi-
ness is  still  carried  on  by  the  firm  of  A.  Whitney
and  Sons.  In  1860  Mr.  Whitney  was  made  presi-
dent of  the  Reading  railroad,  but  he  resigned  in  a
year  from  failing  health,  after  contributing  largely
to  the  success  of  the  road.  He  gave  liberally  dur-
ing his  life,  and  among  other  public  bequests  he
gave  $50,000  to  found  a  professorship  of  dynamical
engineering  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
$12,500  to  the  Franklin  institute,  and  $20,000  to
the  Old  men's  home  in  Philadelphia.

WHITNEY,  Asa,  merchant,  b.  in  1797;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  in  August,  1872.  He  was  in
mercantile  business  in  New  York  city.  He  recog-
nized the  necessity  of  a  railroad  to  the  Pacific,
was  the  first  to  suggest  its  feasibility,  and  from
1846  till  1850  urged  it  upon  congress,  the  legisla-
tures of  several  states,  and  the  public,  by  personal
influence  and  his  writings.  He  was  finally  instru-
mental in  securing  appropriations  in  1853  for  the
first  surveys  of  the  northern,  southern,  and  middle
routes,  and  lived  to  see  communication  opened
from  sea  to  sea  in  1869.  He  was  the  author  of
H  A  Project  for  a  Railroad  to  the  Pacific  "  (New
York,  1849),  and  "  A  Plan  for  a  Direct  Communi-
cation between  the  Great  Centres  of  Populations
of  Europe  and  Asia  "  (London,  1851).

WHITNEY,  Eli,  inventor,  b.  in  Westborough,
Mass.,  8  Dec,  1765;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  8
Jan.,  1825.  During  the  Revolutionary  war  he
was  engaged  in  making  nails  by  hand.  Subse-
quently, by  his  industry  as  an  artisan  and  by
teaching,  he  was  able  to  defray  his  expenses  at
Yale,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1792.  In  the
same  year  he  went  to  Georgia  under  an  engage-
ment as  a  private  tutor,  but,  on  arriving  there,
found  that  the  place  had  been  filled,  lie  then
accepted  the  invitation  of  the  widow  of  Gen.  Na-
thanael  Greene  to  make  her  place  at  Mulberry
Grove,  on  Savannah  river,  his  home  while  he  stud-
ied law.  Several  articles  that  he  had  devised  for
Mrs.  Greene's  convenience  gave  her  great  faith
in  his  inventive  powers,  and  when  some  of  her
visitors  regretted  that  there  could  be  no  profit  in
the  cultivation  of  the  green  seed-cotton,  which
was  considered  the  best  variety,  owing  to  the  great
difficulty  of  separating  it  from  the  seed,  she  ad-
vised them  to  apply  to  Whitney  "  who,"  she  said,
"could  make  anything."  A  pound  of  green  seed-
cotton  was  all  that  a  negro  woman  could  at  that
period  clean  in  a  day. Mr.  Whitney  up  to  that


Cc/^^c^n^y-


time  had  seen  neither  the  raw  cotton  nor  the  cot-
ton seed,  but  he  at  once  procured  some  cotton
from  which  the  seeds  had  not  been  removed,
although  with  trouble,  as  it  was  not  the  season  of
the  year  for  the  cultivation  of  the  plant,  and  be-
gan to  work  out  his
idea  of  the  cotton-
gin.  He  was  oc-
cupied for  some
months  in  con-
structing his  ma-
chine, during  which
he  met  with  great
difficulty,  being
compelled  to  draw
the  necessary  iron-
wire  himself,  as  he
could  obtain  none
in  Savannah,  and
to  manufacture  his
own  iron  tools.  Near
the  end  of  1792  he
succeeded  in  mak-
ing a  gin  of  which
the  principle  and
mechanism  are  both
exceedingly  simple.  Its  main  features  are  a  cylin-
der four  feet  long  and  five  inches  in  diameter,  upon
which  is  set  a  series  of  circular  saws  half  an  inch
apart  and  projecting  two  inches  above  the  sur-
face of  the  revolving  cylinder.  A  mass  of  cot-
ton in  the  seed,  separated  from  the  cylinder  by
a  steel  grating,  is  brought  into  contact  with  the
numerous  teeth  on  the  cylinder.  These  teeth
catch  the  cotton  while  playing  between  the  bars,
which  allow  the  lint,  but  not  the  seed,  to  pass.
Beneath  the  saws  is  a  set  of  stiff  brushes  on  an-
other cylinder  revolving  in  the  opposite  direction,
which  brush  off  from  the  saw-teeth  the  lint  that
these  have  just  pulled  from  the  seed.  There  is-
also  a  revolving  fan  for  producing  a  current  of
air  to  throw  the  light  and  downy  lint  that  is  thus
liberated  to  a  convenient  distance  from  the  re-
volving saws  and  brushes.  Such  are  the  essential
principles  of  the  cotton-gin  as  invented  by  Whit-
ney and  as  it  is  still  used ;  but  in  various  detail*
and  workmanship  it  has  been  the  subject  of  many
improvements,  the  object  of  which  has  been  to-
pick  the  cotton  more  perfectly  from  the  seed,  to
prevent  the  teeth  from  cutting  the  staple,  and  to
give  greater  regularity  to  the  operation  of  the-
machine.  By  its  use  the  planter  was  able  to  clean
for  market,  by  the  labor  of  one  man,  one  thousand

Sounds  of  cotton  in  place  of  five  or  six  by  hand-
Irs.  Greene  and  Phineas  Miller  were  the  only  per-
sons that  were  permitted  to  see  the  machine,  but
rumors  of  it  had  gone  through  the  state,  and  be-
fore it  was  quite  finished  the  building  in  which  it
was  placed  was  broken  into  at  night  and  the  ma-
chine was  carried  off.  Before  he  could  complete-
his  model  and  obtain  a  patent,  a  number  of  ma-
chines based  on  his  invention  had  been  made  sur-
reptitiously and  were  in  operation.  In  May,  1793..
he  formed  a  partnership  with  Mr.  Miller,  who  had
some  property,  and  went  to  Connecticut  to  manu-
facture the  machines ;  but  he  became  involved  in
continual  trouble  by  the  infringement  of  his  patent-
In  Georgia  it  was  boldly  asserted  that  he  was  not
the  inventor,  but  that  something  like  it  had  been
produced  in  Switzerland,  and  it  was  claimed  that
the  substitution  of  teeth  cut  in  an  iron  plate  for
wire  prevented  an  infringement  on  his  invention.
He  had  sixty  lawsuits  ponding  before  he  secured  a
verdict  in  his  favor.  In  South  Carolina  the  legisla-
ture granted  him  $50,000,  which  was  finally  paid


WHITNEY


WHITNEY


489


after  vexatious  delays  and  lawsuits.  North  Carolina
allowed  him  a  percentage  for  the  use  of  each  saw
for  five  years,  and  collected  and  paid  it  over  to  the
patentees  in  good  faith,  and  Tennessee  promised  to
do  the  same  thing,  but  afterward  rescinded  her  con-
tract. For  years — amid  accumulated  misfortunes,
lawsuits  wrongfully  decided  against  him,  the  de-
struction of  his  manufactory  by  fire,  the  industrious
circulation  of  the  report  that  his  machine  injured
the  fibre  of  the  cotton,  the  refusal  of  congress,  on
account  of  the  opposition  of  southern  members,  to
allow  the  patent  to  be  renewed,  and  the  death  of
his  partner— Mr.  Whitney  struggled  on  until  he
was  convinced  that  he  should  never  receive  a  just
compensation  for  his  invention.  In  1791  the
amount  of  cotton  that  was  exported  amounted  to
only  189,500  pounds,  while  in  1803,  owing  to  the
use  of  his  gin,  it  had  risen  to  more  than  41,000,000
pounds.  Despairing  of  gaining  a  competence,  he
turned  his  attention  in  1798  to  the  manufacture  of
fire-arms  near  New  Haven,  from  which  he  eventu-
ally gained  a  fortune.  He  was  the  first  manu-
facturer of  fire-arms  to  effect  the  division  of  labor
to  the  extent  of  making  it  the  duty  of  each  work-
man to  perform  by  machinery  but  one  or  two
operations  on  a  single  part  of  the  gun,  and  thus
made  interchangeable  the  parts  of  the  thousands  of
arms  in  process  of  manufacture  at  the  same  time.
His  first  contract  was  with  the  U.  S.  government
for  10,000  stand  of  muskets  to  be  finished  in  about
two  years.  For  the  execution  of  this  order  he
took  two  years  for  preparation  and  eight  more  for
completion.  He  gave  bonds  for  $30,000,  and  was
to  receive  $13.40  for  each  musket,  or  $134,000  in
all.  Immediately  he  began  to  build  an  armory  at
the  foot  of  East  Rock,  two  miles  from  New  Haven,
in  the  present  village  of  Whitneyville,  where,
through  the  successive  administrations  from  that
of  John  Adams,  repeated  contracts  for  the  supply
of  arms  were  made  and  fulfilled  to  the  entire
approbation  of  the  government.  The  construc-
tion of  his  armory,  and  even  of  the  commonest
tools,  which  were  devised  by  him  for  the  prose-
cution of  the  business  in  a  manner  peculiar  to
himself,  evinced  the  fertility  of  his  genius  and  the
precision  of  his  mind.  The  buildings  became  the
model  upon  which  the  national  armories  were  after-
ward arranged,  and  many  of  his  improvements
were  transferred  to  other  establishments  and  have
become  common  property.  His  advance  in  the
manufacture  of  arms  laid  this  country  under  per-
manent obligations  by  augmenting  the  means  of
national  defence.  Several  of  his  inventions  have
been  applied  to  other  manufactures  of  iron  and
steel  and  added  to  his  reputation.  He  established
a  fund  of  $500  at  Yale,  the  interest  of  which  is  ex-
pended in  the  purchase  of  books  on  mechanical  and
physical  science.  In  1817  he  married  a  daughter
of  Judge  Pierpont  Edwards.  Robert  Fulton  said
that  "Arkwright,  Watt,  and  Whitney  were  the
three  men  that  did  most  for  mankind  of  any  of
their  contemporaries,"  and  Macaulay  said :  "  What
Peter  the  Great  did  to  make  Russia  dominant,  Eli
Whitney's  invention  of  the  cotton-gin  has  more
than  equalled  in  its  relation  to  the  power  and  prog-
ress of  the  United  States."  See  "  Memoir  of  Eli
Whitney,"  by  Denison  Olmsted  (New  Haven,  184G).
WHITNEY,  James  Ainaziah,  lawyer,  b.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y,  30  June,  1839.  He  removed  in
childhood  with  his  parents  to  Mai-yland,  Otsego
co.,  N.  Y.,  where  he  received  a  common-school  edu-
cation, and  began  life  as  a  farmer,  but  in  18G0-'5
studied  chemistry,  mechanics,  and  engineering
without  a  master,  and  in  the  latter  year  became  a
writer  of  specifications  in  the  office  of  a  firm  of


patent  solicitors.  In  1868  he  became  an  editor  of
the  "American  Artisan,"  and  took  an  active  part
in  organizing  the  New  York  society  of  practical
engineers,  of  which  he  was  president  for  several
years.  In  1869-'72  he  was  professor  of  agricul-
tural chemistry  in  the  American  institute,  and
in  the  latter  year  he  established  himself  as  a
solicitor  of  patents.  In  1876  he  was  admitted  to
practice  in  the  U.  S.  circuit  courts.  Iowa  college
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1880.  Besides
numerous  essays  on  scientific,  mechanical,  legal,
and  political  subjects,  Mr.  Whitney  is  the  author
of  a  monograph  on  "  The  Relations  of  the  Patent
Laws  to  the  Development  of  Agriculture"  (New
York.  1874);  "The  Chinese  and  the  Chinese  Ques-
tion "  (1880 ;  enlarged  ed.,  1888) ;  "  Shobab,  a  Tale
of  Bethesda,"  a  poem  (1884) ;  "  Sonnets  and  Lyr-
ics" (1884);  "The  Children  of  Lamech,"  a  poem
(1885) ;  and  "  Poetical  Works  "  (2  vols.,  1886).

WHITNEY,  Josiah  Dwight,  geologist,  b.  in
Northampton,  Mass.,  23  Nov..  1819.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1839,  and  then  spent  six  months
in  the  chemical  laboratory  of  Dr.  Robert  Hare  in
Philadelphia.  In  1840  he  joined  the  survey  of
New  Hampshire  as  assistant  geologist  under  Charles
T.  Jackson,  and  remained  connected  with  that  work
until  May,  1842,  when  he  went  abroad.  For  five
years  he  travelled  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  and
pursued  chemical,  geological,  and  mineralogical
studies.  On  his  return  to  this  country  in  1847
he  engaged  in  the  geological  exploration  of  the
Lake  Superior  region,  and  with  John  W.  Foster
was  in  the  same  year  appointed  by  the  U.  S.
government  to  assist  Charles  T.  Jackson  in  mak-
ing a  geological  survey  of  that  district.  Two
years  later  the  completion  of  the  survey  was  in-
trusted to  Foster  and  Whitney,  who  published
"Synopsis  of  the  Explorations  of  the  Geological
Corps  in  the  Lake  Superior  Land  District  in  the
Northern  Peninsula "  (Washington,  1849),  and
"  Report  on  the  Geology  and  Topography  of  a
Portion  of  the  Lake  Superior  Land  District  in  the
State  of  Michigan "  (part  i.,  Copper  Lands,  1850 ;
part  ii.,  The  Iron  Region,  1851).  On  the  completion
of  this  work  he  travelled  for  two  years  through
the  states  east  of  the  Mississippi  for  the  purpose  of
collecting  information  with  regard  to  the  mining
and  mineral  interests  in  this  country.  His  results
were  issued  as  "  The  Metallic  Wealth  of  the  United
States  described  and  compared  with  that  of  other
Countries"  (Philadelphia,  1854).  In  1855  he  was
appointed  state  chemist  and  professor  in  the  Iowa
state  university,  and  was  associated  with  James
Hall  in  the  geological  survey  of  that  state,  issu-
ing "  Reports  on  the  Geological  Survev  of  Iowa "
(2  vols.,  Albany,  1858-9).  During  1858-'G0  Prof.
Whitney  was  engaged  on  a  geological  survey  of
the  lead  region  of  the  upper  Missouri  in  connection
with  the  official  surveys  of  Wisconsin  and  Illinois,
publishing,  with  James  Hall,  a  "Report  on  the
Geological  Survey  of  the  State  of  Wisconsin "
(Albany,  1862).  He  was  appointed  state  geologist
of  California  in  1860,  and  engaged  in  conducting
a  topographical,  geological,  and  natural  history  sur-
vey of  that  state  until  1874,  when  the  work  was
discontinued  by  act  of  legislature.  Besides  various
pamphlets  and  annual  reports  on  the  subject,  he
issued  six  volumes  under  the  title  of  "  Geological
Survey  of  California  "  (Cambridge,  1864-'70).  In
1865  he  was  appointed  professor  of  geology  in
Harvard,  which  chair  he  still  retains,  with  charge
of  its  school  of  mining  and  practical  geology.  The
degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Yale  in
1870.  Prof.  Whitney  was  one  of  the  original  mem-
bers of  the  National  academy  of  sciences  named


490


WHITNEY


WHITNEY


by  act  of  congress  in  1863,  but  he  has  since  with-
drawn from  that  body.  He  is  also  a  member  of
other  scientific  bodies,  both  at  home  and  abroad.
In  addition  to  contributing  to  the  "  American
Journal  of  Science,"  the  "  North  American  Re-
view," and  similar  periodicals,  he  has  translated
Berzelius's  "  Use  of  the  Blowpipe  "  (Boston,  1845),
and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Yosemite  Guide-Book  "
(San  Francisco,  1869).  Prof.  Whitney  has  made  a
specialty  of  collecting  a  library  of  geological  and
geographical  books.  Mount  Whitney,  the  highest
mountain  in  the  United  States,  was  named  in  his
honor. — His  wife,  Louisa  Goddard.  b.  in  Manches-
ter. England,  17  Dec,  1819;  d.  in  Cambridge,  13  May,
1882,  is  the  author  of  "  The  Burning  of  the  Convent :
a  Narrative  of  the  Destruction  of  the  Ursuline
School  on  Mount  Benedict.  Charlestown,  by  One  of
the  Pupils  "  (Cambridge,  Mass.,  1877),  and  "  Peasy's
Childhood:  an  Autobiography  "  (1878). — His  broth-
er, William  Dwight,  philologist,  b.  in  Northamp-
ton, Mass.,  9  Feb.,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1845,  and  obtained  a  clerkship  in  a  banking-house
in  Northampton.  This  occupation  he  followed  for
three  years,  and  devoted  his  leisure  to  the  study  of
languages,  particularly  Sanskrit.  In  1849-'50  he
studied  under  Prof.  Edward  E.  Salisbury  at  Yale,
and  in  1850  he  went  to  Germany  and  studied  at
the  University  of  Berlin  under  Franz  Bopp  and
Albrecht  Weber,  and  at  the  University  of  Tubingen
under  Rudolf  Roth.  With  the  latter  he  prepared
an  edition  of  the  "  Atharva  Veda  Sanhita  "  (Berlin,
1856),  for  which  he  copied  the  text  from  the  manu-
scripts in  the  Royal  library  in  Berlin,  and  collated
it  with  other  copies  in  the  libraries  of  Paris,  Lon-
don, and  Oxford.  In  1854  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  Sanskrit  at  Yale,  and  in  1870  of  com-
parative philology  also  at  that  university,  and  he
still  retains  the  combined  chair.  Prof.  Whitney
delivered  a  series  of  lectures  before  the  Smithsonian
institution  in  1864,  which  he  repeated  in  extended
form  before  the  Lowell  institute  in  Boston,  and
then  published  as  "  Language  and  the  Study  of
Language  "  (New  York,  1867).  He  was  elected  a
member  of  the  American  oriental  society  in  1849,
was  its  librarian  in  1855-'73,  its  corresponding
secretary  in  1857-'84,  and  since  then  its  president.
His  contributions  to  its  "Journal"  have  been  very
large,  and  of  its  volumes  vi.-xii.,  half  the  contents
were  written  by  him,  including  a  translation  of  the
"  Sflrya  Siddhanta,"  with  notes  and  appendix,  being
a  Hindoo  treatise  on  astronomy  (1860) ;  text,  with
notes,  of  the  "Atharva  Veda  Praticakhya"  (1862);
the  text,  with  English  versions,  notes,  and  native
commentary,  of  the  "  Taittiriya  Praticakhya "
(1871),  which  gained  for  him  the  Bopp  prize  from
the  Berlin  academy  as  the  most  important  Sanskrit
publication  of  the  preceding  three  years ;  the  "  In-
dex Verborum  to  the  Atharva- Veda  "  (1881);  and
reviews  of  Karl  R.  Lepsius's  phonetic  alphabet  and
of  the  opinions  of  Jean  B.  Biot,  Albrecht  Weber,
and  Max  Miiller  on  Hindoo  astronomy.  He  was
also  a  contributor  to  the  great  Sanskrit  diction-
ary of  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  (7  vols.,  St.  Peters-
burg, 1853-"67).  Prof.  Whitney  ranks  as  one  of
the  foremost  Sanskrit  scholars  of  his  time,  and  his
text-books  have  been  awarded  high  praise  for  their
exact  statements  of  general  grammatical  doctrine.
In  the  science  of  language,  of  which  his  exposi-
tions and  classifications  are  accepted  as  authorita-
tive, he  claims  that  the  development  of  speech  is  by
the  acceptance  of  conventional  signs,  and  that  its
beginnings  were  imitative,  in  lieu  of  the  view  ad-
vanced by  others  who  contend  that  language  was
spontaneously  generated  in  the  mind  and  coexist-
ent with  thought. The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  con-


ferred on  him  by  the  Universitv  of  Breslau  in
1861,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Williams  in  1868,
William  and  Mary  in  1869,  and  Harvard  in  1876,
while  that  of  J.  U.  D.  was  given  him  by  St.  An-
drews, Scotland,  in  1874,  and  Litt.  D.  by  Columbia
in  1886.  He  was  the  first  president  of  the  Ameri-
can philological  association  in  1869,  and  in  1865
was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.
Besides  his  membership  in  many  other  scientific
bodies,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  he  is  a  cor-
respondent of  the  Berlin,  Turin,  Rome,  and  St.
Petersburg  academies,  the  Institut  of  France,  and
is  a  foreign  knight  of  the  Prussian  order  "  Pour
le  merite."  Prof.  Whitney  has  written  for  the
"  North  American  Review,"  the  "  New  Englander,"
and  similar  periodicals,  and  various  articles  in
cyclopaedias,  and  has  contributed  to  the  transac-
tions of  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member  many
papers,  of  which  may  be  mentioned  (besides  those
included  in  his  Oriental  and  linguistic  studies)
"Contributions  from  the  Atharva  Veda  to  the
Theory  of  Sanskrit  Verbal  Accent"  (1856);  "On
the  Jyotisha  Observation  of  the  Place  of  the  Col-
ures  and  the  Date  derivable  from  It "  (1864) ;  "  On
Material  and  Form  in  Language "  (1872) ;  "  Dar-
winism and  Language  "  (1874) ;  "  Logical  Consist-
ency in  Views  of  Language  "  (1880) ;  "  Mixture  in
Language  "  (1881) ;  "  The  Study  of  Hindoo  Gram-
mar and  the  Study  of  Sanskrit"  (1884);  "The
Upanishads  and  their  Latest  Translation  "  (1886).
His  other  works,  several  of  which  have  been  trans-
lated into  one  or  more  languages,  include  "  Com-
pendious German  Grammar  "  (New  York,  1869) ;
"  German  Reader  in  Prose  and  Verse "  (1870) ;
"  Oriental  and  Linguistic  Studies "  (1st  series,
1873;  3d  series,  1875);  "Life  and  Growth  of
Language  "  in  the  "  International  Scientific  Se-
ries" (1876);  "Essentials  of  English  Grammar"
(Boston,  1877);  "Sanskrit  Grammar,  including
both  the  Classical  Language  and  the  Older  Dia-
lects of  Veda  and  Brahmana"  (Leipsic,  1879) ;  and
"  Practical  French  Grammar  "  (1886).  At  present
he  is  superintending  editor  of  the  "  Dictionary  of
the  English  Language"  in  course  of  preparation
by  the  Century  company  in  New  York.

WHITNEY,  Myron  W.,  singer,  b.  in  Ashbury,
Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1836.  He  went  to  Boston  at  the  age
of  sixteen  and  made  his  first  appearance  there  in
1858  at  a  Christmas  performance  of  the  "  Messiah  "
that  was  given  by  the  Handel  and  Haydn  society.
After  about  ten  years  of  concert-singing  he  went
to  Florence,  Italy,  where  he  studied  with  Luigi  Ven-
nusini,  and  then  to  London  to  become  a  pupil  of
Alberto  Randegger.  He  then  filled  various  engage-
ments and  attracted  attention  especially  by  his  ren-
dition of  the  part  of  Elijah  at  the  Birmingham  fes-
tival. In  1876  he  was  the  principal  solo-singer  at
the  opening  exercises  of  the  Centennial  exhibition
in  Philadelphia.  Since  that  year  he  has  sung  in
his  native  country,  and  has  appeared  in  nearly  all
the  May  festivals  held  in  different  cities  of  the
Union.  For  several  years  he  was  a  member  of  the
Boston  ideal  opera  company.  He  possesses  a  fine
bass  voice  of  nearly  three  octaves  compass,  and  is
especially  noted  as  an  oratorio-singer.

WHITNEY,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  North-
borough,  Mass.,  6  Sept.,  1744;  d.  there,  29  Feb.,
1816.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1762,  and
on  4  Nov.,  1767,  ordained  pastor  at  Northborough,
where  he  remained  till  his  death.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  a  "  History  of  the  County  of  Worcester"
(Worcester,  1793) ;  single  sermons ;  and  papers  in
the  "  Memoirs  of  the  American  Academy." — His
son,  Peter  (1770-1843),  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1791,  had  charge  of  the  church  at  Quincy,  Mass.,


WHITNEY


WHITSITT


491


from  1800  till  his  death,  and  published  various  dis-
courses.— The  second  Peter's  son,  George,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Quincy,  Mass.,  2  July,  1804 ;  d.  in  Ja-
maica Plain,  Mass.,  2  April,  1842,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1824  and  at  the  divinity-school  in
1828,  and  from  1831  till  his  death  was  pastor  of
churches  in  Roxbury.  He  published  "Some  Ac-
count of  the  Early  History  and  Present  State  of
the  Town  of  Quincy,  Mass."  (Boston,  1827),  of
which  he  was  preparing  an  enlarged  edition  at  the
time  of  his  death. — George's  brother,  Frederic
Augustus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Quincy,  Mass.,  13
Sept.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Brighton,  Mass.,  21  Oct.,  1880,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1833  and  at  the  di-
vinity-school in  1838,  teaching  in  the  mean  time.
After  doing  missionary  work,  he  was  pastor  at
Brighton,  Mass.,  in  1843-'59,  and  afterward  lived
in  that  town  without  a  pastoral  charge.  He  issued
thirteen  annual  reports  as  chairman  of  the  town
school  committee,  and  nine  as  president  of  the
trustees  of  the  Public  library.  Besides  these,  and
various  sermons,  addresses,  and  contributions  to
■current  literature,  he  published  "  Historical  Sketch
of  the  Old  Church  at  Quincy  "  (Albany,  1864),  and
"  Biography  of  James  Holton,"  founder  of  the  Hol-
ton  library,  Brighton  (Boston,  1865).  He  was  also
the  author  of  various  hymns,  some  of  which  are
■collected  in  Rev.  Alfred  P.  Putnam's  "  Singers  and
Songs  of  the  Liberal  Faith  "  (Boston,  1875).

WHITNEY,  Thomas  Richard,  author,  b.  in
New  York  city  in  1804;  d.  there,  12  April,  1858.
He  served  two  years  in  the  assembly  of  the  state  in
1854-'5,  and  one  term  in  congress  in  1855-'7,  having
been  elected  by  the  American  party.  Mr.  Whitney
was  editorially  connected  with  the  New  York  "  Sun-
day Times  "  and  other  papers,  and  published  "  The
Ambuscade,"  a  poem  (New  York,  1845),  and  "  De-
fence of  the  American  Policy  as  opposed  to  the  En-
croachments of  Foreign  Influence,  and  especially
to  the  Interference  of  the  Papacv  "  (1856).

WHITNEY,  William  Collins,  secretary  of  the
navy,  b.  in  Conway,  Mass.,  15  July,  1841.  His
father.  James  S.  Whitney,  was  at  one  time  collec-
tor of  the  port  of  Boston,  and  in  1860  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Charleston  convention.  The  son  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1863  and  at  Harvard  law-
school  in  1865,  and  continued  the  study  of  law
under  Abraham  R.  Lawrence,  in  New  York  city,
where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  practised  his
profession.  In  1871  he  assisted  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  Young  men's  Democratic  club,  and  was
subsequently  brought  into  notice  by  his  active
measures  in  the  movement  against  the  Tweed
ring.  He  was  made  inspector  of  the  city  schools
in  1872,  and  was  defeated  the  same  year  as  the  ,
candidate  of  the  reformed  Democracy  for  district
attorney.  In  the  following  year  he  took  an  active
part  in  the  Tilden  canvass.  He  was  appointed
corporation  counsel  of  New  York  city  in  1875,
1876,  and  1880,  and  is  credited  with  having  saved
the  city  several  millions  of  dollars  by  his  opposition
to  claims  against  the  city  treasury.  He  also  put
in  practice  a  system  for  the  protection  of  the  legal
rights  of  the  corporation,  which  has  proved  of  per-
manent value.  He  resigned  this  office  in  1882,  and
on  5  March,  1885,  was  appointed  secretary  of  the
navy.  Yale  conferred  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  upon
him  in  1888.  His  administration  has  been  marked
by  the  completion  of  several  vessels  that  form  the
nucleus  of  a  new  U.  S.  navy,  in  whose  development
he  has  taken  much  interest.  Secretary  Whitney's
residence,  at  the  corner  of  5th  avenue  and  57th
street.  New  York,  is  one  of  the  finest  in  the  city.

WHITON,  John  Milton,  clergyman,  b.  in  Win-
chendon,  Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1785 ;  d.  in  Antrim,  N.  H.,


28  Sept.,  1856.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1805,
and  was  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  An-
trim, N.  H.,  from  28  Sept.,  1808.  till  1  Jan.,  1853,
and  then  of  the  Congregational  church  in  the
neighboring  town  of  Bennington  till  his  death.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Princeton  in
1848.  Dr.  Whiton  wrote  "Brief  Notices  of  the
Town  of  Antrim,"  in  the  "  Collections  of  the  New
Hampshire  Historical  Society"  (vol.  iv.,  1852);
"Sketches  of  the  Early  History  of  New  Hamp-
shire, 1623-1833  "  (Concord,  1834) ;  also  statistical
account  of  the  Congregational  and  Presbyterian
ministers  of  Hillsborough  county,  in  the  "New
Hampshire  Repository"  for  1846.  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  was  preparing  a  "  History  of  Pres-
byterianism  in  New  Hampshire."— His  grand-
son, James  Morris,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  11  April,  1833.  was  educated  at  the  Boston
Latin-school  and  at  Yale,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1853.  He  was  rector  of  Hopkins  grammar-
school,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  from  1854  till  1864,
pastor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church,  Lynn,
Mass.,  1865-'69,  and  of  the  North  Congregational
church,  Lynn,  1869-75.  In  1876-'8  he  was  princi-
pal of  Williston  seminary,  Easthampton,  Mass.,  and
pastor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church,  Newark,
N.  J.,  in  1879-85,  and  became  pastor  of  Trinity
Congregational  church,  Tremont,  New  York  city,
in  1886.  He  is  regarded  as  a  Christian  evolutionist.
His  views  regarding  endless  punishment  were  made
the  subject  of  an  inquiry  by  a  council  of  Congre-
gational churches  at  Newark  in  1879,  the  result
being  a  vote  of  confidence  and  fellowship,  notwith-
standing his  disavowal  of  that  tenet.  He  has  been
a  frequent  contributor  to  religious  journals,  and,
in  addition  to  various  school-books,  has  published
"  Select  Orations  of  Lysias "  (Boston,  1875) ;  "  Is
Eternal  Punishment  Endless  ?  "  in  which  he  main-
tains that  endless  punishment  is  not  decisively  re-
vealed in  the  New  Testament  (1876) ;  "  Essay  on
the  Gospel  according  to  Matthew  "  (1880) ;  "  The
Gospel  of  the  Resurrection  "  (1881) ;  "  Early  Pupils
of  the  Spirit  "  (London,  1884) ;  "  The  Evolution  of
Revelation  "  (New  York,  1885) ;  "  The  Divine  Satis-
faction "  (London,  1886) ;  and  two  series  of  dis-
courses given  in  Congregational  churches  in  Eng-
land, entitled  "  Turning  of  Thought  and  Conduct "
(London,  1887)  and  "  The  Law  of  Liberty  "  (1888).
— His  daughter,  Mary  Bartlett,  educator,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  17  Aug.,  1857,  was  graduated
at  Smith  college  in  1879,  taught  in  Newark  high-
school  in  1881-'3,  and  has  since  been  a  teacher  in
Packer  institute,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  She  was  the  au-
thor with  her  father  of  "  Six  Months'  Preparation
for  Reading  Xenophon  "  (New  York,  1885).

WHITSITT,  William  Heth,  clergyman,  b.
near  Nashville,  Tenn.,  25  Nov.,  1841.  He  was
graduated  at  Union  university,  Tenn.,  in  1861,  and
at  the  Southern  Baptist  theological  seminary  in
1869,  meanwhile  spending  a  year  at  the  University
of  Virginia.  He  studied  in  1869-70  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Leipsic,  and  in  1870-1  at  the  University  of
Berlin,  served  for  a  short  time  as  pastor  of  the
Baptist  church  in  Albany,  Ga.,  and  in  1872  was
elected  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  in  the
Southern  Baptist  theological  seminary,  Louisville,
Ky.,  which  place  he  still  holds.  Mercer  university
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1874.  Besides  va-
rious contributions  to  reviews  and  other  periodi-
cals, he  is  the  author  of  "  History  of  the  Rise  of
Infant  Baptism"  (Louisville,  1878);  "History  of
Communion  among  Baptists  "  (1880) ;  and  "  Origin
of  the  Disciples  of  Christ,  a  Contribution  to  the
Hundredth  Anniversary  of  the  Birth  of  Alexander
Campbell "  (New  York,  1888).


492


WHITTAKER


WHITTHORNE


WHITTAKER,  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Radnor-
shire, Wales,  15  Oct.,  1808 ;  d.  in  New  York  citv,
9  Feb..  1881.  He  came  to  New  York  in  1850,
and  became  managing  clerk  in  a  law-office.  He
published  ".  Practice  and  Pleading  under  the  Code.
Original  and  Amended,  with  Appendix  of  Forms"
(New  York,  1852 ;  3d  ed.,  1863 ;  with  a  supple-
ment, 1867),  and  "  Analysis  of  Recent  Decisions
on  Practice  and  Pleadings "  (1863).  —  His  son,
Frederick,  author,  b.  in  London,  England,  12
Dec,  1838,  came  to  this  country  with  his  father  in
1850.  and  studied  architecture.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  in  the  National  cavalry  service,  rising
to  the  rank  of  lieutenant  and  brevet  captain.
After  the  war  he  became  a  teacher  and  journalist.
Concerning  the  circumstances  of  the  battle  in
which  Gen.  George  A.  Custer  met  his  death,  he
entered  into  a  long  and  bitter  controversy,  through
a  congressional  memorial  and  otherwise,  which  re-
sulted in  a  military  court  of  inquiry  being  held  in
Chicago  in  1879,  in  which  his  version  of  the  facts
was  virtually  sustained.  Since  that  controversy
Mr.  Whittaker  has  withdrawn  from  all  literature
save  that  of  the  popular  order.  Pie  has  written
numerous  stories  for  the  New  York  "  Ledger,"  and
in  March,  1884,  he  published  in  the  New  York
"  Tribune  "  a  "  Defence  of  Dime  Novels,  by  a  Writer
of  Them."  He  has  published  a  "  Life  of  Gen.
George  Armstrong  Custer"  (New  York,  1876)  and
"  Cadet  Button."  a  novel  (1878).

WHITTAKER,  James,  Shaker  elder,  b.  in  Old-
ham, England,  28  Feb.,  1751 ;  d.  in  Enfield,  Conn.,
20  July,  1787.  He  was  brought  up  in  the  faith  of
the  French  prophets,  and  in  his  youth  was  placed
in  the  care  of  Ann  Lee,  becoming  her  chief  disciple.
He  accompanied  her  to  America,  and  when  she
and  her  brother  William  died  in  1784  he  succeeded
as  the  head  of  the  church,  which,  under  his  active
ministry,  increased  in  New  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  Shir-
ley, Harvard,  and  Woburn,  Mass.,  Enfield,  Conn.,
and  otherplaces.

WHITTEMORE,  Amos,  inventor,  b.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  19  April,  1759;  d.  in  West  Cain-
bridge,  Mass.,  27  March,  1828.  He  was  the  son  of
a  farmer,  and,  after  working  for  several  years  as  a
gunsmith,  formed  a  partnership  with  his  brother
and  others  for  the  manufacture  of  cotton  and  wool
cards.  After  engaging  in  this  business  for  a  short
time  he  invented  a  machine  for  puncturing  the
leather  and  setting  the  wires,  an  operation  that  had
previously  been  performed  by  hand.  In  experi-
menting for  this  invention  he  met  with  the  great-
est difficulty  in  bending  the  wires  to  a  given  angle
after  they  were  finally  fastened  in  the  leather,  and
was  on  the  point  of  giving  up  the  attempt,  when
in  a  dream  he  discovered  the  method  of  effecting
it.  The  invention  was  patented  in  the  United
States  in  1797,  and  Mr.  Whittemore  went  to  Eng-
land to  secure  his  rights  there,  but  was  unsuccess-
ful. In  this  country  the  invention  was  sold  for
$150,000,  but  afterward  it  was  repurchased  by  his
brother,  Samuel,  who  then  conducted  the  business.
His  last  years  were  devoted  to  the  construction  of
an  orrery,  in  which  every  planet  was  to  describe  its
own  orbit,  but  he  did  not  complete  it.

WHITTEMORE,  Don  Jnan,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Milton,  Vt.,  6  Dec,  1830.  He  received  his  early
education  from  his  father,  who  was  a,lawyer,  and
then  spent  two  terms  at  the  Bakersfield  academy.
In  1847  he  became  an  engineer,  and  in  1853-'7
was  made  chief  assistant  engineer  of  the  La
Crosse  and  Milwaukee  railroad, after  which  he  was
chief  engineer  of  the  Southern  Minnesota  railway
company.  His  health  then  failing,  he  accepted  the
place  of  chief  assistant  engineer  of  the  Western


railway  of  Cuba,  but  returned  to  the  United  States
in  1861.  and  became  chief  assistant  engineer  of  the
La  Crosse  and  Milwaukee  railroad.  In  1865  he  was
appointed  chief  assistant  engineer  of  the  Chicago,
Milwaukee,  and  St.  Paul  railway  company,  and  in
1866  its  chief  engineer.  At  that  time  the  road
was  only  275  miles,  but  it  has  steadily  increased
until  it  is  now  5,675,  being  the  largest  railway
under  one  ownership  and  management  in  the
world.  He  has  had  charge  of  the  construction  of
2,700  miles  of  railway  line  and  bridges,  including
those  across  Mississippi  river  at  La  Crosse,  Minne-
apolis, and  Sabula,  and  across  Missouri  river  at
Kansas  City.  During  1874-'5  he  became  much  in-
terested in  the  subject  of  hydraulic  cement,  and
experimented  with  a  product  made  from  stone
found  near  Milwaukee.  From  these  investigations
has  resulted  the  establishment  of  works  that  now

Eroduce  400,000  barrels  yearly.  A  switch-stand  of
is  invention  is  now  in  use  on  more  than  one  tenth
the  mileage  of  railways  in  the  United  States.  The
degree  of  C.  E.  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  Uni-
versity of  Vermont  in  1884,  and  that  of  Ph.  D.
by  the  University  of  Wisconsin  in  1884.  He  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies  and  was  president  of
the  American  society  of  civil  engineers  in  1884.

WHITTEMORE;  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  1  Jan.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  21
March,  1861.  He  was  apprenticed,  at  the  age  of
fourteen,  to  a  morocco-dresser  in  Charlestown.  sub-
sequently to  a  brass-founder,  and  then  to  a  shoe-
maker in  Boston.  Becoming  acquainted  with  the
Rev.  Hosea  Ballou,  he  was  led  to  study  theology
under  his  direction,  and  in  April,  1821,  became

fastor  of  the  Universalist  church  at  Milford,  Mass.
n  1822  he  removed  to  the  church  in  Cambridge-
port,  the  pastorate  of  wThich  he  resigned  in  1831.
At  an  early  period  in  his  career  as  a  minister  he
was  joint  editor  of  the  "  Universalist  Magazine,"
and  in  1828  he  established  the  "  Trumpet,"  a  Uni-
versalist newspaper  in  Boston,  of  which  he  was  sole
editor  and  proprietor  for  thirty  years.  He  repre-
sented Cambridge  repeatedly  in  the  legislature,
and  was  president  of  the  Vermont  and  IVlassachu-
setts  railway,  and  of  the  Cambridge  bank  for  many
years.  Tufts  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1858.  He  published  "  Modern  History  of  Uni-
versalism,  from  the  Era  of  the  Reformation  to  the
Present  Time"  (Boston,  1830;  enlarged  ed.,  1860);
"  Notes  and  Illustrations  of  the  Parables  "  (1832) ;
"  Songs  of  Zion "  (1836) ;  "  Commentary  on  the
Revelation  of  St.  John  "  (1838) ;  "  Guide  to  Univer-
salism  "  (1839) ;  "  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Dan-
iel "  (1840) ;  "  The  Gospel  Harmonist "  (1841) ;  "  Con-
ference Hymns "  (1842) ;  "  The  Sundav-School
Choir"  (1844);  "Life  of  Rev.  Hosea  Ballou"  (4
vols..  1854-'5);  and  an  "  Autobiography  "  (1859).

WHITTHORNE,  Washington  Curran,  sena-
tor, b.  in  Lincoln  (now  Marshall)  county,  Tenn.,
19  April,  1825.  He  was  graduated  at  East  Ten-
nessee university  in  1843,  studied  law,  and  was  li-
censed to  practise.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  in  1855-'8,  and  of  the  Tennessee  house  of
representatives  in  1859-61.  Mr.  Whitthorne  was
on  the  Democratic  electoral  ticket  in  1860,  and
delegate  to  the  Baltimore  convention.  At  the  open-
ing of  the  civil  war  he  became  assistant  adjutant-gen-
eral to  Gen.  Samuel  R.Anderson's  Tennessee  brigade
in  the  Confederate  army,  and  served  throughout
the  western  Virginia  campaign.  He  was  adjutant-
general  of  the  state  of  Tennessee  in  1862-'5,  and  was
in  the  various  campaigns  of  the  Confederate  army
of  Tennessee  as  aide  on  the  staffs  of  Gen.  Samuel  R.
Anderson,  Gen.  Marcus  J.  Wright,  Gen.  John  C.
Carter,  and  Gen.  William  J.  Hardee. He  was  elect-


t^scp-^i


i  DM  fcC?


WHITTIER


WHITTIER


493


ed  representative  in  congress  from  Tennessee  in
1870,  and  served  by  l'e-election  till  1883.  He  was
appointed  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat  to  fill
the  vacancy  occasioned  by  the  resignation  of  How-
ell E.  Jackson,  took  his  seat,  26  April,  1886.  and
was  afterward  elected  to  fill  out  the  unexpired
term.  He  had  previously  been  elected  to  the  house
of  representatives  for  the  50th  congress.  In  the
house  Mr.  Whitthorne  was  for  six  years  chairman
•of  the  committee  on  naval  affairs.

WHITTIER,  John  Greenleaf,  poet,  b.  in  Ha-
verhill, Mass.,  17  Dec,  1807.  His  parents  were
members  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  to  the
principles  and  practices  of  this  sect  he  always  re-
mained faithful,  conforming  even  to  its  peculiari-
ties of  speech  and  garb  in  a  community  where  such
observance,  by  being  singular,  must  often  have
been  trying  to  a  temperament  so  shy  and  sensitive
as  his.  His  first  American  ancestor  came  to  Mas-
sachusetts in  1638,  and  the  conversion  to  Quaker-
ism took  place  in  the  second  generation  of  the
family,  after  the  settlement  of  the  Bay  Colony,  at
&  time  when  that  sect  was  sternly  persecuted.
There  may  therefore  be  something  of  heredity  in
the  unswerving  constancy  of  Whittier  to  unpopu-
lar opinions.  At  the  date  of  his  birth  Haverhill
was  still  a  farming  village,  one  of  the  prettiest
among  the  many  pretty  hamlets  which  then  gave
a  peaceful  charm  to  the  rural  scenery  of  Massachu-
setts. Born  on  a  farm,  Whittier's  first  occupations
were  those  of  a  farmer's  boy,  driving  the  kine  to
and  from  pasture,  riding  to  mill,  fetching  in  wood
for  the  undying  kitchen-fire,  and  helping  in  the
lighter  labors  of  haying  and  harvest.  He  was  thus
early  brought  into  that  intimate  communion  with
Mother  Earth  and  with  Nature  which  comes  not  by
mere  observation,  and  which  gives  such  a  peculiar
charm  of  picturesque  truth  to  so  many  of  his  poems.
How  much  he  thus  learned  and  to  how  good  profit
he  put  it  are  visible  in  many  of  his  poems,  but  es-
pecially in  his  "  Snow-Bound,"  which,  in  addition
to  its  other  merits,  has  now  also  a  historical  value
as  a  vivid  picture  of  modes  of  life  even  then  obso-
lescent and  now  almost  as  far  away  as  those  pic-
tured by  Homer.  And  not  only  will  the  scenery
of  New  England,  both  outward  and  domestic,  live
in  his  verse,  but  it  is  worth  remark  that  the  nobler
qualities  of  the  Puritans  have  nowhere  found  such
adequate  literary  expression  since  Milton  as  in  this
member  of  a  sect  which  they  did  their  utmost  to
suppress.  Almost  alone  among  American  poets,
he  has  revived  the  legends  of  his  neighborhood  in
verse,  and  his  "  Floyd  Ireson  "  is  among  the  best
of  modern  ballads,  surpassed  by  none  save  Scott,
if  even  by  him.  His  schooling  in  other  respects
must  have  been  scanty  enough,  since  his  only  op-
portunity during  boyhood  would  be  the  nearest
district  school  (taught  commonly  by  a  college  stu-
dent younger  than  some  of  his  rustic  pupils),  where
he  got  such  training  in  the  simpler  rudiments  of
knowledge  as  was  possible  under  the  conditions
then  existing.  And  this  training,  as  usually  in  the
country,  was  limited  to  the  winter  months,  when
farm-work  was  necessarily  suspended.  He  has
recorded  his  indebtedness  during  boyhood  to  Dr.
Elias  Weld,  of  Haverhill,  who  gave  him  the  free-
dom of  his  library.

A  farm-hand  taught  him  shoemaking,  the  com-
mon occupation  during  winter  in  the  fishing  and
farming  villages  along  the  coast,  and  by  this
means  he  earned  enough  to  warrant  his  attend-
ing Haverhill  academy  during  six  months  of
1827.  He  was  now  sufficiently  learned,  according
to  the  simpler  notions  of  those  days,  to  be  himself
a  teacher,  and  taught  in  the  district  school  of  West


Amesbury  during  the  following  winter.  This  sup-
plied the  means  for  another  six  months  at  the
academy.  In  Whittier's  case,  as  in  that  of  so
many  other  New  Englanders,  nothing  is  more
characteristic  or  more  touching  than  the  persist-
ent resolve  to  get  the  best  education  within  their
reach  at  whatever  sacrifice.

The  literary  impulse  in  him  must  have  been
strong,  for  while  yet  in  his  nineteenth  year  he  con-
tributed anonymous  verse  to  the  poet's  corner
of  the  "Free  Press,"  a  journal  edited  by  W.  L.
Garrison  in  Newburyport,  and  enjoyed  the  furtive
bliss  of  print.  Garrison  saw  signs  of  promise  in
these  immature  experiments,  sought  out  the  au-
thor, and  gave  him  the  precious  encouragement  of
praise  and  sympathy.  This  led  to  a  lasting  friend-
ship, and,  with  the  traditions  of  his  sect,  may  have
had  some  influence  in  preparing  Whittier  to  enlist
in  the  anti-slavery  crusade  which  began  with  the
establishment  of  the  "  Liberator  "  in  1831,  and  af-
terward caught  so  much  of  its  inspiration  from  his
fervid  lyrics.  The  ambition  to  become  a  poet  was
awakened  in  him  appropriately  enough  by  a  copy
of  Robert  Burns's  poems,  which  fell  into  his  hands
in  his  fourteenth  year.

His  father  dying,  he  carried  on  the  farm  for  the
next  five  years,  and  in  1835  was  sent  to  the  general
court  from  Haverhill.  During  all  these  years  he
had  been  an  industrious  writer,  seeking  an  outlet
in  all  directions  and  contributing  poems  to  John
Neal's  "  Yankee  "  and  to  the  "  New  England  Maga-
zine," where  the  "Autocrat"  began  his  admirable
discourses.  In  1829  he  undertook  the  editorship
of  the  "American  Manufacturer "  in  Boston,  and
in  1830  succeeded  George  D.  Prentice  as  editor  of
the  "  Haverhill  Gazette "  during  the  first  six
months  of  the  year,  and  then  of  the'  "  New  Eng-
land Weekly  Review"  in  Hartford,  Conn.  This
office  he  resigned  in  1832  on  account  of  failing
health  and  returned  home.  In  1836  he  became
secretary  of  the  American  anti- slavery  society,
and  afterward  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  for
a  year  (1838-'9)  he  edited  the  "  Pennsylvania  Free-
man." This  he  did  with  such  sincerity  that  its  print-
ing-office was  sacked  and  burned  by  a  mob.  At  that
time  it  required  the  courage  of  passionate  conviction
to  maintain  principles  the  noisier  profession  of
which  was  to  become  profitable  a  few  years  later.
Delicate  as  his  organization  was,  Whittier  faced
many  a  brutal  mob  with  unflinching  composure.
He  was  never  a  mere  fanatic,  but  always  quick  to
recognize  and  celebrate  high  qualities  even  in  an
adversary,  as  many  of  his  poems  show.  He  re-
fused to  follow  Garrison  in  the  renunciation  of
political  action  as  one  means  of  reform.  In  1840
he  took  up  his  abode  in  Amesbury,  a  quiet  village
near  his  birthplace,  and  there  (with  the  exception
of  six  months  spent  at  Lowell  as  editor  of  the
"  Middlesex  Standard"),  in  the  simple  dignity  of  a
frugal  independence,  the  fruit  of  his  own  literary
labors,  he  has  lived  ever  since,  and  happily  still  lives,
known  and  loved  wherever  our  tongue  is  spoken.
From  1847  to  1859  he  contributed  editorially  to
the  "  National  Era,"  an  anti-slavery  newspaper
published  at  Washington,  in  which  "  Uncle  Tom's
Cabin"  was  first  printed.

In  his  seclusion  Whittier  was  never  idle,  nor  did
he  neglect  his  duties  as  a  citizen  while  confirming
his  quality  as  a  poet.  Whenever  occasion  offered,
some  burning  lyric  of  his  flew  across  the  country,
like  the  fiery  cross,  to  warn  and  rally.  Never
mingling  in  active  politics  (unless  filling  the  office
of  presidential  elector  may  be  called  so),  he  prob-
ably did  more  than  anybody  in  preparing  the  ma-
terial out  of  which  the Republican  party  was


494


WHITTIER


WHITTINGHAM


made.  When  the  civil  war  was  impending  he
would  have  evaded  it  if  possible  by  any  concession
short  of  surrender,  as  his  "  Word  for  the  Hour "
(January,  1861)  shows.  While  the  war  continued
he  wrote  little  with  direct  reference  to  it,  and
never  anything  that  showed  any  bitterness  toward
the  authors  of  it.  After  it  was  over  he  would
have  made  the  terms  of  settlement  liberal  and  con-
ciliatory. He  was  too  wise  and  too  humane  to
stir  the  still  living  embers  of  passion  and  resent-
ment ior  any  political  end  however  dear  to  him.

Of  all  American  poets,  with  the  single  exception
of  Longfellow,  Whittier  has  been  the  most  popular,

and  in  his  case
more  than  in
that  of  any  other
the  popularity
has  been  warmed
through  with  af-
fection. This  has
been  due  in  part
to  the  nobly  sim-
ple character  of
the  man,  trans-
parent through
his  verse,  in  part
to  the  fact  that
his  poetry,  concerning  itself  chiefly  with  the  obvi-
ous aspects  of  life  and  speculation,  has  kept  close
to  the  highest  levels  of  the  average  thought  and
sentiment.  His  themes  have  been  mainly  chosen
from  his  own  time  and  country — from  his  own
neighborhood  even — he  deals  with  simple  motives
and  with  experiences  common  to  all,  and  accord-
ingly his  scenery  (whether  of  the  outward  or  the
inward  eye)  is  domestically  welcome  to  all  his
countrymen.  He  is  never  complex  in  thought  or
obscure  in  expression,  and  if  sometimes  his  diction
might  gain  in  quality  by  a  more  deliberate  choice,
yet  the  pellucid  simplicity  of  his  phrase  and  the
instant  aptness  of  his  epithet  as  often  secure  a
more  winning  felicity  through  his  frankness  of
confidence  in  the  vernacular.  His  provincialisms
of  word  or  accent  have  an  endearing  property  to
the  native  ear,  though  even  that  will  consent  to
a  few  of  his  more  licentious  rhymes.  One  feels
that  it  is  a  neighbor  who  is  speaking.  Nor  should
the  genial  piety  of  his  habitual  thought  and  the
faith  that  seeks  no  securer  foothold  than  the  Rock
of  Ages,  on  which  the  fathers  stood  so  firmly,  be
overlooked  among  the  qualities  that  give  him  a

Erivilege  of  familiar  entrance  to  a  multitude  of
earts  and  minds  which  would  be  barred  against
many  higher,  though  not  more  genuine,  forms  of
poetry.  His  religion  has  the  sincerity  of  Cowper's
without  those  insane  terrors  that  made  its  very
sincerity  a  torture.  There  are  many  points  of
spiritual  likeness  between  the  English  and  the
American  poet,  especially  in  their  unmetaphysi-
cized  love  of  outward  natures,  their  austerity  tem-
pered with  playful  humor,  and  in  that  humanity
of  tone  which  establishes  a  tie  of  affectionate  com-
panionship between  them  and  their  readers.  Whit-
tier has  done  as  much  for  the  scenery  of  New  Eng-
land as  Scott  for  that  of  Scotland.  Many  of  his
poems  (such,  for  example,  as  "Telling  the  Bees"),
in  which  description  and  sentiment  mutually  in-
spire each  other,  are  as  fine  as  any  in  the  language.
Whittier,  as  many  of  his  poems  show,  and  as,
indeed,  would  be  inevitable,  has  had  his  moments
of  doubt  and  distrust,  but  never  of  despair.  He
has  encountered  everywhere  the  moral  of  his  in-
scription on  a  sun-dial,  convinced  that  "there's
light  above  me  by  the  shade  below."  He,  like
others,  has  found  it  hard  to  reconcile  the  creed


held  by  inheritance  with  the  subtle  logic  of  more
modern  modes  of  thought.  As  he  himself  has  said :
"  He  reconciled  as  best  he  could
Old  faith  and  fancies  new."
But  his  days  have  been  "  bound  each  to  each  with
natural  piety  " ;  he  has  clung  fast  to  what  has  been
the  wholesome  and  instructive  kernel  of  all  creeds ;
he  has  found  consolation  in  the  ever-recurring
miracles,  whether  of  soul  or  sense,  that  daily  con-
front us,  and  in  the  expression  of  his  own  delight
and  wonder  and  gratitude  for  them  has  conveyed
that  solace  to  the  minds  and  hearts  of  all  his
readers.  One  quality  above  all  others  in  Whittier
—  his  innate  and  unstudied  Americanism  —  has
rendered  him  alike  acceptable  to  his  countrymen
and  to  his  kindred  beyond  the  sea.  His  first  vol-
ume was  "  Legends  of  New  England,"  in  prose  and
verse  (Hartford,  1831),  which  has  been  followed  by
"  Moll  Pitcher  "  (1832) ;  "  Mogg  Megone  "  (Boston,
1836) ;  "  Ballads  "  (1838) ;  "  Lays  of  My  Home,  and
other  Poems "  (1843) ;  "  Miscellaneous  Poems "
(1844) ;  the  first  English  edition  of  his  poetry,  en-
titled "  Ballads,  and  other  Poems,"  with  an  intro-
duction by  Elizur  Wright  (London,  1844);  "The
Stranger  in  Lowell "  (1845);  "  Supernaturalism  in
New  England  "  (New  York'  and  London,  1847) ;
"  Leaves  from  Margaret  Smith's  Journal "  (Boston,
1849);  "Voices  of  Freedom  "  (Philadelphia,  1849) ;
a  larger  English  collection  of  his  "  Poetical  Works"
(London,  1850) ;  "  Old  Portraits  and  Modern
Sketches"  (Boston,  1850);  "Songs  of  Labor,  and
other  Poems,"  and  "  The  Chapel  of  the  Hermits,
and  other  Poems  "  (1853) ;  "  A  Sabbath  Scene  :  a-
Sketch  of  Slavery  in  Verse  "  (1853) ;  "  Literarv  Rec-
reations and  Miscellanies"  (1854);  "The  Pano-
rama, and  other  Poems  "  (1856) ;  "  Complete  Poeti-
cal Works "  (2  vols.,  1857) ;  "  Home  Ballads  and
Poems  "  (1860) ;  "  Snow-Bound  "  (1862) ;  a  new  edi-
tion of  his  "  Complete  Poetical  Works  "  (1863) ;  "  In
War  Time,  and  other  Poems  "  (1863) ;  "  National
Lyrics  "  (1865) ;  a  collection  of  his  "  Prose  Works  "
(2  vols.,  1866) ;  "  The  Tent  on  the  Beach  "  (1867)  J
"  Among  the  Hills  "  (1868) ;  an  illustrated  edition
of  his  "Complete  Poetical  Works"  (1868);  one
corresponding  in  typography  with  the  "  Prose
Works"  (1869);  a  volume  of  his  "Ballads  of  New
England  "  contains  sixty  illustrations  by  various
artists (1869) ;  "Miriam,  and  other  Poems"  (1870);
"The  Pennsylvania  Pilgrim,  and  other  Poems"
(1872) ;  "  Hazel  Blossoms  ?'  (1874) ;  "  Mabel  Martin  "
(1875) ;  a  new  collected  edition  of  his  "  Poetical
Works"  comprising  poems  that  he  had  written
till  the  date  of  publication  (1875);  "Centennial
Hymn  "  (1876) ;  "  The  Vision  of  Echard,  and  other
Poems "  (1878) ;  "  The  King's  Missive,  and  other
Poems  "  (1881) ;  "  Bav  of  Seven  Islands,  and  other
Poems"  (1883);  "Poems  of  Nature"  (1885);  and
"  St.  Gregory's  Guest,  and  Recent  Poems "  (1886).
A  final  edition  of  his  poetical  and  prose  works  has
been  supervised  by  himself,  and  includes  his  sister's
poems  (7  vols.,  1888-9).  See  a  " Biography,"  by
Francis  H.  Underwood  (Boston.  1875;  new  ed.,
1883).  and  "John  G.  Whittier:  his  Life.  Genius,
and  Writings,"  by  W.  Sloane  Kennedy  (1882).— His
sister,  Elizabeth  Hnssey,  b.  near  Haverhill,  Mass.,
7  Dec,  1815 ;  d.  in  Amesbury,  3  Sept.,  1864,  although
not  a  literary  aspirant,  was  the  author  of  poems
marked  by  tenderness,  grace,  and  rhythmic  felicity.
Several  of  them  were  included  by  her  brother  in
his  volume  entitled  "  Hazel  Blossoms."  Like  him,
she  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  an
ardent  advocate  of  libertv.  The  engraving  repre-
sents Whittier's  home,  Oak  Knoll,  in  Danvers,  Mass.
WHITTINGHAM,  William  Rollinson,  P.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  New  York  city,  2  Dec,  1805 ;  d.  in


WHITTINGHAM


WHITTLESEY


495


Orange,  N.  J.,  17  Oct.,  1879.  He  was  the  son  of
English  parents.  Plis  father,  while  actively  en-
gaged in  business,  found  time  for  scholarly  pur-
suits, while  his  mother,  with-  a  view  to  her  son's
education,  made  herself  acquainted  with  the
learned  languages,  and  became  so  proficient  in
them  that  she  gave  lessons  in  Hebrew  to  divinity
students.  Young  Whittingham  had  no  instruc-
tion other  than  that  he  received  at  home  until  he
was  sent  to  the  General  theological  seminary,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1825.  After  being  or-
dered deacon  in  1827  he  was  assigned  to  mission-
ary work  in  the  neighborhood  of  Orange,  N.  J.
He  was  ordained  priest,  17  Dec.,  1829,  when  he  be-
came rector  of  St.  Mark's  in  the  latter  place.  In
1831  he  accepted  the  rectorship  of  St.  Luke's,  New
York  city,  and  remained  there  until  1835,  when,
after  a  voyage  to  Europe  for  his  health,  he  was
chosen  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  in  the
General  theological  seminary.  This  chair  he  occu-
pied until  1840.  In  that  year,  after  a  spirited  con-
test among  the  friends  of  several  candidates,  he
was  elected  bishop  of  Maryland,  and  consecrated
on  17  Sept.  in  St.  Paul's,  Baltimore.  From  his  ac-
cession the  diocese  advanced  rapidly  in  all  that
concerns  church  improvement,  and  his  personal
influence  with  both  clergy  and  laity  was  as  extra-
ordinary as  it  was  beneficent.  Among  several
charitable  and  educational  institutions  that  were
founded  through  his  efforts  were  St.  James's  col-
lege, Hagerstown,  Md. ;  the  Church  home  and  in-
firmary, Baltimore;  an  order  of  deaconesses ;  and
the  Sisterhood  of  St.  John  in  Washington.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  Dr.  Whittingham's
earnest  advocacy  of  the  Union  cause  separated  him
temporarily  from  the  sympathies  of  many  of  his
people,  but  his  attitude  then  enabled  him  to  labor
more  successfully  for  the  unity  of  the  church  when
the  struggle  had  ended.  In  1869  the  diocese  of
Easton  was  set  off  from  that  of  Maryland,  and  in
1870  Rev.  William  Pinkney,  D.  D.,  was  appointed
to  relieve  Bishop  Whittingham  of  a  part  of  his
labors.  In  1872  he  represented  the  American  church
at the Lambeth conference,  and subsequently

he  attended  the
meeting  of  Old
Catholics  at
Bonn  in  a  sim-
ilar capacity.
Bishop  Whit-
tingham was
a  pronounced
high  -  church-
man, although
he  is  under-
stood to  have
somewhat  mod-
ified his  opin-
ions later  in
life.  His  pecu-
liar views  en-
gaged him  on
several  occa-
sions in  contro-
versies with  his
clergyon  points
of  church  gov-
ernment. Among  these  were  his  presentation  in
1876  for  not  bringing  to  trial  the  rector  of  Mount
Calvary  for  reading  prayers  for  the  dead,  and  the
earlier  contest  with  Rev.  Dr.  Joseph  Trapnell,  of  St.
Andrew's,  concerning  the  prior  right  of  the  bishop
to  celebrate  communion  at  confirmations.  During
the  war  he  had  occasion  to  rebuke  his  clergy  severe-
ly for  omitting  from  the  service  the  prayer  for  the


C/JU°\  Lis  AsL/ttA^i^ZLosvris.


president.  For  many  years  before  his  death  Dr.
Whittingham  was  an  invalid.  His  last  official  act
was  performed  on  7  Nov.,  1878.  At  the  time  of  his
consecration  he  was  the  youngest  of  the  American
bishops ;  at  his  death  he  was  the  oldest  but  one.
having  been  thirty-nine  years  in  the  episcopal
office.  He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Co-
lumbia in  1827.  Besides  editing  the  "  Family  Visi-
tor "  and  "  Children's  Magazine,"  monthly  pviblica-
tions,  and  "  The  Churchman,"  issued  weekly,  he  was
the  editor  of  "The  Parish  Library  of  Standard
Works,"  with  an  introduction  and  notes  (13  vols.,
1828  et  seq.) ;  Jahn's  "  Introduction  to  the  Old  Tes-
tament," with  Dr.  Samuel  H.  Turner  (1827) ;  Will-
iam Palmer's  "  Treatise  on  the  Church  of  Christ "
(2  vols.,  1841);  the  "  Commonitoriurn  "  of  Vincent
of  Lerius,  being  a  new  translation  with  notes,  etc.
(1847) ;  and  "  Ratramm  on  the  Lord's  Supper,"  with
a  revised  translation  (1848).  He  also  contributed,
with  three  other  clergymen,  to  "  Essays  and  Disser-
tations in  Biblical  Literature  "  (New  York.  1829).

WHITTLE,  Francis  McNeece,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Mecklenburg  county,  Va.,  7  July,  1823.  He
was  graduated  at  the  Virginia  theological  semi-
nary, Alexandria,  in  1847,  ordered  deacon,  16  July,
1847,  and  ordained  priest,  8  Oct.,  1848.  He  was
rector  of  Kanawha  parish,  Kanawha  co.,  Va.,  in
1847-'9,  of  St.  James,  Northam  parish,  Gooch-
land co.  in  1849-'52,  of  Grace  church,  Berryville,
in  1852-'7,  and  of  St.  Paul's,  Louisville,  Ky..  in
1857-'68.  He  was  elected  assistant  bishop  of  Vir-
ginia, 17  May,  1867,  and  consecrated  in  St.  Paul's
church,  Alexandria,  Va.,  30  April,  1868.  Upon  the
death  of  Bishop  Johns,  4  April,  1876,  he  became
bishop  of  Virginia.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  the  Theological  seminary  of  Ohio  in  1867,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  William  and  Mary  col-
lege in  1873.  In  1877  the  diocese  of  Virginia  was
divided,  West  Virginia  being  set  off  as  a  separate
diocese. Bishop  Whittle  chose  the  old  diocese.

WHITTLESEY,  Abigail  Goodrich,  educator,
b.  in  Ridgefield,  Conn.,  29  Nov.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Col-
chester, Conn.,  16  July,  1858.  She  was  a  sister  of
Charles  A.  and  Samuel  G.  Goodrich,  was  educated
at  Berlin,  Conn.,  and  married  in  1808  the  Rev.
Samuel  Whittlesey,  who  was  pastor  at  New  Pres-
ton, Conn.,  for  several  years,  then  was  steward  for
a  short  time  of  the  American  asylum  for  the  deaf
and  dumb  at  Hartford,  and  afterward  was  associ-
ated with  her  in  conducting  large  female  semina-
ries in  Utica  and  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.  She  began
in  1832,  while  in  Utica,  the  publication  of  the
"  Mother's  Magazine,"  which  she  edited  till  about
1850,  and  subsequently  revived  under  the  title  of
"  The  Magazine  for  Mothers  and  Daughters."

WHITTLESEY,  Elisha,  lawyer,  b.  in  Washing-
ton, Conn.,  19  Oct.,  1783;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
7  Jan.,  1863.  He  was  brought  up  on  a  farm,  re-
ceived an  academical  education,  studied  law,  and
on  his  admission  to  the  bar  began  practice  in  Can-
field,  Ohio,  in  1806.  He  served  as  an  aide-de-camp
during  the  war  of  1812-15,  was  for  sixteen  years
prosecuting  attorney  of  his  district,  a  member  of
the  Ohio  state  house  of  representatives  in  1820-'l,
and  served  in  congress  from  Ohio  by  successive
elections  from  1  Dec,  1823,  till  9  July,*  1838,  when
he  resigned.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Whig  party,  was  appointed  by  President  Harri-
son in  1841  auditor  of  the  post-office  department,
and  by  President  Taylor  in  1849  first  comptroller
of  the  treasury,  from  which  post  he  was  removed
by  President  Buchanan  in  1857,  but  he  was  reap-
pointed by  President  Lincoln  in  1861,  and  held
office  till  his  death.  In  1845  he  was  appointed
general agent and director  of the Washington


496


WHITTLESEY


WHITTREDGE


national  monument  association,  and  contributed
greatly  to  the  success  of  that  enterprise. — His  neph-
ew, Charles,  geologist,  b.  in  Southington,  Conn.,
4  Oct.,  1808;  d.  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  18  Oct.,  1886,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1831,  and  assigned  to  the  5th  infantry.  In  1832
he  was  stationed  at  Fort  Howard,  Wis.,  and,  after

serving  in  the
Black  Hawk  war,
he  resigned  on  30
Sept.  of  the  same
year.  After  study-
ing law  he  fol-
lowed that  pro-
fession in  Cleve-
land, and  in  1836-
'7  he  was  editori-
ally connected
with  the  Cleve-
land "  Herald."
In  1837  he  was
appointed  assist-
ant geologist  of
Ohio,  under  Will-
iam W.  Mather,
and  given  charge

C^isrt*?  ty&JZtf^fe  Seal  anTSn*
^  matical  parts  of
that  survey,  which  disclosed  the  rich  coal  and
iron  deposits  of  eastern  Ohio  that  are  the  founda-
tion of  its  manufacturing  industries.  At  this  time
he  carefully  examined  and  measured  several  of
the  works  of  the  mound-builders,  and  his  plans
and  notes  of  twenty  of  these  remains  were  em-
bodied in  Davis  and  Squier's  "  American  Monu-
ments of  the  Mississippi  Valley  "  (Washington,
1848).  From  1847  till  1851  he  was  engaged  by  the
U.  S.  government  in  making  a  mineralogical  and
geological  survey  of  the  region  about  Lake  Supe-
rior and  the  upper  Mississippi.  Subsequently  he
was  professionally  engaged  as  a  mining  engineer
in  Michigan,  Wisconsin,  and  Minnesota,  and  in
1858  became  associated  in  the  geological  work  of
the  survey  of  Wisconsin.  In  February,  1861,  he
was  enrolled  in  a  company  that  tendered  its  ser-
vices to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  to  escort  the  president-
elect, Abraham  Lincoln,  to  Washington.  He  was
made  assistant  quartermaster-general  on  the  staff
of  the  governor  of  Ohio  on  17  April,  1861,  and  dur-
ing the  western  Virginia  campaign  acted  as  chief
engineer  of  the  Ohio  troops.  At  the  expiration  of
his  three-months'  service  he  was  appointed,  on  15
Aug.,  1861,  colonel  of  the  20th  Ohio  infantry,  and
detailed  as  chief  engineer  of  the  Department  of
Ohio,  with  charge  of  planning  and  constructing  the
defences  of  Cincinnati.  He  was  present  at  Fort
Donelson,  where  he  led  his  regiment,  and  after  the
surrender  was  sent  to  the  north  in  charge  of  over  10-
000  prisoners.  At  the  battle  of  Shiloh  he  command-
ed the  3d  brigade  of  Gen.  Lewis  Wallace's  division,
but  failing  health  compelled  his  retirement  from
active  service,  and  he  resigned  on  19  April,  1862.
He  then  resumed  the  geological  exploration  in  the
Lake  Superior  and  upper  Mississippi  basin,  and
continued  his  literary  labors.  In  1867  he  was  ac-
tive in  the  founding  of  the  Western  Reserve  and
northern  Ohio  historical  society,  of  which  he  was
president  until  his  death.  His  bibliography  included
about  200  titles,  and,  in  addition  to  his  reports  for
the  geological  surveys,  he  published  in  the  "  Smith-
sonian Contributions"  "Descriptions  of  Ancient
Works  in  Ohio  "  (Washington,  1851) ;  "  On  Fluctua-
tions of  Level  in  the  North  American  Lakes  "  (1860) ;
"  Ancient  Mining  on  the  Shores  of  Lake  Superior  "


(1863) ;  and  "  On  the  Fresh- Water  Glacial  Drift  in
the  Northwestern  States  "  (1866).  He  is  also  the
author  of  "  Life  of  John  Fitch,"  in  Sparks's  "  Ameri-
can Biography "  (Boston,  1845);  and  "Early  His-
tory of  Cleveland  and  Vicinity"  (Cleveland,  1867).

WHITTLESEY,  Frederick,  jurist,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, Conn.,  12  June,  1799 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
19  Sept.,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1818,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  in
1821.  He  settled  in  Rochester  in  1822,  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  "  Morgan  committee,"  and  conducted  an
anti-Masonic  political  newspaper  in  the  canvass
of  1828.  He  was  treasurer  of  Monroe  county  in
1829-'30,  representative  in  congress  from  New  York
in  1831-5,  vice-chancellor  of  the  8th  judicial  dis-
trict of  the  state  in  1839-47,  and  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  of  New  York  in  1847-'8.  Judge  Whit-
tlesey was  professor  of  law  at  Genesee  college  in
1850-'l.  He  published  an  address  that  he  deliv-
ered at  Rochester.  4  July,  1842,  and  pamphlets.

WHITTLESEY,  Joseph  H.,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  in  1821 ;  d.  in  Seattle,  W.  T.,  2  Aug..  1886.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1844,  and  assigned  to  the  2d  U.  S.  dragoons,
becoming  1st  lieutenant,  18  Oct.,  1847.  He  served
in  the  military  occupation  of  Texas  and  in  the  war
with  Mexico,  and  was  brevetted  1st  lieutenant  for
gallantry  at  Buena  Vista  in  1847.  Until  the  open-
ing of  the  civil  war  he  was  on  duty  in  New  Mexico
and  Oregon.  As  major  of  the  5th"  U.  S.  cavalry  he
served  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  till  May,
1862.  During  the  remainder  of  the  war  Maj.
Whittlesey  was  employed  in  organizing  volunteer
cavalry.  He  was  retired  from  active  service  on
account  of  disability  resulting  from  exposure  in
the  line  of  duty.  He  was  employed  on  light  duty
until  February,  1867,  when  he  was  ordered  to  in-
spect the  educational  institutions  of  the  United
States,  for  the  purpose  of  devising  a  system  of
military  instruction  for  colleges  and  universities
with  relation  to  a  scheme  for  future  National  de-
fence. He  was  professor  of  military  science  at
Cornell  in  1868-"I0,  and  treasurer  of  the  Soldiers'
home,  Washington,  D.  C,  till  1881.

WHITTLESEY,  Sarah  Johnson  Cogswell,
author,  b.  in  Williamston.  Martin  co.,  N.  C,  about
1825.  She  was  graduated  at  La  Vallie  seminary,
in  Halifax  county,  N.  C,  in  1841.  She  removed  to
Virginia  in  1848  and  resides  in  Alexandria.  Miss
Whittlesey  has  written  for  the  periodical  press
prose  and  verse,  and  among  other  works  has  pub-
lished "  Heart-Drops  from  Memory's  Urn  "  ( New-
York,  1852) ;  "  The  Stranger's  Stratagem,  or  the
Double  Deceit,  and  other  Stories  "  (1860) ;  "  Her-
bert Hamilton,  or  the  Bas  Bleu  "  (1867) ;  "  Bertha,
the  Beauty:  a  Story  of  the  Southern  Revolution  "
(Philadelphia,  1871);  and,  with  her  brother,  "Spring
Buds  and  Summer  Blossoms  "  (1888).

WHITTREDGE,  Worthington,  artist,  b.  in
Springfield,  Ohio,  22  May,  1820.  When  he  was  about
twenty  years  of  age  he  went  to  Cincinnati,  when
he  soon  began  portrait-painting.  In  1849  he  vis-
ited Europe,  going  first  to  London  and  Paris,  and
then  to  Dlisseldorf,  where  he  was  for  three  years  a
pupil  of  Andreas  Achenbach.  He  studied  also  in
Belgium  and  Holland,  and  in  1855  went  to  Rome,
remaining  there  until  1859.  In  the  latter  year  he
returned  to  the  United  States  and  settled  in  New
York,  where  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  Na-
tional academy  in  1860,  and  an  academician  the
following  year.  In  1874  he  was  president  of  the
academy.  He  made  a  sketching  tour  to  the  west
in  1865,  accompanying  Gen.  John  Pope  on  his  tour
of  inspection.  Mr.  Whittredge  is  an  alert  student
of  nature,  whose  well-finished  landscapes,  though


WHYTE


WICKES


497


doubtless  improved  by  his  training  abroad,  are  yet
distinctively  individual,  with  no  mannerism  result-
ing from  foreign  influence.  His  works,  mostly
pictures  of  American  scenery,  include  "  The  Schut-
zenfest  "  (1857) ;  "  The  Roman  Campagna  "  and
"The  Ruins  of  Tusculum  "  (1859) ;  "  The  Old  Hunt-
ing Grounds  "  (1864) ;  "  Berkeley's  Seat,  Newport "
(1866) ;  "  The  Rocky  Mountains  from  the  River
Platte"  (1868);  "Forest  Brook"  (1873);  "Trout
Brook  "  (1875) ;  "  Twilight  on  the  Hudson  "  and
"  Sunny  Day  in  the  Woods  "  (1883) ;  "  The  Plains  of
Colorado  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Afternoon  in  the  Woods  "
and  "  A  Brook  among  the  Hills  "  (1887).

WHYTE,  William  Pinkney,  senator,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  9  Aug.,  1824.  His  grandfather,
Dr.  John  Campbell  White,  was  a  native  of  Ire-
land, who  settled  in  Baltimore  about  1800,  and  his
mother  was  Isabella,  daughter  of  William  Pink-
ney.  The  son  was  educated  by  a  private  tutor  and
at  Baltimore  college.  After  serving  about  two
years  in  the  banking-house  of  Peabody,  Riggs  and
Co.,  of  which  George  Peabody  had  been  the  head,
he  studied  law  in  Baltimore,  and  completed  his
course  at  Harvard,  and  in  1846  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Maryland.  He  served  in  the  legis-
lature in  the  session  of  1847,  and  in  1848  was  ap-
pointed by  John  Y.  Mason,  secretary  of  the  navy,
as  judge-advocate  of  a  court-martial,  of  which  Cap-
tains Farragut,  Buchanan,  Barron,  and  others  were
members,  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy,  Annapolis.
He  was  elected  comptroller  of  the  treasury  of  Mary-
land in  1853,  and  in  1868  he  was  a  delegate  to  the
Democratic  national  convention  at  New  York.
When  Reverdy  Johnson  became  U.  S.  minister  to
Great  Britain  in  1868,  Mr.  Whyte  was  appointed  to
the  U.  S.  senate  by  the  governor  of  Maryland,  to  fill
the  vacancy  that  was  thus  created.  He  served  until
3  March,  1869. In  1871  he  was  elected  governor  of

Maryland,  but  in
1874  he  resigned
that  office  to  en-
able the  legis-
lature to  choose
his  successor,  on
his  election  to
the  U.  S.  senate.
He  took  his  seat
in  the  senate,  4
March,  1875,  and
served  until  3
March,  1881.  In
1874  he  received
the  degree  of  LL.
D.  from  the  Uni-
versity of  Mary-
land. During
that  year  he  was
counsel  for  the
state,  being  ap-
pointed by  the
governor,  in  the  trial  of  the  boundary  dispute  be-
tween Maryland  and  Virginia,  which  was  submitted
to  the  arbitration  of  Judge  Jeremiah  S.  Black,
ex-Gov.  Charles  J.  Jenkins,  of  Georgia,  and  Sena-
tor James  B.  Beck,  of  Kentucky.  In  the  autumn
of  1881  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Baltimore  without
opposition,  and  he  served  till  November,  1883.  In
1887  he  was  chosen  attorney-general  of  Maryland,
which  office  he  now  holds.

WIBERG,  Andreas,  Swedish  clergyman,  b.  in
Tuna,  Helsingland,  Sweden,  17  July,  1816  ;  d.  early
in  November,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Upsala  in  1843,  ordained  the  same
year,  and  in  1843-'51  was  a  minister  of  the  Lu-
theran state  church  of  Sweden.  In  1852  he  united
vol.  vi. — 32


^d^-^^yO^^


with  the  Baptist  denomination,  and  immediately
afterward  he  came  to  this  country.  In  1852-'3  he
was  colporteur  evangelist  in  the  service  of  the
American  Baptist  publication  society  among  sail-
ors in  New  York  and  Swedish  emigrants  in  the  west,
and  in  1855  he  was  sent  to  Sweden  by  the  same
society  as  superintendent  of  colportage,  and  has
labored  there  ever  since.  He  has  published,  in
Swedish,  "Who  is  to  be  Baptized?"  (Upsala,  1852);
"  Christian  Baptism  as  set  Forth  in  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures," in  English  and  Swedish  (Philadelphia,  1854);
"  Translation  of  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  Mat-
thew, with  Commentary  "  (Stockholm,  1858) ;  "  The
Doctrine  of  the  Holy  Scripture  on  Sanctification  "
(1868);  "The  Doctrine  of  Justification"  (1869);
"  Come  to  Jesus  "  (1869) ;  "  Unity  of  Christians  "
(1878) ;  "  The  Victorious  Reign  of  Christ "  (Chris-
tiana, 1883) ;  and  "  The  Church  "  (1884).  He  edited
"  The  Evangelist "  from  1856  till  1873.

WICKERSHAM,  James  Pyle,  educator,  b.  in
Chester  county,  Pa.,  5  March,  1825.  He  is  of  the
fifth  generation  in  direct  descent  from  Thomas
Wickersham,  who  in  1701  settled  on  a  1,000-acre
tract  of  land  in  Chester  county  that  had  been
deeded  by  William  Penn  in  1682  to  his  father-in-
law,  Anthony  Killingbeck.  The  Wickersham  fami-
ly came  from  the  parish  of  Bolney,  county  of  Sus-
sex, England.  James  received  a  good  education
in  the  public  schools  and  at  Union ville  academy,
near  his  birthplace.  When  he  was  sixteen  years
old  he  was  teacher  in  a  public  school,  and  in  1845
he  became  principal  of  the  Marietta  (Pa.)  academy.
He  was  the  first  county  superintendent  of  Lan-
caster county  in  1854,  and  in  1855  he  opened  the
normal  school  at  Millersville,  Pa.,  which  in  1859
became  the  first  state  normal  school  in  Pennsyl-
vania. In  1866  he  was  appointed  state  superintend-
ent of  public  instruction,  and  held  that  post  for
nearly  fifteen  years.  He  assisted  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  Lancaster  county  educational  associa-
tion, and  became  its  second  president  in  1863.  He
helped  to  organize  the  Pennsylvania  state  teachers'
association,  was  its  fourth  president  in  1855,  as-
sisted at  the  organization  of  the  National  educa-
tional association,  and  was  its  seventh  president
in  1865.  He  was  twice  elected  president  of  the
National  department  of  school  superintendents.
In  1863  he  raised  a  regiment  of  soldiers  for  three,
months'  service,  and  commanded  it  during  the
Gettysburg  campaign.  Lafayette  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1871.  In  1882  he  was  appointed
U.  S.  minister  to  Denmark.  He  has  written  on  edu-
cational subjects  for  magazines  and  newspapers.
For  ten  years  (1871-81)  he  was  editor  of  the
"  Pennsylvania  School  Journal."  His  "  School
Economy  "  (Philadelphia.  1864)  and  "  Methods  of
Instruction  "  (1865)  have  been  translated  into  the
Spanish,  French,  and  Japanese  languages.  His
most  elaborate  work  is  the  "  History  of  Education
in  Pennsylvania  "  (1886).

WICK'ES,  Lambert,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
England  about  1735;  d.  at  sea  on  the  banks  of
Newfoundland  in  1778.  He  was  among  the  first
naval  officers  that  were  appointed  in  the  war  of  inde-
pendence, his  first  commission  being  dated  22  Dec,
1775.  In  the  summer  of  1776  he  commanded  the
brig  "  Reprisal,"  and  in  a  cruise  to  the  West  Indies
he  captured  the  British  ships  "  Friendship  "  and
"  Shark  "  and  the  schooner  "  Peter."  On  his  re-
turn in  July  he  took  Benjamin  Franklin  to  France
in  the  "  Reprisal,"  which  was  the  first  American
war-ship  that  ever  visited  Europe.  On  this  cruise
he  captured  two  British  brigs  in  November,  1776.
After  his  arrival  in  France  with  his  prizes,  which
were  sold,  he  sailed  on  a  cruise  in  the  Bay  of  Bis-


498


WICKES


WICKLIFFE


cay,  where  he  captured  several  other  English  prizes.
The  British  government  remonstrated  with  France,
then  at  peace  with  England,  which  necessitated
mock  sales  of  the  prizes  at  sea.  The  French  gov-
ernment was  thereafter  obliged  to  order  the  Ameri-
can cruisers  to  leave  France.  Wickes  took  com-
mand of  the  American  squadron,  consisting  of  the
brig  "  Lexington,"  which  had  arrived  from  the
United  States,  and  the  "  Dolphin."  Wickes  cap-
tured fourteen  vessels  in  five  days  in  the  Bay  of
Biscay  and  in  the  English  channel,  all  of  which
were  sent  to  France  and  sold  in  June,  1777.  Wickes
was  afterward  chased  by  a  British  ship  of  the  line,
and  escaped  by  throwing  his  guns  overboard.  He
continued  his  cruise  toward  this  country  in  the
"  Reprisal "  alone,  as  the  little  squadron  had  sepa-
rated, and  was  lost  in  a  storm  on  the  banks  of  New-
foundland in  1778.  All  the  crew  of  the  "  Reprisal "
were  lost  with  the  ship  except  the  cook.

WICKES,  Stephen,  physician,  b.  in  Jamaica,
Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  17  March,  1813.  He  is  a  de-
scendant of  Thomas  Wickes,  of  the  Massachusetts
colony  of  1635.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  col-
lege in  1831.  In  1832  he  entered  the  Rensselaer
polytechnic  institute,  Troy,  N.  Y.,  where  he  studied
chemistry  and  natural  science  one  year,  and  after-
ward he  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  in  1834.  He  practised  one
year  in  New  York,  fifteen  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  since
1852  has  been  in  Orange,  N.  J.  He  received  the
honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Princeton  in  1868,
and  is  connected  with  medical  and  other  learned
societies,  and  is  secretary  of  the  New  Jersey  his-
torical society.  In  February,  1886,  he  withdrew
from  the  active  labor  of  his  profession,  and  has  since
devoted  himself  to  literary  work.  He  edited  the
"  Transactions "  of  the  Medical  society  of  New
Jersey  from  1860  till  1882,  also  the  old  transac-
tions of  the  same  from  1766  till  1858,  and  has
published  "Topography  of  Orange"  (Newark.  1859);
"  Water-Cure  in  Orange "  (1861) ;  "  Memoirs  of
Thomas  W.  Blatchford,  M.  D.,  of  Troy "  (1866) ;
"  Memorial  Volume,  First  Presbyterian  Church,
Orange,  N.  J."  (1870) ;  "  Living  and  Dying,  their
Physics  and  Psychics  "  (1874) ;  "  History  of  Medi-
cine in  New  Jersey,  and  of  its  Medical  Men  to  A.
D.  1800"  (1879);  "Sepulture,  its  History,  Methods,
and  Requisites  "  (1884) ;  and  "  History  of  the  New-
ark Mountains  "  (1888). — His  brother,  Thomas,
clergyman,  b.  in  Jamaica,  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,  1814 ;  d.
in  Orange,  N.  J.,  10  Nov.,  1870,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1834,  studied  theology  at  Princeton  and
at  New  Haven  theological  seminary,  and  was  or-
dained as  an  evangelist  in  1839.  He  became  pas-
tor of  the  1st  Congregational  church  of  Marietta,
Ohio,  in  July,  1840,  and  after  a  successful  pastor-
ate of  twenty-nine  years  resigned  and  was  called
to  the  Presbyterian  church  of  Jamestown,  N.  Y.,
where  he  remained  only  about  a  year,  owing  to  the
failure  of  his  health.  He  had  been  active  in  the
formation  of  the  Marietta  Congregational  con-
ference and  of  the  Ohio  state  conference,  and  was
chosen  moderator  of  the  latter  in  1853,  and  again
in  1860.  In  1849  he  was  elected  a  trustee  of  Mari-
etta college,  and  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Wabash  college  in  1860.  He  published  "  Ex-
position of  the  Apocalypse"  (New  York,  1851);
"  The  Son  of  Man  "  (Boston,  1868) ;  "  The  House-
hold "  (1868) ;  and  "  Economy  of  the  Ages  "  (1869).

WICKHAM,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Southold,
Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  6  June,  1763  ;  d.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  17  Jan.,  1839.  He  was  intended  for  the  army,
but  after  studying  at  the  military  academy  of
Arras,  France,  returned  to  this  country,  settled  in
Williamsburg,  Va.,  and  in  1785  began  to  practise


law.  He  removed  to  Richmond  in  1790,  and  for
many  years  occupied  a  high  place  at  the  bar  of
that  city,  engag-
ing, among  other
important  cases,
in  the  trial  of
Aaron  Burr  for
treason  against
the  U.  S.  govern-
ment, in  which
he  was  counsel
for  the  defend-
ant. Of  his  and
his  associate  coun-
sel's efforts  in  this
celebrated  trial,
the  chief  justice
said :  "  The  sub-
ject has  been  ar-
gued in  a  manner
worthy  of  its  im-
portance. A  de-
gree of  eloquence
seldom  displayed
on  any  occasion
has  embellished
solidity  of  argument  and  depth  of  research."  Mr.
Wickham  continued  in  active  practice  until  his
death,  and,  although  he  declined  political  office,  it
is  said  he  could  have  obtained  any  post  in  the  gift
of  the  people.  John  Randolph  of  Roanoke  refers
to  him  in  his  will  as  "  My  best  of  friends,  without
making  any  profession  of  friendship  for  me,  and  the
wisest  and  best  man  I  ever  knew."  Mr.  Wickham
was  noted  for  his  fine  presence  and  courtly  man-
ners, which  obtained  for  him  the  encomium  of  the
poet  Moore  that  "  he  was  the  only  gentleman  he  had
found  in  America,  and  would  have  graced  any  court
in  Europe." — His  grandson,  Williams  Carter,
soldier,  b.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  21  Sept..  1820;  d.
there,  23  July,  1888,  was  educated  at  the  University
of  Virginia,  adopted  the  profession  of  law,  served
in  the  state  senate,  and  was  an  active  member  of
the  "  old-line  "  Whig  party.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  entered  the  Confederate  army  as
captain,  and  became  colonel  of  the  4th  Virginia
regiment,  rising  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.
He  served  in  most  of  the  important  battles  of  the
Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  and  was  wounded
three  times,  severely  at  Williamsburg.  In  1864  he
was  a  member  of  the  Confederate  congress.  After
the  war  he  joined  the  Republican  party,  attaching
himself  to  the  conservative  branch  of  that  body.
He  was  an  admirer  and  advocate  of  Gen.  Grant,
supported  him  for  the  presidency,  and  exerted  a
pacific  influence  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  state.
From  the  first  he  opposed  the  adjustment  of  the
state  debt  as  proposed  by  the  followers  of  William
Mahone,  and  engaged  in  many  controversies  with
that  senator.  He  was  chosen  to  the  state  senate  in
1882-'3,  and  in  the  next  election  he  was  returned
without  opposition.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he
was  a  vice-president,  general  manager,  and  receiver
of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  railroad.

WICKLIFFE,  Charles  A.,  politician,  b.  in
Bardstown,  Ky.,  8  June,  1788 ;  d.  in  Howard
county,  Md.,  31  Oct.,  1869.  He  was  educated  at
the  Bardstown  grammar-school,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1809,  and  began  practice  in
Bardstown.  He  soon  achieved  distinction  as  a
lawyer.  He  was  aide  to  Gen.  Samuel  Caldwell  at
the  battle  of  the  Thames,  5  Oct.,  1813,  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  house  of  representatives  in  1814-'23,
and  sat  in  congress  from  Kentucky  in  1823-'33,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Henry  Clay  Democrats


WICKSTEED


WIGGER


499


He  was  then  elected  again  to  the  state  legislature,
and  was  its  speaker  in  1834.  In  1836  he  was
elected  lieutenant-governor  of  his  native  state,  and
in  1839  he  became  acting  governor.  In  1841  he
was  appointed  postmaster-general  by  President
Tyler,  holding  the  post  till  March,  1845,  and  in
the  latter  year  he  was  sent  by  President  Polk  on  a
secret  mission  to  Texas  in  the  interests  of  annexa-
tion. He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional
convention  of  1845,  a  member  of  the  Peace  congress
in  February,  1861,  served  again  in  congress  in
1861-'3,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Union  Whig,  and
was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  national  Democratic
convention  in  1864.  Mr.  Wickliffe  was  wealthy,
and  his  aristocratic  bearing  and  contempt  for  the
poorer  classes  won  him  the  name  of  "  the  Duke."

WICKSTEED,  Gustavus  William,  Canadian
lawyer,  b.  in  Liverpool,  England,  21  Dec,  1799.
He  removed  to  Canada  in  1821,  began  the  study
of  law  in  1825,  was  admitted  as  an  advocate  in
1832,  and  was  made  a  queen's  counsel  in  1854.  Mr.
Wicksteed  entered  the  public  service  in  1828,  be-
came law-clerk  of  the  Canada  assembly  in  1841,
and  the  same  year  was  appointed  one  of  three  com-
missioners to  revise  the  statutes  and  ordinances  of
Lower  Canada.  In  1856  he  was  chosen  with  Sir
James  B.  Macaulay  and  others  a  commissioner  to
revise,  consolidate,  and  classify  the  public  general
statutes  of  Canada,  and  in  1867  he  became  law-
clerk  of  the  house  of  commons.  In  addition  to
various  indexes  and  tables  of  the  statutes  of  Cana-
da, he  has  published  "  Waifs  in  Verse  "  (Montreal,
1878).  —  His  son,  Richard  John,  advocate  and
barrister,  is  assistant  law-clerk  and  English  trans-
lator in  the  Canadian  house  of  commons.

WIDDIFIELD,  John  Henry,  Canadian  phy-
sician, b.  in  Whitchurch,  Ont.,  12  June,  1812.  He
was  graduated  as  a  physician  and  surgeon  at  the
Royal  college  of  surgeons,  England,  the  Royal
college  of  physicians,  Edinburgh,  Victoria  uni-
versity, Canada,  and  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  of  Ontario,  and  established  himself  in
practice  in  Newmarket,  Ont.  He  received  the  Re-
form nomination  for  the  Dominion  parliament  in
1874,  and  again  in  1882,  but  declined  on  both
occasions.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of
Ontario  in  1875,  re-elected  in  1879,  1883,  and
1886,  and  was  ministerial "  whip  "  under  the  Mowat
government  from  1877  till  1883,  when  he  resigned.

WIDMER,  Christopher,  Canadian  physician,
b.  in  England  in  1780 ;  d.  in  Toronto,  2  May,  1858.
As  surgeon  of  the  14th  light  dragoons  he  served
through  nearly  the  whole  of  the  peninsular  cam-
paign, and  heid  the  medal  with  five  clasps.  He
removed  to  Canada  during  the  war  of  1812,  settled
in  Toronto,  and  on  15  Aug.,  1843,  was  appointed
a  member  of  the  legislative  council  of  Canada
under  a  writ  of  summons  from  the  crown.

WIERZBICKI,  Felix  Paul,  author,  b.  in  Po-
land ;  d.  in  California  in  1861.  He  came  to  the
United  States  on  the  failure  of  the  Polish  revolu-
tion of  1830,  and,  after  teaching  for  a  time,  studied
medicine  and  began  to  practise  in  Providence,
R.  1.  He  emigrated  to  California  in  1848,  and
turned  his  attention  to  metallurgy,  publishing  one
of  the  first  books  issued  upon  the  mines  of  that
state.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  employed
in  the  San  Francisco  mint.  He  is  the  author  of
**  The  Ideal  Man,  a  Conversation  between  Two
Friends  upon  the  Beautiful,  the  Good,  and  the
True  as  manifested  in  Actual  Life,  bv  Philokalist "
(Boston,  1841).

WIGFALL,  Louis  Trezevant,  senator,  b.  in
Edgefield  district,  S.  C,  21  April,  1816 ;  d.  in  Gal-
veston, Tex.,  18  Feb.,  1874. He  was  educated  at


the  College  of  South  Carolina,  but  left  before
graduation  to  go,  as  a  lieutenant  of  volunteers,  to
Florida,  where  he  took  part  in  the  operations
against  the  Indians.  He  subsequently  studied
law  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  removed  to  Marshall,  Tex.,  where
he  practised  his  profession.  He  served  in  the
lower  branch  of  the  Texas  legislature  in  1849-50,
and  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1857-'8,
and  again  in  1859-60.  During  the  latter  session
he  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,  and  took  his  seat,  4
Jan.,  1860.  In  that  body  he  was  among  the  ablest
and  most  uncompromising  defenders  of  the  slave
power.  As  he  did  not  take  his  seat  at  the  called
session  of  the  32d  congress,  lie  was  expelled  on  11
July,  1861.  In  the  mean  time  he  had  been  present
at  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter,  as  a  member
of  Gen.  Pierre  G.  T.  Beauregard's  staff.  On  the
afternoon  of  the  second  day,  13  April,  being  on
Morris  island,  and  noticing  that  the  fire  from  the
fort  had  ceased  and  that  the  flag  had  been  shot
away,  Col.  Wigfall,  with  the  approval  of  Gen.  James
Simons,  in  command  of  the  forces  on  the  island,
embarked  in  a  skiff,  and  set  out  across  the  bay.  On
reaching  Fort  Sumter,  he  made  his  way  through  an
open  port-hole  inside  the  fortification,  where  he  met
Mag.  Robert  Anderson,  and  demanded  the  uncon-
ditional surrender  of  the  fort,  on  the  ground  that
the  work  was  no  longer  tenable  and  that  further
resistance  would  be  madness.  After  some  parley,
Maj.  Anderson  consented  to  have  a  white  flag
hoisted,  and  the  surrender  was  an  accomplished
fact.  Wigfall  subsequently  became  colonel  of  the
2d  infantry  in  the  provisional  Confederate  army,
and  was  promoted  brigadier-general,  21  Oct.,  1861.
He  commanded  a  brigade  composed  of  three  Texas
regiments  and  one  of  Georgia  troops  until  20  Feb.,
1862,  when  he  resigned.  Besides  his  military  ser-
vice, he  also  represented  Texas  in  the  provisional
Confederate  congress  from  February,  1861,  till  Feb-
ruary, 1862.  He  was  also  senator  in  the  Confeder-
ate congress  from  February,  1862,  until  the  end  of
the  war.  He  then  went  to  England,  where  he
resided  for  several  years.  In  1873  he  settled  in
Baltimore.  He  died  while  visiting  Texas  on  a  lec-
turing tour.  Gen.  Wigfall  was  a  forcible  speaker,
being  remarkable  for  his  impassioned  style,  and  an
ardent  partisan,  and  took  part  in  several  duels.

WIGGER,  Winand  Michael,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  New  York  city,  9  Dec,  1841.  He  was  graduated
in  1860  at  the  College  of  St.  Francis  Xavier  in  his
native  city,  and  studied  theology  at  Seton  Hall,
N.  J.,  where  he  remained  several  years.  In  Octo-
ber, 1862,  he  entered  the  seminary  of  Brignoli  Sale,
at  Genoa,  where  he  completed  his  divinity  studies
and  won  the  doctor's  cap.  He  was  ordained  priest
in  1865,  and  returning  to  the  United  States  became
assistant  at  the  cathedral  at  Newark,  N.  J.  In
April,  1869,  he  was  appointed  rector  of  St.  Vincent's
church,  Madison,  N.  J.,  and  remained  there  until
May,  1873.  After  occupying  the  same  office  one
year  at  St.  John's,  Orange,  and  two  years  at  Sum-
mit, N.  J.,  he  returned  to  Madison,  where  he  served
as  rector  until  Bishop  Michael  A.  Corrigan  was  pro-
moted coadjutor  of  New  York  in  1881.  On  the  oc-
currence of  this  event,  the  diocese  of  Newark,  over
which  Bishop  Corrigan  had  presided,  was  reduced,
the  rest  of  the  state  being  erected  into  the  new  see
of  Trenton.  To  the  charge  of  the  former  Dr.
Wigger  was  elected,  being  consecrated  in  Octo-
ber, 1881.  Under  his  care  the  diocese,  although
small  in  extent,  has  increased  in  population,  and
now  contains  over  160,000  Roman  Catholics,  105
churches,  and  184  priests.  There  are  also  within
its  limits  three  colleges,  eighteen seminaries  for


500


WIGGINS


WIGGLESWORTH


young  ladies,  23,340  children  in  the  parochial
schools,  and  fourteen  asylums  and  hospitals.
Bishop  Wigger  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
the  University  of  Sapienza,  Rome,  Italy,  in  1869.

WIGGINS,  Ezekiel  Stone,  Canadian  meteor-
ologist, b.  in  Queen's  county,  New  Brunswick,  4
Dec,  1839.  He  became  a  teacher  in  Ontario,  and
in  1866  was  appointed  superintendent  of  schools
for  Prince  Edward  county.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Philadelphia  college  of  medicine  and  surgery
in  1868  and  at  Albert  college,  Ontario,  in  1869,
and  in  1871  was  appointed  principal  of  the  new
institution  for  the  education  of  the  blind  at  Brant-
ford,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1874.  From  that
year  till  1878  he  was  principal  of  the  Church  of
England  college  at  St.  John.  He  was  an  unsuc-
cessful candidate  for  the  Dominion  parliament  in
1878,  and  the  same  year  was  appointed  to  a  perma-
nent post  in  the  civil  service  of  Canada.  In
1866-'7  he  became  involved  in  a  controversy  with
the  Universalists,  and  in  the  latter  year  published
at  Napanee  his  "  Universalism  Unfounded."  He
owes  his  notoriety  chiefly  to  his  predictions  of
storms,  which  for  many  years  have  been  published
by  newspapers  throughout  the  world.  Occasion-
ally his  prognostications  have  been  verified,  but  in
the  great  majority  of  cases  it  has  been  otherwise.
At  best  his  successes  in  this  department  of  meteor-
ology were  simply  fortunate  conjectures.  His  basis
for  the  prediction  of  storms,  the  juxtaposition  of
planets,  is  not  regarded  by  men  of  science  as  hav-
ing any  appreciable  effect  upon  the  atmospheric
condition  of  the  earth.  He  has  published  "  Archi-
tecture of  the  Heavens"  (Montreal,  1864). — His
wife,  Susan  Anna  Gunhilda,  b.  in  Lakeside,
Queens  co.,  New  Brunswick,  6  April,  1846,  greatly
aided  by  her  writings  and  personal  appeals  in  se-
curing the  passage  of  the  bill  to  legalize  marriage
with  a  deceased  wife's  sister,  through  the  Canadian
senate.  In  recognition  of  her  services  in  this  par-
ticular her  bust  has  been  placed  in  the  parliament-
ary librarv  at  Ottawa,  Canada.

WIGGLESWORTH,  Michael,  clergyman,  b.  in
England,  18  Oct.,  1631 ;  d.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,  10  June,
1705.  His  father,  Edward,  arrived  in  New  Eng-
land with  his  family  in  1638,  and  in  October  of
that  year  removed  from  Charlestown  to  New  Haven,
where  he  resided  until  his  death,  in  October,  1653.
Michael  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1651,  and
from  1652  till  1654  was  a  tutor  there  and  studied
theology,  supplying  the  pulpit  of  Charlestown  dur-
ing the  winter  of  1653-'4;  in  1655  he  began  to
preach  in Maiden,  where  he  was  settled  as  the

faster  in  1657  and  remained  there  till  his  death,
n  1663  he  made  a  voyage  to  Bermuda  in  search  of
health,  and  during  his  absence  an  associate  minis-
ter was  ordained  at  Maiden.  His  health  prevented
him  from  officiating  in  the  pulpit  for  about  twen-
ty years,  during  which  time  he  studied  medicine
and  became  a  skilful  physician.  In  1686  he  re-
sumed his  pulpit  labors,  continuing  to  practise  as
a  physician.  Cotton  Mather  delivered  his  funeral
sermon.  In  it  he  says :  "  It  was  a  Surprize  unto  us
to  see  a  Little,  Feeble  Shadow  of  a  Man,  beyond
Seventy,  Preaching  usually  Twice  or  Thrice  in  a
Week ;  Visiting  and  Comforting  the  Afflicted ;
Encouraging  the  Private  Meetings;  Catechising
the  Children  of  the  Flock;  and  managing  the
Government  of  the  Church ;  and  attending  the
Sick,  not  only  in  his  own  Town,  but  also  in  all
those  of  the  Vicinity."  In  1662  Mr.  Wigglesworth
completed  and  published  a  poem  entitled  "  The
Day  of  Doom,  or  a  Description  of  the  Great  and
Last  Judgment,"  in  which  he  pictured  in  vivid
colors  the  terrors  of  the  judgment-day  and  the


awful  wrath  of  an  offended  God.  Thus  the  poem
recommended  itself  to  the  sternest  of  the  Calvin-
ists  as  well  as  to  their  children.  The  first  edition
consisted  of  eighteen  hundred  copies,  which  were
disposed  of  in  a  little  more  than  a  year.  In  view
of  the  small  number  of  the  population  at  that
time,  and  its  sparseness,  this  indicated  a  great  suc-
cess. The  poem  maintained  its  popularity,  in  the
rural  districts  at  least,  till  the  time  of  the  Revo-
lution. It  was  twice  reprinted  in  England  (in
1671  in  London,  and  in  1711  at  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne).  Ten  editions  have  been  printed  in  this
country,  the  last,  with  other  poems  and  a  memoir,
edited  by  William  Henry  Burr  (New  York,  1867).
In  the  same  year  when  the  •*  Day  of  Doom  "  was
published,  Mr.  Wigglesworth  wrote  a  poem  en-
titled "  God's  Controversy  with  New  England,
written  in  the  Time  of  the  Great  Drought,  anno
1662,  by  a  Lover  of  New  England's  Prosperity."
This  was  not  published  till  1871,  when  it  was  print-
ed in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Massachusetts  His-
torical Society."  Afterward  he  issued  a  new  poem,
"  Meat  out  of  the  Eater,  or  Meditations  concern-
ing the  Necessitv,  End,  and  Usefulness  of  Afflic-
tion to  God's  Children"  (1669  ;  6th  ed.,  1770).  In
1670  he  wrote  an  elegy  on  the  death  of  his  col-
league, the  Rev.  Benjamin  Bunker  (printed  in
1872,  in  the  "  New  England  Historical  and  Genea-
logical Register").  See  a  sketch  of  his  life  by
John  Ward  Dean,  with  a  fragment  of  his  auto-
biography, some  of  his  letters,  and  a  catalogue
of  his  library  (Albany,  1871). — His  son,  Samuel,
clergyman,  b.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,  15  Feb.,  1689 ;  d.
in  Ipswich  Hamlet  (now  Hamilton),  Mass^  3  Sept.,
1768,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1707,  studied
medicine,  and  in  March,  1710,  began  to  practise  in
Ipswich  Hamlet.  The  following  December  he  re-
turned to  his  native  town  and  studied  divinity.
After  preaching  at  Dracut  and  Groton  for  the
next  two  years,  he  accepted  a  call  at  Ipswich  Ham-
let, and  was  ordained  27  Oct.,  1714.  There  he  re-
mained until  his  death.  He  published,  between
1727  and  1765.  nine  occasional  discourses,  besides
"  A  Short  Account  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Hale,  of  New-
bury," in  the  "Christian  History "(1744);  a"Dud-
leian  Lecture"  (1760);  and  an  account  of  a  con-
troversy "  with  the  Fourth  Church,  about  Admit-
ting Persons  from  Neighboring  Churches"  (1765).
— His  son,  Edward,  educator,  b.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,
in  1693;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  16  Jan.,  1765,
was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1710,
and  studied  theol-
ogy. When  Thom-
as Hollis,  of  Lon-
don, established  a
professorship  of
theology  at  Har-
vard, Mr.  Wiggles-
worth was  chosen
to  occupy  it,  24
Jan.,  1722,  and
held  the  office
during  the  rest  of
his  life.  In  1724
he  was  elected  a
member  of  the  cor-
poration of  Har-
vard. Dr.  Wig-
glesworth was  one
of  the  chief  writers  in  the  Whitcfieldian  contro-
versy, and  in  1745  wrote  "  An  Answer  to  Mr.
Whit  ('field's  Reply  to  the  College  Testimony."  In
1754  he  delivered  two  lectures  on  the  "  Distinguish-
ing Characters  of  the  Ordinary  and  Extraordinary


WIGGLESWORTH


WIGHT


501


Ministers  of  Christ,"  which  were  called  forth  by
Whitefield's  preaching  at  Cambridge,  and  were
printed  by  request  of  the  students.  He  was  for
some  time  commissioner  of  the  London  society  for
propagating  the  gospel  among  the  Indians,  but
resigned  the  office  in  1755.  In  1730  he  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Edinburgh  university.
Besides  occasional  sermons,  his  publications  in-
clude "  Sober  Remarks  on  a  Modest  Proof  of  the
Order  and  Government  Settled  by  Christ  and  His
Apostles  in  the  Church"  (1724);  "A  Seasonable
Caveat  against  Believing  Every  Spirit,"  two  lec-
tures (1735) ;  "  An  Inquiry  into  the  Truth  of  the
Imputation  of  Adam's' First  Sin  to  his  Posterity  "
(1738) ;  two  lectures  on  "  The  Sovereignty  of  God
in  the  Exercise  of  His  Mercy  "  (1741) :  "  Some  Evi-
dences of  the  Divine  Inspiration  of  the  Scriptures
of  the  Old  Testament,  from  the  Testimony  of
Jesus  Christ  and  His  Apostles"  (1755);  the  "Dud-
leian  "  lecture  (1757) ;  and  "  The  Doctrine  of  Repro-
bation briefly  Considered  "  (1763). — Edward's  son,
Edward,  educator,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  7  Feb.,
1732;  d.  there,  17  June,  1794,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1749,  became  tutor  there  in  1764,  and
succeeded  his  father  as  Hollis  professor  of  the-
ology. In  1779  he  was  chosen  a  fellow  of  the  cor-
poration. When  the  society  in  Scotland  for  pro-
moting the  gospel  among  the  Indians  of  North
America  established  a  corresponding  board  in
Boston,  he  was  chosen  secretary.  In  1791  he  re-
signed his  professorship  in  consequence  of  a  para-
lytic affection,  and  was  made  professor  emeritus.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Harvard  in
1786,  and  was  an  original  member  of  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences.  He  wrote  "  Calcu-
lations on  American  Population  "  (Boston,  1775) ;
"  Authority  of  Tradition  Considered,"  being  the
Dudleian  lecture  for  1777 ;  and  "  The  Hope  of  Im-
mortality," a  sermon  on  the  death  of  John  Win-
throp  (1779). — Samuel's  son,  Edward,  soldier,  b.
in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  3  Jan.,  1742;  d.  in  Newbury  -
port,  Mass.,  8  Dec,  1826,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1761.  He  engaged  in  commercial  pur-
suits, and,  in  June,  1776,  received  a  commission  as
colonel  of  a  regiment  to  be  raised  in  the  counties
of  Essex,  York,  and  Cumberland  (of  which  the
two  latter  are  now  included  in  the  state  of  Maine).
He  took  part  in  the  operations  of  the  American
fleet  on  Lake  Champlain  under  Gen.  Benedict  Ar-
nold and  Gen.  Horatio  Gates,  being  third  in  com-
mand. In  the  winter  of  1777  he  returned  to  his
home  in  Newburyport  to  raise  a  second  regiment,
but  such  was  "  the  distress  of  the  times  "  that  he
was  ordered  to  march  to  Ticonderoga  before  the
full  complement  of  men  could  be  recruited.  Col.
Wigglesworth  subsequently  took  part  in  the  battle
of  Monmouth  and  other  engagements,  and  in  1778
was  made  president  of  a  court  of  inquiry  that  con-
vened to  investigate  the  surrender  of  Fort  Mont-
gomery and  Fort  Clinton  on  the  Hudson  by  Gov.
George  Clinton.  In  1779  he  applied  to  Gen.  Wash-
ington for  leave  to  resign,  which  was  granted.
Gen.  Washington  afterward  appointed  him  col-
lector for  the  port  of  Newburyport,  as  his  pecuni-
ary prospects  had  been  ruined  by  his  devotion  to
his  country,  and  in  1818  he  was  granted  an  annual
pension  of  $240  by  congress,  through  the  influence
of  President  Monroe,  who  had  served  with  Col.
Wigglesworth  in  the  army  in  the  Jerseys. — The
second  Edward's  grandson,  Edward,  editor,  b.  in
Boston,  14  Jan.,  1804 ;  d.  there,  15  Oct.,  1876,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1822,  and  at  the  law-
school  in  1825,  studied  law  also  with  William  Pres-
cott,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Suffolk  bar.  After
practising  for  a  time,  he  entered  his  father's  count-


ing-room, thereafter  devoting  his  time  mainly  to
mercantile  pursuits.  He  assisted  Francis  Lieber,
from  1827  till  1834,  in  the  preparation  of  the  "  En-
cyclopaedia Americana"  (13  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1828-32).  Intellectual  and  scholarly  culture, with
the  oversight  and  administration  of  a  large  num-
ber of  charitable,  benevolent,  and  humane  societies,
of  which  he  was  a  generous  patron,  divided  in  about
equal  measure  the  whole  half  century  of  Mr.  Wig-
glesworth's  mature  life.  He  was  the  author  of
"  Reflections,"  a  collection  of  apothegms  (Boston,
1885)  that  were  published  after  his  death.

WIGHT,  Moses,  artist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2
April,  1827.  He  was  engaged  in  portrait-painting
until  1851,  when  he  went  to  Europe.  After  three
years  of  study  under  Antoine  A.  E.  Hebert  and
Leon  Bonnat  in  Paris,  he  returned  to  the  United
States,  but  went  abroad  again  in  1860,  and  a  third
time  in  1865.  His  portraits  include  those  of  Alex-
ander von  Humboldt,  Louis  Agassiz,  Charles  Sum-
ner, Edward  Everett,  and  Josiah  Quincy.  Among
his  ideal  works  are  "  Sleeping  Beauty,"  "  Eve  at  the
Fountain,"  "  Lisette,"  "  Confidants,"  "  John  Alden
and  Priscilla,"  and  "  Pet's  First  Cake."

WIGHT,  Orlando  Williams,  author,  b.  in
Centreville,  Alleghany  co.,  N.  Y.,  19  Feb.,  1824 ;
d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  19  Oct.,  1888.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Westfield  academy  and  Rochester  col-
legiate institute,  New  York,  engaged  in  literary
work,  and  was  afterward  ordained  to  the  Uni-
versalist  ministry.  He  was  settled  in  Newark,
N.  J.,  for  three  years,  but  in  1853  visited  Europe,
and  afterward  he  engaged  in  literary  work.  Sub-
sequently he  studied  medicine,  receiving  his  degree
at  the  Long  Island  college  hospital  in  1865,  and
practised  in  Oconomowoc,  Wis.,  and  then  in  Mil-
waukee. In  1874  he  was  appointed  state  geologist
and  surgeon-general  of  Wisconsin,  and  in  1878-'80
he  was  health  commissioner  of  Milwaukee,  also
health  officer  of  Detroit  for  several  years.  The
degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Yale
in  1861.  Dr.  Wight  has  published  "  The  Philosophy
of  Sir  William  Hamilton"  (New  York,  1853);
"  Life  of  Abelard  and  Heloise  "  (1853  ;  enlarged
as  "  Lives  and  Letters  of  Abelard  and  Heloise,
1861) ;  and  has  translated  Victor  Cousin's  "  His-
tory of  Modern  Philosophy,"  with  Frederick  W.
Ricord  (2  vols.,  1852),  and  "  Lectures  on  the  True,
the  Beautiful,  and  the  Good"  (1854);  "Pascal's
Thoughts  "  (1859) ;  Balzac's  novels,  in  part  (6  vols.,
1860) ;  Henry  Martin's  "  History  of  France,"  with
Marv  L.  Booth  (4  vols.,  1863);  and  "Maxims  of
Public  Health  "  (New  York,  1884).  He  also  edited
and  revised  "  Standard  French  Classics  "  (14  vols.,
1858-'60),  and  edited  "The  Household  Library"
(18  vols.,  1859  et  seq.).  He  left  a  book  of  travels
entitled  "  A  Winding  Journey  around  the  World  "
(Detroit,  1888).

WIGHT,  Peter  Bonnett,  architect,  b.  in  New
York  city,  1  Aug.,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at  the
College  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1855,  and,  after
studying  architecture  for  eighteen  months,  went
to  Chicago  in  1858  to  practise  that  profession,  but
returned  the  following  vear  to  his  native  city.
Between  1862  and  1868  he  built  the  New  York
academy  of  design  (see  vignette),  the  Yale  school
of  the  fine  arts,  and  the  Brooklyn  mercantile  libra-
ry, now  known  as  the  Brooklyn  library.  In  1862
he  planned  the  first  army  hospital  that  was  built
by  the  government  during  the  civil  war.  In  1864
he  erected  the  building  of  the  Union  square  branch
in  New  York  city  of  the  sanitary  fair,  and  man-
aged it  until  its  close.  Immediately  after  the
Chicago  fire  in  1871  he  removed  to  that  city,  and
between  1872  and  1876  was  chiefly  engaged  in  the


502


WIG  HTM  AN


WILBOUR


erection  of  commercial  buildings  to  the  value  of
nearly  $2,000,000.  Among  the  latter  was  the
American  express  building,  in  executing  which
he  was  associated  with  Henry  H.  Richardson.  In
1878  he  retired  partially  from  the  more  active  pur-
suit of  his  profession,  and  practised  mainly  as  a
consulting  architect,  devoting  his  time  to  con-
structive engineering,  and  sanitary  matters  con-
nected with  building.  In  1880  he  organized  the
Wight  fire-proofing  company  for  the  construction
of  fire-proof  buildings,  of  which  he  is  still  the  gen-
eral manager  and  principal  stockholder.  In  1868
he  invented  the  first  improvement  in  the  construc-
tion of  fire-proof  buildings.  In  1874  he  took  out
a  patent  for  his  method  of  rendering  iron  col-
umns fire-proof,  and  he  has  since  been  granted
three  others  for  the  same  purpose.  Other  patents
of  his  are  for  the  construction  of  fire-proof  ceil-
ings in  buildings
in  which  wooden
joists  are  used  for
floor  -  construc-
tion ;  for  making
iron  floor -beams
fire  -  proof  when
flat,  hollow,  tile
floor  -  arches  are
used ;  for  devices
for  automatical-
ly closing  gates
to  swing-bridges ;
and  for  making
terra-cot ta  coping
for  brick  walls.
Mr.Wight,besides
frequently  con-
tributing articles
on  subjects  con-
nected with  his
specialty  to  various  periodicals,  has  published  a
monograph  on  the  "  National  Academy  of  Design
Building,"  with  photographic  illustrations  (New
York,  1865),  and  "  One  Phase  in  the  Revival  of  the
Pine  Arts  in  America  "  (Chicago,  1886).

WIGHTMAN,  Valentine,  clergyman,  b.  in
North  Kingston,  R.  I.,  in  1681 ;  d.  in  Groton,
Conn.,  9  June,  1747.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Ed-
ward Wightman,  the  Baptist,  who  was  burned  for
heresy  in  Lichfield,  England,  in  1612.  After  his
ordination  to  the  ministry  in  Rhode  Island  he  re-
moved in  1705  to  Groton,  Conn.  He  was  the  first
Baptist  minister  in  Connecticut,  planted  in  Groton"
the  first  church  of  that  denomination,  and  was
active  in  establishing  other  churches  throughoat
the  state  and  in  the  city  and  state  of  New  York.
He  was  a  scholarly  man,  as  was  evinced  in  a  famous
debate  that  he  held  at  Lynn  in  1727  with  the  Rev.
John  Bulkley,  a  minister  of  the  standing  order.
The  discussion  was  subsequently  published.  Mr.
Wightman  was  also  the  author  of  a  "  Letter  on
sinking  Psalms"  (1725).

WIGHTMAN,  William  May,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  29  Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  there,  15
Feb.,  1882.  He  became  an  active  Christian  in
April,  1825,  began  to  preach  in  the  same  year,  in
1828  was  received  on  trial  into  the  South  Caro-
lina conference,  and  ordained  deacon  by  Bishop
Soule,  and  elder  by  Bishop  Hedding.  From  1828
till  1833  he  filled  stations  in  South  Carolina,  then
for  two  years  was  agent  for  Randolph  Macon  col-
lege, and  for  one  year  was  professor  of  English
literature  in  that  institution.  In  1839-'40  he  was
presiding  elder  of  the  Cokesbury  district.  He  was
a  member  of  the  general  conference  of  the  Meth-
odist Episcopal  church  in  1840,  and  also  of  the


famous  conference  of  1844,  which  resulted  in  the
division  of  the  church.  From  1840  till  1854  he
was  editor  of  the  "  Southern  Christian  Advocate  "
in  Charleston,  and  for  the  next  five  years  he  was
president  of  Woodford  college,  S.  C.  In  1859  he
was  transferred  to  the  Alabama  conference,  and
became  chancellor  of  the  Southern  university,
which  post  he  filled  until  July,  1867.  In  May,
1866,  he  was  elected  and  ordained  bishop  at  the
general  conference  that  met  in  New  Orleans.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Randolph  Macon
college,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  College  of
Charleston.  He  edited  the  autobiography  of  Bish-
op William  Capers,  with  an  interesting  memoir
(Nashville,  Tenn.,  1858).

WIKOFF,  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia
in  1813;  d.  in  Brighton,  England,  2  May,  1884.
His  father,  a  physician  of  Philadelphia,  was  owner
of  the  township  of  Blocklev,  on  Schuylkill  river,
and  left  a  large  fortune.  The  son  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1831,  admitted  to  the  Phila-
delphia bar,  and  in  1834  sailed  for  Europe,  where
his  career  was  made  notable  by  intimacy  with
many  of  the  foremost  men  of  his  time,  and  he
had  the  reputation  of  being  better  acquainted
with  important  unwritten  history  than  any  other
man  of  his  day.  In-  1837  he  was  appointed  at-
tache to  the  U.  S.  legation  at  London.  He  visited
Paris  soon  afterward,  and  carried  back  to  Lon-
don to  Joseph  Bonaparte  the  jewelry  and  per-
sonal effects  of  Napoleon  I.,  for  which  he  received
one  of  the  first  consul's  silver  drinking-cups.  He
received  the  cross  of  the  Legion  of  honor  from
Napoleon  III.,  whom  he  had  visited  in  1845,  when
the  prince  was  imprisoned  at  Ham,  and  he  also
rendered  valuable  service  during  the  days  that
followed  the  defeat  at  Sedan  in  1870.  Mr.  Wi-
koff's  title  of  "  chevalier,"  by  which  he  was  com-
monly known,  belonged  to  him  as  a  knight-com-
mander of  the  Spanish  order  of  Ysabel  la  Catolica,
which  was  conferred  by  Queen  Isabella  of  Spain.
In  1849  he  was  editor  of  the  "  Democratic  Review."
In  1855  he  was  employed  by  Lord  Palmerston  as
a  secret  agent  of  the  British  government  in  Paris.
No  man  had  a  brighter  diplomatic  career  before
him,  and  no  one  ever  threw  it  away  so  lightly.  He
last  visited  this  country  in  1880  to  arrange  for  the
publication  of  an  autobiography,  under  the  title  of
"  Reminiscences  of  an  Idler.  He  published  "  Na-
poleon Louis  Bonaparte,  First  President  of  France :
Biographical  and  Personal  Sketches,  including  a
Visit  to  the  Prince  at  the  Castle  of  Ham  "  (New
York,  1849);  "Life  of  Alfred,  Count  d'Oreay"
(1849);  ''My  Courtship  and  its  Consequences,"
which  is  said  to  have  been  published  first  in  Lon-
don, and  there  "  suppressed  by  the  foreign  office  "
(1855) ;  "  Adventures  of  a  Roving  Diplomatist "
(1856) :  "  A  New-Yorker  in  the  Foreign  Office,  and
his  Adventures  in  Paris"  (London,  1858);  and
"The  Four  Civilizations"  (1870).

WILBOUR,  Charles  Edwin,  Egyptologist,  b.
in  Little  Compton,  Newport  co.,  R.  I.,  17  March,
1833.  He  received  a  classical  education,  and  en-
tered Brown,  where  he  took  a  prize  for  proficiency
in  Greek,  and  was  noted  for  his  thorough  ac-
quaintance with  the  ancient  and  modern  languages,
but  was  not  graduated,  owing  to  delicate  health,
Having  taught  himself  short-hand,  when  he  had
sufficiently  recovered  he  went  to  New  York  city  in
1854  and  became  connected  with  the  "Tribune"
as  a  reporter.  He  also  studied  law,  and  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1859.  The  following  eighteen
vears  were  devoted  to  literary  and  journalistic  work.
In  1872  he  began  the  study  of  Egyptian  antiquit  ie&
and  visited  the  principal  libraries  of  the  United


WILBUR


WILBUR


503


States  and  Canada.  Two  years  later  he  went  abroad
and  spent  much  time  in  consulting  the  archaeologi-
cal treasures  of  the  British  museum  and  the  great
libraries  of  the  continent.  He  then  became  a  co-
laborer  with  Heinrich  Karl  Brugsch,  commonly
known  as  Brugsch  Bey,  and  Gaston  C.  C.  Maspero,
in  the  field  of  Egyptology,  accompanying  the
latter  on  five  winter  exploring  expeditions  up
the  Nile.  Mr.  Wilbour  now  (1889)  continues  the
work,  using  his  own  dahabeeyah,  or  Nile  boat.  He
has  published  "  Rachel  in  the  New  World,"  from
the  French  of  Leon  Beauvallet,  with  John  W.
Palmer  (New  York,  1856);  a  translation  of  Victor
Hugo's  "  Les  Miserables  "  (1862-'3) ;  and  "  The  Life
of  Jesus,"  from  the  French  of  Ernest  Renan  (1863).
— His  wife,  Charlotte  Beebee,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  2  March,  1830,  was  educated  at  Wilbraham,
Mass.,  and  married  Mr.  Wilbour,  18  Jan.,  1858.
She  was  elected  president  of  Sorosis  in  1870,  and
five  times  re-elected.  She  was  a  founder  of  the
club,  devoted  much  time  and  thought  to  securing
for  it  a  permanent  foundation,  and  was  instrumen-
tal in  organizing  the  Association  for  the  advance-
ment of  women  that  was  formed  by  it  in  1873.
She  instituted  lectures  on  health  and  dress  reform,
suggested  and  aided  in  preparing  entertainments
for  various  purposes,  and  assisted  many  women  in
obtaining  public  recognition.  Since  she  has  re-
sided abroad  she  has  maintained  her  interest  in
the  elevation  of  her  sex,  and  sought  every  opportu-
nity to  labor  for  it.

WILBUR,  Hervey,  author,  b.  in  Wendell,
Franklin  co.,  Mass.,  in  1787 ;  d.  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  5  Jan.,  1852.  He  studied  theology  and
had  charge  of  the  Congregational  church  in  his
native  town  in  1817-23,  but  afterward  was  princi-
pal of  several  schools  for  girls.  He  was  a  pioneer
in  the  establishment  of  Bible  classes,  and  was  prob-
ably the  first  in  this  country  to  compile  and  pub-
lish a  Bible-class  text-book.  He  engaged  in  many
literary  and  scientific  labors,  and  was  the  author
of  a  popular  work  on  astronomy,  the  compiler  of
a  "  reference "  Bible,  and  a  lecturer  on  natural
history  and  astronomy.  He  received  the  honorary
degree  of  A.  M.  from  Dartmouth  in  1812.  Mr.
Wilbur  published  "  A  Discourse  on  the  Religious
Education  of  Youth  "  (2d  ed.,  Boston,  1814) ;  "  A
Reference  Bible  "  (1828) ;  "  Elements  of  Astrono-
my "  (New  Haven,  1829) ;  "  Lexicon  of  Useful
Knowledge  "  (New  York,  1830) ;  and  "  A  Reference
Testament  for  Bible  Classes "  (London,  1831). —
His  daughter,  Anne  Toppan,  b.  in  Wendell,
Franklin  co.,  Mass.,  20  June,  1817 ;  d.  near  Mari-
etta, Ohio,  14  Sept.,  1864,  was  educated  at  New-
buryport and  elsewhere.  After  completing  her
studies,  she  taught  music  at  New  Hampton,  N.  H.,
Gorhara,  Me.,  and  in  schools  in  other  places.  She
translated  several  volumes  from  the  French  and
other  languages,  among  them  "The  Solitude  of
Juan  Fernandez  "  (Boston,  1851),  and  contributed
chiefly  fiction,  under  the  name  of  "  Florence  Leigh,"
to  various  periodicals.  In  1848  she  edited  the  Bos-
ton "  Ladies'  Magazine "  and  the  Lowell,  Mass.,
"  Ladies'  Casket."  After  becoming  Mrs.  Joseph
Wood,  she  published  English  versions  of  X.  B.
Sain  tine's  "  Queen  of  the  Danube  "  and  Edmond
About's  "  La  question  Romaine  "  (Boston,  1859),
and  "  Romance  of  a  Mummy  "  (Columbus,  1860). —
His  son,  Hervey  Backus,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Wendell,  Franklin  co.,  Mass.,  18  Aug.,  1820 ;  d.  in
Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  1  May,  1883,  was  graduated  at
Amherst  in  1838,  and  at  the  Berkshire  medical  in-
stitution, Pittsfield,  Mass.,  in  1842.  Meantime  he
studied  engineering,  and  he  subsequently  practised
medicine  at  Lowell  and  Barre,  Mass, Being  greatly


impressed  by  the  perusal  of  an  account  of  Dr.
Edouard  Seguin's  school  for  idiots  at  Paris,  he  re-
ceived several  idiot  pupils  into  his  own  house  at
Barre  in  July,  1848,  and  organized  the  first  school
for  idiots  in  the  United  States.  By  his  own  ear-
nest personal  studies  and  efforts,  he  thus  developed
the  system  of  education  for  the  weak-minded  that
has  been  adopted  in  every  similar  institution  in
this  country,  in  Canada,  and  in  some  parts  of  Eu-
rope. In  1815  Dr.  Hervey  Backus  prevailed  upon
the  legislature  of  New  York  to  establish  an  experi-
mental school  at  Albany,  which,  under  Dr.  Wilbur's
direction,  was  so  successful  as  to  be  fully  organized
in  1854  as  the  State  asylum  for  idiots  at  Syracuse.
Dr.  Wilbur  remained  in  charge  of  this  institution
until  his  death.  He  published  numerous  reports
and  other  papers  on  idiocy.  A  tablet  with  the  fol-
lowing inscription  has  been  placed  on  the  walls  of
the  asylum  :  "  Hervey  Backus  Wilbur,  M.  D.,  the
First  in  America  to  Attempt  the  Education  of  the
Feeble-Minded ;  and  the  First  Superintendent  of
this  Asylum.  By  his  Wisdom,  Zeal,  and  Humanity
he  Secured  its  Permanent  Establishment.  To  his
Memory  this  Tablet  is  raised  by  the  Board  of  Trus-
tees."— Another  son,  Charles  Toppan,  physician,
b.  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  18  May,  1835,  while  a
student  of  medicine  became  connected  as  a  teach-
er with  the  New  York  state  asylum  for  idiots,
of  which  his  brother  was  superintendent,  and  he
was  thus  led  to  an  investigation  of  the  various
forms  of  dementia.  In  1858  he  was  called  to  as-
sist in  the  organization  of  the  Ohio  state  asylum
for  idiots  at  Columbus,  and  for  some  time  he  acted
as  its  assistant  superintendent.  In  1859  he  re-
moved to  Lakeville,  Conn.,  and  aided  in  the  estab-
lishment of  a  school  for  feeble-minded  children,
which  was  afterward  conducted  by  Dr.  Henry  M.
Knight.  In  1860  he  was  graduated  at  the  Berk-
shire medical  institution  and  returned  to  Ohio,  set-
tling at  Marietta,  where  he  began  to  practise.  The
following  year  he  entered  the  volunteer  service,
and  remained  in  the  army  until  the  end  of  the
civil  war  as  assistant  surgeon  and  surgeon.  In
September,  1865,  he  took  charge  of  the  Illinois  in-
stitution for  the  education  of  feeble-minded  chil-
dren at  Jacksonville,  and  he  was  so  successful  in
its  management  that  the  legislature  subsequently
voted  the  erection  of  larger  and  more  appropriate
buildings  at  a  cost  of  $185,000.  It  was  afterward
removed  to  Lincoln,  111.  In  1883  he  severed  his
connection  with  the  institution,  and  the  following
year  he  opened  a  private  asylum  for  the  feeble-
minded at  Kalamazoo.  During  his  connection
with  the  Illinois  asylum  Dr.  Wilbur  was  instru-
mental in  establishing  similar  institutions  in  Iowa,
Indiana,  Kansas,  Nebraska,  Minnesota,  and  other
western  states.  In  January,  1882,  he  founded  the
"  Philanthropic  Index  and  Review,"  a  monthly
publication  devoted  to  the  interests  of  feeble-
minded children,  and  the  only  periodical  of  the
kind  in  existence.

WILBUR,  John,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in  Hop-
kinton,  R.  I.,  17  July,  1774;  d.  there,  1  May,
1856.  He  was  the  son  of  Quaker  parents,  and  be-
came a  preacher  of  the  society.  He  opposed  the
introduction  of  religious  views  that  he  deemed  to
be  at  variance  with  the  original  doctrines  of  his
sect,  and  in  1838  was  accused  by  several  members
of  the  Rhode  Island  yearly  meeting  of  circulating
in  his  conversation  "and  writings  opinions  and
statements  derogatory  to  the  character  of  the  Eng-
lish Quaker,  Joseph  John  Gurney,  then  on  a  visit
to  the  United  States.  He  was  sustained  by  a  large
majority  in  his  own  monthly  meeting  (that  of  South
Kingston,  R.  I.),  but  that  body  having  been  dis-


504


WILCOX


WILD


solved,  and  its  members  added  to  the  Greenwich
meeting,  he  was  formally  disowned  by  the  latter
in  January,  1843,  its  action  being  subsequently
confirmed  by  the  quarterly  meeting  and  the  Rhode
Island  yearly  meeting.  His  supporters  were  suffi-
ciently numerous  in  Rhode  Island  and  other  parts
of  New  England  to  form  an  independent  yearly
meeting,  the  members  of  which  were  known  as
Wilburites.  Mr.  Wilbur  twice  visited  England,
the  second  time  in  1854.  He  published  several
polemical  pamphlets,  but  his  "  Journal  and  Cor-
respondence "  (Providence,  1859)  did  not  appear
until  after  his  death.

WILCOX,  Cadmus  Marcellus,  soldier,  b.  in
Wayne  county,  N.  C,  29  May,  1826.  He  studied
at  Cumberland  college,  Nashville,  his  parents  hav-
ing removed  to  Tennessee  during  his  infancy,  then
entered  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  and  was  grad-
uated in  1846.  He  served  through  the  war  with
Mexico,  being  engaged  as  acting  adjutant  of  the
4th  infantry  in  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz  and  the
battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  and  as  aide  to  Gen.  John  A.
Quitman  in  the  storming  of  Chapultepec,  where  he
earned  the  brevet  of  1st  lieutenant,  and  in  the  cap-
ture of  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  was  promoted  1st
lieutenant  on  24  Aug..  1851,  served  as  assistant
instructor  of  tactics  at  the  military  academy  from
1852  till  1857,  then  went  to  Europe  for  a  year  on
sick-leave,  was  made  captain  of  infantry  on  20
Dec,  1860,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
was  on  frontier  duty  in  New  Mexico.  Resigning
his  commission  on  8  June,  1861,  he  was  appointed
colonel  in  the  provisional  army  of  the  Confederacy,
and  assigned  to  the  command  of  an  Alabama  regi-
ment. He  joined  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston's  army
with  his  regiment  on  16  July,  1861,  marched  to
Manassas  to  re-enforce  Gen.  Pierre  G.  T.  Beaure-
gard, and  served  with  the  Army  of  Northern  Vir-
ginia till  its  final  surrender,  being  promoted  briga-
dier-general on  21  Oct.,  1861,  and  major-general  on
9  Aug.,  1863.  He  commanded  a  brigade  in  Gen.
James  Longstreet's  corps  at  the  second  Bull  Run,
Fredericksburg,  Chancellorsville,  and  Gettysburg,
and  a  division  under  Gen.  Ambrose  P.  Hill,  which
resisted  the  repeated  assaults  of  Gen.  Winfield  S.
Hancock's  troops  at  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness.
Gen.  Wilcox  declined  a  brigadier-general's  com-
mission in  the  Egyptian  army  after  the  war.  In
1886  he  was  appointed  chief  of  the  railroad  division
of  the  general  land-office  in  Washington,  D.  C.
He  is  the  author  of  a  book  on  "  Rifles  and  Rifle-
Practice  "  (New  York,  1859),  and  the  translator  of
"  Evolutions  of  the  Line,  as  practised  by  the  Aus-
trian Infantry  and  adopted  in  1853  "  (1860).

WILCOX,'  Carlos,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newport,
N.  H.,  22  Oct.,  1794;  d.  in  Danbury,  Conn.,  29
May,  1827.  His  father,  a  farmer,  removed  in  1798
to  Orwell,  Vt.,  where  the  son's  youth  was  spent.
He  was  a  precocious  child,  and  this,  with  an  acci-
dent to  his  knee  which  unfitted  him  for  agricul-
tural labor,  decided  his  parents  to  send  him  to  col-
lege. He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1813,
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1817,  after
some  interruptions  from  an  affection  of  the  heart,
which  continued  till  it  ended  his  life.  He  preached
in  several  places  in  1819-'20.  though  still  in  feeble
health,  and  spent  the  years  1820-'2  in  the  house  of
a  friend  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  writing  on  his  long
poem  "The  Age  of  Benevolence,"  which  he  had
projected  in  college.  He  was  pastor  of  the  North
church  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  from  1824  till  1826,
when  he  accepted  a  call  to  Danbury.  His  poem,
"  The  Age  of  Benevolence,"  was  to  contain  five
books,  of  which  he  completed  the  first  and  parts  of
three  others. The  first  Was  published  separately


(Salisbury,  1822),  and  fragments  of  the  work  ap-
peared after  his  death  in  a  volume  of  his  "  Re-
mains," which  contains  also  "  The  Religion  of
Taste,"  a  poem  that  he  read  before  the  Yale  Phi
Beta  Kappa  society  in  1824,  fourteen  sermons,  and
a  memoir  of  the  author  (Hartford,  1828).  His
verses  abound  in  accurate  rural  description.

WILCOX,  Ella  Wheeler,  author,  b.  in  Johns-
town Centre,  Wis.,  about  1845.  She  was  educated
in  the  public  schools  of  Windsor  and  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Wisconsin.  In  1884  she  married  Robert
M.  Wilcox,  of  Meriden,  Conn.,  and  since  1887  they
have  resided  in  New  York  city.  Mrs.  Wilcox  be-
gan to  write  for  newspapers  at  an  early  age,  has
contributed  much  to  periodicals,  and  has  published
in  book-form  "  Drops  of  Water  "  (New  York,  1872) ;
"Maurine"  (Milwaukee,  1875);  "Shells"  (1883);
"  Poems  of  Passion  "  (Chicago.  1883) ;  "  Mai  Mou-
lee,"  a  novel  (New  York,  1885);  and  "Poems  of
Pleasure  "  (1888).

WILCOX,  Leonard,  senator,  b.  in  Hanover,  N,
H.,  29  Jan.,  1799 ;  d.  in  Orford,  N.  H.,  18  June,
1850.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1817,
studied  law,  and  practised  at  Orford.  He  became
a  judge  of  the  state  superior  court,  25  June.  1838,
but  infirm  health  forced  him  to  resign  on  20  Sept.,
1840.  After  the  resignation  of  Franklin  Pierce
from  the  U.  S.  senate.  Judge  Wilcox  filled  his
seat  for  the  remainder  of  the  unexpired  term,  first
by  appointment  of  the  governor  and  then  by  the
choice  of  the  legislature,  being  elected  as  a  Demo-
crat. He  served  from  7  March,  1842,  till  3  March,
1843,  was  made  a  justice  of  the  New  Hampshire
court  of  common  pleas,  7  Dec,  1847,  and  on  26
June,  1848,  was  again  placed  on  the  bench  of  the
superior  court.

WILCOX,  Fhineas  Bacon,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mid-
dletown,  Conn.,  26  Sept.,  1798;  d.  in  Columbus,
Ohio,  25  March,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1821,  and  practised  law  at  Columbus,  Ohio,  for
about  forty  years,  paying  particular  attention  to
land-titles.  He  was  the  author  of  '•  Condensed  Re-
ports of  the  Superior  Court  of  Ohio  "  (Columbus,
1832) ;  "  Ohio  Forms  and  Practice "  (1833) :  "  A
Few  Thoughts  by  a  Member  of  the  Bar  "  (1836) ;
"  Reports  of  the  Superior  Court  of  Ohio,"  being  vol.
x.  of  the  "Ohio  Reports"  (1842):  "Digest  of  the
First  Twelve  Volumes  of  Ohio  Reports"  (1844);
"Practical  Forms  in  Action,  Personal  and  Real,
and  in  Chancery"  (2d  ed.,  1858);  and  "Practical
Forms  under  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure  "  (1862).

WILD,  Edward  Augustus,  soldier,  b.  in  Brook-
line,  Mass.,  25  Nov.,  1825.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1844,  and  on  21  April,  1861,  became
captain  in  the  1st  Massachusetts  regiment,  with
which  he  served  in  the  peninsular  campaign,  being
wounded  at  Williamsburg  and  Fair  Oaks.  He  be-
came major  of  the  32d  Massachusetts,  24  July,  1862,
lieutenant-colonel  on  7  Aug.,  and  colonel  of  the
35th  on  20  Aug.,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  South
Mountain,  where  his  left  arm  was  shattered.  After
assisting  Gov.  John  A.  Andrew  in  raising  and  or-
ganizing colored  troops  in  Februarv-April,  1863,
he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  24
April,  and,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  months  at
the  siege  of  Charleston,  served  in  North  Carolina,
recruiting  colored  troops.  In  December  he  led  an
expedition  through  the  eastern  counties  of  the
state,  and  on  18  Jan.,  1864,  he  took  command  of
the  district  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth,  Va.  He
commanded  a  brigade  in  the  affair  at  Wilson's
wharf,  and  was  in  front  of  Petersburg  when  he
was  placed  under  arrest  on  23  June,  1864,  for  re-
fusing to  obey  the  order  of  his  superior  to  relieve
his  brigade  quartermaster  and  take  another. The


WILD


WILDE


505


finding  of  the  court-martial  was  set  aside  by  the
commanding  general,  and  this  action  was  subse-
quently confirmed  by  the  judge-advocate-general
at  Washington.  He  afterward  served  on  the  expe-
dition to  Roanoke  river  in  December,  1864,  and
then  before  Richmond  till  its  capture,  and  in  1865
superintended  the  operations  of  the  Preedmen's
bureau  in  Georgia.  On  15  Jan.,  1866,  he  was  mus-
tered out  of  service.  Since  the  war  Gen.  Wild
has  been  engaged  in  silver-mining.

WILD,  Joseph,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in  Sum-
mit, Littleborough,  Lancashire,  England,  16  Nov.,
1834.  He  entered  the  local  ministry  of  the  Primi-
tive Methodists  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  became  a
travelling  preacher,  and  at  twenty-one  emigrated
to  the  United  States.  After  travelling  through
the  south  and  west  as  a  preacher  and  lecturer,
he  was  stationed  as  a  minister  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church  in  1857  at  Hamilton,  Ont.,  re-
maining one  year.  He  then  took  a  three-years'
course  in  theology  at  the  Biblical  institute  at  Con-
cord, N.  H.,  returned  to  Canada,  preached  for  a
year  at  Goderich,  and  in  1863  was  settled  at
Orono,  Me.,  whence  he  was  transferred  two  years
later  to  Belleville,  Ont.,  where  he  was  pastor  of
the  Methodist  church  and  bursar  and  professor
of  Oriental  languages  in  Albert  university.  Wes-
leyan  university  of  Ohio  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1870.  In  1872  he  was  called  to  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  and,  after  remaining  the  allotted  three
years,  being  dissatisfied  with  the  itinerant  system,
he  accepted  a  call  to  the  Union  Congregational
church  in  the  same  city.  In  1881  he  was  installed
as  pastor  of  the  Bond  street  Congregational  church,
Toronto,  where  he  still  officiates.  He  is  popular
as  a  preacher,  has  the  largest  regular  congregation
in  Canada,  and  his  sermons  are  printed  in  the
"  Canadian  Advance,"  and  circulated  in  Great  Brit-
ain and  Australia,  as  well  as  in  the  Dominion.  In
1888  he  acted  as  chairman  of  the  Congregational
union  of  Ontario  and  Quebec.  Dr.  Wild  is  a  large
and  stxccessful  cultivator  of  fruits.  He  has  pub-
lished "  The  Lost  Ten  Tribes  "  (New  York,  1878) ;
"How  and  When  the  World  Will  End"  (1879);
"  The  Future  of  Israel  and  Judah  "  (London,  1879) ;
"Talks  for  the  Times"  (Toronto,  1886);  and
"  Songs  of  the  Sanctuary "  (1886).  Editions  of
most  of  his  works  have  been  issued  in  the  United
States  and  England  as  well  as  in  Canada.

WILDE,  Richard  Henry,  scholar,  b.  in  Dub-
lin, Ireland,  24  Sept.,  1789  ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,
10  Sept.,  1847.  His  father,  Richard  Wilde,  a  Dub-
lin merchant,  came  to  the  United  States  in  1797,
and  died  in  1802.  The  Widow  and  son  removed  to
Augusta,  Ga.,  where  he  fitted  himself  for  the  bar
and  was  admitted  in  1809.  He  was  elected  at-
torney-general of  Georgia,  and  then  chosen  to
congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  one  term,  in
1815-'17.  He  returned  to  the  bar,  but  sat  again
in  congress  from  7  Feb.  till  3  March,  1825,  being
elected  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and,  after  a  defeat  for
the  next  congress,  was  a  member  again  from
1827  till  1835.  His  best  speeches  were  those  on
internal  improvements  (Washington,  1828),  in  op-
position to  the  Force  bill  and  to  the  removal  of
the  deposits  from  the  U.  S.  bank,  and  those  on
the  tariff  and  the  currency.  His  opposition  to
President  Jackson  made  him  unpopular  with  his
constituents,  and  he  was  defeated  in  1834.  where-
upon he  went  to  Europe  and  remained  there  till
1840,  engaged  in  scholarly  pursuits.  He  devoted
himself  specially  to  Italian  literature,  chiefly  in
Florence,  and,  obtaining  access  to  valuable  private
libraries,  discovered  some  forgotten  documents
bearing  on  the  life  and  times  of  Dante,  and  also  a


portrait  of  the  poet  that  had  been  painted  on  the
wall  of  the  chapel  of  Bargello  by  Giotto,  but  covered
for  many  years  with  whitewash.  He  also  made  a
study  of  the  life
of  Torquato  Tas-
so,  and  became
the  f  riendof  many
Italian  literary
men.  After  his  re-
turn to  this  coun-
try he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Whig
state  convention
at  Milledgeville,
Ga.,  in  1842,  but
took  no  further
part  in  politics.
He  removed  to
New  Orleans  in
1843,  and.  on  the
organization of  ^-,

meVoTthtuni-  G4Z%L^  £^^£^
versity  of  Louisi-
ana, became  its  professor  of  constitutional  law,,
which  post  he  held  till  his  death  from  yellow  fever.
Mr.  Wilde's  brother,  James,  who  had  been  a  sub-
altern officer  in  the  Seminole  war,  interested  him
in  Florida,  and  he  began  to  write  an  epic  whose
scene  was  laid  in  that  state.  This  was  never  fin-
ished, but  a  lyric  that  it  contained,  called  "  The
Lament  of  the  Captive,"  but  now  known  by  its
first  line,  "My  Life  is  like  the  Summer  Rose,"  be-
came widely  popular.  It  was  suggested  by  the
story  of  Juan  Ortez,  the  last  survivor  of  the  ill-
fated,  expedition  of  Panfilo  de  Narvaez.  The  verses
appeared  first  in  print  about  1815  without  Mr.
Wilde's  authorization,  and  were  continually  re-
published. Soon  afterward  it  was  said  in  the
"  North  American  Review  "  that  they  were  trans-
lated from  a  Greek  ode  that  purported  to  have  been
written  by  Alca?us.  Scholars  soon  discovered  that
the  latter  was  not  genuine,  and  it  was  found  that
it  was  the  work  of  Anthony  Barclay,  of  Savannah,
who  had  translated  Mr.  Wilde's  song  into  Greek
for  his  own  amusement.  The  song  was  set  to
music  by  Charles  Thibault.  Mr.  Barclay  subse-
quently wrote  an  "  Authentic  Account  of  Wilde's
Alleged  Plagiarism,"  which  was  published  by  the
Georgia  historical  society  (Savannah,  1871).  The
story  of  the  poem  in  its  entirety  was  first  told  in
"  Our  Familiar  Songs"  by  Helen  Kendrick  Johnson
(New  York,  1881).  Mr.  Wilde's  only  published
work  is  "Conjectures  and  Researches  concerning
the  Love,  Madness,  and  Imprisonment  of  Torquato
Tasso,"  the  fruit  of  his  studies  in  Italy,  a  scholarly
work,  which  is  also  valuable  for  the  poetical  trans-
lations from  Tasso  that  it  contains  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1842).  He  contributed  an  essay  on  "  Pe-
trarch "  to  the  "  Southern  Review,"  and  wrote  poet-
ry, original  and  translated,  for  the  magazines.  His
translations  from  the  Italian,  Spanish,  and  French
are  graceful  and  correct.  He  left  many  manu-
scripts, including  an  unfinished  "  Life  of  Dante  "  :
a  collection  of  translations  of  Italian  lyrics,  which
he  intended  to  publish  with  biographical  sketches
of  the  authors ;  and  a  completed  poem  of  several
cantos,  entitled  "  Hesperia,"  which  was  edited  by
his  son  and  issued  after  his  death  (Boston,  1867).

WILDE,  Samuel  Sumner,  jurist,  b.  in  Taun-
ton, Mass.,  5  Feb.,  1771 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22
June,  1855.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1789,  studied  law  in  his  native  place,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1792.  After  practising  till  1 794
in  Waldoborough,  Me.,  and  till  1799  at  Warren,  Me..


506


WILDER


WILDER


which  he  represented  in  the  Massachusetts  legisla-
ture in  1 798-'9,  he  removed  to  Hallowell,  Me.  He
served  as  a  presidential  elector  in  1800  and  1808,
was  a  state  councilor  in  1814,  and  a  delegate  to  the
Hartford  convention  in  the  same  year,  and  from
1815  till  his  resignation  in  1850  was  a  judge  of  the
Massachusetts  supreme  court.  In  1820,  after  the
separation  of  Maine,  he  removed  to  Newburyport,
Mass.,  and  in  1831  he  went  to  reside  in  Boston.
Judge  Wilde  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  of  1820,  and  a  member  of  the
American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences.  He  was
one  of  the  best  nisi  prius  judges  in  the  state,  and
possessed  profound  legal  learning  and  great  in-
tegrity. Bowdoin  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
in  1817,  Harvard  in  1841,  and  Dartmouth  in  1849.
Judge  Wilde  published  several  orations.  He  mar-
ried Eunice,  daughter  of  Gen.  David  Cobb,  and
their  daughter  Caroline  became  the  wife  of  Caleb
Cushing.  A  discourse  on  his  life  by  Rev.  Dr.
Ephraim  Peabody,  with  the  proceedings  of  the
Boston  bar,  was  published  (Boston,  1855).

WILDER,  Alexander,  phvsician,  b.  in  Verona,
Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  May,  1823.  He  attended  the
common  schools,  was  self-educated  in  the  higher
branches,  taught  for  some  time,  and  was  graduated
in  medicine  at  Syracuse  in  1850.  He  was  an  editor
of  the  Syracuse  "  Star  "  in  1852  and  of  the  "  Jour-
nal "  in  1853,  and  took  charge  of  the  "  New  York
Teacher "  in  1856.  In  1857  he  went  to  Spring-
field, 111.,  where  he  prepared  the  bill  to  incorporate
the  State  normal  university.  Removing  to  New
York  city,  he  became  connected  in  1858  with  the
"  Evening  Post,"  on  whose  staff  he  remained  for
thirteen  years.  In  1871  he  was  elected  an  alder-
man of  New  York  on  the  anti-Tweed  ticket.  He
was  president  of  the  Eclectic  medical  society  of
New  York  in  1870-'l,  of  whose  "Transactions"
he  edited  two  volumes  (Albany,  1870-'l),  and  be-
came secretary  of  the  National  association,  whose
annual  "  Proceedings "  he  has  issued  since  1876.
In  1873-'7  he  was  professor  of  physiology  in  the
Eclectic  medical  college  of  the  city  of  New  York,
and  from  1878  till  1883  he  held  successively  the
chairs  of  physiology  and  psychological  science
in  the  United  States  medical  college.  Dr.  Wilder
is  a  member  of  the  American  Akademe,  a  philo-
sophical society,  and  editor  of  its  "  Journal,"
published  in  Orange,  N.  J.  He  has  published
many  monographs,  including  "  The  Intermarriage
of  Kindred  "  (New  York,  1870) ;  "  Plea  for  the  Col-
legiate Education  of  Women  "  (1874) ;  "  Vaccina-
tion a  Medical  Fallacy  "  (1878) ;  "  Paul  and  Plato  "
(St.  Louis,  1881) ;  "  Life  Eternal "  (Orange,  N.  J.,
1885) ;  and  "  The  Ganglionic  Nervous  System  "
(1887).  He  has  edited  essays  on  "  Ancient  Sym-
bol-Worship "  (New  York,  1873) ;  Thomas  Taylor's
"  Eleusinian  and  Bacchic  Mysteries  "  (1875) ;  Rich-
ard Payne  Knight's  "  Symbolical  Language  of
Ancient  Art  and  Mythology  "  (1876) ;  and  "  In-
dia: what  can  it  Teach  us?"  by  Max  Miiller
(1883) ;  and  translated  Iamblichus's  work  on  "  The
Mysteries  of  the  Egyptians,  Assyrians,  and  Chal-
daeans,"  in  "  The  Platonist."

WILDER,  Burt  Green,  naturalist,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  11  Aug.,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Lawrence  scientific  school  in  1862  and  at  the
medical  department  of  Harvard  in  1866.  Meanwhile
he  served  in  the  U.  S.  army  as  a  medical  cadet  in
1862-'3  and  as  assistant  surgeon  and  surgeon  in
the  55th  Massachusetts  volunteers  in  1863-'5.  In
1867  he  was  elected  professor  of  physiology,  com-
parative anatomy,  and  zoology  in  Cornell  univer-
sity, which  chair  he  still  holds,  and  he  was  also
professor  of  physiology  in  the  Medical  school  of


Maine,  Bowdoin  college,  in  1874-'84.  His  dis-
covery in  1862  that  silk  might  be  drawn  from  a
living  spider  to  the  extent  of  150  yards  at  a  time
led  to  his  further  researches  on  the  habits  of  the
spider  and  the  qualities  and  usefulness  of  the  silk.
Since  1880  he  has  devoted  his  attention  mostly  to
studies  on  the  vertebrate  brain.  He  has  also  striv-
en earnestly  for  the  adoption  of  a  uniform  anatomi-
cal nomenclature,  claiming  that  names  should  be
as  far  as  possible  mononyms,  and  that  in  each  lan-
guage should  be  used  the  appropriate  paronym  of
the  Latin  name  rather  than  the  Latin  form.  In
1887  he  described  the  brain  of  cerotodus  and
showed  that  among  vertebrates  the  proper  cerebral
hemispheres,  the  special  organs  of  the  mind,  occupy
five  different  positions  relative  to  the  olfactory
tracts  and  bulbs,  which  are  the  direct  continua-
tions of  the  general  brain  axis  and  were  probably
the  primitive  and  at  first  most  important  parts  of
the  prosencephal.  In  brain  publications  he  has
insisted  upon  the  morphological  significance  of
the  cavities,  and  upon  the  need  of  greater  care
and  improved  methods  in  dissection  and  prepara-
tion. In  1857  he  described  the  slip  system  of  notes,
consisting  of  the  brief  statement  of  facts,  ideas,  or
references  to  books,  written  lengthwise  upon  slips
equal  to  the  sixth  part  of  a  sheet  of  note-paper.
He  also  uses  these  slips  for  correspondence,  and  in
1886  invented  a  note-wheel  on  the  circumference
of  which  they  are  filed.  Prof.  Wilder  lectured  at
Harvard  in  1868,  at  the  University  of  Michigan  in
1876-'7,  at  the  Lowell  institute,  Boston,  in  1866
and  1870,  at  the  American  institute,  New  York,  in
1870-'3,  and  on  the  Cartwright  foundation  before
the  Alumni  association  of  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  1884.  He  is  a  member  of  scien-
tific societies,  presided  over  the  section  on  biology
of  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science  in  1885,  and  was  president  of  the  Ameri-
can neurological  association  in  1885.  His  bibli-
ography includes  nearly  100  technical  papers  in
scientific  and  medical  journals  and  in  the  publica-
tions of  learned  societies,  also  about  80  reviews
and  articles  in  magazines.  He  has  published  in
book-form  "  What  Young  People  Should  Know  "
(Boston,  1875);  "Emergencies:  how  to  Avoid
them  and  how  to  Meet  them  "  (1879) ;  "  Health
Notes  for  Students  "  (1883) ;  and,  with  Prof.  Simon
H.  Gage,  "  Anatomical  Technology  as  applied  to
the  Domestic  Cat  "  (New  York,  1882).

WILDER,  Daniel  Webster,  journalist,  b.  in
Blackstone,  Mass.,  15  July,  1832.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1856,  and  became  a  lawyer
and  journalist.  He  has  been  an  editor  of  the
Leavenworth,  Kan.,  "  Conservative  "  and  "  Times,"
the  Fort  Scott  "  Monitor,"  the  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
"  Express,"  the  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  "  Herald,"  and  the
"  World,"  of  Hiawatha,  Kan.  Mr.  Wilder  was  one
of  the  chief  organizers  of  the  Kansas  historical  so-
ciety, and  has  served  as  its  president.  He  was  ap-
pointed surveyor-general  of  Kansas  and  Nebraska
in  1863,  and  elected  state  auditor  of  Kansas  in
1872  and  1874,  and  superintendent  of  insurance
in  1887.  He  has  published  "  Annals  of  Kansas  "
(Topeka,  Kan.,  1875).

WILDER,  Marshall  Pinckney,  merchant,  b.
in  Rindge,  N.  H.,  22  Sept.,  1798;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  16  Dec,  1886.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  engaged  in  farming,  but  in
1819  became  a  partner  of  his  father,  who  was  a
merchant  in  his  native  place.  In  1825  he  removed
to  Boston,  where  he  established  a  wholesale  busi-
ness in  West  India  goods,  and  in  1837  he  became  a
member  of  the  commission  firm  of  Parker,  Blanch-
ard  and  Wilder. He  acquired  a  large  fortune,  and


WILDER


WILEY


507


served  also  as  a  director  in  many  commercial  or
financial  companies.  Mr.  Wilder  served  in  the
legislature  in  1839,  in  the  governor's  council  in
1849,  and  in  the  state  senate,  of  which  he  was
president,  in  1850,  and  he  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Constitutional
Union  party  in  1860,
being  chairman  of
the  Massachusetts
delegation  to  its  Na-
tional convention  of
that  year,  which
nominated  Bell  and
Everett.  Through-
out the  war  he  was  a
firm  supporter  of  the
U.  S.  government.
He  took  special  in-
terest in  agriculture
and  horticulture,  was
president  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts agricul-
tural society  for  eight
years,  of  the  Norfolk
agricultural  society  for  twenty  years,  and  for  six
years  of  the  U.  S.  agricultural  society,  of  which
he  was  the  founder.  He  was  also  a  founder  of  the
American  pomological  society,  and  became  its  presi-
dent on  its  organization  in  1848,  continuing  many
years  in  office.  The  value  of  his  researches  in  hy-
bridization and  fruit-culture  were  recognized  not
only  in  the  United  States  but  abroad.  Mr.  Wilder
was  also  president  of  the  New  England  historic-
genealogical  society  from  1868  till  1886,  and  was  a
leader  in  the  movement  that  gave  to  Boston  the
Natural  history  rooms  and  the  Institute  of  tech-
nology. He  published  a  large  number  of  historical,
agricultural,  and  other  addresses,  including  those
"  On  Laying  the  Corner-Stone  of  the  First  Massa-
chusetts Horticultural  Hall "  (Boston,  1844) ;  "  On
the  225th  Anniversary  of  the  Settlement  of  Dor-
chester "  (1855) ;  annual  addresses  before  the  His-
toric-genealogical society  (1868-73) ;  lectures  on
"California"  (1871)  and  "The  Hybridization  of
Plants"  (1872);  "On  the  Progress  and  Influence
of  Rural  Art"  (1872);  and  addresses  before  the
American  pomological  society  (1848-'73)  and  the
U.  S.  agricultural  society  (1852-6).

WILDER,  Samson  Vryling  Stoddard,  mer-
chant, b.  in  Bolton,  Mass.,  in  1780 ;  d.  in  Eliza-
beth, N.  J.,  2  April,  1865.  He  became  a  merchant
in  Boston,  visited  Europe  in  the  interests  of  his
business,  where  he  formed  the  acquaintance  of
Rev.  Rowland  Hill  and  other  eminent  men,  who
enlisted  his  sympathies  in  the  formation  of  Bible
and  tract  societies,  and  in  1830  went  to  New  York,
where  he  engaged  in  banking.  He  was  president
of  the  American  tract  society  in  1823-'42,  and  was
connected  with  many  similar  organizations,  from
all  of  which  he  retired  in  1842.  He  was  the  author
of  numerous  religious  tracts  that  were  widely  cir-
culated. See  "Records  of  the  Life  of  S.  V.  S.
Wilder"  (New  York,  1866).

WILDES,  George  Dudley,  clergyman,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  19  June,  1819.  He  was  fitted
for  Harvard,  and  became  usher  in  mathematics  at
Chauncey  Hall  school,  Boston.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Virginia  theological  seminary  at  Alexandria,
was  ordained  deacon  in  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  in
1846,  by  the  bishop  of  Kentucky,  and  at  the  same
time  invited  to  the  professorship  of  mathematics  at
Shelby  college,  Ky.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  Ded-
ham,  Mass.,  in  1848,  by  Bishop  Eastburn.  After
holding  several  charges,  he  became  assistant  at  St.
Paul's,  Boston,  and  also  supervisor  of  the  Episcopal


school  of  Massachusetts.  Afterward  he  was  at
Brookline  and  then  at  Salem,  where  he  became  a
member  of  the  State  board  of  education.  At  the
outset  of  the  civil  war  Dr.  Wildes  was  instrumental
in  raising  the  23d  and  19th  Massachusetts  regi-
ments, forming  also  the  field  hospital  corps,  vol-
unteering as  its  head  for  service,  and  being  com-
missioned a  chaplain.  Since  1867  he  has  been  rec-
tor of  Christ  church,  Riverdale,  New  York.  He
received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Harvard  in  1855,
of  S.  T.  D.  from  Hobart  in  1871,  and  that  of  D.  D.
from  the  College  of  Kansas  in  1886.  Since  its
organization  in  1874  he  has  been  general  secre-
tary of  the  church  congress,  being  one  of  its  origi-
nal founders.  In  this  capacity  he  has  edited  eleven
volumes  of  papers  and  addresses  (1872-'88).  Dr.
Wildes  has  published  sermons  and  addresses,  has
edited  Bishop  Griswold's  "Lectures  on  Prayer,"
and  translated  George  Herbert's  Latin  poems.

WILDEY,  Thomas,  a  founder  of  the  Order  of
Odd-Fellows  in  the  United  States,  b.  in  London,
England,  15  Jan.,  1783;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  19
Oct.,  1861.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1817,  and
labored  in  Baltimore  as  a  maker  of  coach-springs.
In  1819  he  established  in  that  city  the  first  lodge
of  Odd-Fellows  in  the  United  States,  and  from
1825  till  1833  he  was  grand-sire  of  the  grand  lodge.
A  monument  has  been  erected  to  his  memory  in
Baltimore  by  members  of  the  order.

WILES,  Lemuel  Maynard,  artist,  b.  in  Perry,
Genesee  co.  (now  Wyoming),  N.  Y.,  21  Oct.,  1826.
In  1848-'51  he  studied  with  William  Hart  in
Albany,  and  Jasper  F.  Cropsey  in  New  York.  He
followed  his  profession  in  Washington,  D.  C,  Buf-
falo, Utica,  and  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1864  opened
a  studio  in  New  York.  In  1875  he  assumed  the
directorship  of  the  College  of  fine  arts  in  Ingham
university,  Le  Roy,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1888  he  founded
the  Silver  Lake  art-school  at  Perry,  N.  Y.  His
works  include  "  The  Pillar  of  Fire,"  "  Mount
San  Jacinto,  California,"  "  Ruins  of  the  Cathe-
dral of  San  Juan  Capistrano,  Cal.,"  "  The  Noon-
day Retreat,"  "  The  Vale  of  Elms,"  "  Snow-
bound," and  "A  Song  of  the  Sea." — His  son,
Irving  Ramsay,  artist,  b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  8  April,
1861,  studied  painting  at  first  under  his  father
and  afterward  at  the  Art  students'  league,  New
York,  and  in  1882-'4  under  Jules  Joseph  Lefebvre
and  Carolus  Duran  in  Paris.  He  is  known  as  a
clever  figure-painter,  and  his  "  Corner  Table "
gained  the  third  Hallgarten  prize  at  the  Academy
of  design  in  1886.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Society
of  American  artists,  and  the  Water-color  society.

WILEY,  Calvin  Henderson,  clergvman,  b.  in
Guilford  county,  N.  C,  3  Feb.,  1819 ;'d.  in  Win-
ston. N.  C,  11  Jan.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  i840.  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  soon  after  his
graduation.  He  was  elected  to  the  state  legisla-
ture in  1850,  and  again  in  1852,  and  in  the  latter
year  was  chosen  the  first  state  superintendent  of
common  schools,  to  which  post  he  was  re-elected
for  six  successive  terms  of  two  years  each  by  an
almost  unanimous  vote.  So  efficient  was  the  sys-
tem of  public  instruction  under  his  administration
that  the  schools  were  kept  in  operation  during  the
entire  period  of  the  civil  war,  something  which  it
is  claimed  did  not  occur  in  any  other  southern
state.  Having  previously  studied  theology,  he  was
licensed  to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  Orange  in
1855,  in  1869  was  appointed  general  agent  of  the
American  Bible  society  for  middle  and  eastern
Tennessee,  and  in  1874  was  transferred  to  North
Carolina,  South  Carolina  being  included  in  his
field  of  labor  in  1876. During  the  civil  war  Mr.


508


WILEY


WILKES


Wiley  was  instrumental  in  establishing  a  publish-
ing-house at  Greensboro'  to  supply  the  state  with
text-books ;  also  in  organizing  at  Columbia,  S.  C,
an  educational  association  for  the  Confederacy,
and  in  establishing  a  North  Carolina  state  educa-
tional association,  of  whose  journal  he  was  one  of
the  editors.  He  founded  with  William  D.  Cooke
the  "Southern  Weekly  Post"  of  Raleigh,  which
he  also  edited,  published  and  edited  the  "  Oxford
Mercury,"  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  "  North
Carolina  Presbyterian,"  and  contributed  to  other
journals.  In  addition  to  school-books,  he  pub-
lished "  Alamance,  or  the  Great  and  Final  Experi-
ment." a  novel  (New  York,  1847) ;  "  Adventures  of
Old  Dan  Tucker  with  his  Son  Walter"  (London,
1851) ;  "  Utopia :  a  Picture  of  Early  Life  at  the
South  "  (Philadelphia,  1852) ;  "  Life  in  the  South  :
a  Companion  to  '  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin '  "  (1852) ;
"  Scriptural  Views  of  National  Trials "  (Greens-
boro', 1863) ;  and  "  Roanoke ;  or  Where  is  Uto-
pia?" (Philadelphia,  1886).

WILEY,  Harvey  Washington,  chemist,  b.  in
Kent,  Jefferson  co.,  Ind.,  18  Oct.,  1844.  He  was
graduated  at  Hanover  college  in  1867,  and  was
professor  of  Latin  and  Greek  in  1868-71  at  Butler
university,  Indianapolis,  also  studying  at  Indiana
medical  college,  where  he  received  the  degree  of
M.  D.  in  1871.  After  teaching  science  for  a  year
in  the  Indianapolis  high-school,  he  entered  the
Lawrence  scientific  school  at  Harvard,  where  he
was  graduated  with  the  degree  of  S.  B.  in  1873,
and  then  accepted  the  chair  of  chemistry  at  Butler
university,  which  institution  gave  him  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  in  1876.  He  studied  chemistry  at  the
University  of  Berlin  in  1878,  and  during  1874-'83
was  professor  at  the  Agricultural  college  of  Indiana
(now  Purdue  university).  He  also  held  in  1881-'3
the  office  of  state  chemist  of  Indiana,  and  in  1883
he  was  appointed  chemist  of  the  LT.  S.  department
of  agriculture  in  Washington,  which  place  he  has
since  held.  Prof.  Wiley  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies,  and  in  1886  was  vice-president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science,  with  charge  of  the  section  of  chemistry.
He  was  also  in  1886  president  of  the  Chemical
society  of  Washington  and  of  the  Association  of
official  agricultural  chemists.  His  work  has  been
chiefly  in  technology,  and  more  especially  in  rela-
tion to  food-products.  The  subjects  of  glucose  and
grape-sugar  were  veiy  thoroughly  studied  by  him
while  he  was  state  chemist,  and  since  his  appoint-
ment in  Washington  he  has  investigated  sorghum-
sugar.  Prof.  Wiley  has  published  presidential  and
college  addresses,  and  his  papers  number  more
than  fifty.  These  include  the  results  of  his  re-
searches, and  have  been  published  in  scientific
journals,  the  transactions  of  societies  of  which  he
is  a  member,  and  government  reports.

WILEY,  Isaac  William,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Lewistown.  Pa.,  29  March,  1825;  d.  in  Foochow,
China,  in  November,  1884.  At  fourteen  years  of
age  he  went  to  an  academy  to  fit  for  college,  hoping
to  be  a  minister,  and  in  his  eighteenth  year  he  was
licensed  as  lay  preacher.  Owing  to  impaired  health,
he  gave  up  the  idea  of  entering  the  ministry,  and
in  1844  he  was  graduated  at  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York.
In  1846  he  began  medical  practice  in  western  Penn-
sylvania, where  he  continued  several  years  with
success.  In  1850  he  offered  himself  as  a  minister
to  the  Philadelphia  conference,  but  there  was  no
room  for  him.  At  this  time  Dr.  John  P.  Durbin,
hearing  of  his  abilities  as  a  physician  and  his
desire  to  enter  the  ministry,  induced  him  to  go
to  China  as  medical  missionary. At  Foochow,  in


1853,  his  wife  died,  and  in  the  following  year  he
brought  back  his  motherless  children  to  the  United
States.  He  entered  the  ministry  in  New  Jersey,
and,  after  filling  pastorates  for  four  years,  became
principal  of  Pennington  seminary,  which  post  he
filled  until  1863.  In  1864  the  general  conference
elected  him  editor  of  the  "Ladies'  Repository,"
published  in  Cincinnati.  In  1872  he  was  made
bishop.  As  a  pastor  Dr.  Wiley  was  useful  and
highly  respected,  as  principal  of  a  seminary  he
was  greatly  beloved,  and  as  an  editor  his  taste  was
excellent  and  his  style  chaste.  As  a  bishop  he  was
prudent,  deliberate,  and  clear,  and  seldom  fell  into
any  error  either  of  the  interpretation  of  constitu-
tional or  parliamentary  law,  or  the  selection  of
men  for  particular  posts.  He  died  in  China  on  an
episcopal  tour  to  the  missions  that  he  had  done  so
much  to  found.  His  death  took  place  in  a  house
on  the  very  lot  that  he  had  occupied  as  a  missionary
thirty-two  years  before.  Bishop  Wiley  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Wesleyan  university  in  1864,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Ohio  Wesleyan  university
in  1879.  He  published  "  The  Fallen  Missionaries
of  Fuh-Chau"  (New  York,  1858),  and  "Religion
in  the  Family " ;  and  among  other  works  edited
Rev.  Thomas  R.  Birks's  "  The.  Bible  and  Moslem
Thought "  (Cincinnati,  1864) ;  "  The  Life  and  Work
of  Earnest  Men,"  by  Rev.  W.  K.  Tweedie  (1864) ;
and  Friedrich  Tholuck's  "Christ  of  the  Gospels
and  of  Criticism  "  (1865).

WILHORST,  Cora  de,  singer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  16  Oct.,  1835.  Her  maiden  name  was  Withers,
and  her  father  belonged  to  a  well-known  New  York
family.  Her  maternal  grandfather,  David  Dun-
ham, was  associated  with  Robert  Fulton  in  the
construction  of  the  first  steamboat.  Cora  was
educated  in  her  native  city,  studied  music,  and
became  separated  from  her  family  through  her
marriage  with  her  music-teacher  Henri,  Comte  de
Wilhorst.  She  then  appeared  in  concerts  with
Sigismund  Thalberg,  the  pianist,  her  debut  tak-
ing place  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  21  Aug.,  1856.  She
made  her  first  appearance  in  opera  at  the  New  York
academy  of  music  as  Lucia,  28  Jan.,  1857.  After
visiting  Paris  and  singing  with  Mario  in  "Don
Pasquale,"  she  returned  to  this  country  and  began
an  operatic  engagement  in  Philadelphia,  2  Nov.,
1858.  During  the  next  four  years  Mme.  de  Wil-
horst sang  in  the  United  States,  opening  the  first
opera-house  in  Cincinnati  and  trie  first  music-
hall  in  Chicago.  She  retired  from  the  stage  in
1860,  but  resumed  her  profession  in  Paris  in  1869,
singing  in  concerts.  In  1870  she  appeared  in
"  Rigoletto "  in  that  city,  taking  the  place  of
Adelina  Patti,  who  had  gone  to  Russia.  The
Franco-Prussian  war  compelled  her  to  give  up  a
three- vears'  engagement  to  sing  in  the  French  capi-
tal. In  February,  1871,  she  sang  for  the  first  time
in  Great  Britain,  appearing  with  Sims  Reeves  at
the  Crystal  palace,  Sydenham.  She  remained  in
England,  taking  part  in  oratorios,  concerts,  and
festivals  until  1874,  when  she  married  Oliver  de
Raucourt,  and  retired  from  the  stage.  In  1880  she
returned  to  the  United  States,  where  she  has  since
devoted  herself  to  teaching  singing.  Mme.  de
Wilhorst  claims  to  be  the  first  American  singer
that  began  her  operatic  career  in  this  country  be-
fore studying  abroad.

WILKES,  Charles,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  3  April,  1798 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
8  Feb.,  1877.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midship-
man, 1  Jan..  1818,  and  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,
28  April,  1826.  He  was  appointed  to  the  depart-
ment of  charts  and  instruments  in  1830.  and  was
the  first  in  the  United  States  to  set  up  fixed  astro-


WILKES


WILKESON


509


nomical  instruments  and  observe  with  them.  On
18  Aug.,  1838,  he  sailed  from  Norfolk,  Va.,  in  com-
mand of  a  squadron  of  five  vessels  and  a  store-ship,
to  explore  the  southern  seas. He  visited  Madeira,

the  Cape  Verd
islands,  Rio  de
Janeiro,  Tierra
del  Fuego,  Val-
paraiso, Callao,
the  Paumotou
group,  Tahiti,
the  Samoan
group  (which  he
surveyed  and
explored),  Wal-
lis  island,  and
Sydney  in  New
South  Wales.
He  left  Sydney
in  December,
1839,  and  dis-
covered what
he  thought  to
be  an  Antarctic
continent,  sail-
ing along  vast
ice-fields  for  several  weeks.  In  1840  he  thoroughly
•explored  the  Feejee  group,  and  visited  the  Hawai-
ian islands,  where  he  measured  intensity  of  gravity
by  means  of  the  pendulum  on  the  summit  of  Mauna
Loa.  In  1841  he  visited  the  northwestern  coast  of
America  and  Columbia  and  Sacramento  rivers,  and
■on  1  Nov.  set  sail  from  San  Francisco,  visited  Ma-
nila, Sooloo,  Borneo,  Singapore,  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  and  St.  Helena,  and  cast  anchor  at  New
York  on  10  June,  1842.  Charges  preferred  against
him  by  some  of  his  officers  were  investigated  by  a
■court-martial,  and  he  was  acquitted  of  all  except
illegally  punishing  some  of  his  crew,  for  which  he
was  reprimanded.  He  served  on  the  coast  survey
in  1842-'3,  was  promoted  to  commander,  13  July,
1843,  and  employed  in  connection  with  the  report
on  the  exploring  expedition  at  Washington  in
1844-'61.  He  was  commissioned  a  captain,  14
Sept.,  1855,  and  when  the  civil  war  opened  was
placed  in  command  of  the  steamer  "  San  Jacinto  "
in  1861  and  sailed  in  pursuit  of  the  Confederate
privateer  "  Sumter."  On  8  Nov.,  1861,  he  inter-
cepted at  sea  the  English  mail-steamer  "  Trent,"
bound  from  Havana  to  St.  Thomas,  W.  I.,  and  sent
Lieut.  Donald  M.  Fairfax  on  board  to  bring  off  the
Confederate  commissioners,  John  Slidell  and  James
M.  Mason,  with  their  secretaries.  The  officials
were  removed  to  the  "  San  Jacinto,"  in  which  they
were  taken  to  Fort  Warren,  in  Boston  harbor.  The
navy  department  gave  Capt.  Wilkes  an  emphatic
■commendation ;  congress  passed  a  resolution  of
thanks,  and  his  act  caused  great  rejoicing  through-
out the  north,  where  he  was  the  hero  of  the  hour.
But  on  the  demand  of  the  British  government  that
Mason  and  Slidell  should  be  given  up,  Sec.  Seward
complied,  saying  in  his  despatch  that,  although  the
commissioners  and  their  papers  were  contraband
of  war,  and  therefore  Wilkes  was  right  in  captur-
ing them,  he  should  have  taken  the  "  Trent "  into
port  as  a  prize  for  adjudication.  As  he  had  failed
to  do  so,  and  had  constituted  himself  a  judge  in  the
matter,  to  approve  his  act  would  be  to  sanction  the
"right  of  search,"  which  had  always  been  denied
by  the  U.  S.  government.  The  prisoners  were
therefore  released.  In  1862  Wilkes  commanded
the  James  river  flotilla,  and  shelled  City  Point.  He
was  promoted  to  commodore,  16  July,  1862,  and
took  charge  of  a  special  squadron  in  the  West
Indies. He  was  placed  on  the  retired  list  because


of  age,  25  June,  1864,  and  promoted  to  rear-admiral
on  the  retired  list,  25  July,  1866.  For  his  services
to  science  as  an  explorer  he  received  a  gold  medal
from  the  Geographical  society  of  London.  The
reports  of  the  Wilkes  exploring  expedition  were  to
consist  of  twenty-eight  quarto  volumes,  but  nine
of  these  were  not  completed.  Of  those  that  were
published,  Capt.  Wilkes  was  the  author  of  the
"  Narrative  "  of  the  expedition  (6  vols.,  4to,  also  5
vols.,  8vo,  Philadelphia,  1845 ;  abridged  ed.,  New
York,  1851),  and  the  volumes  on  "Meteorology"
and  "Hydrography."  Admiral  Wilkes  was  also
the  author  of  "  Western  America,  including  Cali-
fornia and  Oregon "  (Philadelphia,  1849),  and
"  Theory  of  the  Winds  "  (New  York,  1856).

WILKES,  George,  journalist,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1820 ;  d.  there,  23  Sept.,  1885.  In  1850  he
became  co-editor,  with  William  T.  Porter,  of  the
"  Spirit  of  the  Times  "  in  New  York,  and  subse-
quently he  was  proprietor  of  that  paper.  He  was
well  known  as  a  politician,  and  travelled  repeatedly
in  Europe.  In  April,  1870,  he  received  from  the
emperor  of  Russia  the  grand  cross  of  the  Order  of
St.  Stanislas  for  his  services  in  suggesting  to  the
Russian  government  an  overland  railway  to  China
and  India  by  way  of  Russia.  In  addition  to  con-
tributions to  periodicals,  he  published  "  History
of  California,  Geographical  and  Political "  (New
York,  1845),  and  "  Europe  in  a  Hurry"  (1852).

WILKES,  Henry,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Birmingham,  England,  21  June,  1805  ;  d.  in  Mon-
treal', Canada,  17  Nov.,  1886.  He  removed  to  Cana-
da in  1820,  was  graduated  at  Glasgow  university,
Scotland,  in  1833,  studied  in  the  Glasgow  theologi-
cal academy,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Albany  street
Congregational  church  in  Edinburgh  in  1833-'6.
He  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church,  Mon-
treal, from  1836  till  1871,  principal  and  professor  of
theology  in  the  Congregational  college  of  British
North  America  in  1870-'83,  and  from  1883  till  his
death  professor  of  theology  and  church  history  in
this  institution.  He  represented  the  Colonial  mis-
sionary society,  London,  England,  in  1836-'83.  The
University  of  Vermont  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1850,  and  McGill  college,  Montreal,  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1870.  Dr.  Wilkes  published  numerous  sermons
and  addresses,  and  "  The  Internal  Administration
of  the  Congregational  Churches  "  (Montreal.  1858).

WILKESON,  Samuel,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Car-
lisle, Pa.,  in  1781 ;  d.  in  the  mountains  of  Tennes-
see in  July,  1848.  His  father,  John,  a  native  of
Ireland  of  Scotch  descent,  came  to  this  country  in
1760,  settled  in  Delaware,  and  served  against  the
British  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution.  The  son  re-
ceived few  educational  advantages,  and  worked  on
a  farm  till  about  1806,  when  he  began  his  career
as  a  builder  and  owner  of  vessels  and  a  trader  on
Lake  Erie  and  elsewhere.  During  the  war  of
1812  he  supplied  Gen.  William  Henry  Harrison
with  transports  for  the  use  of  the  troops  in  invad-
ing Canada.  In  1814  he  settled  in  Buffalo  and  en-
gaged in  business  as  a  merchant.  In  1819  he  was
an  active  advocate  of  the  construction  of  the  Erie
canal,  and  in  1822  he  was  chiefly  instrumental  in
securing  the  selection  of  Buffalo  as  its  terminus.
He  was  appointed  first  judge  of  the  Erie  court  of
common  pleas  in  February,  1821,  though  he  was
without  a  legal  education,  was  elected  to  the  state
senate  in  1842,  and  served  in  that  body  and  in  the
court  for  the  correction  of  errors  for  six  years.  In
1836  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Buffalo.  He  erected
and  put  in  operation  a  furnace  in  Mahoning  county,
Ohio,  the  first  in  this  country  to  "  blow  in  "  on  raw
bituminous  coal  and  smelt  iron  with  that  fuel  un-
coked,  built  the  first  iron-foundry  in  Buffalo,  and


510


WILKIE


WILKINS


established  in  that  city  the  business  of  manufac-
turing steam-engines,  stoves,  and  hollow-ware.  He
favored  a  system  of  gradual  and  compensated
emancipation  of  the  slaves,  and  advocated  the  colo-
nization of  the  negroes  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa.
He  afterward  removed  to  Washington,  the  head-
quarters of  the  American  colonization  society,  over
which  he  presided,  for  two  years  edited  its  organ,
the  "  African  Repository,"  directed  the  affairs  of
the  colony  of  Liberia,  establishing  commercial  re-
lations between  it  and  Baltimore  and  Philadelphia,
and  gathered  colonists  wherever  he  could  in  the
south.— His  son  Samuel,  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  9
May,  1817,  was  educated  at  Williams  and  Union,
and  was  graduated  at  the  latter  in  1837.  He  was
for  twelve  years  a  staff-writer  on  the  New  York
"  Tribune,"  and  its  war-correspondent  in  the  Army
of  the  Potomac,  and  was  the  editor  and  owner  of
the  Buffalo  "  Democracy "  and  of  the  Albany
"  Evening  Journal,"  having  bought  out  Thurlow
Weed  in  1865.  He  has  been  secretary  of  the
Northern  Pacific  railroad  company  since  March,
1869. — The  second  Samuel's  son,  Bayard,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  17  May,  1844;  d.  near  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  1  July,  1863,  in  the  first  year  of  the  civil  war
solicited  and  obtained  a  commission  as  2d  lieuten-
ant in  the  4th  U.  S.  artillery.  He  served  with  his
battery  in  and  about  Fortress  Monroe  and  Nor-
folk, and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg.
He  was  promoted  captain  of  his  battery,  and  com-
manded it  at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  where  he  was
killed.  He  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel
of  artillery  after  his  death  for  gallantry  in  battle.
— Another  son,  Frank,  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  8
March,  1845,  has  contributed  to  the  New  York
"  Times,"  the  New  York  u  Sun,"  and  other  papers,
and  has  published  "  Recollections  of  a  Private
Soldier  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  "  (New  York,
1887). — Another  son,  Samuel,  was  one  of  the  build-
ers of  Tacoma,  on  Puget  sound.

WILKIE,  Francis  Bangs,  journalist,  b.  in  West
Charlton,  N.  Y.,  2  July,  1832.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  in  1857,  during  which  period  he  had
editorial  charge  of  the  "  Daily  Star "  of  Schenec-
tady. Soon  after  he  settled  in  Davenport,  Iowa,
where  he  established  the  "  Evening  News,"  and  in
1861  became  the  war-correspondent  of  the  "  New
York  Times,"  having  charge  of  all  the  military
movements  in  the  region  west  of  the  Alleghany
mountains.  He  then  became  an  editorial  writer
on  the  "  Chicago  Times "  in  1864,  which  he  held
till  the  close  of  1887.  He  was  the  correspondent
of  the  latter  during  the  Russo-Turkish  war,  and
for  several  years  was  at  the  head  of  the  European
bureau  of  that  journal.  His  published  works  are
"  Davenport,  Past  and  Present "  (Davenport,  Iowa,
1858) ;  «  The  Iowa  First "  (Dubuque,  Iowa,  1862) ;
"  Walks  about  Chicago,  and  Army  and  Miscellane-
ous Sketches  "  (Chicago,  1871) ;  "  The  Chicago  Bar  "
(1872) ;  "  Sketches  beyond  the  Sea  "  (1879) ;  "  His-
tory of  the  Great  Inventions  and  their  Influence  on
Civilization"  (Cincinnati,  1883);  "The  Gambler,"
a  novel  (Chicago,  1888) ;  and  "  Pen  and  Powder  "
(Boston,  1888). He  signs  his  articles  "  Poliute."

WILKINS,  Isaac,  clergyman,  b.  in  Withywood,
Jamaica,  W.  I.,  17  Dec,  1742  ;  d.  in  Westchester,
N.  Y.,  5  Feb.,  1830.  His  father,  Martin,  who  at
one  time  held  a  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  island,
brought  the  son  to  New  York  in  early  youth  to  be
educated.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1760,
was  a  member  from  the  borough  of  Westchester  of
the  New  York  colonial  legislature  in  1772,  and  for
several  years  was  actively  and  efficiently  engaged
in  public  affairs.  He  supported  the  loyalist  side  of
the  controversy  with  the  mother  country,  wrote


political  pamphlets  which  appeared  in  the  "  West-
chester Farmer,"  and  thereby  rendered  himself
odious  to  the  Whigs.  He  was  compelled  by  the
Sons  of  Liberty  to  leave  this  country  in  1775,  and
the  British  government  conferred  upon  him  a  life
annuity  of  £125.  Mr.  Wilkins  returned  to  New
York  before  the  end  of  the  war,  sold  his  property
in  Westchester,  and  resided  on  Long  Island  until
the  return  of  peace.  In  1784  he  removed  to  Shel-
burne,  Nova  Scotia,  purchased  a  farm,  and  took  an
active  part  in  political  affairs.  He  went  to  New
York  again  in  1794,  studied  for  the  ministry,  was
ordained  deacon  in  St.  Peter's  church,  Westchester,
in  1798,  by  Bishop  Provoost,  and  called  to  the  rec-
torship, being  ordained  priest  in  the  same  church,

14  Jan.,  1801,  by  the  same  bishop.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1811.  He
married  Isabella,  daughter  of  Lewis  Morris. — His
grandson,  Lewis  Morris,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  24  May,  1801 ;  d.  in  Wind-
sor, Nova  Scotia,  14  March,  1885,  was  the  son  of
Lewis  Morris  Wilkins,  who  was  a  member  of  the
house  of  assembly  of  Nova  Scotia,  a  speaker  of
that  body,  and  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court.  The
son  was  graduated  at  King's  college,  Windsor,  in
1819,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
practised  at  Windsor  from  1823  till  1856,  when  he
became  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Nova  Scotia,
which  post  he  held  till  1876.  Previous  to  his  ap-
pointment to  the  judiciary,  he  had  served  in  both
branches  of  the  Nova  Scotia  legislature.

WILKINS,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  Donegal,  Lan-
caster co..  Pa.,  1  June,  1733;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,
11  Dec,  1809.  His  father,  John,  an  early  settler
on  Chiques  creek,  was  an  Indian  trader,  and  took
an  active  part  against  the  Marylanders  during  the
boundary  difficulties,  who  offered  £50  for  his  arrest.
He  was  captured  and  taken  to  Annapolis  jail,  but
subsequently  released,  John,  the  younger,  re-
moved to  Carlisle  in  1763,  and  ten  years  later  to
Bedford,  engaging  in  mercantile  pursuits.  At  the
opening  of  the  Revolution  he  organized  a  company
of  associators,  and  in  1776  was  commissioned  a
captain  in  the  Continental  service,  and  was  at
Brandywine  and  Germantown.  He  was  a  member
of  the  Pennsylvania  constitutional  convention  of

15  July,  1776,  from  Bedford  county.  In  Novem-
ber, 1783,  he  removed  to  Pittsburg,  entered  into
business,  and,  upon  the  organization  of  Alleghany
county,  was  appointed  one  of  the  associate  judges
of  the  court.  He  served  as  member  of  the  supreme
executive  council  in  1790,  was  chief  burgess  of  the
borough  of  Pittsburg,  commissioner  of  public
buildings,  and  county  treasurer  from  1794  till  1803.
— His  son,  William,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  20  Dec,
1779;  d.  in  Homewood,  Alleghany  co.,  Pa.,  23
June,  1865,  attended  Dickinson  college  for  a  short
time,  read  law  at  Carlisle,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  at  Pittsburg  on  28  Dec,  1801.  He  practised
law  there  for  more  than  fifty  years,  except  when
engaged  in  the  performance  of  public  duties.  He
was  president  of  the  common  councils  of  the  city
in  1816-'19,  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1820,
and  was  a  candidate  for  speaker,  but  was  defeated
and  made  chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee.
He  resigned  on  18  Dec,  1820,  when  he  was  ap-
pointed president-judge  of  the  5th  judicial  district
of  Pennsylvania.  He  held  this  office  until  25  May,
1824,  when  he  was  made  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district
court  for  western  Pennsylvania.  While  on  the
bench  in  1828,  he  was  elected  to  congress,  but  de-
clined to  serve.  In  1831  he  was  chosen  U.  S.  sena-
tor for  the  full  term  of  six  years,  and  gave  up  the
judgeship.  He  was  a  supporter  of  Andrew  Jack-
son in  opposition  to  John  C.  Calhoun's  doctrines,


WILKINSON


WILKINSON


511


and,  as  chairman  of  the  senate  committee,  he  re-
ported the  bill  that  passed  congress,  authorizing
the  president  to  use  the  army  to  suppress  the  nulli-
fication movement.  In  1833  the  electoral  vote  of
Pennsylvania  was  cast  for  him  for  vice-president.
In  1834  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Russia.  In
1842  he  was  again  elected  to  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives, and  served  until  19  Jan.,  1844,  when  he
was  made  secretary  of  war  by  President  Tyler.  In
1855  he  was  chosen  state  senator  from  Alleghany
county.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  although
more  than  eighty  years  of  age,  he  took  an  active
interest  in  supporting  the  government  as  major-
general  of  the  home-guard,  being  always  a  stanch
war  Democrat.  Prom  1805  until  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  active  in  any  matter  for  the  improve-
ment of  Pittsburg.  In  1810  he  helped  to  organize
the  Pittsburg  manufacturing  company,  which  in
1814  was  incorporated  as  the  Bank  of  Pittsburg,
and  he  was  its  first  president.  He  was  interested
in  building  the  bridge  across  Monongahela  river,
and  aided  the  Pennsylvania  railroad  in  reaching
the  city  of  Pittsburg.  His  second  wife  was  Matilda
Dallas,  daughter  of  Alexander  James  Dallas.

WILKINSON,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Benedict,
Md.,  in  1757;  d.  near  the  city  of  Mexico,  28  Dec.,
1825.  He  had  just  completed  his  studies  for  the
medical  profession  when  he  enlisted  in  the  army
under  Washington  at  Cambridge. There  he  soon

formed  a  close  in-
timacy with  Col.
Benedict  Arnold
and  Capt.  Aaron
Burr,  and,  being
given  a  captain's
commission,  joined
Arnold  in  Septem-
ber, 1775,  on  his  ex-
pedition into  Can-
ada. He  was  ad-
vanced to  the  rank
of  major,  and  in
June,  1776,  ap-
pointed to  the  staff
of  Gen.  Horatio
Gates.  Subsequent-
ly he  was  promot-
ed to  a  colonelcy,
and  appointed  ad-
jutant-general. In
this  capacity  he  was
in  the  battle  of  Berais's  Heights  on  19  Sept.,  1777,
and  in  the  more  important  engagement  of  7  Oct.
Under  cover  of  darkness,  Col.  John  Hardin,  of
Kentucky,  had  penetrated  the  British  lines  and
obtained  an  accurate  view  of  their  strength  and
position.  He  regained  the  American  outposts,  and
there  met  Wilkinson,  who  was  making  the  rounds
with  some  boon  companions.  Hardin  confided  to
him  his  discoveries,  and  begged  he  would  at  once
make  them  known  to  Gen.  Gates.  This  Wilkinson
did,  suppressing  Hardin's  name,  and  making  him-
self the  hero  of  the  midnight  adventure.  The  con-
sequence was  that  when  Burgoyne  had  surren-
dered, Wilkinson  was  made  bearer  of  the  tidings
to  congress,  with  a  recommendation  for  his  ap-
pointment as  a  brigadier-general.  He  was  eighteen
days  on  the  way,  and  the  news  was  a  week  old  when
he  finally  delivered  his  despatches.  After  several
days  a  proposal  was  introduced  into  congress  to
present  him  with  a  sword,  whereupon  Dr.  John
Witherspoon  dryly  remarked  :  "  1  think  ye'd  better
gie  the  lad  a  pair  of  spurs."  This  defeated  the  reso-
lution, but  congress,  several  weeks  later,  did  ap-
point him  a  brigadier-general  by  brevet,  and  soon


£^£/kj£-^£  ^u^-7  o-w-f


afterward  secretary  of  the  board  of  war,  of  which
Gates  was  a  member.  Wilkinson  was  at  this  time
deep  in  the  Conway  cabal,  which  proposed  to  ele-
vate Gates  to  the  chief  command  of  the  army,  and
the  discovery  of  the  conspiracy  was  due  to  his  tell-
ing the  secret  in  a  convivial  hour  to  Lord  Stir-
ling. Forty-nine  army  officers  of  his  own  grade
petitioned  congress  to  rescind  his  appointment  as
brigadier,  and  he  at  once  resigned  his  brevet  com-
mission, retaining  his  rank  of  colonel.  He  was  not
again  actively  employed  till  toward  the  close  of  the
war,  when  he  served  for  a  time  as  clothier-general
of  the  army.  He  then  emigrated  to  Lexington,
Ky.  Mississippi  river  was  then  closed  to  Ameri-
can commerce,  and  western  produce  was  rotting
on  the  ground  for  lack  of  a  market.  Wilkinson
saw  that  he  might  realize  a  speedy  fortune  if  he
could  obtain  from  the  Spaniards  an  exclusive  right
to  trade  with  New  Orleans.  Securing  the  good-will
of  the  commandant  of  Natchez,  by  the  present  of  a

Rair  of  thoroughbreds,  he  loaded  a  flat-boat  with
Kentucky  produce,  in  the  spring  of  1787,  and  sent
it  boldly  down  the  Mississippi,  while  he  went  by  the
land-route  to  New  Orleans.  The  flat-boat  preceded
him,  and  was  promptly  seized  by  the  authorities
on  its  arrival ;  but  it  was  quickly  liberated  on  the
appearance  of  Wilkinson,  who  secured  an  unlimited
trading  permission  from  the  Spanish  governor.
The  price  he  was  to  pay  for  this  commercial  con-
cession and  an  annual  pension  of  $2,000  was  the
betrayal  of  his  country.  In  the  entire  district  west
of  the  Alleghanies  great  dissatisfaction  then  ex-
isted with  the  Federal  government,  in  consequence
of  its  inability  to  open  the  Mississippi  to  western
commerce  and  its  failure  to  protect  the  people
against  the  raids  of  the  savages.  It  was  thought
that  advantage  could  be  taken  of  this  disaffec-
tion to  sever  the  west  from  the  east  and  erect  it
into  a  separate  republic  in  close  alliance  with  Spain.
Thus  divided,  both  republics  would  be  weak,  and
neither  would  be  dangerous  to  the  Spanish  posses-
sions. Wilkinson  went  about  the  accomplishment
of  this  treasonable  project  with  consummate  ability,
and  by  June,  1788,  by  means  of  Spanish  gold  and
Spanish  promises,  was  able  to  count  upon  the  sup-
port of  a  majority  of  the  convention,  which  was
to  meet  on  the  28th  of  the  ensuing  July,  to  form  a
constitution  for  the  new  state  of  Kentucky.  His
work  he  now  considered  done ;  but  Diego  Gardoqui,
the  Spanish  minister,  desired  the  secession  of  the
entire  west,  and  despatched  a  messenger  with  cor-
rupt overtures  to  John  Sevier,  leader  of  the  settlers
south  of  Kentucky.  Sevier  at  once  despatched  a
quick  messenger  to  Isaac  Shelby,  at  Danville,  Ky.,
who,  with  the  aid  of  Thomas  Marshall  and  George
Muter,  succeeded  in  thwarting  Wilkinson's  trea-
sonable designs  in  the  convention.  Wilkinson  con-
tinued his  efforts,  but  with  no  chance  of  success.
His  trading  adventures  not  proving  successful,  he
applied,  in  1791,  for  reinstatement  in  the  army.
In  December  of  that  year  he  was  appointed  a  lieu-
tenant-colonel on  the  recommendation  of  Thomas
Marshall,  who  justified  the  appointment  by  saying
that  so  long  as  Wilkinson  was  unemployed  he  con-
sidered him  dangerous  to  the  public  quiet,  if  not
to  the  safety,  of  Kentucky.  He  took  service  in  the
western  department  under  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne,
but  continued  a  treasonable  correspondence  with
the  Spanish  officials,  and  there  is  proof  that  down
to  1800  he  was  in  receipt  of  a  Spanish  pension.
His  intrigues  encouraged  Spain  to  persist  in  the  oc-
clusion of  the  Mississippi,  and  they  entailed  twelve
years  of  savage  warfare  upon  the  border  settle-
ments. Wilkinson  performed  good  service  against
the  northwestern  Indians,  and  was  promoted  to  a


512


WILKINSON


WILKINSON


brigadier-generalship  on  5  March,  1792,  and  to  the
supreme  command  of  the  army  on  the  death  of
Wayne  in  1796.  He  was  made  governor  of  Louisi-
ana in  1805,  and  in  the  autumn  of  that  year  dis-
closed to  the  government  the  plan  of  Aaron  Burr
to  erect  a  southwestern  empire.  Burr  asserted,  and
Jackson  believed,  that  he  was  implicated  in  this
conspiracy,  and  the  presumption  is  very  strong  that
he  was  its  originator.  In  1811  he  was  court-mar-
tialed, charged  with  complicity  with  Burr,  and  with
being  in  the  pay  of  Spain,  but  was  acquitted  for  lack
of  evidence,  his  subsequently  published  correspond-
ence with  the  Spanish  government,  which  conclu-
sively shows  his  guilt,  not  being  then  accessible.
In  1813  he  was  made  major-general,  and  employed
in  the  northern  department,  where  he  was  not  suc-
cessful, owing  to  a  disagreement  with  Gen.  Wade
Hampton.  A  court  of  inquiry  exonerated  him  in
1815.  He  was  discharged  from  the  service  at  the
close  of  the  war,  and  removed  to  Mexico.  His  life
he  has.  in  part,  related  in  his  "  Memoirs  of  My
Own  Times"  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1816).  His
treason  is  outlined  in  Humphrey  Marshall's  "  His-
tory of  Kentucky  "  (2  vols.,  Frankfort,  1824),  and
more  fully  related  in  Charles  Gayarre's  "  Spanish
Domination  in  Louisiana "  (New  York,  1854),  and
James  R.  Gilmore's  "  Advance-Guard  of  Western
Civilization "  (1887).  See  also  Daniel  Clark's
"  Proofs  of  the  Corruption  of  Gen.  James  Wilkin-
son" (1809),  and  "Burr's  Conspiracy  Exposed  and
Gen.  Wilkinson  Vindicated"  (1811).

WILKINSON,  Jemima,  religious  impostor,  b.
in  Cumberland,  R.  I.,  in  1753;  d.  in  Jerusalem,
Yates  co.,  N.  Y.,  1  July,  1819.  She  was  brought
up  as  a  Quaker,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty,  having
recovered  after  a  severe  fever  and  an  apparent  sus-
pension of  life,  she  claimed  to  have  been  raised
from  the  dead,  to  have  received  a  divine  commis-
sion, and  to  be  able  to  work  miracles.  She  was
shrewd  and  persuasive,  and,  having  secured  numer-
ous followers,  retired  with  them  in  1789  to  a  tract
of  14,000  acres  which  had  been  purchased  in  Yates
county,  N.  Y.,  and  which  she  named  Jerusalem.
She  assumed  the  name  of  "  Universal  Friend,"  was
accompanied  by  two  "  witnesses,"  Sarah  Richards
and  Rachel  Miller,  and  insisted  on  the  Shaker
doctrine  of  celibacy.  The  exercises  of  her  religious
meetings  also  resembled  those  of  that  sect.  When
she  preached  she  stood  in  the  door  of  her  bed-
chamber, wearing  a  waistcoat,  stock,  and  white  silk
cravat.  Though  she  recommended  poverty,  her
dupes  enabled  her  to  live  in  luxuiy,  and  she  owned
lands  that  were  purchased  in  the  name  of  Rachel
Miller.  After  her  death  the  sect  was  entirely  dis-
persed. See  "  History  of  Jemima  Wilkinson,"  by
David  nume  (Geneva,  N.  Y.,  1821).

WILKINSON,  Jesse,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia about  1790;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  23  May,  1861.
He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  4  July,  1805,
and  was  commissioned  a  lieutenant,  10  April,  1810.
During  the  war  of  1812  he  commanded  the  schooner
"  Hornet,"  which  was  used  as  a  despatch-vessel  on
Potomac  river  in  1813-'15.  He  served  at  the  Nor-
folk navy-yard  in  1816-'18  and  in  1820-'l,  and  in
the  intervening  time  commanded  the  "  Hornet "
and  was  on  coast-survey  duty.  He  was  promoted
to  master-commandant,  18  April,  1818,  commanded
the  brig  "  Spark,"  of  Com.  David  Porter's  flotilla,
for  the  suppression  of  piracy  in  the  West  Indies  in
1822-'3,  and  served  at  the  Norfolk  navv-yard  in
1824-'5  and  at  Boston  in  1826.  He  served  in  the
"John  Adams"  in  the  West  Indies  against  the

Sirates  in  1827-'8,  was  promoted  to  captain,  11
larch,  1829,  and  was  at  the  navy-yard  at  Norfolk
in  1829-'33. He  commanded  the  frigate  "  United


States,"  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  in  1835-'40,
and  the  West  India  squadron,  in  the  flag-ship
"  Macedonian,"  in  1840-2,  and  was  commandant
of  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  in  1843-7.  In  1848-'9
he  was  commodore  commanding  the  West  India
squadron  in  the  flag-ship  "  Raritan."  After  this
he  served  on  boards  and  courts-martial  until  his
death,  though  most  of  this  period  of  his  life  was
spent  on  leave  or  waiting  orders.

WILKINSON,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Nor-
folk, Va.,  6  Nov.,  1821.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a
midshipman,  8  Dec,  1837,  attended  the  "naval
school  at  Philadelphia,  and  became  a  passed  mid-
shipman, 29  June,  1843,  served  in  the  "  Oregon "
on  special  service  in  1844-5,  and  in  the  " Ports-
mouth "  in  1845-'6.  He  was  attached  to  the
"  Saratoga "  in  the  later  operations  on  the  Gulf
coast  of  Mexico,  was  commissioned  a  master,  25
June,  1850,  and  became  lieutenant,  5  Nov.,  1850.
He  served  in  the  steamer  "  Southern  Star,"  on  the
expedition  to  Paraguay,  in  1858-'9,  was  on  duty  in
the  coast  survey  in  1860-'l,  and  when  the  civil  war
began  resigned  his  commission,  20  April,  1861,  and
entered  the  Confederate  navy  as  a  lieutenant.  He
was  assigned  to  duty  in  Fort  Powhatan  on  the
James  river,  and  then  ordered  to  command  a  bat-
tery at  Acquia  creek.  In  the  spring  of  1862  he
was  appointed  executive  of  the  ram  "Louisiana,"
at  New  Orleans,  in  which  he  was  taken  prisoner  at
the  capture  of  the  city  by  Farragut.  He  was  ex-
changed, 5  Aug.,  1862,  and  on  12  Aug.  left  Rich-
mond with  funds  and  Confederate  bonds  with
which  to  purchase  and  load  a  vessel  in  England
with  a  cargo  of  war  material.  He  there  bought
the  steamer  "  Giraffe,"  in  which  he  ran  the  blockade
at  Wilmington,  N.  C,  having  on  board  machinery
to  make  Confederate  paper.- money.  Shortly  after-
ward the  "  Giraffe  "  was  renamed  the  "  R.  E.  Lee."
He  made  regular  trips  from  Wilmington  to  Ber-
muda with  cotton,  and  back  with  cargoes  of  arms
and  military  stores.  In  October,  1863,  he  was  or-
dered to  command  an  expedition  to  release  the
Confederate  prisoners  on  Johnson's  island ;  but  the
Canadian  governor-general  learned  of  the  plot,  and
it  was  a  failure.  He  served  in  the  iron-clad  "Al-
bemarle "  in  1864,  and  in  September  had  command
of  the  "  Chickamauga,"  in  which  he  destroyed  a
great  many  merchant-vessels.  In  1865  he  had
charge  of  the  blockade-runner  "  Chameleon,"  which
he  took  to  Liverpool,  where  she  was  seized  after
the  war,  and  delivered  to  the  U.  S.  government.
He  has  published  "  The  Narrative  of  a  Blockade-
Runner  *  (New  York,  1877).

WILKINSON,  Morton  Smith,  senator,  b.  in
Skaneateles,  Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  22  Jan.,  1819.
Pie  received  an  academical  education,  went  to  Illi-
nois in  1837,  was  engaged  for  two  years  in  railroad
business,  afterward  returned  to  his  native  place,
where  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
Syracuse  in  1842,  and  in  1843  began  practice  at
Eaton  Rapids,  Mich.  He  removed  to  St.  Paul,
Minn.,  in  1847,  was  elected  a  member  of  the  first
territorial  legislature  in  1849,  and  was  appointed
one  of  a  board  of  commissioners  to  prepare  a  code
of  laws  for  the  territory.  He  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republican  in  1859,  and  held  his
seat  till  1865,  serving  as  chairman  of  the  commit-
tee on  Revolutionary  claims,  and  as  a  member  of
the  committee  on  Indian  affairs.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  Baltimore  convention  of  1864  and  to  the
Loyalists'  convention  of  1866  at  Philadelphia,  and
served  in  congress  from  Minnesota  from  4  March,
1869,  till  3  March.  1871.  He  was  a  member  of  the
state  senate  in  1874-'7,  and  afterward  united  with
the  Democratic  party.


WILKINSON


WILLARD


513


WILKINSON,  William  Clearer,  clergyman,
ft.  in  Westford,  Vt,  19  Oct.,  1833.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Rochester  university  in  1857,  and  at  the
theological  seminary  there  in  1859.  In  the  same
year  he  became  pastor  of  the  Wooster  place  Bap-
tist church,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  and  he  remained
there  until  1861,  when  he  resigned,  and  made  an
.extensive  tour  in  Europe.  After  spending  a  year
.as  tutor  in  modern  languages  in  Rochester  uni-
versity, he  accepted  a  call  to  the  pastorate  of  the
Mount  Auburn  Baptist  church,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.
Resigning  this  charge  in  1866,  he  opened  a  school
in  Tarrytown,  N.  Y.,  where  he  still  resides.  In
1872  he  was  elected  to  the  professorship  of  homi-
letics  and  pastoral  theology  in  Rochester  theological
•seminary,  but  in  1881  he  retired  from  this  office
.and  has  since  devoted  himself  to  literary  work.  He
is  counsellor  of  the  Chautauqua  literary  and  scien-
tific circle,  and  dean  of  the  department  of  litera-
ture and  art  in  the  Chautauqua  university.  He
has  also  lectured  at  Wellesley  college  on  English
literature.  Rochester  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1873.  Dr.  Wilkinson  has  contributed  exten-
sively to  periodicals,  and  has  prepared  text-books
in  languages  for  the  Chautauqua  university,  which
have  been  widely  used  (1882-'7).  His  other  publica-
tions include  "  The  Dance  of  Modern  Society "
(New  York,  1869) ;  "  A  Free  Lance  in  the  Field
of  Life  and  Letters "  (1874) ;  "The  Baptist  Prin-
ciple" (Philadelphia,  1881);  "Webster,  an  Ode"
.{New  York,  1882);  "Poems"  (1883);  and  "Edwin
Arnold  as  Poetizer  and  as  Paganizer  "  (1884).

WILLARD,  Abijah,  soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster,
TVfass.,  in  1722 ;  d.  in  Lancaster,  N.  B.,  in  1789.  He
served  at  the  capture  of  Cape  Breton,  was  wounded
in  the  campaign,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  captain.
In  1774  he  was  appointed  a  mandamus  councillor,
.and  soon  became  an  object  of  public  indignation.
•While  in  Union,  Connecticut,  he  was  seized  and
-confined,  but  was  released  on  the  signing  of  a  dec-
laration that  was  dictated  by  his  captors.  He  com-
manded a  Massachusetts  regiment  under  Jeffrey
Amherst,  went  to  Halifax  with  the  royal  army  in
1776,  and  at  a  late  period  of  the  Revolutionary  war
was  on  Long  Island.  In  1778  he  was  proscribed
and  banished,  and  in  July,  1783,  was  in  the  city  of
New  York,  where  he  joined  fifty-four  other  loyal-
ists in  a  petition  to  Sir  Guy  Carleton  for  extensive
grants  of  land  in  Nova  Scotia.  These  petitioners
.are  known  as  the  "  Fifty-five,"  and  their  petition
caused  much  excitement  in  New  York  and  St.  John.
In  a  controversy  between  "  Viator "  and  a  "  Con-
sistent Loyalist,"  published  in  London  in  1784,  his
name  often  appears.  On  the  one  hand,  it  was  said
that  as  commissary  he  "saved  the  government
.several  thousand  pounds,"  and  on  the  other  he
"saved  to  himself  and  nephew  many  thousand
pounds  more  than  they  were  worth  when  the  re-
bellion began."  Willard  settled  in  New  Bruns-
wick, and  was  a  member  of  the  council.  After  his
•death  his  family  returned  to  Massachusetts.

WILLARD,  Emma,  educator,  b.  in  Berlin,
Conn.,  23  Feb.,  1787;  d.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  15  April,
1870.  She  was  a  daughter  of  Samuel  Hart,  and
a  sister  of  Mrs.  Almira  Lincoln  Phelps.  She  re-
ceived her  education  at  the  village  academy,  and
in  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  began  to  teach  at  the  age
of  sixteen.  After  serving  as  principal  of  various
academies,  she  took  charge  of  an  institution  in
Middlebury,  Vt.,  and  in  1809  married  Dr.  John
Willard.  who  was  then  U.  S.  marshal  of  Vermont.
In  1814  she  opened  a  boarding-school  for  girls  in
Middlebury,  where  she  introduced  new  studies
and  made  many  improvements  upon  the  ordinary
methods  of  instruction.  Deciding  to  establish  a
vol.  vi. — 33


seminary  for  girls,  she  matured  her  plans  in  a
treatise  on  the  "Education  of  Women,"  which
was  published  in  the  form  of  an  address  to  the
legislature  in  1819,  and  in  that  year  she  opened  a
school  in  Water-
ford,  N.  Y.,  which
was  incorporated
and  in  part  sup-
ported by  the  state
government.  In
1821  she  removed
to  Troy,  N.  Y.,
which  town  had
offered  her  an  ap-
propriate build-
ing, and  her  school
became  known  as
the  Troy  female
seminary.  In  1825
Dr.  Willard  died,
and  the  entire  busi-
ness management  ,
devolved  upon  her.  ^  ^^^<^W^^<^L^
She  continued  sue-  <>

cessfully  until  1838,  when  she  resigned,  and  was
succeeded  by  her  son,  John  Hart  Willard,  and  his
wife.  In  1830  she  travelled  in  Europe,  and  on  her
return  she  published  her  "Journal  and  Letters
from  France  and  Great  Britain  "  (Troy,  1833),  de-
voting her  share  of  the  proceeds  of  its  sale,  amount-
ing to  $1,200,  to  the  support  of  a  school  in  Greece,
that  had  been  founded  mainly  by  her  exertions,  for
the  education  of  native  female  teachers.  She  was
associated  in  this  enterprise  with  Almira  Lincoln
Phelps,  Sarah  J.  Hale,  Lydia  H.  Sigourney,  and
others.  In  1838  she  married  Dr.  Christopher  C.
Yates,  from  whom  she  was  divorced  in  1843,  and
resumed  her  former  name.  For  many  years  before
her  death  she  resided  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  directed
her  energy  to  the  revision  of  her  numerous  school-
books  and  to  public  labors  in  the  cause  of  higher
education.  In  1846she  made  a  journey  of  8,000miles
through  the  western  and  southern  states,  addressing
teachers'  conventions,  and  in  1854  she  attended  the
World's  educational  convention  in  London.  She
is  considered  the  pioneer  in  the  higher  education
of  women  in  this  country,  and  educated  about  5,000
pupils.  Her  school-books  have  had  a  large  sale,
and  have  been  translated  into  many  of  the  lan-
guages of  Europe  and  Asia.  Her  publications  in-
clude "  The  Woodbridge  and  Willard  Geogra-
phies and  Atlases,"  comprising  a  universal  geog-
raphy and  atlas,  a  school  geography  and  atlas,
an  ancient  geography  and  atlas,  geography  for
beginners,  and  atlas  (1823) ;  "  History  of  the
United  States,  or  Republic  of  America  "  (New
York,  1828) ;  "  Universal  History  in  Perspective "
(1837) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood  "
(1846) ;  "Respiration  and  its  Effects,  particularly  as
respects  Asiatic  Cholera  "  (1849) ;  "  Last  Leaves  of
American  History  "  (1849) ;  "  Astronomy  "  (1853) ;
"  Morals  for  the  Young "  (1857) ;  and  numerous
charts,  atlases,  pamphlets,  and  addresses.  She  was
the  author  of  many  poems,  the  best  known  of  which
is  "  Rocked  in  the  Cradle  of  the  Deep."  These
were  published  in  a  volume,  which  was  afterward
suppressed  (New  York,  1830).  See  her  "  Life,"  by
John  Lord  (New  York,  1873).

WILLARD,  Frances  Elizabeth,  reformer,  b.
in  Churchville,  N.  Y,  28  Sept.,  1839.  She  was
graduated  at  Northwestern  female  college,  Evans-
ton,  111.,  in  1859,  became  professor  of  natural  sci-
ence there  in  1862,  and  was  principal  of  Genesee
Wesleyan  seminary  in  1866-'7.  The  following  two
years  she  spent  in  foreign  travel,  giving  a  part  of


514


WILLARD


WILLARD


the  time  to  study  in  Paris,  and  contributing  to
periodicals.  In  1871-'4  she  was  professor  of  aes-
thetics in  Northwestern  university  and  dean  of  the
Woman's  college,  where  she  developed  her  system
of  self-government,  which  has  been  adopted  by
other  educators.  Miss  Willard  left  her  profession
in  1874  to  identify  herself  with  the  Woman's
Christian  temperance  union,  serving  as  correspond-
ing secretary  of  the  National  organization  till
1879,  and  since  that  date  as  president.  As  secre-
tary she  organized  the  Home  protection  movement,
and  sent  an  appeal  from  nearly  200,000  people  to
the  legislature  of  Illinois  asking  for  the  temperance
ballot  for  women.  On  the  death  of  her  brother,
Oliver  A.  Willard,  in  1879,  she  succeeded  him  as
editor  of  the  Chicago  "Evening  Post."  Since  1882
she  has  been  a  member  of  the  executive  committee
of  the  Prohibition  party.  In  1886  she  accepted  the
leadership  of  the  White  Cross  movement  in  her
own  unions,  which  has  obtained  through  her  in-
fluence enactments  in  twelve  states  for  the  protec-
tion of  women.  In  1888  she  was  made  president
of  the  American  branch  of  the  International  coun-
cil of  women,  and  of  the  World's  Christian  tem-
perance union,  which  she  had  founded  five  years
before.  Besides  many  pamphlets  and  contributions
to  magazines  and  the  press,  Miss  Willard  has  pub-
lished "  Nineteen  Beautiful  Years,"  a  tribute  to  her
sister  (New  York,  1863) ;  "  Woman  and  Temper-
ance "  (Chicago,  1883) ;  "  How  to  Win  "  (New  York,
1886) ;  and  "  Woman  in  the  Pulpit  "  (Boston,  1888).

WILLARD,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Guilford,  Conn.,
20  May,  1792;  d.  in  Saratoga  Springs.  N.  Y.,  31
Aug.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  col-
lege in  1813,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1817,  and  he
began  the  practice  of  law  in  Salem,  Washington
co.,  N.  Y.  On  the  elevation  in  1836  of  Esek  Cowen
to  the  bench  of  the  supreme  court,  he  was  appoint-
ed judge  and  vice-chancellor  of  the  4th  judicial
district  of  New  York,  filling  that  office  until  the
new  organization  of  the  judiciary  under  the  con-
stitution of  1846,  when  he  was  elected  one  of  the
justices  of  the  supreme  court.  In  1854  he  was  a
member  of  the  court  of  appeals.  In  1856  he  was
appointed  by  President  Pierce  one  of  the  commis-
sioners to  examine  into  the  validity  of  the  Califor-
nia land-titles  which  were  claimed  under  Spanish
and  Mexican  grants.  In  1861  he  was  chosen  state
senator  by  the  votes  of  all  parties,  and,  by  his  ef-
forts in  that  body,  the  confusion  in  the  laws  re-
specting murder  and  the  rights  of  married  women
was  removed,  and  simple  statutes  were  substituted
in  their  place.  The  rapidity  and  ability  with
which  he  discharged  his  official  duties,  his  uniform
courtesy  and  kindness  to  the  profession,  his  ab-
horrence of  pettifogging  and  chicanery,  and  the
purity  and  integrity  of  his  character  as  a  judge
and  as  a  man,  commanded  universal  respect  and
esteem,  and  did  much  to  elevate  the  judiciary  of
his  native  state.  Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1850.  After  his  retirement  from  the
bench  he  published  "  Equity  Jurisprudence  "  (Al-
bany, 1855);  a  "Treatise  on  Executors,  Adminis-
trators, and  Guardians"  (1859);  and  a  "Treatise
on  Real  Estate  and  Conveyancing"  (1861).  works
of  great  learning  and  ability.  They  are  constantly
cited  with  confidence,  and  received  as  authority
both  in  the  United  States  and  in  England.

WILLARD,  John  Dwight,  jurist,  b.  in  Lan-
caster, N.  Y.,  4  Nov.,  1799 ;  d.  in  Troy,  N.  Y..  16
Oct.,  1864.  After  graduation  at  Dartmouth  in
1819  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
New  York  about  1823,  and  began  practice  in  Trov
in  1826.  He  was  editor  of  the  Troy  "  Sentinel  "
for  several  years. He  was  judge  of  the  court  of


common  pleas  and  also  of  the  New  York  circuit
court,  and  served  in  the  state  senate.  The  degree
of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Dartmouth  in
1860,  and  by  La  Grange  university  of  Kentucky
in  1862. He  left  $10,000  to  Dartmouth.

WILLARD,  Simon,  settler,  b.  in  Horsemonden,
Kent,  England,  in  April,  1605 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  24  April,  1676.  He  was  the  son  of  Richard
Willard,  came  to  New  England  in  1634,  and  was
a  founder  of  Concord,  of  which  he  was  clerk  from
1635  till  1653.  He  represented  it  in  the  legis-
lature from  1636  till  1654,  and  was  assistant  and
councillor  from  1654  till  1676.  He  removed  to
Lancaster  in  1660,  in  1672  to  Groton,  and  on  the
dispersion  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  town  by  the
Indian  wars,  in  which  he  served  as  major  of  mili-
tia, settled  in  Salem.  He  became  a  magistrate,  and
died  while  holding  a  court  in  Charlestown.  The
Rev.  Ebenezer  Pemberton  calls  him  "  a  sage  pa-
triot in  Israel,  whose  wisdom  assigned  him  a  seat
at  the  council-board,  and  his  military  skill  and
martial  spirit  entitled  him  to  the  chief  place  in  the
field."  A  letter  from  Maj.  Simon  Willard  to  the
commissioners  of  the  United  Colonies  in  1654  is
contained  in  Thomas  Hutchinson's  "  Collection  of
Original  Papers  relative  to  the  History  of  the
Colonv  of  Massachusetts  Bay  "  (Boston,  1769).  See
his  "  Life,"  by  Joseph  Willard  (Boston,  1858).— His
son,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Concord,  Mass.,  31
Jan.,  1640;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  12  Sept.,  1707,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1659,  studied  divinity,
was  ordained  minister  at  Groton  in  1663,  and  con-
tinued there  until
the  Indian  war  of
1676.  He  became
colleague  with
the  Rev.  Thomas
Thacher,  the  first
pastor  of  the  Old
South  church  in
Boston,  and  con-
tinued in  connec-
tion with  that
church  until  his
death.  A  story  il-
lustrating his  ex-
cellent delivery  is
told.  His  son-in-
law,  the  Rev.  Sam-
uel Neal,  preached
for  him  in  the  Old
South  church,  and

the  sermon  being  considered  very  poor,  the  con-
gregation requested  that  he  should  not  be  invited
to  fill  the  pulpit.  Mr.  Willard  borrowed  the  iden-
tical sermon  and  read  it  to  the  same  audience,
which  immediately  requested  a  copy  for  publica-
tion. On  the  retirement  of  Increase  Mather  from
the  presidency  of  Harvard,  Mr.  Willard,  being
vice-president,  succeeded  to  the  government  of
that  college,  serving  in  1701-'7.  He  published  nu-
merous sermons,  including  "  Sermon  occasioned  by
the  Death  of  John  Leverett,  Governor  of  Massa-
chusetts "  (Boston.  1679) ;  "  The  Duty  of  a  People
that  have  renewed  their  Covenant  with  God "
(1680);  "Ne  Sutor  ultra  Crepidam,  or  Brief  Ani-
madversions upon  the  New  England  Anabaptists'
Late  Fallacious  Narrative"  (1681);  "Mourner's
Cordial  against  Excessive  Sorrow  "  (1691) ;  "  Peril
of  the  Times  displayed  "  (1700) ;  and  other  treatises,
and  left  "  Expositions  upon  Psalms,  Romans,  Co-
rinthians, and  Galatians,  and  other  compositions
in  manuscript,  which  were  edited  and  published
by  Joseph  Sewall  and  Thomas  Prince,  colleague
pastors  of  the  Old  South  church,  with  the  title  of


S  Wi$£>


WILLARD


WILLARD


515


"  A  Compleat  Body  of  Divinity  in  Two  Hundred
and  Fifty  Lectures  on  the  Assembly's  Shorter
Catechism,"  in  what  is  said  to  be  the  first  miscel-
laneous folio  volume  that  was  published  in  this
country  (Boston,  1726). — Samuel's  son,  Josiah,
jurist,  b.  in  Massachusetts,  1  May,  1681 ;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  6  Dec,  1756,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1698,  and  was  secretary  of  Massachusetts
from  June,  1717,  until  his  death,  being  known  as
"  the  good  secretary."  He  was  judge  of  probate  in
1731,  and  a  member  of  the  council  in  1734. — Sam-
uel's grandson,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kings-
ton, Jamaica,  W.  I.,  in  1705 ;  d.  in  Kittery,  Me.,
25  Oct.,  1741,  was  the  son  of  John,  who  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1690,  and  was  a  merchant  of
Jamaica  for  several  years.  After  graduation  at
Harvard  in  1723,  the  son  was  appointed  to  the
charge  of  a  pastorate  in  Biddeford,  Me.,  in  1730.
See  "  The  Minister  of  God  approved  :  a  Sermon  at
the  Ordination  of  Mr.  John  Hovey.  with  a  Funeral
Sermon  on  Samuel  Willard,"  by  William  Thomp-
son, A.  M.,  and  a  preface  by  Thomas  Prentice
(Boston,  1743). — The  second  Samuel's  son,  Joseph,
clergyman,  b.  in  Biddefora,  Me.,  9  Jan.,  1738 ;  d.
in  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  25  Sept.,  1804,  was  left
fatherless  at  an  early  age,  and  made  several  coast-
ing voyages.  Through  the  generosity  of  friends
he  entered  Harvard,  was  graduated  in  1765,  and
in  the  next  year  was  chosen  tutor  there,  remain-
ing until  1772.  He  was  ordained  colleague,  with
the  Rev.  Joseph  Champney,  of  the  1st  Congrega-
tional church  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  on  25  Nov.,  1772,
and  in  1781  was  elected  president  of  Harvard,  serv-
ing until  his  death.  His  only  publications  were  a
few  sermons,  a  Latin  address  on  the  death  of
Washington,  prefixed  to  the  Rev.  David  Tappan's
"  Discourse  "  (Cambridge,  1800),  and  mathematical
and  astronomical  papers  in  the  "  Memoirs  of  the
American  Academy,"  and  the  "Transactions"  of
the  Philosophical  society.  He  was  a  sound  Greek
scholar,  and  left  a  Greek  grammar  in  manuscript.
— The  second  Samuel's  grandson,  Solomon,  archi-
tect, b.  in  Petersham,  Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  26  June,
1783 ;  d.  in  Quincy,  Mass.,  27  Feb.,  1862,  worked
in  his  father's  carpenter-shop,  and  farmed  till  1804,
when  he  went  to  Boston,  where  he  followed  his
trade.  Subsequently  he  became  an  expert  wood-
carver,  his  first  important  work  in  that  art  being
the  colossal  spread  eagle  that  was  placed  on  the
old  custom-house  in  Boston.  He  began  to  carve
in  stone  in  1815,  was  employed  in  decorating  many
public  buildings  in  Boston,  and  gave  lessons  in
architecture  and  drawing.  He  was  a  founder  of
the  Boston  mechanics'  institute.  On  2  Nov.,  1825,
he  was  chosen  architect  and  superintendent  of
Bunker  Hill  monument,  his  design  having  been
accepted  by  the  building  committee  in  the  follow-
ing year.  He  was  engaged  on  this  work  for  the
subsequent  seventeen  years,  being  frequently  in-
terrupted by  want  of  funds  and  by  disagreements
in  the  committee  in  charge;  but  on  23  July,  1842,
the  top-stone  of  the  monument  was  laid,  and  on
the  anniversary  of  the  battle  in  1843  its  completion
was  celebrated  in  the  presence  of  the  president  of
the  United  States,  his  cabinet,  and  a  large  con-
course of  citizens  from  every  part  of  the  Union.
Mr.  Willard's  other  works  include  the  U.  S.  branch
bank,  Boston,  the  plan  of  the  soldiers'  monument
at  Concord,  Mass.,  the  court-house  at  Dedham,
Mass.,  and  the  Harvard  monument  in  Charlestown,
Mass.  He  introduced  the  free  use  of  granite  as  a
building  material  in  this  country,  furnished  the
first  granite  paving-stones  that  were  ever  used  in
Boston,  invented  many  ingenious  plans  for  work-
ing stone,  and,  as  carpenter,  designer,  architect,


and  builder,  was  greatly  in  advance  of  his  con-
temporaries. See  '•  Memoir  of  Solomon  Wil-
lard," by  William  W.  Wheildon  (Boston,  1865).
— Joseph's  son,  Sidney,  educator,  b.  in  Beverly,
Mass.,  19  Sept.,  1780;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass..  6
Dec,  1856,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1798,
where  he  was  librarian  in  1800-'5,  and  Hancock
professor  of  Hebrew  and  other  Oriental  languages
from  1807  until  his '  resignation.  In  connection
with  this  professorship  he  was  also  professor  of  the
English  language,  and  in  1827  the  charge  of  the
Latin  department  was  assigned  to  him  also.  He
studied  theology  and  sometimes  preached.  He
was  mayor  of  Cambridge  from  1848  till  1850,
served  frequently  in  the  legislature,  and  was  once
a  member  of  the  executive  council.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Anthology  club,  and  a  founder  of
"  The  Literary  Miscellany,"  established  and  edited
the  "  American  Monthly  Review  "  (4  vols.,  1832-'3),
was  editor  of  "  The  Christian  Register,"  contrib-
uted to  numerous  periodicals,  and  published  a
"  Hebrew  Grammar "  (Cambridge,  1817),  and
"  Memoirs  of  Youth  and  Manhood  "  (2  vols.,  1855).
— Another  son  of  Joseph,  Joseph,  author,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  14  March,  1798 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  12  May,  1865,  studied  at  Phillips  Exeter
academy,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1816,  stud-
ied law  in  Amherst,  practised  in  Waltham  and
Lancaster,  and  settled  in  Boston  in  1829.  He  be-
came master  of  chancery  in  1838,  was  appointed
joint  clerk  with  George  C.  Wilde,  of  the  supreme
court  and  court  of  common  pleas  of  Suffolk  county,
and  held  these  offices  until  1856,  when  they  became
elective.  He  was  then  chosen  clerk  of  the  superior
court  for  five  years,  and  re-elected  for  a  like  term
in  1861.  Mr.  Willard  was  corresponding  secretary
of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society  from  1829
till  1864,  and  many  years  a  trustee  of  the  old  Bos-
ton library.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Topographical
and  Historical  Sketches  of  the  Town  of  Lancaster
in  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts"  (Wor-
cester, 1826) ;  "  Address  to  the  Members  of  the  Bar
of  Worcester  County,  2  Oct.,  1829"  (Lancaster,
1830) ;  "  Address  in  Commemoration  of  the  200th
Anniversary  of  the  Incorporation  of  Lancaster,
Mass.,  with  an  Appendix  "  (Boston,  1853) ;  "  The
Willard  Memoir,  or  Life  and  Times  of  Major  Si-
mon Willard,  and  Some  Account  of  the  Name  and
Family  in  Europe  from  an  Early  Day"  (1858);
"  Naturalization  in  the  American  Colonies  "  (1859) ;
and  "  Letter  to  an  English  Friend  on  the  Rebellion
in  the  United  States  and  on  the  British  Policy "
(1862).  He  edited  the  fifth  edition  of  the  "  Narra-
tive of  the  Captivity  and  Removes  of  Mrs.  Mary
Rowlandson  among  the  Indians  "  (Lancaster,  1828),
and  was  the  author  of  many  addresses,  pamphlets,
and  contributions  to  various  magazines.  lie  left,
incomplete,  a  "Life"  of  Gen.  Henry  Knox. — Jo-
seph's nephew,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Peters-
ham, Mass.,  19  April,  1775 :  d.  in  Deerfield,  Mass.,  8
Oct.,  1859,  spent  his  early  life  on  his  father's  farm,
and,  receiving  an  injury  in  the  back  which  unfit-
ted him  for  agricultural  labor,  prepared  for  college,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1803.  He  was  a
tutor  at  Bowdoin  in  1804-'5,  studied  theology  there
and  in  Cambridge,  and  in  1807  became  pastor  of
the  Congregational  church  in  Deerfield,  where  he
remained  until  he  resigned  in  1829,  owing  to  loss
of  sight.  He  then  conducted  a  school  with  his
son-in-law  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  for  three  years,  and
occasionally  preached.  He  became  a  member  of
the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in
1815,  and  received  the  "degree  of  D.  D.  from  Har-
vard in  1826.  In  addition  to  many  pamphlets,
sermons,  and  school-books,  he  published  the  "  Deer-


516


WILLARD


WILLCOX


field  Collection  of  Sacred  Music "  (1808) ;  "Origi-
nal Hymns"  (1823);  "Index  to  the  Bible,  with
Juvenile  Hymns  "  (1826) ;  "  The  Franklin  Primer  "
(1826) ;  a  "  General  Class-Book  "  (1828) ;  "  Sacred
Poetry  and  Music  Reconciled :  a  Collection  of
Hymns "  (1830) ;  and  an  "  Introduction  to  the
Latin  Language"  (1835). — The  second  Joseph's
son,  Sidney,  soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Mass.,  3
Feb.,  1831;  d.  in  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  13  Dec,
1862,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1852,  and  stud-
ied and  practised  law  in  Boston.  During  the  civil
war  he  entered  the  National  army,  and  was  made
major  of  the  35th  Massachusetts"  regiment  on  27
Aug.,  1862,  and  fell  at  Fredericksburg,  Va.

WILLARD,  Simon,  watch-maker,  b.  in  Rox-
bury,  Mass.,  9  Jan.,  1795;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  24
Aug.,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1815,  appointed  3d  lieutenant  of
ordnance,  and  ordered  to  the  Pittsburg  arsenal,
crossing  the  Alleghany  mountains  on  foot.  He  re-
signed from  the  army  on  1  May,  1816,  and  after  an
unsuccessful  business  career  of  seven  years  entered
his  father's  clock-making  establishment  in  Boston,
and  at  the  end  of  two  years  apprenticed  himself  to
a  mechanician  in  New  York  city.  After  learning
the  methods  of  constructing  chronometers,  he  re-
turned to  Boston,  where  he  established  himself  in
business,  occupying  the  same  premises  forty-two
years,  during  which  time  he  acquired  a  fortune.
He  constructed  an  astronomical  clock  that  was  for
forty  years  the  standard  in  his  part  of  the  city.

"WILLARD,  Sylvester  David,  physician,  b.  in
Wilton,  Conn.,  19  June,  1825;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
2  April,  1865.  He  was  educated  in  the  academy  in
his  native  town,  graduated  at  Albany  medical  col-
lege in  1848,  and  acquired  a  large  practice  in  that
city.  From  1857  till  1865  he  was  secretary  of  the
New  York  state  medical  society,  whose  "Transac-
tions "  he  edited,  and  he  was  president  of  the
medical  society  of  Albany  county  in  1858.  He  en-
tered the  National  army  as  volunteer  surgeon  in
1862,  and  in  1865  became  surgeon-general  of  the
state  of  New  York.  Being  directed  by  the  legis-
lature to  report  the  condition  of  the  insane  in  the
state,  Dr.  Willard  urged  the  necessity  of  erecting
a  large  asylum  for  the  poor,  and  a  bill  to  establish
such  an  asylum  was  in  the  state  senate  at  the  time
of  Dr.  Willard's  death.  It  afterward  passed,  and
the  institution  was  "called  the  Willard  asylum  for
the  insane.  It  is  one  of  the  largest  of  the  kind
in  this  country.  Both  houses  of  the  legislature
passed  resolutions  of  regret  upon  his  death.  Dr.
Willard  devoted  much  time  to  historical  and  an-
tiquarian research,  and  was  the  author  of  many
scientific  papers,  addresses,  and  contributions  to
medical  journals.  He  published  "  Historical  Ad-
dress" (Albany,  1857);  "  Biographical  Memoirs  of
Physicians  of  Albany  County  "  (1857) ;  "  Memoir
of  Thomas  Spencer,  M.  D."  (1858) ;  and  "  Annals
of  the  Medical  Societv  of  the  County  of  Albanv,
1800-'51,  with  Biographical  Sketches  "  (1864).

WILLAUMETZ,  Jean-Baptiste  Philibert
(veel-o-metz),  Count,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in
Belle-Isle-en-Mer,  7  Aug.,  1763;  d.  in  Suresnes,
near  Paris,  17  May,  1845.  He  entered  the  French
navy  in  1777,  was  with  D'Estaing  at  Savannah  in
1779,  and  De  Grasse  at  Yorktown  in  October,  1781,
and  in  the  engagements  with  Lord  Rodney  off
Dominica,  9  and  12  April,  1782.  He  served  after-
ward in  the  Indian  ocean.  In  1802  he  commanded
the  "  Hercule  "  in  Leclerc's  expedition  to  Santo
Domingo,  and  as  commander  of  the  station  south
of  Mole  St.  Nicolas  held  in  check  the  insurgents,
whom,  despite  his  instructions,  he  treated  with
humanity,  and  refused  to  cause  the  prisoners  to  be


shot.  After  his  promotion  to  rear-admiral  he  sailed
on  14  Dec,  1805,  with  a  division  for  Cayenne,  Jerome
Napoleon  serving  under  him  as  post-captain.  He
pillaged* the  coast  of  British  Guiana,  and  then
turned  to  the  north,  his  instructions  being  to  de-
stroy the  cod-fisheries  along  the  coast  of  New-
foundland ;  but  on  20  Aug..  1806,  the  fleet  was
struck  by  a  hurricane,  which  dismasted  and  dis-
persed all  the  vessels.  Two  were  sunk  near  the
coast  of  South  Carolina,  and  two  others  reached
Chesapeake  bay,  where  they  were  condemned  and
sold.  Jerome  Napoleon  sailed  for  France,  and  the
admiral,  with  his  remaining  two  ships,  put  into
Havana  for  repairs.  Here  he  received  orders  to
abandon  the  expedition  to  Newfoundland,  and  to  re-
turn to  Brest.  He  was  made  a  count  by  Napoleon,
vice-admiral  by  Louis  XVIII.,  and  in  1832  retired
and  was  created  a  peer  of  France.  He  published
"Dictionnaire.de  marine"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1820).

WILLCOX,  Albert  Oliver,  merchant,  b.  in
New  York  city,  10  May,  1810.  He  was  educated
in  the  New  York  high-school,  and  embraced  a  mer-
cantile career.  Between  1835  and  1860  he  was  an
active  member  of  several  anti-slavery  societies.  As
chairman  of  the  executive  committee  of  one  of
these,  he  issued,  on  3  Nov.,  1838,  an  address  con-
taining the  first  proposal  of  political  anti-slavery
action.  He  was  among  the  founders  of  the  "  Na-
tional Era "  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1844.  He
was  engaged  for  many  years  before  the  war  in  ex-
tending the  earliest  mercantile  agency,  and  in  the
dry-goods  business,  and  has  since  followed  the  in-
surance business  in  New  York  city,  and  devoted
himself  to  the  public  advocacv  of  woman  suffrage.

WILLCOX,  Orlando  Bolivar,  soldier,  b.  in
Detroit,  Mich.,  16  April,  1823.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  in  1847,  eighth
in  a  class  of  thirty-eight,  among  whom  were
Ambrose  P.  Hill
and  Ambrose  E.
Burnside,  and
was  assigned  to
the  4th  artillery.
He  served  in  the
latter  part  of  the
Mexican  war,  on
the  plains,  and
in  the  final  cam-
paign against
the  Seminoles  in
1856-'7,  but  re-
signed his  com-
mission on  10
Sept.  of  the  lat-
ter year,  studied
law,  and  in  1858
was  admitted
to  the  bar  at
Detroit, Mich.,  /

where  he  practised  till  the  opening  of  the  civil  war.
He  became  colonel  of  the  1st  Michigan  regiment
on  1  May,  1861,  and  his  command  was  the  first
from  the  west  to  arrive  at  the  seat  of  war.  He  was
engaged  in  the  capture  of  Alexandria,  Va.,  and
commanded  a  brigade  at  Bull  Run,  where  he  was
wounded  and  captured.  After  confinement  in
Charleston  and  Columbia,  S.  C,  till  17  Aug.,  1862,
during  part  of  which  time  he  was  kept  a  close
prisoner  as  a  hostage  for  Confederate  privateers
that  were  on  trial  for  their  lives  in  New  York,  he
was  exchanged  and  commissioned  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  to  date  from  21  July,  1861.  He
took  part  in  the  Maryland  and  Rappahannock
campaigns,  temporarily  commanded  the  9th  army
corps  and  the  district  of  central  Kentucky  from


&fi>.ZOu


'U&sot,


WILLEKENS


WILLETT


517


10  April  till  9  June,  1863,  had  charge  of  the
district  of  Indiana  and  Michigan  during  the  draft
riots,  and  then  engaged  in  the  operations  in  eastern
Tennessee  till  March,  1864.  He  commanded  a  di-
vision in  the  9th  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
in  the  Richmond  campaign,  and  on  1  Aug.,  1864,
was  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers  "for
distinguished  and  gallant  servioes  in  the  several
actions  since  crossing  the  Rapidan."  At  Petersburg
his  division  was  the  first  to  break  through,  and  re-
ceived the  actual  surrender  of  the  city.  From
26  April  till  28  July,  1865,  he  had  charge  of  the
district  of  Washington,  N.  C,  and  from  7  Aug.,
of  that  year,  till  15  Jan.,  1866,  he  commanded  that
of  Michigan.  On  the  latter  day  he  was  mustered
out,  and  returned  to  the  practice  of  law  at  Detroit,
where  he  was  also  made  TJ.  S.  assessor  of  internal
revenue ;  but  on  28  July,  1866,  he  was  recommis-
sioned  in  the  regular  army,  as  colonel  of  the  29th
infantry,  and  on  2  March,  1867,  he  received  the
brevets  of  brigadier-general  for  Spottsylvania,  and
major-general  for  the  capture  of  Petersburg.  He
was  transferred  to  the  12th  infantry  on  15  March,
1869,  was  superintendent  of  the  general  recruit-
ing service  in  New  York  city  in  1873-'4,  and  com-
manded various  posts  and  departments  till  his
promotion  to  brigadier-general,  13  Oct.,  1886.
While  in  command  of  the  Department  of  Arizona,
he  received  the  thanks  of  the  territorial  legislature
on  19  Feb.,  1881,  for  "his  constant  and  vigilant
care,  his  untiring  effort  and  military  skill  in  pro-
tecting the  people  and  freeing  the  territory  of  Ari-
zona from  the  cruel  and  brutal  outrages  of  the
hostile  Indian  tribes  within  the  military  depart-
ment." On  16  April,  1887,  he  was  placed  on  the
retired  list,  at  which  time  he  was  in  command  of
the  Department  of  the  Missouri.  Gen.  Wilcox
has  published  "  Shoepack  Recollections  "  (Boston,
1856),  and  "Faca,  an  Army  Memoir,  by  Major
March  "  (1857).

WILLEKENS,  Jacobus,  Dutch  admiral,  b.  in
Breda  in  1571 ;  d.  in  Ternate  in  1633.  He  was  in
the  employ  of  the  East  and  West  Indian  company
for  years,  and  in  1620  presented  to  John  Usseling,
president  of  the  board  of  directors,  a  memoir  in
which  he  advocated  a  combined  attack  on  the
Spanish  possessions  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific
coast.  Usseling  commended  the  memoir  to  the
directors,  and  in  1623  the  expedition  was  decided
upon.  Willekens,  being  appointed  commander-in-
chief,  directed  the  armament  of  two  fleets.  One,
in  command  of  Jacob  L'Hermite-Clerk,  sailed  from
Amsterdam,  29  April,  1623,  to  operate  against
Peru  and  Mexico,  while  the  main  fleet,  under  Wille-
kens, was  to  attack  Brazil,  and  sailed  from  Texel,
22  Dec,  1623.  Early  in  June,  1624,  he  began  oper-
ations against  San  Salvador  da  Bahia,  and  after
his  vice-admiral.  Piet  Hein  (q.  v.),  had  crossed  the
bar  on  10  June  and  captured  the  Portuguese  fleet,
the  city  surrendered  at  discretion  on  the  following
day.  Bishop  Texeira  preached  the  war  against
the  heretics  among  the  Indians,  and  the  Portu-
guese, having  rallied,  besieged  Willekens :  but  the
latter  repelled  them,  and  led  an  expedition  into
the  interior,  on  his  return  from  which  he  was  de-
feated by  the  Indians.  Surrendering  the  com-
mand to  Hein,  he  sailed,  24  Aug.,  1624,  for  Am-
sterdam to  obtain  re-enforcements.  He  returned
in  June,  1625,  but  found  Bahia  abandoned  by
Hein  and  in  the  possession  of  a  Spanish-Portu-
guese fleet,  which  he  attacked.  Being  driven  back,
he  sailed  to  the  south,  landing  at  intervals  and
destroying  the  Portuguese  establishments.  Chased
by  the  Spanish  fleet,  he  returned  to  Holland,  where
he  learned  of  the  new  expedition  that  had  been


sent  to  Brazil  under  command  of  Hein  in  1626
and  sailed  to  his  succor.  He  made  a  successful
attack  against  Rio  de  Janeiro,  which  paid  ransom,
and  joined  Hein  ;  but  the  two  admirals  disagreeing
as  to  the  chief  command,  they  separated  and  Wille-
kens returned  to  Amsterdam.  He  afterward  com-
manded in  the  East  Indies,  dying  at  Ternate  after
a  successful  attack  against  Manila.  Willekens's
clerk  wrote  an  account  of  the  expedition  to  Brazil,
and  it  was  published  in  Dutch  (Amsterdam,  1626),
but  is  best  known  in  the  French  version,  entitled
"  Journal  de  l'expedition  entreprise  par  ordre  de
nos  seigneurs  des  Etats-Generaux,  au  Bresil,  et  du
siege  et  de  la  capture  de  Bahia,  sous  les  ordres  de
l'Amiral  Jacob  Willekens  "  (1629).

WILLET,  Joseph  Edg-erton,  educator,  b.  in
Macon,  Ga.,  17  Nov.,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at
Mercer  university  in  1846  and  elected  in  1847  ad-
junct professor  of  natural  philosophy  and  chemis-
try, but  spent  some  time  in  the  analytical  labora-
tory of  Yale  college  before  fully  taking  up  the  du-
ties of  his  chair.  Since  1849  he  has  been  engaged
in  teaching  natural  science  in  Mercer  university,
having  been  made  full  professor  in  1848.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  employed  by  the  Confederate
government  to  superintend  the  laboratory  at  At-
lanta, in  which  all  kinds  of  ammunition  were
manufactured,  and  in  recent  years  he  has  served
on  the  U.  S.  commission  to  investigate  the  habits,
nature,  and  ravages  of  the  cotton  caterpillar.  Prof.
Willet  has  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  "  Sci-
ence and  Religion,"  besides  lecturing  before  agri-
cultural societies.  He  is  the  author  of  a  prize-book,
"  The  Wonders  of  Insect  Life  "  (1869).

WILLETT,  Thomas,  merchant,  b.  in  England
in  1611 ;  d.  in  Barrington,  R,  I.,  4  Aug.,  1674.  He
came  with  Isaac  Allerton  from  Leyden  in  1630,
and  became  a  trader  and  sea-captain  of  Plymouth
colony,  but  lived  much  of  the  time  in  New  Amster-
dam, and  in  1650  acted  as  a  commissioner  on  be-
half of  the  New  Netherlands  to  settle  boundary
disputes  with  New  England.  In  1651  he  became
a  magistrate  of  Plymouth  colony.  He  was  the  first
to  inform  Peter  Stuyvesant  of  the  coming  of  a
hostile  English  fleet  in  1664.  After  the  surrender
he  accompanied  the  officers  that  went  to  take  pos-
session of  Albany  as  a  mediator  with  the  Indians,
and  on  12  June,  1665,  was  appointed  by  Gov.
Richard  Nicolls  the  first  mayor  of  New  York.  On
23  Aug.  he  was  nominated  one  of  the  commis-
sioners of  admiralty.  He  was  a  councillor  under
Gov.  Richard  Lovelace.  When  the  Dutch  retook
the  colony  in  1673,  his  property  in  New  York  was
confiscated,  and  he  retired  to  New  England. — His
son,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  1  Oct.,
1646,  was  major  commanding  the  militia  of  Queens
county,  and  summoned  them  to  meet  the  French
under  the  Marquis  Denonville  in  1687.  He  was  a
councillor  under  Sir  Edmund  Andros,  and  was
continued  in  the  office  under  Gov.  Henry  Slough-
ter. — The  first  Thomas's  great-grandson,  Marinus,
soldier,  b.  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  31  July,  1740;  d.  in
New  York  city,  22  Aug.,  1830,  served  with  dis-
tinction as  a  lieutenant  in  Gen.  James  Abercrom-
bie's  expedition  against  Fort  Ticonderoga  in  1758,
and  participated  in  the  capture  of  Fort  Frontenac.
He  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Sons  of  Liberty
in  New  York  city,  and  on  6  June,  1775,  prevented
the  sending  of  arms  from  the  arsenal  to  the  British
troops  in  Boston  harbor.  He  joined  Gen.  Richard
Montgomery's  force,  was  commissioned  as  captain,
took  part  in  the  expedition  against  Canada,  and
remained  in  command  of  the  post  at  St.  John's
after  its  capture.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  3d  New  York  regiment,  and  was  en-


518


WILLETT


WILLEY


gaged  in  skirmishes  near  New  York  city  in  the
spring  of  1776.  In  August,  1777,  he  was  second
in  command  at  Fort  Stanwix,  whence  he  led  a
sally  against  the  main  force  of  Col.  Barry  St.  Leger,

and  thus  gave  the
victory  to  the
militia  at  Oris-
kany.  He  joined
Gen.  Washing-
ton's army  in  New
Jersey  in  June,
1778,  and  in  1779
accompanied  Gen.
John  Sullivan  in
his  expedition
against  the  Six
Nations.  From
1780  till  the  end
of  the  war  he
commanded  the
forces  in  the  Mo-
hawk valley,  en-
countering the  ir-

^/rtfl/yimud '/VoukJfc John^ohnson  at

Johnstown  in  the
summer  of  1781,  and  in  February,  1783,  conducting
the  last  hostile  movement  against  the  British,  which
was  an  attempt  to  surprise  the  garrison  at  Oswego.
He  was  elected  to  the  state  assembly  after  the  peace,
but  vacated  his  seat  in  February,  1784,  on  being
appointed  sheriff  of  New  York,  which  office  he  held
till  1792.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  offered  the  com-
mand and  rank  of  a  brigadier-general  in  the  expedi-
tion against  the  western  Indians,  but  declined.  He
was  sent  by  President  Washington  in  1794  to  the
south  on  a  mission  to  the  Creek  Indians,  and  brought
Alexander  McGillivray  and  his  principal  chiefs  and
warriors  to  New  York,  where  tney  signed  a  treaty
of  peace.  When  De  Witt  Clinton  was  removed
from  the  office  of  mavor  of  New  York,  in  1807,
Willett  was  appointed  in  his  place.  In  1810  the
section  of  the  Republicans  that  became  the  Tam-
many party  nominated  him  for  lieutenant-governor
in  opposition  to  Clinton.  On  24  June,  1812,  he
was  secretary  of  a  mass-meeting  in  favor  of  mili-
tary preparations  against  the  British.  See  "  A
Narrative  of  the  Military  Actions  of  Col.  Marinus
Willett,"  prepared  chiefly  from  his  manuscript
journals  by  his  son,  William  M.  Willett  (New  York,
1831). — Marinus's  son,  William  Marinus,  author,
b.  in  New  York  city,  3  Jan.,  1803,  entered  the  New
York  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church
in  1823,  and  preached  in  eastern  New  York  and
Connecticut,  and  afterward  in  the  limits  of  the
Genesee  conference,  to  which  he  was  transferred
in  1826  till  1833.  In  1838  he  became  instructor  in
Hebrew  at  Wesleyan  university,  and  in  1841-'2
was  professor  of  Hebrew  and  biblical  literature,
and  also  edited  the  last  numbers  of  the  college
magazine  that  was  called  the  "  Classic."  In  1843
he  founded  the  Biblical  institute  at  Newbury,  Vt.,
of  which  he  was  president  till  1848.  His  life  has
since  been  spent  in  literary  labor.  He  edited  the
"Newbury  Biblical  Magazine"  in  1843-'4,  and  in
1882  the  "  New  Bible  Magazine,"  which  was  con-
tinued only  through  one  volume.  His  works  in-
clude "  Scenes  in  the  Wilderness :  Authentic  Nar-
rative of  the  Labors  and  Sufferings  of  the  Moravian
Missionaries  among  the  North  American  Indians  "
(New  York,  1842) ;  "  A  New  Life  of  Summerfield  "
(Philadelphia.  1857);  "The  Life  and  Times  of
Herod  the  Great,  as  connected,  Historically  and
Prophetically,  with  the  Coming  Christ "  (Philadel-
phia, 1860) ; "  Herod  Antipas,  with  Passages  from  the


Life  of  Jesus,"  a  sequel  to  the  last-named  (New
York,  1866) ;  "  The  Messiah  "  (Boston,  1874) ;  and
"  The  Restitution  of  All  Things  "  (New  York,  1880).

WILLETTS,  Jacob,  educator,  b.  in  Fishkill,
N.  Y.,  in  1785;  d.  near  Mechanic,  Dutchess  co.,
N.  Y.,  12  Sept.,  1860.  He  was  educated  at  the
Friends'  boarding-school  near  Mechanic,  and  on
his  eighteenth  birthday  became  head  teacher  there.
About  1813  he  settled  on  the  island  of  Nantucket,
where  with  his  wife  he  conducted  a  flourishing
school  for  many  years;  but  in  1824  they  returned
to  Dutchess  county  and  established  a  school  near
Mechanic,  which  they  continued  until  1852.  He
was  an  accomplished  mathematician,  and  published
text-books  of  geography,  arithmetic,  and  book-
keeping, which  were  much  used  throughout  the
country. — His  wife,  Deborah,  b.  in  Marshfield,
Mass.,  in  1789;  d.  near  Mechanic,  Dutchess  co.,
N.  Y.,  in  1880,  was  educated  in  the  same  school
with  Mr.  Willetts,  and  married  him  in  1812.  Her
maiden  name  was  Rogers,  and  she  was  a  lineal  de-
scendant of  the  martyr  of  Smithfield.  She  was  a
skilful  grammarian,  and  was  often  consulted  on
difficult  questions  by  Goold  Brown,  who  in  the
preface  of  his  celebrated  grammar  acknowledged
his  indebtedness  to  her.

WILLEY,  Austin,  reformer,  b.  in  Campton,  N.
H.,  24  June,  1806.  He  was  educated  at  Pembroke
academy,  studied  at  Bangor  theological  seminary,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1837,  arid  in  1839  be-
came editor  of  the  "  Advocate  of  Freedom,"  an
anti-slavery  paper  that  had  been  established  in  the
preceding  year  at  Brunswick,  Me.,  which  he  con-
ducted until  the  abolition  of  slavery.  He  was  also
an  early  advocate  of  prohibition,  and  contributed
to  the  adoption  of  the  Maine  law.  He  has  pub-
lished in  book-form  a  "  Family  Memorial "  (San
Francisco,  1865),  and  "  History  of  the  Anti-Slavery
Cause  in  State  and  Nation  "  (Portland,  1886).

WILLEY,  Benjamin  Glazier,  author,  b.  in
Conway,  N.  H.,  1  Feb.,  1796 ;  d.  in  East  Sumner,
Me.,  17  April,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin
in  1822,  studied  theology  with  Rev.  Asa  Cumniings,
was  ordained  as  colleague  pastor  at  Conway  in
1824,  and  preached  there  for  seven  years,  and  sub-
sequently at  Milton  and  Farmington,  N.  H.,  and
East  Sumner,  Me.  His  father,  Samuel,  was  one  of
the  first  settlers  of  Conway,  and  his  brother,  who
was  also  named  Samuel,  perished  with  all  his
family  in  the  avalanche  of  28  Aug.,  1826.  An  ac-
count of  this  catastrophe  is  given  in  Mr.  Willey's
"  Incidents  in  White  Mountain  History  "  (Boston,
1856),  which  was  enlarged  and  republished  under
the  title  of  "  History  of  the  White  Mountains,
together  with  many  Interesting  Anecdotes,  illus-
trating Life  in  the  Backwoods  "  (New  York,  1870).

WILLEY,  Calvin,  senator,  b.  in  East  Haddam,
Conn.,  15  Sept.,  1776;  d.  in  Stafford,  Conn.,  23
Aug.,  1858.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1798,  and  began  practice  at  Salford.  He
served  in  the  state  house  of  representatives  f(5r
nine  successive  years  and  in  the  state  senate  for
two  years,  was  postmaster  at  Stafford  Springs  in
180fr-'8,  and  afterward  at  Tolland  till  1816,  and
for  seven  years  filled  the  office  of  probate  judge  for
the  Stafford  district.  He  was  a  presidential  elector
in  1824,  voting  for  John  Quincy  Adams,  and  was
elected  a  U.  S.  senator,  serving  from  9  Dec,  1825,
till  3  March,  1831.  At  the  end  of  his  term  he  re-
sumed practice  at  Stafford.

WILLEY,  Henry,  botanist,  b.  in  Geneseo.
N.  Y.,  19  July,  1824.  He  was  educated  at  the
normal  school  in  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  and  after-
ward taught  a  farm-school  for  boys  in  Geneseo.
Subsequently  he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to


WILLEY


WILLIAMS


519


the  bar  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  York  in  Au-
gust, 1848.  For  several  years  he  practised  his
profession,  first  in  Geneseo,  and  then  in  Spencer-
port,  N.  Y.  In  1858  he  went  to  Massachusetts,  and
after  teaching  for  several  years  settled  in  New
Bedford  as  editor  of  the  "  Daily  Evening  Standard,"
which  occupation  he  still  continues.  During  this
time  he  became  interested  in  the  study  of  lichens,
of  which  he  has  made  a  collection,  both  of  exotic
and  native  species.  His  publications  on  liehe-
nology  have  been  quite  extensive,  and,  besides  vari-
ous reports  to  the  national  surveys  of  specimens
submitted  to  him  for  examination,  include  "  A
List  of  North  American  Lichens"  (New  Bedford,
1872)  and  "'An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of
Lichens"  (1887).  He  is  also  the  author  of  a
"  Willey  Genealogy  "  (1888).

WILLEY,  Waitman  Thomas,  senator,  b.  in
Monongalia  county,  Va.  (now  W.  Va.),  18  Oct.,
1811.  He  was  graduated  at  Madison  college,
Uniontown,  Pa.,  in  1831,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1833.  He  was  clerk  of  the
county  and  circuit  courts  successively  from  1841
till  1855,  and  a  member  in  1850-'l  of  the  Virginia
constitutional  convention.  Mr.  Willey  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  State  convention  that  met  at  Richmond
in  February,  1861,  and  after  the  adoption  of  the
ordinance  of  secession  was  elected  by  the  Unionist
legislature  at  Wheeling  to  occupy  the  seat  in  the
U.  S.  senate  that  was  vacated  by  James  M.  Ma-
son, taking  his  seat  on  13  July,  1861.  He  attended
the  convention  that  decided  to  create  a  new  state,
was  chosen  to  represent  West  Virginia  in  the  sen-
ate, and  took  his  seat  on  3  Dec,  1863.  In  the
following  year  he  was  re-elected  for  the  full  term
that  ended  on  3  March,  1871,  and  served  as  chair-
man of  the  committees  on  patents  and  on  claims.
In  1866  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Loyalists'  con-
vention at  Philadelphia,  and  in  1871  he  was  a
member  of  the  Constitutional  convention  of  West
Virginia.  He  has  written  for  reviews  and  de-
livered lectures  on  various  subjects,  including  a
series  on  "  Methodism  "  in  1853.  Allegheny  col-
lege gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1863.

WILLIAMS,  Abram  Pease,  senator,  b.  near
Portland,  Me.,  3  Feb.,  1832.  He  attended  acade-
mies in  North  Anson  and  Farmington,  Me.,  re-
moved to  California  in  1858,  and,  after  engaging  in
mining,  became  a  merchant  at  Mono  Lake,  but  the
Indians  destroyed  his  property,  and  in  1861  he
went  to  San  Francisco,  where  he  has  since  engaged
in  commerce.  He  has  also  devoted  some  time  to
agriculture  and  sheep-raising.  Mr.  Williams  was
the  founder  of  the  San  Francisco  board  of  trade,
and  for  two  years  its  pi^esident,  and  was  first  vice-

f  resident  of  the  chamber  of  commerce  of  that  city,
n  1884-'8  he  was  chairman  of  the  Republican  state
central  committee.  On  4  Aug.,  1886,  he  was  elected
U.  S.  senator  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  John
F.  Miller,  deceased,  succeeding  George  Hearst,  who
had  been  appointed  by  the  governor.  Mr.  Will-
iams served  till  3  March,  1887,  and  was  in  turn
succeeded  by  Mr.  Hearst.

WILLIAMS,  Alpheus  Starkey,  soldier,  b.  in
Saybrook,  Conn.,  10  Sept.,  1810;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  21  Dec,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1831,  studied  law  there,  and  afterward
spent  some  time  in  European  travel,  a  part  of  his
tour  being  in  company  with  Edwin  Forrest  and
Nathaniel  P.  Willis.  In  1836  he  began  the  prac-
tice of  law  in  Detroit,  Mich.  In  1838  he  was  cap-
tain of  a  local  militia  company.  In  1840  he  was
appointed  judge  of  probate  of  Wayne  county,  and
he  held  that  post  until  1844,  when  he  was  elected
recorder  of  the  city  of  Detroit. At  the  opening  of


the  war  with  Mexico  he  was  commissioned  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  1st  Michigan  volunteer  in-
fantry, and  served  with  credit  until  the  close  of
hostilities,  when  he  returned  to  Detroit  and  re-
sumed the  practice  of  law.  In  1861,  when  the  civil
war  began,  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  offer  his  ser-
vices in  support  of  the  government,  and  as  he  had
always  been  an  active  member  of  the  Democratic
party,  his  example  had  great  influence.  On  17
May,  1861,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of
volunteers.  He  at  once  entered  upon  his  duties  in
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  in  the  spring  of
1862  was  made  commander  of  a  division  in  the
corps  of  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  in  the  Shenan-
doah valley.  During  the  retreat  of  the  corps  in
May,  1862,  he  did  himself  great  credit  by  his  skill
and  courage.  While  still  a  brigadier-general  he
commanded,  with  ability  and  success,  an  army
corps  in  the  battles  of  South  Mountain,  Antietam,
and  Gettysburg.  In  the  autumn  of  1863  he  was
sent  with  his  corps  to  Tennessee,  and  in  the  follow-
ing spring,  as  division  commander,  he  entered
upon  the  Atlanta  campaign.  He  took  an  active
part  in  all  the  battles  of  that  summer.  At  the
head  of  the  20th  corps  he  marched  with  Sherman
to  the  sea,  and  at  Savannah  he  was  promoted  to
be  brevet  major-general  of  volunteers  to  rank
from  12  Jan.,  1865,  being  39th  on  the  list  of  such
brevet  appointments,  though  far  in  advance  of
them  all  in  date  of  previous  commission  and  in
actual  service.  Perhaps  his  was  the  only  instance
during  the  civil  war  where  an  officer  of  his  grade
was  placed  in  command  of  a  corps,  except  in  a
momentary  emergency.  Notwithstanding  this
neglect  to  recognize  his  merits,  Gen.  Williams
gave  his  best  energies  to  his  work.  He  shared  in
the  campaign  in  the  Carolinas  and  in  the  grand
review  at  Washington,  and  was  retained  in  service
during  the  reconstruction  era  in  Kentucky  and
Arkansas,  until  July,  1866,  when  he  was  honorably
mustered  out.  He  was  soon  afterward  appointed
U.  S.  minister  to  San  Salvador,  where  he  spent
three  years  in  diplomatic  duties.  He  returned  in
1870  to  his  old  home,  and  was  in  that  year  an  un-
successful candidate  for  governor  of  Michigan.  In
1874,  and  again  in  1876,  he  was  elected  a  repre-
sentative in  congress.  He  had  established  a  repu-
tation as  an  honest  and  independent  legislator,  when
his  career  was  cut  short  by  death.  During  his
second  term  in  congress  he  was  chairman  of  the
committee  on  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  did
much  to  beautify  the  capital  city.

WILLIAMS,  Arthur  Trefusis  Heneage,  Ca-
nadian soldier,  b.  at  Penryn  Park,  Port  Hope,
Ont.,  13  June,  1837;  d.  on  Saskatchewan  river,
Northwest  territory,  4  July,  1885.  His  father  had
been  a  commander  in  the  British  navy,  and.  subse-
quently removing  to  Canada,  was  a  member  of  the
Canada  assembly  from  1840  till  1848.  The  son  was
educated  at  Upper  Canada  college  and  Edinburgh
university,  and  afterward  spent  several  years  in
travel  through  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  and  the
European  continent.  From  1867  till  1871  he  rep-
resented East  Durham  as  a  Conservative  in  the
Ontario  legislature,  and  from  1878  till  his  death
he  sat  for  the  same  constituency  in  the  Dominion
parliament.  He  was  appointed  a  lieutenant-colonel
of  militia  in  1866,  in  1880  commanded  the  Cana-
dian rifle-team  at  Wimbledon,  and  in  1885  led  the
Midland  battalion  in  suppressing  the  Northwest
insurrection.  He  was  present  with  his  command
at  the  battle  of  Batoche,  and  afterward  went  with
Gen.  Sir  Frederick  Middleton  to  Prince  Albert,
and  thence  to  Battleford  and  Fort  Pitt.  From  the
last-named  place  he  was  sent  in  pursuit  of  Big


520


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


Bear,  an  Indian  chief  who  had  joined  Louis  Kiel,
and  while  engaged  in  this  service  he  contracted  a
cold  which  resulted  in  his  death  soon  afterward.

WILLIAMS,  Barney  (the  stage  name  of  Ber-
nard Flaherty),  actor,  b.  in  Cork,  Ireland,  in
1823;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25  April,  1876.  He
came  to  this  country  as  a  boy,  and  in  1836  was
connected  with  the  old  Franklin  theatre,  New
York.  In  1845  he  was  the  manager  of  the  Vaux-
hall  garden,  in  the  Bowery,  and  after  his  marriage
in  1850  he  played,  with  his  wife,  in  Irish  comedy.
After  a  successful  visit  to  San  Francisco  in  1854
they  went  abroad  in  1855,  but  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1859,  and  filled  a  long  engage-
ment at  Niblo's  garden.  In  1867  Williams  became
manager  of  Wallack's  old  Broadway  theatre,  and
subsequently  he  played  with  success  in  this  coun-
try, Great  Britain,  and  Canada.  Mr.  Williams
attained  a  wide  reputation  as  an  Irish  comedian.
Among  his  last  plays  were  "  The  Emerald  Ring,"
"  The  Connie  Soogah,"  and  "  The.  Fairy  Circle." —
His  wife,  Maria  Pray,  b.  in  New  York  city  in
1828,  became  a  ballet-girl  at  fifteen  years  of  age,
performing  at  the  Chatham  theatre,  and  shortly  af-
terward married  Charles  Mestayer.  After  his  death
she  married  Mr.  Williams  in  1850,  and  thereafter
generally  appeared  with  him,  playing  star  engage-
ments. She  is  a  sister  of  Mrs.  William  J.  Florence.

WILLIAMS,  Benjamin,  governor  of  North
Carolina,  b.  in  North  Carolina  in  1754;  d.  in  Moore
county,  N.  C,  in  1814.  He  entered  the  Revolu-
tionary army  as  a  captain,  and  did  good  service  at
Guilford,  for  which  he  was  promoted  colonel.  Col.
Williams  served  many  years  in  the  legislature,  sat
in  congress  in  1793-'5,  and  was  governor  of  .  his
state  in  1799-1802,  and  again  in  1807-'8.  In
1808-'9  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate.

WILLIAMS,  Catherine  R.  (Arnold),  author,
b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  about  1787;  d.  there,  11
Oct.,  1872.  She  was  a  granddaughter  of  Oliver
Arnold,  attorney-general  of  the  state  of  Rhode  Isl-
and, and  daughter  of  Capt.  Alfred  Arnold,  and  in
1818  married  Mr.  Williams ;  but  the  match  was  un-
fortunate, and,  after  a  separation  from  her  husband,
she  supported  herself  by  literary  work.  She  was
the  author  of  "  Original  Poems  "  (Providence,  1828) ;
"  Religion  at  Home  "  (1829) ;  "  Tales,  National  and
Revolutionary  "  (2d  series,  1830  and  1835) ;  "  Aris-
tocracy "  (1832) ;  "  Fall  River,  an  Authentic  Narra-
tive "  (1833) ;  "  Biography  of  Revolutionary  Heroes  "
(1839);  "Neutral  French,  or  the  Exiles  of  Nova
Scotia "  (1841) ;  "  Annals  of  the  Aristocracy  of
Rhode  Island  " (2  vols.,  1843-5).  See "  Bibliograph-
ical Memoirs  of  Three  Rhode  Island  Authors,"  by
Sidney  S.  Rider  (Providence,  1880).

WILLIAMS,  Channing  Moore,  P.  E.  mission-
ary bishop,  b.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  18  July,  1829.
He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  William  and
Mary  in  1853  and  at  the  theological  seminary  at
Alexandria,  Va.,  in  1855,  ordered  deacon  in  St.
Paul's  church,  Alexandria,  1  July,  1855,  and  sailed
for  China  as  a  missionary  under  Bishop  Boone  in
November  of  that  year.  He  was  ordained  priest
in  the  mission  chapel,  Shanghai,  China,  by  Bishop
Boone,  11  Jan.,  1857,  and  shortly  afterward,  by
direction  of  the  foreign  committee,  he  was  trans-
ferred to  Japan.  He  was  consecrated  missionary
bishop  of  China,  with  jurisdiction  in  Japan,  in  St.
John's  chapel,  New  York,  3  Oct.,  1866.  lie  received
the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1867.  The
convention  of  1874  relieved  him  of  the  China  mis-
sion, and  changed  his  title  to  bishop  of  Yedo.

WILLIAMS,  Charles  Langdon,  lawyer,  b.  in
Rutland.  Vt.,  in  1821 ;  d.  there,  10  Feb..  1861.  He
was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1839,  admitted  to


the  bar  in  1842,  and  practised  in  Brandon,  Vt.„
in  1844-'8,  and  afterward  in  Rutland.  He  pub-
lished "  Statistics  of  the  Rutland  County  Bar,"
with  biographical  sketches  (Brandon,  Vt.,  1847);.
"  Statutes  of  Vermont "  (Burlington,  1851) ;  and
vols,  xxvii.-xxix.  of  "  Vermont  Supreme  Court
Reports  "  (Rutland,  1856-'8).

WILLIAMS,  David,  patriot,  b.  in  Tarrytownr
N.  Y.,  21  Oct.,  1754:  d.  near  Livingston ville,'N.  Y.y
2  Aug.,  1831.  He  enlisted  in  the  Revolutionary
army  in  1775,  served  under  Gen.  Richard  Mont-
gomery at  St.  John's  and  Quebec,  and  continued
in  the  army  till  1779.  During  his  service  his  feet
were  badly  frozen,  and  this  partially  disabled  him
for  life.  With  John  Paulding  and  Isaac  Van
Wart,  he  was  one  of  the  captors  of  Maj.  John  Andre
on  23  Sept.,  1780.  (See  Paulding,  John.)  Many  of
the  details  of  the  capture  are  related  in  Williams's
deposition  that  he  made  on  the  following  day.
Some  time  after  the  war  he  bought  a  farm  near  the
Catskill  mountains,  that  had  been  the  property  of
Daniel  Shays,  leader  of  Shays's  rebellion.  Will-
iams was  very  generous,  and  indorsed  freely  for  his
friends.  The  farm  became  heavily  mortgaged,  yet
he  succeeded  in  retaining  it,  and  received  also  a
pension  of  $200  a  year  from  the  government.  The
estate  is  now  in  the  possession  of  his  grandson,
William  C.  Williams.  Williams  was  given  a  silver
medal  by  order  of  congress,  and  also  received  in
New  York  city  a  cane  that  was  made  from  the
cheval-de-f rise  for  obstructing  the  Hudson  at  West.
Point.  In  December,  1830,  he  visited  New  York
by  invitation  of  the  mayor,  who  gave  him  a  horse,
harness,  and  carriage,  and  the  pupils  of  one  of  the
city  schools  presented  him  with  a  silver  cup.  A
monument  has  been  erected  to  his  memory,  by  the-
state,  at  the  stone  fort  near  Schoharie  court-house.
The  purity  of  the  motives  of  Andre's  captors  has
been  called  in  question  by  some  historians,  but  it
has  been  vindicated  by  Horatio  Seymour  and  Henry
J.  Raymond  in  addresses  at  Tarrytown  in  1853,
by  Samuel  J.  Tilden  and  Chauncey  M.  Depew  at
the  same  place  in  1880,  and  by  Grenville  Tremaine-
and  Daniel  Knower  at  Schoharie  in  1876.

WILLIAMS,  David  Rogerson,  soldier,  b.  in
Robbins  Neck,  S.  C,  10  March,  1776;  d.  in  Lynch's
creek,  S.  C,  15  Nov.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in'  1797,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to-
the  bar.  In  addition  to  his  practice  he  conducted
a  large  plantation.  He  served  in  congress  in
1805-'9,  and  was  again  chosen  in  1810  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  till  1813.  In  the  latter  year,  on  9
July,  he  was  appointed  a  brigadier-general  in  the-
regular  army,  but  after  seeing  some  service  he  re-
signed on  6  April,  1814,  and  in  1814-'16  was  gov-
ernor of  the  state.  He  was  killed  by  accident  at  a
new  bridge  over  Lvnch's  creek.

WILLIAMS,  Edward,  English  author,  lived  in
the  17th  century.  He  published  "  Virgo  Trium-
phans,  or  Virginia  richly  and  truly  Valued  "  (Lon-
don, 1650 ;  2d  ed., u  With  Addition  of  the  Discovery
of  Silkworms,  etc.,"  1650).  The  book  is  said  by
some  authorities  to  be  in  substance  the  work  of
John  Farrer,  of  Geding.

WILLIAMS,  Edward  P.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Castine,  Me.,  26  Feb..  1833 ;  d.  in  Yeddo  bay,  near
Yokohama,  Japan,  24  Jan.,  1870.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy,  10  June,  1853T
and  was  commissioned  a  lieutenant,  16  Sept..  1855.
During  the  first  year  of  the  civil  war  he  served  in
the  steamer  "  Paul  Jones "  on  the  South  Atlantic
blockade,  and  subsequently  he  was  executive  of
the  steamer  "  Powhatan."  He  was  promoted  to
lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862.  William*
was  one  of  the  volunteers  that  were  called  for  by


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


521


Admiral  Dahlgren  to  storm  Fort  Sumter,  and  on
the  night  of  8  Sept.,  1863,  commanded  the  first
division  of  boats  with  sailors  and  marines  in  that
attack.  He  was  captured  and  sent  as  prisoner  to
Columbia,  S.  C,  where  he  remained  for  one  year
until  exchanged.  He  was  promoted  to  commander,
25  July,  1866,  served  at  the  rendezvous  at  Boston,
1865-'6,  and  on  ordnance  duty  at  Boston  and  New
York,  1866-8.  On  9  Feb.,  1869,  he  took  command
of  the  steamer  "  Oneida  "  on  the  Asiatic  station.
He  sailed  from  Yokohama  at  4.30  p.  m.,  24  Jan.,
1870,  and  at  6.30  p.  m.  his  vessel  was  run  down  by
the  English  mail-steamer  "  Bombay  "  and  sank  in
fifteen  minutes.  The  "  Bombay  "  was  not  injured,
and,  after  backing  out  to  clear  her  sharp  stern  from
the  "  Oneida,"  she  steamed  away  without  waiting
to  give  assistance  or  heeding  signals  of  distress.
Twenty-two  officers  and  115  men  were  lost,  2  officers
and  37  men  were  saved.  Capt.  Williams  stood  on  the
bridge  and  refused  to  leave  his  ship  when  he  was
urged  to  do  so  by  those  in  the  boat.  The  secretary
of  the  navy  said  in  his  official  report  to  congress
that,  after  a  thorough  investigation  of  the  collision,
he  concluded  that  the  disaster  was  due  to  the  reck-
lessness and  bad  navigation  of  the  English  steam-
er. Another  theory  was  that  the  captain  of  the
"  Bombay"  mistook  the  "  Oneida"  for  a  rival  mer-
chant steamer  of  the  American  Pacific  mail  line,
and  ran  into  her  purposely.

WILLIAMS,  Edwin,  author,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  7  March,  1797:  d.  in  New  York  city,  21
Oct.,  1854.  His  father,  Joseph,  was  extensively  en-
gaged as  a  shipping  and  importing  merchant,  and
was  a  general  of  Connecticut  militia.  The  son  re-
moved to  New  York,  was  for  many  years  secretary
of  the  American  institute,  and  actively  connected
with  the  historical,  geographical,  and  statistical  so-
cieties. He  contributed  constantly  to  periodicals,
published  "  The  New  York  Annual  Register  "  in
1830-'45,  and  was  the  author  of  "  The  Politician's
Manual  "  (New  York,  1832-'4) ;  "  New  Universal
Gazetteer"  (1833);  "Book  of  the  Constitution"
(1833) ;  '•  New  York  as  it  Is  "  (1833) ;  "  Arctic  Voy-
ages "  (1835) ;  "  The  Fashionable  Puzzler  "  (1835) ;
"  The  Statesman's  Manual "  (1838,  many  editions  :
continued  after  his  death  by  Benson  J.  Lossing) :
"  Truths  in  Relation  to  the  Erie  Railroad  "  (1842) ;
"Political  History  of  Ireland"  (1843);  "Wheat
Trade  of  the  United  States  and  Europe  "  (1846) ;
"Presidents  of  the  United  States"  (1849);  and
"  The  Twelve  Stars  of  the  Republic  "  (1850).  With
C.  Edwards  Lester  he  issued  "  The  Napoleon  Dy-
nasty, or  History  of  the  Bonaparte  Family  "  (1852).

WILLIAMS,  Elisha,  lawver,  b.  in  Pomfret,
Conn.,  29  Aug.,  1773;  d.  in  New  York  city,  29
June,  1833.  He  studied  law  with  Judge  Tapping
Reeve  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  with  Chief-Justice
Spencer,  of  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  June,  1793,  and  began  practice  at  Spencertown,
N.  Y.,  but  removed  to  Hudson  in  1800.  In  1815
he  founded  the  town  of  Waterloo,  N.  Y.,  which  he
named  immediately  after  the  battle  of  Waterloo,
and  in  1830,  leaving  the  bar  on  account  of  feeble
health,  he  removed  there  with  his  family.  The
expense  of  building  the  court-house  in  that  town
was  borne  chiefly  by  him.  He  exerted  great  politi-
cal influence  in  Columbia  county,  N.  Y.,  in  the
Federal  party,  was  frequently  elected  to  the  as-
sembly, and  was  an  active  member  of  the  New
York  constitutional  convention  of  1821.  Mr.  Will-
iams won  a  reputation  which,  during  his  lifetime,
placed  him  at  the  head  of  American  orators  and
high  among  the  nisi  prius  lawyers  of  the  country.
His  power  over  a  jury  was  astonishing,  and  his
delivery  was  remarkable  for  force  and  elegance.


In  this  respect  he  ranked,  in  his  day,  as  the  equal,
if  not  the  superior  of  Rufus  Choate.  In  appear-
ance Mr.  Williams's  form  was  erect,  his  shoulders
were  square,  and  he  was  more  than  six  feet  in
height.  His  eyes  were  dark  and  sparkling  and  his
forehead  high  and  straight.  His  manners  were
courteous  and  bland.

WILLIAMS,  Elkanah,  physician,  b.  in  Law-
rence county,  Ind.,  19  Dec,  1822 ;  d.  in  Hazle-
wood,  Pa.,  5  Oct.,  1888.  His  father,  Isaac  Williams,
was  a  captain  in  the  war  of  1812  and  one  of  the
earliest  settlers  of  Indiana.  The  son  was  edu-
cated at  Bedford  seminary,  the  State  university  at
Bloomington,  and  at  Asbury  university,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1847.  He  took  his  medical  de-
gree at  the  University  of  Louisville  in  1850,  prac-
tised-in  Indiana,  and  in  1852-'3  spent  eighteen
months  in  the  study  of  ophthalmology  in  Paris,
London,  Prague,  Vienna,  and  Berlin.  He  returned
to  Cincinnati  in  1855  and  began  practice  as  a  spe-
cialist in  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear,  being  the  first
regular  physician  in  the  United  States  to  confine
his  practice  strictly  to  those  branches.  Soon  after-
ward he  became  associated  as  a  clinical  lecturer  in
Miami  medical  college,  and  in  1860  he  was  given
the  chair  of  ophthalmology,  the  first  of  the  kind
in  the  United  States,  and  held  it  for  many  years.
He  was  ophthalmic  surgeon  to  the  Commercial  hos-
pital in  Cincinnati  in  1862-'72,  and  early  in  the
civil  war  was  appointed  assistant  surgeon  to  the  U.  S.
marine  hospital,  which  post  he  held  till  the  close  of
the  war.  He  attended  the  international  ophthalmic
congress  at  Paris  in  1862,  where  he  read  a  paper  on
"  Plusieurs  questions  de  therapeutique,"  and  in
1872  attended  a  similar  meeting  at  London.  In
1876  he  was  elected  president  of  the  ophthalmic  con-
gress in  New  York.  Dr.  Williams  was  also  elected
president  of  the  Ohio  state  medical  society  in  1875.

WILLIAMS,  Ephraim,  soldier,  b.  in  Newton,
Mass.,  24  Feb.,  1715;  d.  near  Lake  George,  N.  Y.,
8  Sept.,  1755.  In  early  years  he  was  a  sailor,  and
made  several  voyages  to  Europe ;  but  he  afterward
joined  the  army  and  served  in  Canada  in  the
war  of  1740-'8  against  the  French,  attaining  the
rank  of  captain.  In  1750  the  government  of
Massachusetts  granted  him  200  acres  of  land  in
the  present  townships  of  Adams  and  Williamstown,
upon  which,  in  the  following  year,  he  erected  Fort
Massachusetts,  and  was  appointed  commander  of
the  whole  line  of  frontier  posts  west  of  Connecticut
river.  In  1755,  on  the  renewal  of  the  war  between
France  and  England,  he  led  a  regiment  of  Massa-
chusetts troops  to  join  Sir  William  Johnson,  who
was  on  his
way  to  invade
Canada.  At
Albany,  un-
der a  present-
iment of  ear-
ly death,  he
made  a  will
leaving  the
bulk  of  his
landed  and
other  proper-
ty to  found
a  free  school
at  Williams-
town.  On  8
Sept.,  1755,  at
the  head  of
1,200  men,  while  making  a  reconnoissance  of  Baron
Dieskau's  advancing  force,  he  fell  into  an  ambus-
cade of  the  enemy  near  the  head  of  Lake  George,
and,  at  the  first  volley,  was  shot  through  the  head.


522


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


The  funds  that  he  left  were  allowed  to  accumulate
for  thirty  years,  when  a  free  school  was  incorpo-
rated. Theinstitution  was  afterward  converted  into
a  college,  the  first  commencement  of  which  was
held  on  2  Sept.,  1795,  when  seventy-seven  students
were  present,  four  of  whom  graduated.  Col.  Will-
iams never  married.  In  1854  the  alumni  of  Will-
iams erected  a  monument  (consisting  of  a  huge
boulder)  to  him  near  Lake  George,  on  the  spot
where  he  fell.  See  illustration  on  preceding  page.
— Ephraim's  brother,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in
Newton,  Mass.,  1  April,  1718 ;  d.  in  Deerfield,
Mass.,  28  Sept.,  1775,  studied  medicine  in  Boston,
and  settled  in  Deerfield,  Mass.,  in  1739.  In  1743
he  was  appointed  surgeon  in  the  army  in  the  pro-
jected expedition  into  Canada,  which  failed  to  set
out.  He  was  afterward  surgeon  of  the  chain  of
forts  that  extended  from  Fort  Drummer,  Vt.,  to
Fort  Massachusetts  at  Hoosac  or  Adams,  suffering
much  hardship  and  danger  in  visiting  these  posts,
which  were  exposed  to  the  onslaughts  of  the  In-
dians. He  was  a  surgeon  in  the  army  under  Sir
William  Johnson  at  Lake  George  in  1755,  and  pres-
ent at  the  skirmish  on  8  Sept.  of  that  year  in  which
his  brother,  Col.  Ephraim,  was  killed.  Dr.  Will-
iams became  lieutenant-colonel  in  1756,  serving  on
Lake  George.  His  letters  during  that  campaign
are  interesting  and  faithful  histories  of  its  events,
and  furnish  many  medical  and  military  facts.
When  he  resumed  practice  he  was  the  only  surgeon
in  his  neighborhood,  and  was  frequently  called  to
Vermont  and  New  Hampshire.  He  was  a  justice
of  the  peace,  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas
and  of  probate,  town-clerk  for  many  years,  and
held  many  minor  civil  offices.  He  educated  several
students  in  the  profession  of  medicine,  and  left  a
large  and  valuable  library.

WILLIAMS,  George  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  New
Lebanon,  Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  23  March,  1823.  He
was  educated  at  an  academy  in  Onondaga  county,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1844,  and,
removing  to  Iowa,  began  practice  there.  He  was
elected  judge  of  the  first  judicial  district  of  that
state,  serving  from  1847  till  1852,  and  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1852.  In  1853-'7  he  was  chief
justice  of  Oregon  territory,  and  he  was  reappointed
to  that  office  by  President  Buchanan,  but  declined.
He  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed
the  constitution  of  Oregon  in  1858,  and,  having
been'  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  the  state  as  a
Union  Republican,  served  from  4  Dec,  1865,  till  3
March,  1871. He  was  a  member  of  the  joint  high

commission  that  in
1871  arranged  the
treaty  of  Wash-
ington for  the  ad-
justment of  dif-
ferences between
Great  Britain  and
the  United  States
growing  out  of  the
Alabama  claims,
and  was  appointed
by  President  Grant
at torney  -general of
the  United  States,
serving  from  10
Jan..  1872,  till  15
May,  1875.  On  1
Dec,  1873,  he  was
nominated  by  President  Grant  chief  justice  of
the  U.  S.  supreme  court ;  but  his  nomination  was
not  confirmed  by  the  senate,  and  his  name  was
withdrawn.  He  afterward  practised  law  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C.


4"^9rrti/iA


WILLIAMS,  George  Washington,  author,  b.
in  Bedford  Springs,  Pa.,  16  Oct.,  1849.  He  is  a
mulatto.  He  served  in  the  civil  war,  was  a  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  artillery  in  the  Republican  army
of  Mexico  in  1865-'7,  and  attended  school  at  New-
ton Centre,  Mass.,  until  1874.  For  a  year  he
preached  in  Boston,  but  in  1875  he  became  a  jour-
nalist. He  was  graduated  at  Cincinnati  law  col-
lege in  1877,  spent  two  years  in  the  office  of  Al-
phonso  Taft,  and  in  1879-'81  was  a  member  of  the
Ohio  legislature.  In  1880-'2  he  was  judge-advo-
cate-general of  the  Grand  army  of  the  republic,
and  in  1885-'6  he  was  U.  S.  minister  to  Hayti.  In
1888  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  world's  conference
of  foreign  missions  at  London,  England,  where
his  speech  on  "  The  Drink  Traffic  in  the  Congo  "
attracted  much  attention.  He  has  edited  "The
Southwestern  Review "  at  Cincinnati  and  "  The
Commoner  "  at  Washington,  and  is  the  author  of
"  History  of  the  Negro  Race  in  America  from  1619
till  1880  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1883) ;  "  History  of
the  Negro  Troops  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion"
(1887) ;  and  "  Historv  of  the  Reconstruction  of
the  Insurgent  States  "  (2  vols.,  1889).

WILLIAMS,  Henry  Shaler,  geologist,  b.  in
Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  6  March,  1847.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Sheffield  scientific  school  of  Yale  in  1868,
and  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  1871  from
that  university  for  advanced  studies.  Subsequent-
ly he  became  professor  of  palaeontology  in  Cor-
nell university,  which  chair  he  still  holds,  and  he
is  also  engaged  in  palaeontological  researches  for
the  U.  S.  geological  survey.  Prof.  Williams  is  a
member  of  various  scientific  societies,  and  since
1882  has  been  a  fellow  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science.  His  contributions
to  scientific  literature  include  papers  that  have
appeared  in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"
"  The  American  Naturalist,"  the  "  Bulletins  of  the
U.  S.  Geological  Survey,"  and  in  the  proceedings
of  the  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member,  and  he  is
also  the  author  of  "  Bones,  Ligaments,  and  Muscles
of  the  Domestic  Cat "  (New  York,  1875).

WILLIAMS,  Henry  Willard,  physician,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  11  Dec,  1821.  He  was  educated
in  the  schools  of  Boston  and  Salem,  and  from  his
seventeenth  till  his  twenty-fourth  year  was  en-
gaged in  mercantile  business.  He  was  graduated
in  medicine  at  Harvard  in  1849,  engaged  in  prac-
tice in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  became  distinguished
as  an  oculist.  He  has  been  for  twenty-five  vears
ophthalmic  surgeon  to  the  Boston  city  hospital,  was
a  lecturer  in  Harvard  medical  school  in  1869-'71,
and  from  that  time  has  filled  the  chair  of  ophthal-
mology. Dr.  Williams  is  connected  with  many
medical  societies,  American  and  European,  was  for
some  years  president  of  the  American  ophthalmo-
logical  society,  and  at  the  International  congress
at  London  in  1872  was  a  vice-president.  The  de-
gree of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Harvard
in  1868.  Pie  published  a  "  Practical  Guide  to  the
Study  of  the  Diseases  of  the  Eye  "  (Boston,  1862) ;
"  Recent  Advances  in  Ophthalmic  Science  "  (1866) ;
"Optical  Defects  in  School-Children  "  (1868);  a
Boylston  prize  essay;  "Our  Eyes  and  how  to  take
Cafe  of  Them  "(1871);  and  "The  Diagnosis  and
Treatment  of  Diseases  of  the  Eye"  (1886).

WILLIAMS,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Hanover
county,  Ya.,  in  1740;  d.  on  King's  Mountain,  Gas-
ton co.,  N.  C,  8  Oct.,  1780.  He  emigrated  first  to
Granville  county,  N.  C,  and  then  to  Little  River,
Laurens  district,  S.  C,  in  1773,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Provincial  congress  of  South  Carolina  in
January,  1775.  He  was  appointed  a  lieutenant-
colonel  of  militia  in  1776,  commanded  a  detachment


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


523


at  the  battle  of  Stono,  20  June,  1779,  and  defeated
the  British  and  Tories  at  Musgrove's  Mills,  18
Aug.,  1780.  He  led  one  of  the  attacking  columns  at
the  battle  of  King's  Mountain,  where  he  was  killed.
WILLIAMS,  James  Douglas,  governor  of  In-
diana, b.  in  Pickaway  county,  Ohio,  16  Jan..  1808;
d.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  20  Nov.,  1880.  His  par-
ents were  emigrants  from  Europe,  and  moved
with  him  to  Knox  county,  Ind.,  in  1818,  and  at  the
death  of  his  father  in  1828  the  support  of  the  fam-
ily devolved  on  him.  James  was  almost  entirely
self-taught.  In  1843  he  became  a  member  of  the
legislature,  and  from  that  time  till  1874  sat  almost
continuously  in  this  body,  either  in  the  house  of
representatives  or  in  the  senate. He  was  a  dele-

fate  to  the  National  Democratic  convention  at
laltimore  in  1872,  was  the  Democratic  nominee
for  U.  S.  senator  from  Indiana  in  1873  against
Oliver  P.  Morton,  who  was  elected,  and  was  then
chosen  to  congress,  serving  from  6  Dec,  1875,  till
1  Dec,  1876,  when  he  resigned,  having  been  elect-
ed governor  of  his  state.  He  held  this  office  till
his  death.  Gov.  Williams  was  a  farmer,  and  his
foremost  object  was  the  development  of  the  agri-
cultural interests  of  his  state.  He  was  one  of  the
incorporators  and  president  of  the  state  board  of
agriculture,  originated  many  of  the  laws  that  have
perfected  school  and  college  facilities  in  Indiana,
and  was  instrumental  in  establishing  as  law  the
right  of  widows  in  that  state  to  hold  their  deceased
husband's  estates,  when  not  in  excess  of  $300,  with-
out administration.  He  was  a  man  of  the  strictest
integrity,  plain  and  simple  in  his  manner  and  at-
tire, and  was  known  as  Blue-Jeans  Williams,  owing
to  his  wearing  trousers  of  that  material.

WILLIAMS,  James  William,  Canadian  An-
glican bishop,  b.  in  Overton,  Hampshire,  England,
15  Sept.,  1825.  His  father,  Rev.  David  Williams,
was  for  many  years  rector  of  Banghurst,  Hamp-
shire. The  son's  pre-
liminary education  was
received  under  his  fa-
ther. For  a  time  he
attended  the  grammar-
school  at  Crewkerne,
Somersetshire,  whence
he  went  to  Pembroke
college,  Oxford.  In
1851  he  was  graduated,
taking  high  honors  in
classics.  The  bishop  of
Oxford  admitted  him
to  deacon's  orders,  and
in  1856  the  bishop  of
.  Bath and Wells or-

$£•»/ 0 „  S/\^  dained  him  priest. He

/W.  *£-*~Z/{S^K~  held  curacies  in  Buck-
inghamshire and  Som-
ersetshire, and  for  two  years  occupied  the  post
of  assistant  master  in  Leamington  college.  In
1857  he  accepted  an  invitation  to  organize  a
school  in  connection  with  Bishop's  college,  Len-
noxville,  province  of  Quebec.  He  went  to  Can-
ada, became  rector  of  the  school,  and  shortly  after-
ward succeeded  to  the  chair  of  classics  and  belles-
lettres  in  the  college,  which  post  he  continued
to  hold  until  his  elevation  to  the  episcopate.  Un-
der his  direction  both  school  and  college  took  a
high  place.  In  1863  Bishop  Mountain,  of  Quebec,
died,  and  the  synod  promptly  selected  Mr.  Will-
iams to  succeed  him  in  the  see.  At  that  time  the
jurisdiction  of  the  bishop  was  very  extensive.  In
1793  it  had  extended  over  the  whole  of  Upper  and
Lower  Canada.  From  time  to  time  its  limits  have
been  curtailed,  and  it  is  now  confined  to  that  part


of  the  province  of  Quebec  which  extends  from
Three  Rivers  to  the  Straits  of  Bellisle  and  New
Brunswick,  on  the  shores  of  the  St.  Lawrence  and
east  of  a  line  drawn  from  Three  Rivers  to  Lake
Memphremagog.  The  new  bishop  of  the  diocese
was  consecrated  at  Quebec  on  11  June,  1863.  Bish-
op Williams  is  a  close  student  of  literature.  As  a
pulpit  orator  he  occupies  a  high  place.  The
charges  that  he  delivered  to  the  clergy  of  the  dio-
cese of  Quebec  at  the  visitation  held  in  Bishop's
college,  Lennoxville,  in  1864,  and  in  June,  1888,  in
Quebec  city,  at  the  close  of  his  twenty-fifth  year  as
bishop,  attracted  attention.  His  lecture  on"  Self-
Education  "  (Quebec,  1865)  and  several  papers  be-
fore the  Literary  and  historical  society  of  that  city
have  also  been  much  admired.  Dr.  Williams,  dur-
ing the  twenty-five  years  of  his  episcopacy,  confirmed
11,176  persons,  ordained  47  deacons  and  43  priests,
and  consecrated  37  churches.

WILLIAMS,  Jared  Warner,  senator,  b.  in
West  Woodstock,  Conn.,  22  Dec,  1796 ;  d.  in  Lan-
caster, N.  H.,  29  Sept.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1818,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  in  1822  began  to  practise  at  Lancaster.
He  was  a  member  of  the  state  house  of  representa-
tives in  1830-'l  and  1835-'6,  and  a  member  of  the
state  senate  in  1832-'4.  Mr.  Williams  was  elected
to  congress  from  New  Hampshire  as  a  Democrat
for  two  successive  terms,  and  served  from  4  Sept.,
1837,  till  3  March,  1841.  He  was  governor  of  New
Hampshire  in  1847-'9,  and  was  appointed  a  United
States  senator  from  that  state  in  place  of  Charles
G-.  Atherton,  deceased,  serving  from  12  Dec,  1853,
till  3  March,  1855.

WILLIAMS,  Jesse  Lynch,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Westfield,  Stokes  co.,  N.  C,  6  May,  i807;  d.  in
Fort  Wayne,  Ind.,  9  Oct.,  1886.  His  ancestors,
English  Quakers,  came  to  Maryland  about  1700.
His  parents,  who  adhered  to  the  same  faith,  re-
moved to  Cincinnati  in  1814,  and  subsequently  to  a
place  near  Richmond,  Ind.  The  son  was  first  a
rod-man  and  then  an  engineer  on  the  preliminary
survey  for  the  Miami  and  Erie  canal,  and  contin-
ued in  the  service  of  the  state  of  Ohio  from  1824
till  1832,  when  he  was  appointed  by  Indiana  chief
engineer  of  the  Wabash  and  Erie  canal.  In  1837
he  became  chief  engineer  of  all  the  internal  im-
provements of  the  state,  including  about  1,300
miles  of  canals,  railroads,  and  other  works.  In
1853  he  became  chief  engineer  of  the  Fort  Wayne
and  Chicago  railroad,  and  in  1856,  after  its  consoli-
dation with  other  roads  to  form  the  Pittsburg,
Fort  Wayne  and  Chicago  road,  he  became  a  direc-
tor. From  1864  till  his  resignation  in  1869  he  was
appointed  annually  a  government  director  of  the
Union  Pacific  railroad  and  devoted  himself  to  se-
curing the  best  location  through  the  Rocky  moun-
tains. He  was  chief  engineer  and  receiver  of  the
Grand  Rapids  and  Indiana  railroad  in  1869-'71,
and  was  connected  with  other  roads.  Mr.  Williams
was  active  in  the  councils  of  the  Presbyterian
church,  and  served  as  a  director  of  the  Theological
seminary  of  the  northwest  from  its  organization
till  his  death.  A  discourse  on  his  life  by  the  Rev.
David  W.  Moffat,  D.  D.,  was  printed  privately
(Fort  Wayne.  Ind.,  1886).

WILLIAMS,  John,  clergvman,  b.  in  Roxbury,
Mass.,  10  Dec,  1644;  d.  in  Deerfield,  Mass.,  12
June,  1729.  His  grandfather,  Robert,  came  to  this
country  about  1638,  settling  in  Roxbury,  Mass.
John  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1683,  ordained
to  the  ministry  in  1688,  and  settled  as  pastor  in
Deerfield,  which,  being  a  frontier  town,  was  con-
stantly exposed  to  the  attacks  of  the  Indians.  On
the  night  of  28  Feb.,  1704,  300  French  and  Indians


524


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


under  the  command  of  Maj.  Hertel  de  Rouville
took  advantage  of  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  guards,
surprised  the  garrison,  and  took  300  citizens  cap-
tive, besides  killing  several,  including  two  of  Mr.
Williams's  children  and  a  negro  woman-servant.
They  then  compelled  him,  his  wife,  and  all  his  re-
maining children,  except  one,  who  was  absent  from
home,  to  begin  on  foot  the  march  toward  Canada,
in  which  they  were  accompanied  by  their  fellow-
settlers.  Mrs.  Williams  fell  exhausted  on  the  sec-
ond day  of  their  journey,  and  was  at  once  de-
spatched with  a  tomahawk.  After  travelling  about
300  miles  they  reached  their  destination,  and,  al-
though Mr.  Williams  suffered  many  cruelties  from
his  captors,  he  was  finally  redeemed  by  Gov.  Phil-
ippe de  Rigaud  Vaudreuil,  and  returned  to  Boston
in  1706,  leaving  his  daughter  Eunice  still  in  cap-
tivity. He  resumed  his  charge  in  Deerfield  in  the
latter  part  of  1706  and  remained  there  until  his
death.  He  also  gave  much  time  to  scientific  re-
searches and  left  many  manuscripts  on  these  sub-
jects. He  published  several  sermons  and  a  narra-
tive of  his  captivity  called  "  The  Redeemed  Cap-
tive "  (Boston,  1707).  See  a  "  Biographical  Memoir
of  Rev.  John  Williams,  with  Appendix,  contain-
ing the  Journal  of  his  Son,  Rev.  Stephen  Williams,
during  his  Captivity,"  by  Stephen  W.  Williams
(Greenfield,  Mass.,  1837).  This  is  in  a  great  part
a  reprint  of  "  The  Redeemed  Captive." — His  son,
Eleazer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Deerfield,  1  July,  1688 ;
d.  in  Mansfield,  Conn.,  21  Sept.,  1742,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1708,  and  from  1710  until  his
death  was  pastor  at  Mansfield.  He  published  sev-
eral sermons. — Another  son,  Stephen,  clergyman,
b.  in  Deerfield,  Mass.,  14  May,  1693;  d.  in  Long
Meadow,  Mass.,  10  June,  1782,  was  taken  captive
by  the  Indians  in  his  eleventh  year,  and,  with  the
other  Deerfield  prisoners,  marched  on  foot  to  Cana-
da. After  being  detained  for  about  fourteen  months
he  was  bought  from  the  Indians  by  the  governor
of  Canada,  and  in  November,  1705,  was  returned
to  Boston.  His  minute  account  of  this  experience
is  incorporated  in  the  "  Memoir  of  John  Williams  "
that  has  been  mentioned.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1713,  ordained  to  the  ministry  in  1716,
and  was  pastor  at  Long  Meadow,  Mass.,  for  sixty-
six  years.  In  the  course  of  his  ministry  he  served
as  chaplain  in  three  different  campaigns  against
the  French  and  Indians,  accompanying  Sir  Will-
iam Pepperrell  to  Cape  Breton  and  Sir  William
Johnson  to  Lake  George  during  the  old  French
war.  He  aided  in  establishing  the  mission  among
the  Stockbridge  Indians  in  1734,  of  which  John
Sergeant,  of  Yale,  was  subsequently  in  charge.
Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1773.
He  published  a  "Sermon  on  the  Ordination  of
John  Keep"  (1772). — John's  daughter,  Eunice,  b.
in  Deerfield,  17  Sept.,  1696;  d.  in  Canada  in  1786,
was  carried  captive  to  Canada  when  she  was  in  her
eighth  year.  When  her  father  was  redeemed  she
was  left  among  the  Indians  and  no  money  could
subsequently  procure  her  release.  She  forgot  the
English  language,  adopted  the  Roman  Catholic  re-
ligion, married  an  Indian  named  John  de  Rogers,
and  conformed  to  Indian  views  and  habits.  She
visited  her  relatives  several  times,  but  always  re-
fused to  adopt  English  dress  or  civilized  customs.
The  legislature  of  Massachusetts  offered  her  a
tract  of  land  if  she  and  her  family  would  settle  in
New  England;  but  she  refused,  saying  that  it
would  endanger  her  soul. — Her  putative  great-
grandson,  Eleazer,  missionary,  b.  in  Caughnawa-
Sa,  N.  Y.,  probably  in  1787;  d.  in  Hoganstown,
r.  Y.,  28  Aug.,  1858,  is  supposed  to  have  been  ;i
grandson  of  Ezekiel  Williams,  an  English  physi-


■^CLJi-O-sZ^yr  /Z^C^tCe^rr^O


cian,  and  Eunice's  daughter.  Their  son,  Thomas,
married  an  Indian  woman  named  Mary  Ann  Kon-
watewenteta  on  7  Jan.,  1779.  Eleazer  was  sent  to
school  at  Long  Meadow  about  1800,  and  remained
there  nine  years.  He  then  studied  three  years  un-
der the  Rev.  Enoch  Hale  in  Westhampton,  Mass.
At  the  beginning
of  the  second
war  with  Great
Britain  he  be-
came superin-
tendent -  general
of  the  Northern
Indian  depart-
ment. At  the
battle  of  Platts-
burg,  14  Sept.,
1814,  he  was  se-
verely wounded.
He  subsequently
officiated  as  lay
reader  among  the
Oneida  Indians
and  took  orders
in  the  Episcopal
church.  About
1820  this  tribe
sold  lands  to  the

state  of  New  York  and  removed  to  Green  Bayr
Wis.,  Mr.  Williams  accompanying  them.  In  1846
the  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  among
the  Indians  gave  money  for  his  support  as  a  mis-
sionary, which  was  withheld  at  the  end  of  two
years,  the  reports  of  his  service  not  being  favorable.
He  left  Wisconsin  in  1850  and  settled  at  St.  Regis.
In  February,  1853,  an  article  by  the  Rev.  John  H.
Hanson,  D.  D.,  appeared  in  "  Putnam's  Magazine,"
entitled  "Have  we  a  Bourbon  among  us?"  The
author  had  seen  a  published  paragraph  to  the  effect
that  "  Eleazer  Williams  was  none  other  than  Louis
XVIL,  the  son  of  Louis  XVI.  and  Marie  Antoin-
ette, who  was  born  at  Versailles,  27  March,  1785,
and  supposed  to  have  died  in  the  Temple."  Dr.
Hanson  sought  an  interview  with  Williams,  who
assured  him  that  he  was  convinced  of  his  royal
descent.  In  an  interview  he  told  Dr.  Hanson  that
until  he  was  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  of  age  his
mind  was  a  blank  ;  but  by  a  fall  lie  recovered  his
intellect,  though  not  his  memory.  He  then  said
that  in  1841,  on  a  steamboat,  the  Prince  de  Joinville
urged  him  to  sign  a  solemn  "abdication  of  the
throne  of  France,"  which  he  refused  to  do.  Dr.
Hanson  issued  a  volume  entitled  "  The  Lost  Prince  "
(New  York,  1854),  intending  to  prove  the  identity  of
Williams  with  Louis  XVII.  Hanson's  arguments
in  favor  of  Williams's  Bourbon  descent  are  that
his  baptism  was  not  registered  and  that  his  puta-
tive mother  once  admitted  that  he  was  an  adopted
son.  Many  physicians  attested  that  Williams  was
not  an  Indian,  and  he  had  a  remarkable  resem-
blance to  the  Bourbon  family.  The  belief  was  gen-
eral that  the  Dauphin  was  removed  from  prison  and
brought  to  America.  Skenondough,  an  Indian,
had  made  oath  that  the  youth  was  brought  by  two
French  gentlemen  to  Lake  George.  Other  evi-
dences are  the  money  that  was  sent  from  an  un-
known source  to  educate  him,  the  De  Joinville  in-
terview, which  Williams  recorded  in  his  diary,  and
the  marks  on  his  body,  which  the  Dauphin  also
bore.  On  the  other  hand,  many  Indians  denied
Skenondough's  story,  and  Bishop  Charles  F.
Robertson.  Williams's  literary  executor,  refutes
from  Williams's  own  papers  the  statement  that
he  was  educated  with  funds  that  were  supplied
by  unknown  persons,  he  having  original  bills  to


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


525


the  contrary.  Prince  de  Joinville  denied  the
alleged  interview  with  Williams,  in  a  letter  ad-
dressed to  John  Jay,  of  New  York.  Williams
became  interested  in  genealogical  research  in
1822  and  assisted  in  preparing  a  life  of  Eunice
Williams,  and  it  is  probable  that  his  taste  for  in-
vestigation of  historical  subjects,  with  the  knowl-
edge of  the  doubtfulness  of  his  parentage,  created
in  his  mind  a  sincere  adherence  to  his  singular  de-
lusion. He  was  an  authority  on  Indian  history,
manners,  and  customs,  and  was  thoroughly  familiar
with  the  labors  of  the  early  French  missionaries.
In  1846  he  became  a  corresponding  member  of  the
New  England  historic-genealogical  society.  He  is
the  author  of  "  A  Spelling-Book  in  the  Language
of  the  Seven  Iroquois  Nations  "  (Plattsburg,  1813) :
"  A  Caution  against  Our  Common  Enemy,"  in  the
Iroquois  language  (Albany,  1813;  English  trans-
lation, 1815);  and  a  "Life  of  Te-ho-ra-gwa-ne-
gen,  alias  Thomas  Williams"  (printed  privately,
1859).  He  also  translated  into  Iroquois  "  The
Book  of  Common  Prayer"  (New  York,  1853).
— John's  grandson,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wal-
tham,  Mass.,  23  April,  1743 ;  d.  in  Rutland,  Vt.,
2  Jan.,  1817,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1761,
where  his  proficiency  in  mathematical  studies  in-
duced Prof.  John  Winthrop  to  select  him  to  go  as
his  companion  to  Newfoundland  to  observe  the
transit  of  Venus  on  6  June  of  that  year.  Mr.  Will-
iams taught  at  Bradford  while  studying  theology,
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1763,  and  was  pastor  of
the  church  in  Bradford  in  1765-'80.  He  continued
his  school  while  occupying  this  charge,  and  gave
lessons  in  natural  philosophy  to  Benjamin  Thomp-
son, afterward  Count  Rumford,  who  was  an  inmate
of  his  family,  and  with  whom  he  maintained  a  sci-
entific correspondence  in  later  years.  He  was  Hol-
lis  professor  of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy
in  Harvard  in  1780-'8,  lectured  on  astronomy  to  the
senior  class  in  1785-'8,  and  in  the  last-named  year,
by  request  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences,  went  to  Penobscot  bay  to  observe  a  total
eclipse  of  the  sun.  In  the  same  year  he  was  ap-
pointed by  the  colonial  government  to  survey  the
western  boundary  of  Massachusetts.  In  1788  he
resigned  his  professorship,  and  he  was  pastor  in
Rutland,  Vt.,  from  1789  till  1795.  He  subsequently
preached  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  for  about  two  years,
but  his  later  life  was  passed  in  Rutland,  where  he
edited  the  "  Herald."  He  surveyed  the  western
boundary  of  Vermont  in  1805  by  appointment  of
the  governor,  and  delivered  a  course  of  lectures
in  the  University  of  Vermont  not  long  after  its  es-
tablishment. The  University  of  Edinburgh  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1785,  and  Yale  the
same  honor  in  1786.  He  was  a  member  of  several
scientific  bodies,  here  and  abroad.  He  left  many
valuable  manuscripts  on  philosophical,  scientific,
-and  mathematical  subjects,  and  published,  besides
pamphlets  and  addresses,  "  The  Rural  Magazine,"
a  monthly  devoted  to  historical  and  literary  sub-
jects, and  a  "  History  of  Vermont,"  a  work  of  great
labor  and  research  (Rutland,  1794;  2  vols.,  1809). —
Samuel's  son,  Charles  Kilbourne,  jurist,  b.  in
^Cambridge,  Mass.,  24  Jan.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Rutland,
Vt.,  9  March,  1853,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in
1800,  practised  law  in  Rutland,  Vt.,  and  became  an
■eminent  member  of  the  state  bar.  During  the  sec-
ond war  with  Great  Britain  he  served  in  one  cam-
paign on  the  northern  frontier.  He  was  frequently
in  the  legislature  from  1809  till  1821,  and  again  in
1849,  state's  attorney  in  1814-'15,a  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  in  1822-'4and  in  1829-42,  collector  of
customs  for  the  state  of  Vermont  in  1825-'9,  and
ichief  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Vermont  in


1842-'6,  at  the  same  time  occupying,  ex  officio,  the
position  of  chancellor  of  the  state.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  officers  of  censors  in  1847,  and  gover-
nor in  1850-'2.  With  his  retirement  from  that
office  he  closed  a  public  life  of  forty  years.  Early
in  his  career  he  took  great  interest  in  the  organi-
zation of  the  militia,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  briga-
dier-general. He  was  an  active  member  of  the
Abolition  party,  and  while  governor  of  Vermont
he  approved  the  once  celebrated  habeas  corpus  act
which  had  passed  the  legislature  and  was  the  be-
ginning of  the  struggle  in  Vermont  against  sla-
very. In  1845  he  became  a  corresponding  member
of  the  New  England  historic-genealogical  society.
In  1834  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Middlebury.  See  a  "  Memoir "  of  him  by  Chief-
Justice  Isaac  Redfield  (Rutland,  Vt.,  1852).—
A  great-grandson  of  John,  Stephen  West,  phy-
sician, b.  in  Deerfield.  Mass.,  27  March,  1790;  d.  in
Laona,  111.,  9  July,  1855,  was  the  son  of  Dr.  Thomas
Williams,  a  well-known  physician  in  western  Massa-
chusetts. Stephen  was  educated  in  his  native  town,
studied  medicine  under  his  father  and,  after  at-
tending a  course  of  lectures  at  Columbia,  settled  in
practice  in  Deerfield.  and  attained  to  success  in  his
profession.  In  1816  he  turned  his  attention  to  the
study  of  natural  history  and  botany.  With  Ed-
ward Hitchcock  and  Dennis  Cooley  he  explored
the  forests  and  valleys  of  Deerfield  in  search  of
plants  that  were  subsequently  collected  in  an  herba-
rium. He  lectured  on  medical  jurisprudence  before
the  Berkshire  medical  school  in  1823-'31,  and  in
1838  became  professor  of  materia  medica,  phar-
macy, and  medical  jurisprudence  in  Willoughby
university,  Cuyahoga  co.,  Ohio,  which  chair  he  re-
signed in  1853.  In  1838-'9  he  lectured  at  Dart-
mouth medical  college.  Dr.  Williams  was  a  mem-
ber of  many  historical  societies,  president  of  the
Franklin  county,  Mass.,  medical  society,  and  vice-
president  of  the  Massachusetts  medical  society.
He  delivered  many  lectures  on  scientific  subjects,
and  published,  besides  many  pamphlets,  "  Report  of
the  Indigenous  Medical  Botany  of  Massachusetts  *'
(Deerfield,  1819) ;  "  Traditionary  and  Historical
Sketch  of  the  Indians  who  formerly  resided  in  the
Valley  of  the  Connecticut,"  in  the  "  Scientific
Tract "  series  (1819) ;  "  Catechism  of  Medical  Juris-
prudence "  (Northampton,  Mass.,  1833);  "Bio-
graphical Memoir  of  Rev.  John  Williams  "  (Spring-
field, Mass.,  1837) ;  "  American  Medical  Biography  "
(1845) ;  and  "  The  Genealogy  of  the  Williams  Fam-
ily in  America  "  (1847).  He  edited  James  Beding-
field's  "  Compendium  of  Medicine "  (Deerfield,
Mass.,  1818). — John's  first  cousin,  William,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Newton,  Mass.,  2  Feb.,  1665 ;  d.  in  Hat-
field, Mass.,  29  Aug.,  1741,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1683.  He  was  settled  as  pastor  of  the  church  at
Hatfield  in  1685,  and  labored  there  for  fifty-five
years.  He  published  numerous  sermons  and  theo-
logical treatises,  and  commanded  a  wide  influence
in  his  community. — William's  son,  Elislta,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Hatfield,  Mass.,  24  Aug.,  1694;  d.  in
Wethersfield,  Conn.,  24  July,  1755,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1711,  studied*  law,  settled  in  Weth-
ersfield, Conn.,  and  for  several  years  was  clerk  of
the  state  general  assembly  and  a  member  of  that
body.  After  the  Collegiate  school  of  Connecticut
(now  Yale)  was  removed  from  Saybrook  to  New
Haven,  some  of  the  students  refusing  to  obey  the
rules  of  government,  Mr.  Williams  was  chosen  to
instruct  such  as  wished  to  withdraw,  and  taught
them  at  Wethersfield  for  two  years.  He  was  or-
dained to  the  ministry  in  1721,  and  served  the
church  at  Wethersfield  till  1726,  when  he  became
president  of  Yale,  holding  office  till  1739. He  sub-


526


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


sequently  represented  Wethersfield  again  in  the
legislature,  and  was  chosen  a  justice  of  the  superior
court.  In  1745  he  went  to  Cape  Breton  as  chap-
lain of  the  Connecticut  troops,  and  the  next  year,
when  an  expedition  was  planned  to  Canada  and  a
regiment  of  1,000  men  was  raised  in  Connecticut,
he  was  appointed  its  colonel.  The  troops  were  not
called  out,  and  in  1749  he  went  to  England  to  so-
licit the  royal  government  to  pay  the  wages  of  the
enlisted  men  that  had  held  themselves  in  readiness
to  inarch  for  more  than  a  year  and  a  half.  His
mission  was  unsuccessful,  but  on  his  return  he  was
employed  in  several  public  offices.  Dr.  Philip
Doddridge,  who  was  his  intimate  friend,  said  of
him  :  "  He  possessed  an  ardent  sense  of  religion,
solid  learning,  and  consummate  prudence.  I  look
upon  him  as  one  of  the  most  valuable  men  on
earth." — Elisha's  son,  Samuel  Porter,  clergyman,
b.  in  Wethersfield,  Conn.,  in  1779;  d.  in  Newbury-
port,  Mass.,  23  Dec,  1826,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1796,  was  ordained  to  the  ministry,  and  in
charge  of  the  church  at  Mansfield,  Conn.,  in
1807-'17.  From  1821  until  his  death  he  was  pas-
tor at  Newburyport.  He  published  many  sermons
and  addresses,  a  volume  of  which,  with  a  memoir,
appeared  after  his  death  (New  Haven,  1827). —
Another  son  of  William,  Solomon,  clergyman,  b.
in  Hatfield,  Mass.,  4  June,  1700;  d.  in  Lebanon,
Conn.,  29  Feb.,  1776,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1719,  ordained  pastor  of  the  church  in  Lebanon  in
1722,  and  held  that  charge  until  his  death.  Yale  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1773.  Dr.  Williams  pos-
sessed wide  influence  among  the  clergy  of  New  Eng-
land. In  the  course  of  his  ministry  he  engaged  in
two  important  controversies.  One,  in  1741,  was
with  Rev.  Andrew  Croswell,  on  the  "  Nature  of
Justifying  Faith,"  and  the  other  with  his  relative,
Jonathan  Edwards,  the  elder,  in  1751,  on  "The
Qualifications  Necessary  to  Lawful  Communion  in
the  Christian  Sacraments."  He  had  an  extensive
correspondence  abroad  and  in  this  country.  He
published  nineteen  sermons  (1729-'75). — Solomon's
son,  Eliphalet,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lebanon,  21  Feb.,
1727 ;  d.  in  East  Haftford,  Conn..  29  June,  1803,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1743,  and  held  a  pastor-
ate in  East  Hartford  from  his  ordination  in  1748
until  his  death.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1782.  He  was  a  member  of  its  corporation
from  1769  till  1801,  and  published  several  popular
discourses. — Eliphalet's  son,  Eliphalet  Scott,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  East  Hartford,  Conn.,  7  Oct..  1757;  d.
in  Beverly,  Mass.,  3  Feb.,  1845,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1775,  the  same  year  became  adjutant  of  a
Connecticut  regiment,  and  fought  at  the  battles  of
Trenton  and  Princeton.  He  then  enlisted  in  the
navy,  and  participated  in  the  engagement  between
the  "  Hancock  "  and  the  "  Levant,"  in  which  Capt.
Edward  Hardy  was  shot  down  by  his  side.  He  set-
tled in  Maine  in  1790,  taught  and  was  a  farmer,
and  in  1799  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the
Baptist  church.  He  was  pastor  of  the  church  in
Beverly,  Mass.,  in  1803-'12,  and  was  then  dismissed
at  his  own  request,  becoming  a  minister  at  large,
with  his  residence  in  Boston.  He  gave  liberally
for  the  erection  of  churches,  and  to  missions. —
Another  son  of  Solomon,  William,  signer  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence,  b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,
18  April.  1731 ;  d.  there.  2  Aug.,  1811,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1747.  resided  with  his  father
and  studied  theology  for  about  a  year,  and  in  1755
attended  his  relative,  Col.  Ephraim  Williams,  on
the  expedition  to  Lake  George.  He  became  town-
clerk  of  Lebanon  in  1756,  holding  that  office  for
forty-five  years,  was  a  representative  in  the  as-
sembly for  more  than  fifty  years,  for  many  years


speaker,  and  for  more  than  ninety  sessions  was  not
absent  more  than  five  times,  except  during  his  ser-
vice in  congress  in  1776-'7.  He  became  colonel  of
the  12th  regiment  of  militia  in  1773,  but  resigned
his  commission
in  1776  to  ac-
cept a  seat  in
congress,  sign-
ing the  Declara-
tion of  Inde-
pendence on  4
July  of  that
year.  During  a
greater  part  of
the  war  he  was
a  member  of  the
council  of  safe-
ty, expended
nearly  all  his
property  in  the
patriot  cause,
and,  abandon-
ing his  business,
which  was  that
of  a  merchant,
went  from  house
to  house  soliciting  private  donations  to  supply  the
army,  and  making  speeches  to  induce  a  larger  en-
listment. He  became  an  assistant,  or  councillor,  in
1780,  held  office  for  twenty-four  years,  was  judge
of  the  county  court  of  Windham,  and  judge  of  pro-
bate for  Windham  district  for  forty  years.  Al-
though prudent  and  economical  in  many  cases,  he
frequently  devoted  all  the  emoluments  of  his  offi-
ces to  benevolent  objects.  Throughout  the  war  his
house  was  open  to  the  soldiers  in  their  marches  to
and  from  the  army,  and  in  1781  he  gave  up  his
dwelling  to  the  officers  of  a  detachment  that  was
stationed  for  the  winter  in  Lebanon.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Connecticut  convention  in  1787
that  ratified  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,
strongly  advocating  its  adoption.  He  married
Mary,  second  daughter  of  Gov.  Jonathan  Trumbull.

WILLIAMS,  John,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Hanover  county,  Va. ;  d.  in  Gran-
ville county,  N.  C,  in  October,  1799.  He  was
brought  up  to  the  trade  of  a  house-carpenter,  but
removed  to  North  Carolina,  where  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  In  1770,  while  attending  court  at  Hills-
borough, he  was  seized  by  the  Regulators  and  se-
verely beaten.  He  was  one  of  the  first  judges  un-
der the  state  constitution  in  1777-'90,  and  sat  in
the  Continental  congress  in  1777-'8.

WILLIAMS,  John,  author,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, about  1765 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  12  Oct.,
1818.  He  was  educated  at  the  Merchant  Tailors'
school  and  intended  for  the  church,  but  adopted
literature  instead,  and,  after  acting  as  a  translator
for  London  booksellers,  went  to  Dublin,  Ireland,
where  he  was  connected  with  various  journals.  His
violent  denunciations  of  the  government  caused
his  prosecution,  and  he  was  fined  heavily  and  judi-
cially declared  in  1797  to  be  "a  common  libeller."
Soon  afterward  he  came  to  the  United  States,
where  he  edited  a  Democratic  newspaper.  He  died
in  great  poverty.  Mr.  Williams  wrote  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Anthony  Pasquin."  He  was  the  au-
thor of  several  plays;  "Poems"  (London,  1789);
"  Legislative  Biography  "  (1795) ;  "  The  Hamilton-
iad  "  (Boston,  1804) ;  "  Life  of  Alexander  Hamil-
ton "  (1804);  and  "  The  Dramatic  Censor"  (1811).

WILLIAMS,  John,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Deer-
field,  Mass.,  30  Aug.,  1817.  He  entered  Harvard
at  the  age  of  fourteen,  and  after  remaining  there
two  years  joined  the  junior  class  at  Washington


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


527


(now  Trinity)  college,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1835.  He  studied  theology  with  Dr.  Samuel  F.
Jarvis,  and  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Thomas  C.
Brownell  in  1838.  From  1837  till  1840  he  served
as  tutor  in  Washington  college,  and  he  then  spent  a
year  in  travel  in  England  and  France.  On  his  re-
turn he  became  assistant  minister  of  Christ  church,
Middletown,  Conn.,  from  which  he  was  called  to
the  rectorship  of  St.  George's  church,  Schenectady,
N.  Y.  While  rector  in  Schenectady  his  influence
was  great  in  his  parish,  among  the  students  of
Union  college,  and  he  was  nearly  elected  provis-
ional bishop  of  New  York  on  the  suspension  of
Bishop  Benjamin  T.  Onderdonk.  In  1848,  when  he
was  but  thirty-one  years  old,  he  was  chosen  presi-
dent of  Trinity  college,  and  the  announcement  of
his  election  was  received  with  great  enthusiasm,
while  his  inaugural  address  showed  the  scholarly
principles  on  which  he  considered  all  true  educa-
tion to  be  based.  In  connection  with  the  presi-
dency Dr.  Williams  held  the  professorship  of  his-
tory and  literature.  In  1851  Dr.  Brownell,  bishop
of  Connecticut,  having  asked  that,  on  account  of
his  growing  infirmities,  an  assistant  bishop  might
be  elected,  the  diocesan  convention  chose  Dr.  Will-
iams, and  he  was  consecrated  on  29  Oct.  He  was
able  to  continue  in  charge  of  the  college  for  two
years,  but  in  1853,  as  his  episcopal  duties  became
more  numerous  and  urgent,  he  felt  obliged  to  re-
tire from  the  presidency.  Under  his  administra-
tion the  college  had  increased  in  prosperity,  its
course  of  instruction  had  been  developed,  and  its
library  funds  had  been  increased.  Owing  to  Dr.
Williams's  profound  learning  in  theology  and  his
gifts  as  a  teacher,  several  graduates  and  others
studying  for  holy  orders  had  been  for  a  few  years
under  his  care,  and  an  informal  theological  de-
partment had  grown  up  at  the  college.  In  1854  a
charter  was  obtained  for  the  Berkeley  divinity-
school,  and  it  was  located  at  Middletown.  In  this
school  Bishop  Williams  has  been  from  the  begin-
ning the  dean  and  the  principal  instructor  in  doc-
trinal theology,  in  the  history  of  the  Reformation,
and  in  the  Prayer-Book,  and  his  lectures  at  differ-
ent times  have  covered  the  whole  range  of  theo-
logical studies.
Many  of  the  cler-
gy of  the  Episco-
pal church  in
this  country
have  thus  been
trained  by  him.
He  has  also  con-
tinued to  lecture
on  history  at
Trinity  college,
of  which  he  was
made  vice-chan-
cellor at  the  time
of  his  resigna-
tion of  the  presi-
dency, succeed-
ing to  the  chan-
cellorship when
he  became  bish-
op of  the  diocese
on  the  death  of
Bishop  Brownell
in  1885.  For  many  years  before  that  time  the  whole
administration  of  the  diocese  had  been  in  Bishop
Williams's  hands.  In  1881  he  was  appointed  the
first  lecturer  at  the  General  theological  seminary,
New  York,  on  the  Bishop  Paddock  foundation,  and
in  the  same  year  he  delivered  the  first  series  of
Bedell  lectures  at  the  seminary  and  college  in


^/%&**?7<r.


Gambier,  Ohio.  At  the  general  conventions  of
1883  and  1886  he  was  chosen  chairman  of  the
house  of  bishops,  and  he  has  constantly  served  on
important  committees  of  the  bishops  and  joint
commissions  of  the  convention.  In  1884  he  visited
Scotland  for  the  centenary  commemoration  of  the
consecration  of  the  first  bishop  of  Connecticut,  and
delivered  the  commemorative  sermon  in  Aber-
deen. Bishop  Williams  is  a  churchman  of  the
type  that  was  once  represented  by  Dean  Hook  and
Bishops  Wilberforce  and  Wordsworth.  Since  his
ordination  he  has  been  a  diligent  student  of  ecclesi-
astical history.  He  is  remarkable  for  his  genial
manners  to  young  men,  and  in  an  eminent  degree
exerts  a  personal  influence  over  his  students.  His
manner  in  the  pulpit  is  dignified  and  impressive,
and  he  is  one  of  the  most  eloquent  speakers  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  of  which  he  is  now
the  presiding  bishop.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Union  in  1847,  Trinity  in  1849,  Colum-
bia in  1851,  and  Yale  in  1883,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Hobart  in  1870.  His  literary  works  include
many  and  valuable  contributions  to  the  "  American
Church  Quarterly  Review,"  the  "  Churchman,"  and
other  periodicals,  a  charge  on  "  Everlasting  Pun-
ishment "  (1865),  with  many  occasional  sermons  and
addresses;  "Ancient  Hymns  of  Holy  Church"
(Hartford,  1845) ;  "  Thoughts  on  the  Gospel  Mira-
cles "  (New  York,  1848) ;  Paddock  lectures  on  "  The
English  Reformation"  (1881);  Bedell  lectures  on
"  The  World's  Witness  to  Jesus  Christ "  (1882) ;
historical  sermons  in  the  "  Seabury  Centenary "
(1885) ;  and  "  Studies  in  the  Book  of  Acts  "  (1888).
He  also  edited,  with  additional  notes,  an  American
edition  of  Bishop  Harold  Browne's  "Exposition
of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  "  (1864).

WILLIAMS,  John  LI  h  u rh  n  1  d.  Canadian  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Carmarthen,  Wales,  19  Dec,  1817.
He  removed  to  Canada  in  1833,  was  ordained  a
minister  of  the  Methodist  church  in  1850,  elected
president  of  the  London  conference  in  1874,  was
joint  representative  to  the  general  conference  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  of  the  United
States  in  1876,  and  was  president  of  the  united
general  conference  in  1883  for  the  unification  of
the  various  branches  of  the  Methodist  church  in
Canada.  He  was  joint  representative  at  the  cen-
tennial conference  of  the  Methodist  churches  of
the  United  States  in  1884,  and  in  1885  was  ap-
pointed general  superintendent  of  the  Methodist
church  in  Canada.  Victoria  university  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1877.

WILLIAMS,  John  Foster,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  12  Oct.,  1743;  d.  there,  24  June,
1814.  He  early  adopted  the  life  of  a  sailor,  and  in
the  spring  of  1779  commanded  the  Massachusetts
cruiser  "  Hazard,"  of  fourteen  guns,  with  which  in
that  year  he  captured  the  "  Active,"  eighteen  guns,
and  performed  other  gallant  exploits.  In  1780  he
was  given  the  "  Protector,"  another  Massachusetts
ship,  with  which,  on  9  July,  1780,  he  fought  the
letter-of -marque  "  Admiral  Duff,"  which  blew  up
after  an  action  of  an  hour  and  a  half.  After  tak-
ing many  prizes  he  had  a  running  fight  with  the
frigate  "  Thames  "  and  narrowly  escaped  capture.
He  commanded  the  "  Hazard  "  again  in  the  unfor-
tunate expedition  to  Penobscot  river,  in  which
that  vessel  with  others  was  lost.  Late  in  October
he  set  out  for  a  cruise  in  the  West  Indies,  where  he
took  valuable  prizes ;  but,  falling  in  with  two  ships
of  superior  force,  he  was  captured  and  remained  a

Erisoner  till  the  peace. From  1790  until  his  death
e  was  in  command  of  a  revenue-cutter.
WILLIAMS,  John  Joseph,  R.  C.  archbishop,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  April,  1822. He  studied  in


528


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


'■^UzZ ' /hMox^n^


his  native  city,  and  in  1833-'41  at  the  College  of
Montreal,  where  he  was  graduated  in  the  latter
year.  He  then  followed  a  course  in  theology  in  the
Sulpitina  seminary  in  Paris,  France,  where  he  was

ordained  in  1845.
He  was  stationed
at  the  Boston  ca-
thedral till  1855,
when  he  was  ap-
pointed its  rector,
and  in  1857  he  was
transferred  to  the
pastorate  of  St.
James's  church  in
the  same  city.  On
9  Jan.,  1866,  he
was  chosen  coad-

i'utor  to  Bishop
iMtzpatrick  and
titular  bishop  of
Tripoli,  but  be-
fore his  consecra-
tion, which  took
place  on  1 1  March,
1866,  he  had  suc-
ceeded to  the  bishopric  of  Boston  by  the  death
of  his  superior.  The  new  sees  of  Springfield  and
Providence  were  created  from  his  original  diocese
in  1870  and  1872,  respectively,  and  on  12  Feb.,  1875,
&  new  ecclesiastic  province  was  established,  em-
bracing these  dioceses  and  those  of  Portland  and
Burlington.  Boston  became  the  archiepiscopal
see,  and  Bishop  Williams  was  made  archbishop,  re-
ceiving the  pallium  from  the  hands  of  Archbishop
McCloskey.  During  his  administration  many  edu-
cational institutions  have  been  established,  of  which
the  most  important  is  the  Sulpitian  theological
seminary,  which  was  opened  in  1884.  In  1886  his
diocese  contained  320,000  Roman  Catholics,  300
priests,  and  167  churches.

WILLIAMS,  John  Mason,  jurist,  b.  in  New
Bedford,  Mass.,  24  June,  1780 ;  d.  there,  28  Dec,
1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1801,  studied
law,  and,  on  his  admission  to  the  bar  in  1803,  rose
rapidly  in  his  profession.  He  became  associate
justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in  1821,  and
its  chief  justice  in  1839-44.  In  1844-'56  he  was
commissioner  of  insolvency.  Among  Judge  Will-
iams's published  addresses  are  "  Remarks  on  Ani-
mal Magnetism  "  (New  York,  1837),  and  orations
on  the  lives  of  Samuel  Howe  (Worcester,  Mass.,
1828)  and  Peter  O.  Thacher  (Boston,  1843).  He
was  also  author  of  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Nullifica-
tion and  Compromise  "  (New  York,  1863).

WILLIAMS,  John  S,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lockport,
N.  Y.,  14  Dec,  1825.  He  received  a  liberal  edu-
cation, studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
practised  in  his  native  place  and  in  Lafayette,  Ind.,
where  he  settled  in  1853.  He  was  elected  mayor
of  that  town  in  1856  and  1858,  and  for  some  time
edited  the  Lafayette  "  Daily  American."  He  re-
cruited the  63d  Indiana  volunteers  in  the  autumn
of  1861,  was  commissioned  as  its  colonel,  and  was
with  his  regiment  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,
and  till  July,  1863,  when  he  was  compelled  through
illness  to  resign.  He  resumed  practice,  and  in
1866  was  appointed  by  President  Johnson  collector
of  internal  revenue  for  the  8th  district  of  Indiana,
holding  the  office  till  the  accession  of  a  new  ad-
ministration in  1869.  Subsequently  he  became  the
publisher  of  the  Lafayette  "  Sunday  Times."  In
April,  1885,  President  Cleveland  appointed  him  3d
auditor  of  the  U.  S.  treasury  department.— His
brother,  George  Bnrchell,  financier,  b.  in  Lock-
port,  N.  Y,  5  Dec,  1841,  received  his  education  at


Lockport  Union  academy.  In  1858  he  removed  to
Lafayette,  Ind.,  where  he  became  largely  interested
in  mercantile  and  manufacturing  pursuits.  He  be-
came supervisor  of  internal  revenue  for  the  state
of  Indiana  in  November,  1868,  and  in  July,  1870,
deputy  commissioner  of  internal  revenue  at  Wash-
ington, D.  C.,but  resigned  at  the  end  of  November,
1871,  having  been  appointed  by  the  Japanese  gov-
ernment, at  the  suggestion  of  his  own  government,
which  had  been  requested  to  recommend  some  per-
son who  was  qualified  to  assist  in  the  organization  of
a  financial  system,  to  be  counsellor  to  the  imperial
authorities  in  all  matters  relating  to  finance,  and
particularly  upon  banking,  internal  revenue,  ex-
port and  import  duties,  and  economic  and  mone-
tary matters.  In  1873  he  visited  the  United  States
and  Europe  on  a  financial  mission  for  the  imperial
government,  returning  to  Japan  in  the  summer  of
the  following  year.  He  was  again  appointed  a
commissioner  .to  Europe  and  the  United  States  in
October,  1875,  and  resigned  the  office  of  financial
counsellor  in  November,  remaining  in  Europe  till
June,  1876,  when  he  retired  from  the  Japanese  ser-
vice. He  has  since  resided  at  Washington,  D.  C.

WILLIAMS,  John  Stuart,  senator,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery county,  Ky.,  in  1820.  He  was  graduated
at  Miami  university,  Oxford,  Ohio,  in  1838,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  engaged  in  prac-
tice at  Paris,  Ky.  He  served  in  the  war  with
Mexico,  first  as  a  captain  and  afterward  as  colonel,
and  was  in  command  of  the  4th  Kentucky  volun-
teers at  the  taking  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  After
his  return  he  resumed  practice,  and  engaged  in
agriculture  and  the  breeding  of  fine  stock,  took  an
active  part  as  a  Whig  in  politics,  served  as  a  dele-
gate to  national  conventions  and  as  a  presidential
elector,  and  was  in  the  legislature  of  Kentucky  in
1851-'2.  Although  he  had  opposed  secession,  he
raised  a  brigade  for  the  Confederate  army,  received
a  commission  as  brigadierrgeneral  in  1862,  and  was
serving  under  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston  when  the
surrender  took  place.  Going  back  to  his  home,  he
urged  the  people  to  renew  their  allegiance  to  the
National  government.  He  served  again  in  the
legislature  in  1873-'4,  and  was  elected  a  U.  S.  sena-
tor from  Kentucky  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  from
4  March,  1879,  till  3  March,  1885.  Since  that  time
he  has  been  engaged  in  farming,  in  improving
lands  in  southern  Florida,  and  in  promoting  rail-
ways in  the  mineral  regions  of  Kentucky.

WILLIAMS,  John  Wilson  Montgomery,
clergyman,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  Va.,  7  April,  1820.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbian  college,  Washing-
ton, D.  C.,  in  1845,  and  subsequently  at  Newton
theological  seminary.  After  preaching  for  several
years  in  Virginia,  chiefly  at  Lynchburg,  he  was
called  to  the  pastorate  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  of
Baltimore,  Md.,  where  he  still  remains.  He  has
been  president  of  the  Maryland  tract  society  since
1870,  vice-president  of  the  Southern  Baptist  con-
vention, several  times  moderator  of  the  Maryland
Baptist  union  association,  and  trustee  of  Columbian
college  (now  university)  since  1851.  In  1866  that
institution  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
Besides  several  sermons,  he  has  published  "  Pas-
tor and  People,  a  Lecture  "  (Washington,  1867) ;
"  Reminiscences  of  a  Pastorate  of  Thirty-three
Years  "  (1884) ;  "  Training  of  our  Members  in  the
Distinctive  Principles  of  our  Denomination  a  Duty
and  a  Necessity  "  (Philadelphia,  1855) ;  and  "  How
to  enlarge  the  Congregation,"  a  tract  (1887).

WILLIAMS,  Jonathan,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  26  May,  1750 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  16
May,  1815.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was  a
patriot  of  the  Revolution. The  son  received  a


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


529


good  education,  entered  a  counting-house  in  Boston,
and  then  made  several  voyages  to  the  West  Indies
and  to  England.  He  was  in  the  latter  country  in
1770  and  1773,  and  was  intrusted  by  his  grand-
uncle,  Benjamin  Franklin,  with  political  despatches
to  this  country.  Pie  was  also  Franklin's  secretary
during  the  latter's  residence  in  France  as  U.  S.
ambassador,  and  for  part  of  the  time  served  as
U.  S.  commercial  agent.  While  in  France  he
studied  military  science,  especially  fortification.
After  his  return  to  this  country  in  1785  he  was  for
several  years  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  in  Philadelphia,  but  on  6  Feb.,  1801,  he  was
appointed  major  of  the  2d  regiment  of  artillerists
and  engineers  in  the  regular  army,  and  on  4  Dec.
he  was  made  inspector  of  fortifications,  and  took
command  of  the  post  at  West  Point,  with  the  duties
of  instruction  in  his  branches.  On  the  establish-
ment of  the  present  military  academy  in  1802  he
became  its  superintendent,  but  on  20  June,  1803,
he  resigned  his  commission  on  a  question  of  rank.
On  19  April,  1805,  he  returned  to  the  army,  at
President  Jefferson's  request,  as  lieutenant-colonel
and  chief  engineer,  resuming  also  the  superintend-
ence of  the  academy.  He  planned  and  built  most
of  the  inner  forts  in  New  York  harbor,  including
Fort  Columbus,  Fort  Clinton  (now  Castle  Garden),
and  Castle  Williams,  which  was  named  for  him.
At  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1812  Col.  Williams
claimed  the  command  of  the  last-named  work,  and
on  being  refused  it  by  the  secretary  of  war,  resigned,
31  July,  1812.  He  {hen  returned  to  Philadelphia,
and  was  for  several  years  vice-president  and  cor-
responding secretary  of  the  American  philosophical
society.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1814,  but
died  without  taking  his  seat.  Col.  Williams  has
been  called  "  father  of  the  corps  of  engineers."

His  full-length
portrait  is  in  the
library  of  the  U.
S.  military  acad-
emy, among
those  of  other
superintendents
and  professors.
He  was  the  au-
thor of  a  me-
moir on  "The
Use  of  the  Ther-
mometer in  Nav-
igation "  (Phila-
delphia, 1799),
and  translat-
ed "  Elements
of  Fortifica-
tion "  (1801)
and  Koscius-
ko's "  Manoeu-
vres for  Horse
Artillery "  (1808),  besides  contributing  to  the
"  Transactions  "  of  the  American  philosophical  so-
ciety.— His  son,  Alexander  John,  soldier,  b.  in
Philadelphia  in  1790;  d.  in  Fort  Erie,  Upper
Canada,  15  Aug.,  1814,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1811,  and  assigned  to  the
engineers,  but  was  made  captain  of  artillery,  17
March,  1813.  He  commanded  Fort  Mifflin,  Pa.,
in  1812-'14,  and  then  engaged  in  the  campaign  on
the  Niagara  frontier.  During  the  defence  of  Fort
Erie,  while  he  was  repelling  the  fourth  assault  of
the  enemy  in  a  hand-to-hand  encounter,  a  lighted
port-fire  in  front  of  the  British  enabled  them  to
direct  their  volleys  on  his  company.  He  sprang
forward,  cut  it  off  with  his  sword,  and  fell  mor-
tally wounded  by  a  musket-ball.
VOL  vi. — 34


WILLIAMS,  Mary  Bushnell,  author,  b.  in
Baton  Rouge,  La.,  in  1826.  Her  father,  Judge
Charles  Bushnell,  was  a  native  of  Boston,  Mass.
She  was  educated  by  Prof.  Alexander  Dimitry,
married  Josiah  P.  Williams,  a  planter  of  Rapides
parish,  and  resided  near  Alexandria,  on  Red  river,
till  1869,  when  she  removed  to  Opelousas.  Her
husband  died,  and  their  residence,  "The  Oaks,"
was  destroyed  during  the  Red  river  expedition  in
1864.  For  some  time  during  the  civil  war  she
was  a  refugee  in  Texas.  She  has  contributed  to
periodical  literature,  and  her  poetry  has  been
much  admired,  notably  the  verses  entitled  "  The
Serfs  of  Chateney."  She  has  in  preparation  a  vol-
ume of  "  Tales  and  Legends  of  Louisiana."

WILLIAMS,  Nelson  Grosvenor,  soldier,  b.
in  Bainbridge,  Chenango  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  May,  1823.
He  was  educated  at  Utica  academy,  and  spent  one
year  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  colonel
of  the  3d  Iowa  volunteers,  and  served  in  Missouri
until  March,  1862.  He  commanded  the  1st  brigade
of  the  4th  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  at
the  battle  of  Shiloh,  where  a  horse  was  killed  un-
der him,  and  was  at  the  siege  of  Corinth.  He  was
made  brigadier-general  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  but  re-
signed soon  afterward,  owing  to  injuries  received
at  Shiloh.  In  1869  he  entered  the  U.  S.  custom
service  in  New  York  city.

WILLIAMS,  Otho  Holland,  soldier,  b.  in
Prince  George  county,  Md.,  in  March,  1749 ;  d.
about  1800.  His  ancestors  were  among  the  earliest
settlers  in  Maryland  from  England  after  Lord  Bal-
timore became  proprietor  of  the  province.  Otho
was  left  an  orphan  at  twelve  years  of  age,  and  a  few
years  later  placed  in  the  clerk's  office  of  Frederick,
Md.,  whence  he  was  transferred  to  the  clerk's  office
at  Baltimore.  In  1775  he  was  appointed  a  lieuten-
ant in  a  rifle  corps  that  was  raised  in  Frederick
county.  The  company  to  which  he  was  attached
marched  to  Boston,  and  the  captain  having  been
promoted,  young  Williams  succeeded  to  the  com-
mand. When  Fort  Washington  was  attacked  he
was  a  major.  He  was  severely  wounded,  taken
prisoner,  and  carried  to  New  York,  where  he  was
released  on  his  parole.  On  suspicion  that  he  would
open  a  secret  correspondence  with  Washington,  he
was  reapprehended  and  placed  in  confinement,
where  he  suffered  great  indignities  and  cruelty.
He  was  exchanged  after  fifteen  months  of  impris-
onment. During  his  captivity  he  was  promoted  to
the  command  of  the  6th  regiment  of  the  Maryland
line,  and  after  his  exchange  he  participated  in  all
the  battles  of  that  command.  He  acted  as  deputy
adjutant-general  of  the  southern  army  under  Gen.
Horatio  Gates ;  and  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene,  on
assuming  command  of  that  army,  appointed  Col.
Williams  adjutant-general.  During  Greene's  cele-
brated retreat  he  led  the  light  corps  that  acted  as  a
rear-guard,  and  did  efficient  service.  At  a  critical
moment  in  the  battle  of  Eutaw,  Gen.  Greene  issued
the  order  "Let  Williams  advance  and  sweep  the
field  with  his  bayonets."  He  led  a  charge  that
gained  him  the  highest  honors  of  the  day.  Near
the  close  of  the  war  Williams  was  sent  by  Gen.
Greene  with  despatches  to  congress,  and  he  was
promoted  by  that  body  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general.  On  the  cessation  of  hostilities,  Gen.  Will-
iams settled  in  Baltimore,  and  was  appointed  by
the  governor  collector  of  the  port.  He  held  that
office  under  the  governor's  appointment  until  the
adoption  of  the  Federal  constitution,  and  was
then  reappointed  by  Washington,  retaining  the
office  till  his  death.  See  memoir  by  Osmond
Tiffany  (Baltimore,  1851).


530


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  about  1780 :  d.  in  New  York  city,
18  Oct.,  1840.  His  father,  Peter,  a  negro,  was  born
a  slave,  became  sexton  of  the  1st  Methodist  Epis-
copal church  in  New  York,  afterward  engaged  in
trade,  and  was  the  principal  founder  of  a  church
for  colored  Methodists.  The  son  embraced  Prot-
estant Episcopal  tenets  with  his  pastor,  the  Rev.
Thomas  Lyell,  was  educated  by  the  Rev.  Richard
C.  Moore,  became  a  lay  reader,  and  in  1820  was
ordained  by  Bishop  John  H.  Hobart,  and  inducted
as  rector  of  an  Episcopal  church  for  people  of  his
race.  He  published  an  "  Oration  on  the  Abolition
of  the  Slave-Trade  "  (New  York,  1808),  and  "  Dis-
course on  the  Death  of  Capt.  Paul  Cuffee  "  (1817).

WILLIAMS,  Beuel,  senator,  b.  in  Hallowell
(now  Augusta),  Me.,  2  June,  1783;  d.  in  Augusta,
Me.,  25  July,  1862.  He  was  educated  at  Hallowell
academy,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1802,  and  practised  in  Augusta.  He  was  a  member
of  the  state  house  of  representatives  in  1822-'6,
then  sat  in  the  state  senate  for  three  years,  and
after  that  was  in  the  house  again  till  1832.  In
1836  he  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Van
Buren  ticket.  In  the  following  year  he  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat  to  fill  a  vacancy,
taking  his  seat  on  4  Sept.,  1837.  He  opposed  the
Ashburton  treaty,  which  adjusted  the  northeastern
boundary.  In  February,  1842,  in  consequence  of
a  resolution  of  the  legislature,  in  which  the  Whigs
had  obtained  a  preponderance,  he  offered  his  resig-
nation, and  in  the  congress  that  began  its  sessions
on  4  Dec.,  1843,  he  was  replaced  by  John  Fairfield.
He  was  the  principal  promoter  of  the  railroad
between  Portland  and  Augusta,  which  afforded
direct  rail  communication  with  Boston,  and  was  its
president  from  1847,  when  the  work  was  begun,
and  the  chief  manager  after  its  completion  in  1851
for  about  ten  years.  The  degree  ot  LL.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Bowdoin  in  1855. — His  son,
Joseph  Hartwell,  lawyer,  b.  in  Augusta,  Me.,  15
Feb.,  1814,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1834,  and
at  the  law-school  in  1837,  and  practised  his  pro-
fession in  Augusta  till  1862.  He  rnarried  a  sister
of  the  Rev.  Sylvester  Judd.  He  was  president  of
the  state  senate  in  1857,  and  became  acting  gov-
ernor on  the  resignation  of  Hannibal  Hamlin  in
February  of  that  year.  Gov.  Williams  was  nomi-
nated to  the  office  of  judge  of  the  Maine  supreme
court  in  1862,  but  declined.  In  1864-'6  and  1874
he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,  serving  in
1865-'6  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  finance.
He  is  the  author  of  "  A  Brief  Study  in  Genealogy,"
treating  of  the  Cony  family,  to  which  his  mother
belonged  (printed  privately,  Cambridge,  1885). —
Reuel's  nephew,  Seth,  soldier,  b.  in  Augusta,  Me.,
22  March,  1822;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  23  March,
1866,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acade-
my in  1842,  commissioned  as  2d  lieutenant  of
artillery  on  31  Aug.,  1844,  and  as  1st  lieutenant  on
3  March,  1847,  and  during  the  Mexican  war  served
as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Robert  Patterson,  partici-

Eating  in  all  the  principal  battles,  and  gaining  the
revet  of  captain  for  gallantry  at  Cerro  Gordo.
He  was  adjutant  of  the  military  academy  in  1850-'3,
and  subsequently  served  in  the  adjutant-general's
department  till  his  death.  He  was  promoted  major
on  11  May,  1861,  and  appointed  a  brigadier-general
in  the  volunteer  army  on  23  Sept.,  and  from  20
Aug.,  1861,  till  11  Nov.,  1862,  served  as  adjutant-
general  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,
being  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  on  17  July,  1862.
He  was  adjutant-general  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac while  it  was  commanded  by  Gen.  McClellan.
and  continued  to  serve  in  that  capacity  under  Gen.


Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker,  and
Gen.  George  G.  Meade,  winning  the  brevet  of
colonel  for  gallant  conduct  at  Gettysburg.  His
health  was  impaired  by  continued  and  arduous
duties,  and  from  November,  1864,  till  the  close  of
hostilities  he  served  on  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant's
staff  as  inspector-general  of  the  army.  He  took
part  in  nearly  every  important  engagement,  and
received  the  brevet  of  major-general  of  volunteers
on  1  Aug.,  1864,  for  brave  conduct  in  the  field  in
the  campaigns  from  Gettysburg  to  Petersburg,
that  of  brigadier-general  in  the  U.  S.  army  on  13
March,  1865,  for  gallantry  in  the  final  campaign
near  Richmond,  and  that  of  major-general  on  the
same  date  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services
throughout  the  war.

WILLIAMS,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Eng-
land about  1745 ;  d.  in  Norfolk  county,  Va.,  26
Sept.,  1775.  He  was  a  local  preacher  in  John
Wesley's  society,  and  from  him  received  permission
to  preach  in  this  country  under  the  direction  of
the  regular  missionaries.  Arriving  in  New  York
city  in  October,  1769,  he  began  his  labors  in  the
chapel  there,  then  received  a  general  license  from
Joseph  Pilmoor  in  Philadelphia,  assisted  Robert
Strawbridge  in  evangelistic  work,  and  in  1772  en-
tered Virginia  as  the  apostle  of  Methodism.  When
he  began  by  singing  and  preaching  on  the  court-
house steps  in  Norfolk,  his  ecstatic  manner  caused
the  citizens  to  suspect  his  sanity,  yet  he  soon  made
converts  and  organized  a  society.  He  was  received
into  the  travelling  connection  at  the  first  general
conference,  which  was  held  at  Philadelphia  in
June,  1773,  and  in  the  following  year  married  and
located.  He  was  the  first  to  print  Methodist  books
in  this  country,  and  gave  a  wide  circulation  to
Wesley's  sermons  until  the  conference  that  ad-
mitted him  appropriated  the  right  of  publication.

WILLIAMS,  Robert,  member  of  congress,  b.
in  Surry  county,  N.  C,  12  July,  1773 ;  d.  in  Louisi-
ana about  1820.  His  father,  Maj.  Joseph,  was  a
Whig  partisan  who  had  many  desperate  encounters
with  the  Tories  during  the  Revolution.  The  son
became  a  lawyer,  and  during  the  war  acted  as
adjutant-general  of  the  state.  He  also  collected
the  acts  of  the  general  assembly  from  1776.  For
many  years  he  was  a  trustee  and  treasurer  of  the
University  of  North  Carolina.  He  was  a  member  of
congress  for  three  terms,  serving  from  15  May,
1797,  till  3  March,  1803,  and  was  then  appointed
land  commissioner  for  Mississippi.  Retiring  from
that  office  in  1805,  he  went  to  Tennessee,  and  sub-
sequently settled  in  Louisiana. — His  cousin,  Rob-
ert, lawyer,  b.  in  Caswell  county,  N.  C,  about
1765;  d.  in  Louisiana,  was  appointed  governor  of
Mississippi  territory  bv  President  Jefferson,  filling
that  office  from  1805  till  1809.— The  second  Rob-
ert's brother,  Marmaduke,  member  of  congress,
b.  in  Caswell  county.  N.  C,  6  April,  1772;  d.  in
Tuscaloosa,  Ala.,  29  Oct.,  1850,  studied  and  prac-
tised law,  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in
1802,  and  served  in  congress  three  successive  terras,
entering  the  house  when  his  cousin  retired.  After
the  conclusion  of  his  last  term  he  emigrated  to
Alabama  in  1810.  He  was  a  delegate  from  Tusca-
loosa county  to  the  convention  that  framed  the
state  constitution  in  1819,  and  on  its  adoption  was
a  candidate  for  governor,  but  was  defeated  by  Will-
iam W.  Bibb,  who  had  held  that  office  in  the  terri-
torial government.  He  was  elected  to  the  legisla-
ture in  1821,  and  was  ten  times  re-elected.  In
1826  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  to  settle
territorial  accounts  between  Alabama  and  Missis-
sippi, and  he  was  judge  of  the  county  court  from
1832  till  1842,  when  he  was  retired  by  limitation


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


531


of  age. — The  first  Robert's  brother.  John,  senator,
b.  in  Surry  county,  N.  C,  29  Jan.,  1778 ;  d.  in  Knox-
ville,  Tenn.,  10  Aug.,  1837,  was  appointed  a  captain
in  the  6th  U.  S.  infantry  in  April,  1799,  but  re-
signed in  June,  1800,  studied  law  in  Salisbury,
N.  C,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1803,  and  re-
moved to  the  vicinity  of  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  where
he  entered  into  practice.  In  1812  he  raised  a  regi-
ment of  mounted  volunteers,  and  conducted  a  vic-
torious campaign  against  the  Seminoles.  On  his
return  he  was  commissioned  as  colonel  of  the  39th
U.  S.  infantry,  and  ordered  to  the  Creek  nation,
where  he  was  in  the  battle  of  the  Horse-Shoe  Bend
of  the  Tallapoosa.  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson's  report
of  this  action  failed  to  do  justice  to  his  command
in  the  opinion  of  Col.  Williams,  who  from  that
time  was  Jackson's  most  powerful  and  determined
adversary.  He  served  till  the  close  of  the  war
with  Great  Britain,  and  was  then  elected  U.  S.
senator  from  Tennessee  to  serve  through  the  unex-
pired term  of  George  W.  Campbell,  and  was  re-
elected, serving  from  4  Dec,  1815,  till  3  March,
1823.  He  was  in  1825  appointed  charge  d'affaires
in  Central  America,  but  remained  in  that  post  only
six  days.  He  was  afterward  a  member  of  the  state
senate,  and  declined  a  seat  on  the  supreme  bench
of  Tennessee. — His  wife,  Melinua,  was  a  sister  of
Hugh  L.  White. — Another  brother,  Lewis,  member
of  congress,  b.  in  Surry  county,  N.  C,  1  Feb.,  1786 ;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  20  Feb.,  1842,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1808,
and  in  1813  entered  political  life  as  a  member  of
the  state  house  of  commons.  He  was  re-elected  in
1814,  and  on  4  Dec,  1815,  took  his  seat  in  con-
gress, to  which  body  he  was  returned  twelve  times,
remaining  a  member  until  his  death.  John  Q.
Adams  and  other  representatives  pronounced  eulo-
gies on  Mr.  Williams,  who  was  commonly  styled
•'  the  father  of  the  house." — Lewis's  twin  brother,
Thomas  Lanier,  jurist,  b.  in  Sussex  county,  N.  C,
1  Feb.,  1786;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  3  Dec,  1856,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  North  Carolina
with  the  valedictory.  After  studying  law,  he  re-
moved to  Knoxville,  Tenn.  He  was  several  times
elected  a  representative  and  also  a  senator  to  the
General  assembly.  For  a  short  time  he  was  one
of  the  judges  of  the  supreme  court,  and  voluntarily
relinquished  that  office  to  the  regret  of  the  bar.
In  1836.  on  the  establishment  of  corporate  courts
of  equity  jurisdiction  in  Tennessee,  he  was  chosen
chancellor  and  served  as  such  for  sixteen  years.
He  was  regarded  as  the  father  of  equity  jurispru-
dence in  Tennessee,  and  during  his  long  judicial
career  only  one  or  two  of  his  decisions  were  re-
versed.— John's  son,  Joseph  Lanier,  member  of
congress,  b.  in  Tennessee,  about  1800,  resided  in
Knoxville,  and  was  elected  as  a  Whig  to  congress,
and  twice  re-elected,  serving  from  4  Sept.,  1837,
till  3  March,  1843.

WILLIAMS,  Rohert,  soldier,  b.  in  Culpeper
county,  Va.,  5  Nov.,  1829.  His  grandfather,  James
Williams,  served  in  the  Virginia  line  in  the  Revo-
lutionary war  and  also  in  command  of  Virginia
troops  during  the  war  of  1812..  Robert  was  edu-
cated at  the  local  schools  and  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he  was  graduated  and  promoted  to
brevet  2d  lieutenant  in  the  1st  dragoons  in  1851.
He  served'  at  the  cavalry-school  for  practice  and
with  his  regiment  in  Oregon  for  six  years,  in  the
mean  time  becoming  2d  lieutenant  in  1853,  and  1st
lieutenant  in  1855.  In  1857  he  was  assigned  to
duty  as  an  assistant  instructor  in  tactics  at  West
Point.  Having  been  appointed  in  May,  1861.  cap-
tain and  assistant  adjutant-general,  he  served  as
such until October, when he  was  commissioned


colonel  of  the  1st  Massachusetts  cavalry.  He  was
engaged  in  operations  at  Hilton  Head,  S.  C,  in  the
attack  on  Secession ville,  James  island,  S.  C,  and  in
central  Virginia  till  October,  1862,  when  he  re-
signed from  the  volunteer  service  and  was  assigned
to  duty  at  the  war  department,  having  become
major  and  assistant  adjutant-general  in  July  of
the  same  year.  He  afterward  served  as  adjutant-
general,  respectively,  of  the  Departments  of  the
Missouri  and  of  the  Platte,  and  of  the  Division  of
the  Missouri.  He  was  promoted  by  seniority  in
his  department  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  in
February,  1869,  colonel,  1  July,  1881,  and  by  brevet
to  the  grade  of  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  Army,  13
March,  1865,  "  for  diligent,  faithful,  and  meritori-
ous services  during  the  rebellion."  Gen.  Williams
married  the  widow  of  Stephen  A.  Douglas.  He
has  published  professional  papers  in  periodicals.

WILLIAMS,  Roger,  founderof  Rhode  Island.b.
in  Wales  in  1599  ;  d.  in  Rhode  Island  early  in  1683.
Little  is  known  of  his  family  or  his  early  life.  He
seems  to  have  been  employed  in  some  capacity  by
the  great  lawyer  Sir  Edward  Coke,  who  placed  him
at  the  Charterhouse  school  in  1621,  and  afterward  at
Pembroke  college,  Cambridge,  where  he  took  a  de-
gree. He  was  admitted  to  orders  in  the  Church  of
England,  but  soon  became  the  friend  and  com-
panion of  John  Cotton  and  Thomas  Hooker,  and
adopted  the  most  advanced  views  of  the  Puritan
party.  He  embarked  at  Bristol,  1  Dec,  1630,  in
the  ship  '■  Lion,"  and  on  5  Feb.,  1631,  arrived  at
Boston.  He  had  then  been  recently  married,  but  of
his  wife's  early  history  very  little  is  known.  He
was  distinguished  as  an  eloquent  preacher  and  ripe
scholar,  and  soon  after  his  arrival  in  Massachu-
•  setts  he  was  invited  to  the  church  at  Salem,  as.
assistant  to  the  pastor,  Mr.  Skelton.  But  rumors
of  his  heretical  opinions  were  already  abroad.  It
was  said  that  he  had  declared  the  ministers  at
Boston  blameworthy  for  not  formally  proclaiming
their  penitence  for  ever  having  lived  in  commun-
ion with  the  Church  of  England,  and  that  he  de-
nied the  right  of  magistrates  to  inflict  punishment
for  Sabbath-breaking,  or  "  any  other  offence  that
was  a  breach  of  the  first  table."  In  spite  of  oppo-
sition based  upon  these  charges,  Mr.  Williams  was
settled,  12  April,  1631,  as  assistant  or  teacher  in  the
Salem  church.  But  he  found  his  position  there  so
uncomfortable  that  before  the  end  of  the  summer
he  thought  it  best  to  seek  shelter  under  the  more
tolerant  jurisdiction  of  the  Plymouth  colony.  At
Plymouth  he  was  settled  in  August,  1631,  as  assist-
ant to  the  pastor,  Ralph  Smith.  Here  he  made  his
first  acquaintance  with  the  chiefs  of  the  Wampa-
noags  and  Narragansetts.  and,  being  an  excellent
linguist,  soon  learned  to  talk  in  the  language  of
these  Indians.  About  this  time  he  was  first  sus-
pected of  the  "  heresy  of  Anabaptism."  For  such
an  aggressive  and  vigorous  thinker  the  field  of  ac-
tion at  Plymouth  seemed  too  narrow,  and  in  1633
he  returned  to  Salem,  followed  by  several  members
of  the  congregation  who  had  become  devotedly  at-
tached to  him.  In  1634  he  was  settled  as  pastor  of
the  church  in  Salem.  There  he  soon  got  into  trou-
ble by  denying  the  validity  of  the  charter  granted
in  1629  by  Charles  I.  to  the  Company  of  Massachu-
setts Bay.  He  maintained  that  the  land  belonged  to
the  Indians,  and  not  to  the  king  of  England,  who
therefore  had  no  right  to  give  it  away.  The  pro-
mulgation of  this  view  seemed  dangerous  to  the
founders  of  Massachusetts,  who  were  in  many  ways
incurring  the  risk  of  arousing  the  hostility  of  the
king,  and  were  therefore  anxious  to  avoid  offend-
ing him  on  such  a  point  as  this.  It  was  likely  to
be  interpreted  in  England  as  indicating  an  inten-


532


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


tion  on  the  part  of  the  settlers  of  Massachusetts  to
throw  off  their  allegiance,  and  accordingly  they
hastened  to  condemn  Mr.  Williams  and  his  views.
This  purely  political  question  was  complicated
with  disputes  arising  from  Mr.  Williams's  advanced
opinions  on  toleration.  He  maintained  that  "  no
human  power  had  the  right  to  intermeddle  in  mat-
ters of  conscience ;  and  that  neither  church  nor
state,  neither  bishop  nor  king,  may  prescribe  the
smallest  iota  of  religious  faith."  For  this,  he  main-
tained, "  man  is  responsible  to  God  alone."  The
ministers,  with  his  friends,  Cotton  and  Hooker  at
their  head,  sent  a  committee  to  Salem  to  censure
him;  but  he  denied  their  spiritual  jurisdiction,
and  declared  his  determination  to  "remove  the
yoke  of  soul-oppression."  In  July,  1635,  he  was
summoned  before  the  general  court  at  Boston,  and
in  October  he  was  ordered  to  quit  the  colony  within
six  weeks,  but  permission  was  presently  granted  for
him  to  remain  until  spring.  It  was  then  reported
that  many  people  in  Salem,  "  taken  with  an  appre-
hension of  his  godliness,"  repaired  to  his  house  for
religious  instruction,  and  that  they  meditated  with-
drawing from  Massachusetts  and  founding  a  colony
upon  Narragansett  bay,  in  which  the  principle  of
religious  toleration  should  be  strictly  upheld. To

Erevent  this  movement,  it  was  decided  to  send  him
ack  to  England.  He  was  again  summoned  to
Boston,  but  refused  to  obey  the  summons,  where-
upon the  magistrates  sent  to  Salem  a  warrant  for
his  arrest.  He  suspected  what  was  coming,  and  left
his  home  just  before  the  officers  arrived.  He  made
his  way  through  the  wilderness  to  the  wigwams
of  the  Pokanokets.  Their  chief,  Massasoit,  granted
him  a  tract  of  land  on  Seekonk  river.  There,
in  the  spring,  he  was  joined  by  friends  from  Sa-
lem, and  they  began  to  build;  but,  in  order  to
avoid  any  complications  with  the  Plymouth  colony,
they  moved  to  the  site  of  Providence,  where  they
made  their  first  settlement  in  June,  1636.  This
territory  was  granted  to  Mr.  Williams  by  the  Narra-
gansett chiefs,  Canonicus  and  Miantonomoh.  His
influence  over  these  Indians  was  great,  and  it  soon
enabled  him  to  perform  for  the  infant  colonies  a
service  that  no  other  man  in  New  England  could
have  undertaken  with  any  hope  of  success ;  he  de-
tached the  powerful  tribe  of  Narragansetts  from
the  league  that  the  Pequot  sachem  Sassacus  was
forming  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  all  the  Eng-
lish settlements.  The  effect  of  Mr.  Williams's
diplomacy  was  to  leave  the  Pequots  to  fight  with-
out allies,  and  the  English  soon  exterminated  them.
During  the  Pequot  war  the  magistrates  of  the
colony  that  had  banished  him  sought  his  counsel,
and  he  gave  it  freely.  In  1638  he  assisted  John
Clarke  and  William  Coddington  in  negotiating  the
purchase  of  Aquidneck,  or  Rhode  Island,  for  which
the  Indians  were  liberally  paid.  True  to  his  prin-
ciple of  toleration,  while  he  opposed  the  opinions
of  that  restless  agitator,  Samuel  Gorton,  he  refused
to  join  in  the  movement  for  expelling  him  from
Providence.  In  1643  he  went  to  England  and  ob-
tained the  charter  for  the  Rhode  Island  and  Provi-
dence settlements,  dated  14  March,  1644.  While
in  England  he  published  his  "  Key  into  the  Lan-
guage of  America  "  (London,  1643),  a  work  of  great
value  on  the  speech  of  the  New  England  Indians.
He  also  wrote  and  published  anonymously  his
famous  book  "  The  Bloody  Tenent  of  Persecution
for  Cause  of  Conscience  "  (London,  1644).  In  this
book  the  doctrines  of  religious  freedom  are  ably  and
attractively  presented  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue
between  Truth  and  Peace.  It  was  dedicated  to  the
parliament,  then  waging  war  against  the  king,  and
it  attracted  general  attention  from  its  great  literary


merit  as  well  as  from  the  nature  of  the  subject.  It
was  answered  by  Mr.  Cotton's  book  entitled  "  The
Bloody  Tenent  washed  and  made  White  in  the
Blood  of  the  Lamb  "  (London,  1647).  After  a  while
Mr.  Williams  published  an  effective  rejoinder  en-
titled "  The  Bloody  Tenent  made  yet  more  Bloody
by  Mr.  Cotton's  Endeavor  to  wash  it  White  "  (Lon-
don, 1652).  The  controversy  was  conducted  on
both  sides  with  a  candor  and  courtesy  very  rare  in
those  times.  While  in  London,  in  1644,  Mr.  Will-
iams also  published  a  reply  to  Mr.  Cotton's  state-
ment of  the  reasons  for  his  banishment.  This  ad-
mirable book,  a  small  quarto  of  forty-seven  pages,
entitled  "  Mr.  Cotton's  Letter  Examined  and  An-
swered," is  now  exceedingly  rare.  Mr.  Williams
landed  in  Boston,  17  Sept.,  1644,  with  a  letter  signed
by  several  members  of  parliament,  which  was  vir-
tually a  safe-conduct  for  his  passage  through  Massa-
chusetts territory.  Through  his  exertions  a  treaty
was  made  with  the  Narragansetts,  4  Aug.,  1645,
which  saved  New  England  from  the  horrors  of  an
Indian  war.  In  order  to  obtain  the  abrogation
of  the  commission  of  William  Coddington  as
governor  of  the  islands  of  Rhode  Island  and  C6-
nanicut,  Mr.  Williams  sailed  in  November,  1651,
for  England,  in  company  with  John  Clarke.
Through  the  aid  of  Sir  Henry  Vane  this  mission
was  successful.  While  in  England,  Mr.  Williams
spent  several  weeks  at  Vane's  country  house  in
Lincolnshire,  and  he  saw  much  of  Cromwell  and
Milton.  At  this  time-he  wrote  and  published  his
"  Hireling  Ministry  None  of  Christ  s  "  (London,
1652),  which  is  an  able  argument  against  an  estab-
lished church  and  the  support  of  the  clergy  by
taxation.  In  the  same  year  he  published  "  Experi-
ments of  Spiritual  Life  and  Health,  and  their  Pre-
servatives. He  returned  to  Providence  in  1654
and  took  part  in  the  reorganization  of  the  colonial
government  in  that  year.  He  was  chosen,  12  Sept.,
1654,  president  of  the  colony,  and  held  that  office
until  May,  1658.  During  this  time  he  secured  the
toleration  of  the  Quakers,  who  were  beginning  to
come  to  New  England,  and  on  this  occasion  he  was
again  brought  into  conflict  with  the  government  of
IViassachusetts.  A  new  charter  was  granted  to  Rhode
Island,  8  July,  1663,  under  which  Benedict  Arnold
was  first  governor  and  Roger  Williams  one  of  the
assistants.  This  charter  established  such  a  liberal
republican  government  that  the  Revolution  in
1776  made  no  change  in  it,  and  it  was  not  super-
seded until  1842.  (See  Dorr,  Thomas  Wilson.)
Mr.  Williams  in  1663  was  appointed  commissioner
for  settling  the  eastern  boundary,  which  had  long
been  the  subject  of  dispute  with  both  Plymouth
and  Massachusetts.  For  the  next  fourteen  years
he  was  most  of  the  time  either  a  representative  or
an  assistant.  In  1672  he  was  engaged  in  his  fa-
mous controversy  with  the  Quakers,  of  whose  doc-
trines and  manners  he  strongly  disapproved,  though
he  steadfastly  refused  to  persecute  them.  George
Fox  was  then  in  Newport,  and  Mr.  Williams  chal-
lenged him  to  a  public  discussion  of  fourteen  theo-
logical propositions.  Fox  left  the  colony  before
the  challenge  had  been  delivered  to  him,  but  it
was  accepted  by  three  Quaker  champions,  John
Stubbs,  John  Burnet,  and  William  Edmundson.
Mr.  Williams,  though  seventy-three  years  of  age,
rowed  himself  in  a  boat  from  Providence  to  New-
port, about  thirty  miles,  to  meet  his  adversaries.
The  debate  was  carried  on  for  three  days  in  the
Quaker  meeting-house,  without  changing  anybody's
opinion.  Mr.  Williams  afterward  wrote  an  ac-
count of  the  affair,  and  maintained  his  own  view,
in  the  book  entitled  "  George  Fox  digged  out  of
his  Burrowes,"  a  small  quarto  of  327  pages  (Boston,


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


533


1676).  A  copy  of  this  book  is  in  Harvard  college
library.  His  last  written  document  bears  the  date
16  Jan.,  1683,  and  relates  to  the  dispute  about  the
Pawtuxet  lands.  In  a  letter  written,  10  May,  1683,
by  John  Thorndike,  of  Providence,  to  the  Rev.
Samuel  Hubbard,  he  says :  "  The  Lord  hath  ar-
rested by  death  our  ancient  and  approved  friend,
Mr.  Roger  Williams,  with  divers  others  here."  His
death  must  have  occurred  between  16  Jan.  and  10


May,  probably  at  Providence,  as  he  was  buried
there.  He  was  a  man  of  wonderful  strength  and
activity.  In  private  life  he  was  as  gentle  and  kind
as  he  was  undaunted  and  pugnacious  in  contro-
versy. His  opinions  and  conduct  in  regard  to  tol-
eration entitle  him  to  a  place  among  the  foremost
men  of  the  world  in  the  17th  century,  and  this  is
fully  recognized  in  Prof.  David  Masson's  work  on
Milton,  where  the  history  of  modern  liberalism  is
discussed  with  profound  learning.  See  James  D.
Knowles's  "  Memoir  of  Williams  "  (Boston,  1834) ;
William  Gammell's  "Life  of  Roger  Williams"
(1845) ;  Romeo  Elton's  "  Life  of  Roger  Williams  "
(London,  1852):  and  Henry  M.  Dexter's  "As  to
Roger  Williams"  (Boston.  1876).  Dr.  Dexter  has
recovered  a  lost  tract  by  Williams,  "  Christenings
make  not  Christians"  (London,  1645),  which  he
found  in  the  British  museum,  and  edited  for
Rider's  historical  tracts,  No.  14,  1881. — A  de-
scendant, Betsey,  b.  in  Cranston  (now  a  part  of
Providence),  R.  I.,  in  1789 ;  d.  there,  27  Nov.,  1871,
inherited  a  farm  of  one  hundred  acres,  by  direct
succession  through  five  generations,  from  Roger
Williams,  and  bequeathed  it  to  the  city  of  Provi-
dence to  form  the  park  that  bears  his  name.  The
statue  lately  erected  is  shown  in  the  illustration.

WILLIAMS,  Samuel,  pioneer,  b.  in  Carlisle,
Pa.,  16  Oct.,  1786 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  3  Feb.,
1859.  In  his  youth  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  hatter,
and  removed  with  his  parents  to  Chillicothe,  Ohio,
in  1807.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  was
with  a  detachment  at  River  Raisin,  Mich.,  when
Gen.  William  Hull  surrendered  Detroit.  An  ac-
count of  this  military  expedition,  written  by  him,
was  published  in  1870,  entitled  "Two  Western
Campaigns."  In  1815  he  was  appointed  by  the
surveyor-general  of  Ohio  chief  clerk  of  that  office,
which  post  he  filled  for  thirty  years.  His  familiar-
ity with  the  public  surveys  was  of  great  value  to
the  service,  and  he  compiled  for  the  general  land-
office  the  "  Instructions  to  Surveyors-General  of
Public  Lands,"  which  is  still  used,  and  of  which


several  editions  have  been  issued.  He  was  one  of
the  founders  in  1845  of  the  Ohio  Wesleyan  uni-
versity, and  in  1843  of  the  Wesleyan  female  col-
lege at  Cincinnati,  of  both  of  which  he  was  for
many  years  a  trustee  and  patron,  bequeathing  to
the  former  a  valuable  private  library.  He  left  in
manuscript  copious  memoirs  of  his  own  life  and
times,  and  a  genealogy  of  his  family.

WILLIAMS,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pom-
fret,  Conn.,  5  Nov.,  1779;  d.  in  Providence.  R.  I.,
29  Sept.,  1876.  He  studied  for  two  years  at  Will-
iams, then  entered  Yale,  was  graduated  in  1800,
and  taught  at  Beverly,  Mass.,  and  Woodstock  and
Norwich,  Conn.,  till  1803,  when  he  opened  a  school
for  colored  pupils  in  Boston,  Mass.  He  was  there
licensed  in  order  to  act  as  chaplain  of  the  alms-
house, was  sent  to  New  York  state  as  a  missionary
in  the  same  year,  and  repeated  his  tour  in  1804  and
1805,  after  being  ordained  as  an  evangelist  on  16
May,  1804.  From  1807  till  his  death,  except  while
officiating  as  pastor  at  Foxborough,  Mass.,  in
1816-'21,  at  Attleborough  in  1823-7,  at  Hebron-
ville  in  1827-30,  and  at  Barrington,  R.  I.,  in  1835,
he  resided  mainly  at  Providence,  and,  while  hold-
ing no  charge,  preached  to  colored  people  and
others  through  the  state  of  Rhode  Island.  He
drafted  the  articles  of  faith  and  the  rules  of  the
Rhode  Island  evangelical  consociation,  and  was
its  first  scribe.  Of  his  many  printed  sermons,  some
of  which  were  signed  by  the  pen-name  "  Demens
Egomet,"  one  was  called  "  An  Explicit  Avowal  of
Nothingarianism,"  another  had  the  title  "  Jehovah,
or  Uni-trini-tarianism,"  and  others  commemorated
the  first  settlement  of  Rhode  Island  and  the  re-
vival of  religion  in  1740.  Several  volumes  of  col-
lected sermons  were  issued  at  various  times.

WILLIAMS,  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Greens-
burgh,  Westmoreland  co.,  Pa.,  28  Aug.,  1806.  He
was  graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in  1825,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1828,  and  entered
into  practice  at  Pittsburg.  He  served  in  the  state
senate  from  1838  till  1841.  In  1861  he  entered  the
state  house  of  representatives,  and  after  serving
two  years  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
taking  his  seat  on  7  Dec,  1863.  He  was  twice  re-
elected, was  a  member  of  the  committee  on  the
judiciary  during  his  entire  period  of  service,  and
in  March,  1868,  acted  as  one  of  the  managers  of
the  impeachment  of  President  Andrew  Johnson.

WILLIAMS,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
state  in  1815;  d.  in  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  5  Aug.,
1862.  He  was  appointed  a  cadet  in  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  from  Michigan,  graduated  in  1837,
and  immediately  commissioned  as  2d  lieutenant
of  infantry.  He  served  in  the  Florida  wars  and
during  the  Canadian  rebellion  on  the  northern
frontier,  was  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  at
the  military  academy  in  1840-1,  being  promoted
1st  lieutenant  on  5  Oct.,  1840,  and  from  1844  till
1850  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott.
During  the  Mexican  war  he  was  present  at  Vera
Cruz  and  the  other  principal  engagements  of  the
war,  receiving  the  brevet  of  captain  for  bravery
at  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and  that  of  major
for  taking  a  gallant  part  in  the  battle  of  Chapulte-
pec.  He  became  a  captain  on  12  Sept.,  1850,  was
engaged  in  operations  against  the  Seminoles  in
Florida  in  1856-7  and  in  the  Utah  expedition  in
1858,  was  promoted  major  on  14  May,  1861,  and
made  a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  28  Sept.,
1861.  He  took  part  in  the  North  Carolina  expedi-
tion, and  remained  in  command  of  Fort  Hatteras
till  March,  1862,  then  took  command  of  a  brigade
in  the  Ship  island  expedition,  was  engaged  in
opening  the  lower  Mississippi  in  April  and  May,


534


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


1862,  commanded  in  the  first  unsuccessful  attack
on  Vicksburg,  and  projected  and  superintended
the  cutting  of  a  canal  that  was  designed  to  turn
the  course  of  the  Mississippi  away  from  that  city.
On  the  failure  of  this  enterprise  he  was  placed  in
command  at  Baton  Rouge,  where  he  successfully
repelled  the  vigorous  attack  of  Gen.  John  C.  Breck-
inridge, and  was  killed  in  the  moment  of  victory
while  leading  to  the  charge  an  Indiana  regiment
whose  field-officers  had  fallen.

WILLIAMS,  Thomas  H.,  senator,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia, about  1795.  He  went  to  Pontotoc,  Miss.,
soon  after  the  Indians  were  removed  from  that
region,  and  became  a  member  of  the  state  house
of  representatives.  Mr.  Williams  was  appointed
by  the  governor,  and  afterward  elected  by  the
legislature,  a  U.  S.  senator,  to  fill  the  vacancy
caused  by  the  resignation  of  James  F.  Trotter,
and  served  from  13  Dec,  1838.  till  3  March,  1839.

WILLIAMS,  Thomas  Hill,  U.  S.  senator,  b.
in  North  Carolina,  about  1780 ;  d.  in  Robertson
county,  Tenn.,  about  1840.  He  received  an  aca-
demical training,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  began  practice,  but  became  a  clerk  in  the
war  department  at  Washington.  In  1805  he  was
appointed  by  President  Jefferson  register  of  the
land-office  for  the  territory  of  Mississippi,  and  he
was  collector  of  customs  at  the  port  of  New  Orleans.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that  framed
the  state  constitution  of  Mississippi,  and  was  elected
one  of  the  first  U.  S.  senators  from  that  state.  He
was  re-elected,  and  served  from  11  Dec,  1817,  till
3  March,  1829.  During  the  session  of  1820-'l  he
voted  for  the  Missouri  compromise  bill.  He  then
removed  to  Tennessee,  where  he  remained  until
the  time  of  his  death.

WILLIAMS,  Thomas  Scott,  jurist,  b.  in
Wethersfield,  Conn.,  26  June,  1777;  d.  in  Hart-
ford, 15  Dec.  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1794,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1799,
and  began  practice  at  Mansfield,  Conn.,  but  re-
moved to  Hartford  in  1803.  He  was  appointed
attorney  of  the  board  of  managers  of  the  school
fund  in  1809,  from  1813  till  1829  represented  Hart-
ford in  the  general  assembly,  and  sat  in  congress
in  1817-'19.  In  May,  1829,  he  was  appointed  an
associate  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  errors  and
of  the  superior  court,  and  in  May,  1834,  he  was
appointed  chief  justice,  which  office  he  held  until
the  constitutional  expiration  of  his  term  in  1847.
After  retiring  from  the  bench  he  never  resumed
the  practice  of  his  profession  further  than  to  act
occasionally  as  an  arbitrator  or  referee.  He  was
mayor  of  the  city  of  Hartford  from  1831  till  1835.
For  several  years  he  had  been  president  of  the
American  tract  society,  and  he  was  active  in  vari-
ous other  religious  and  benevolent  organizations.
He  was  a  contributor  to  objects  of  benevolence,  and
bequeathed  $28,000  to  charitable  institutions.

WILLIAMS,  Sir  William,  British  officer,  b.  in
England  about  1776 ;  d.  in  Bath,  England,  17  June,
1832.  He  was  appointed  ensign  in  the  40th  foot
in  1794,  lieutenant  in  1795,  captain  in  1799,  major
in  1802,  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  60th  foot  in
1809.  He  served  at  Corunna,  Salamanca,  and
other  battles  during  the  campaign  in  the  penin-
sula, and  in  1814  in  Canada,  when  he  commanded
at  St.  John's  and  at  the  posts  in  advance  on  Riche-
lieu river,  and  was  complimented  in  general  or-
ders for  his  services.  He  was  appointed  a  knight
commander  of  the  Bath.  5  Jan.,  1815,  became  a
colonel  in  1819,  and  a  major-general  in  1830.

WILLIAMS,  William,  publisher,  b.  in  Fram-
ingham,  Mass.,  12  Oct..  1787 :  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,
10  June,  1850. He  was  a  descendant  in  the  fifth


generation  from  the  Puritan  settler,  Robert  Will-
iams, of  Roxbury.  His  father's  family  removing
to  the  village  of  New  Hartford,  Oneida  co.,  in  1791,
he  was  there  apprenticed  at  the  age  of  eleven  to
William  McLean,  a  pioneer  of  printing  and  found-
er of  the  first  newspaper  in  central  New  York.
In  1800  he  entered  the  establishment  of  Asahei
Seward,  his  brother-in-law,  in  Utica,  and  upon  com-
ing of  age  formed  a  partnership  with  him  under
the  firm-name  of  Seward  and  Williams.  The  works
issued  from  their  press  were  chiefly  religious  and
instructive.  They  were  also  publishers  of  a  news-
paper which,  under  the  name  of  the  "  Utica  Pa-
triot and  Patrol,"  and  other  titles,  strongly  advo-
cated De  Witt  Clinton  and  his.  canal  policy,  but
ended  in  1821  in  a  lawsuit  and  loss.  Seward  with-
drew in  1824,  leaving  the  business  entirely  to  his
partner,  who  indulged  his  anti-Mason  proclivities
in  issuing  a  weekly  paper  entitled  "  The  Elucida-
tor,"  which  was  also  a  financial  failure.  In  1829
he  published  "  Light  on  Masonry,"  which  brought
upon  him  the  ill-will  of  the  Masons.  Mr.  Williams
was  an  elder  in  the  Presbyterian  church,  and  the
organizer  and  superintendent  of  one  of  the  earliest
Sunday-schools  in  the  country.  During  the  cholera
scourge  in  1832  he  gave  his  whole  time  to  prescrib-
ing for  the  sick,  distributing  aid  to  the  needy,  and
burying  the  dead,  until  he  was  taken  dangerously
ill  toward  the  end  of  the  plague.  He  raised  a  com-
pany of  volunteers  in  1813  for  the  relief  of  Sackett's
Harbor,  and  served  elsewhere  in  the  war,  remaining
after  its  close  as  colonel  of  the  militia  regiment  in
Utica. — His  son,  Samuel  Wells,  sinologist,  b.  in
Utica,  N.  Y.,  22  Sept.,  1812 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  16  Feb.,  1884,  entered  Rensselaer  polytechnic
institute  at  Troy  in  1831.  While  in  this  school
he  accepted  a  proposal  to  go  to  China  and  take
charge  of  a  printing-office  recently  established  there
by  the  American  board  of  missions.  Arriving  at
Canton,  25  Oct.,  1833,  he  found  Dr.  Robert  Morrison,
an  Englishman,  and  Elijah  C.  Bridgman,  an  Ameri-
can, the  only  Protestant  missionaries  in  China.  He
joined  the  latter  as  editor  of  the  "  Chinese  Reposi-
tory," which  he  both  printed  and  edited  until  its
conclusion  in  1851.  In  all  he  contributed  about
130  articles  to  this  magazine.  In  1835  he  removed
his  office  to  the  Portuguese  colony  of  Macao  in
order  to  complete  the  printing  of  Dr.  Walter  H.
Medhurst's  Hokkeen  dictionary,  which  had  been
left  unfinished  at  the  dissolution  of  the  East  India
company's  China  branch,  and  the  company's  font
of  Chinese  type  was  from  this  date  placed  entirely
at  his  disposal.  During  the  winter  of  1837-8  he
began  to  print  the  "Chinese  Chrestomathy,"  by
Dr.  Bridgman,  to  which  he  contributed  one  half.
While  this  was  in  press  he  was  also  kept  busy
learning  Japanese  from  some  sailors,  and  with
their  aid  made  a  version  of  the  books  of  Genesis
and  Matthew  in  that  language.  In  1844  he  re-
turned to  the  United  States  by  way  of  India,
Egypt,  Palestine,  and  Italy,  and  proposed  to  the
secretary  of  the  Presbyterian  board  of  missions  to
assist  them  in  obtaining  a  full  font  of  Chinese
type,  from  matrices  to  be  cut  in  Berlin.  His  share
of  raising  the  necessary  funds  was  performed  by
delivering  many  courses  of  lectures  on  China  in
various  cities  of  the  Union,  and  these,  being  ampli-
fied, were  published  under  the  title  of  the  "  Middle
Kingdom. '  with  a  new  map  of  the  empire  (2  vols..
New.  York,  1848).  The  same  year  he  returned
with  his  wife  to  China  and  began  at  once  a  new
Chinese  dictionary,  the  completion  of  which  was
delayed,  while  he  accompanied  Com.  Matthew  C.
Perry's  two  expeditions  to  Japan  in  1853-'4,  as
i  Japanese  interpreter,  and  materially  assisted  in


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMS


535


concluding  the  treaty  that  opened  that  country  to
foreign  commerce  and  civilization.  In  September,
1855,  he  was  appointed  secretary  and  interpreter
to  the  U.  S.  legation  in  China.  His  "  Tonic  Dic-
tionary of  the  Chinese  Language  in  the  Canton
Dialect "  was  finished  in  August,  1856,  eight  years
from  its  beginning  and  just  before  the  destruc-
tion of  the  foreign  factories  at  Canton,  which
with  his  press  and  more  than  7,000  books,  were
burned  in  December  of  that  year.  He  resigned  his
connection  with  the  American  board  in  1857,  and
in  the  following  year  assisted  the  American  envoy,
William  B.  Reed,  in  negotiating  a  new  treaty  and
the  settlement  of  claims  of  Americans  upon  the
Chinese  government  for  losses  at  Canton  and  else-
where. To  Mr.  Williams's  abiding  interest  in  the
cause  of  missions  was  due  the  insertion  in  this
treaty  of  a  clause  tolerating  Christianity  in  China,
a  stipulation  which  was  borrowed  from  his  draft
and  inserted  by  each  of  the  three  allied  European
powers  there  assembled.  The  next  year  he  ac-
companied Mr.  Ward  to  exchange  the  ratifications
on  the  first  visit  of  Americans  to  Peking.  When
the  legation  returned  to  the  south,  Mr.  Williams
made  a  second  visit  to  the  United  States.  In
1862  he  went  with  Anson  Burlingame  to  Peking,
where  he  resided  with  his  family  several  years,  in
the  course  of  which  he  built  at  his  own  expense
and  from  his  own  designs  the  buildings  that  ai-e
still  occupied  by  the  U.  S.  legation  in  that  capital.
Besides  his  official  duties,  he  found  time  to  complete
in  these  years  his  great  work,  "  A  Syllabic  Diction-
ary of  the  Chinese  Language,"  a  quarto  volume  of
1336  pages,  containing  12,527  characters  and  their
pronunciations  in  four  dialects.  In  order  to
superintend  the  printing  personally,  he  spent  the
year  1873  in  Shanghai,  where  it  was  stereotyped
and  published  (1874)  at  the  Presbyterian  mission
press,  from  the  font  of  Chinese  type,  the  funds  for
which  he  was  instrumental  in  raising  in  1846-'8.
Much  impaired  in  health,  he  returned  in  1875,  go-
ing back  to  China  in  1876  to  close  his  affairs
there  and  resign  his  office  of  secretary  and  inter-
preter, the  oldest  commission  at  that  time  in  the
U.  S.  diplomatic  service.  During  his  term  he  had
acted  as  charge  d'affaires  nine  times,  amounting
to  nearly  five  years  of  service  as  acting  minister.
He  was  the  oldest  foreign  resident  in  China  at  the
date  of  his  departure.  In  1877  he  was  appointed
professor  of  the  Chinese  language  and  literature
in  Yale,  being  the  first  professor  of  the  sort
in  this  country.  In  1881  he  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  American  Bible  society,  and  later  in
the  year  president  of  the  American  oriental  society.
In  1848  Mr.  Williams  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Union  college.  Besides  the  works  already
mentioned,  he  published  "  Easy  Lessons  in  Chinese  "
(Macao,  1842) ;  "  English  and  Chinese  Vocabulary  "
(1843);  "Chinese  Topography "  (1844) ;  and  "Chi-
nese Commercial  Guide,  based  on  a  previous  work
(1844:  5th  revised  ed.,  Hong  Kong,  1863);  and
completely  rewrote,  enlarged,  and  brought  down
to  date  his  important  work  on  "  The  Middle  King-
dom" (2  vols.,  New  York,  1883).  See  "The  Life
and  Letters  of  S.  Wells  Williams,"  by  his  son,
Frederick  Wells  Williams  (New  York,  1888).

WILLIAMS,  Sir  William  Fenwick,  bart.,
Canadian  soldier,  b.  in  Annapolis  Royal,  Nova
Scotia,  4  Dec,  1800 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  26
July,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Woolwich  in
1821,  and  in  1825  became  2d  lieutenant  of  artil-
lery. In  1829  he  was  transferred  to  the  East
Indies,  and  was  stationed  in  Ceylon,  where  he
secured  an  appointment  in  the  surveyor-general's
•office,  and  superintended  the  construction  of  sev-


/fc^i^<3


eral  public  works.  He  travelled  much  through
India,  visited  Egypt,  Syria,  and  Constantinople,
and  in  1839  he  returned  to  England  and  rejoined
his  corps.  He  became  captain  in  1840,  was  sent
to  Turkey,  and  afterward  was  British  commissioner
to  the  confer-
ence at  Erze-
roum  to  settle
the  boundary-
line  between
Persia  and  Tur-
key in  Asia.  In
1848  he  was  ad-
vanced to  a  lieu-
tenant -  colonel-
cy. During  the
Crimean  war,
when  the  Rus-  '
sians  had  driven
the  Turks  un-
der the  walls
of  Kars,  and  it
was  feared  that
Prince  Betutoff
might  follow  up
his  success  in  Asia,  Col.  Williams  was  despatched
as  commissioner,  and,  going  to  Kars,  proceeded  im-
mediately to  reorganize  the  troops.  He  was  ap-
pointed a  lieutenant-general  in  the  sultan's  army
under  the  name  of  Williams  Pacha.  After  defend-
ing Kars  for  four  months  against  the  Russians,  he
met  their  commander,  Gen.  Mouravieff,  at  the  head
of  a  large  force,  on  the  heights  above  the  city,  and
defeated  him  with  great  slaughter.  Assisted  by
the  Hungarian  General  Kmety,  he  did  all  in'  his
power  for  the  defence  of  Kars ;  but  on  14  Nov.  he
capitulated.  When  the  war  was  over,  Williams
returned  to  England.  The  queen  created  him  a
baronet,  and  decorated  him  with  the  ribbon  of  the
Order  of  the  Bath.  A  pension  of  £1,000  was
granted  him,  and  both  houses  of  parliament
thanked  him.  The  sultan  of  Turkey  conferred  on
"the  hero  of  Kars"  the  rank  of  a  pacha  of  the
highest  order,  and  the  decoration  of  the  Medjidieh.
Napoleon  III.  created  him  a  grand  officer  of  the
Legion  of  honor,  besides  presenting  him  with  a
diamond-hilted  sabre.  Oxford  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  C.  L.,  the  corporation  of  London  in-
vested him  with  the  freedom  of  the  city  and  a
costly  sword,  and  his  native  province  of  Nova
Scotia  gave  him  a  sword  costing  150  guineas.  In
July,  1856,  he  was  given  the  command  of  the  gar-
rison at  Woolwich,  and  elected  to  parliament  for
Calne.  At  the  general  elections  in  the  following
year  he  was  again  returned,  but  he  retired  in  1859.
In  the  latter  year  he  was  appointed  commander-in-
chief  of  the  forces  in  British  North  America.  He
was  administrator  of  Canada  from  12  Oct.,  1860,  to
22  Jan.,  1861,  during  the  absence  of  the  governor-
general,  Sir  Edmund  Head.  When  Lieut.-Gov.  Sir
Richard  Graves  Macdonnell  left  Nova  Scotia  in
1865,  Sir  Fenwick  Williams  administered  the  gov-
ernment of  that  province.  He  was  the  first  lieu-
tenant-governor of  Nova  Scotia  after  the  union  of
1867,  which  post  he  held  three  months.  On  2
Aug.,  1868,  he  was  made  a  full  general,  and  in  Au-
gust, 1870,  he  was  appointed  governor-general  of
Gibraltar.  That  post  he  resigned  in  1875.  In  Oc-
tober, 1877,  he  retired  from  the  army,  and  in  1881
he  was  appointed  constable  of  the  Tower.

WILLIAMS,  William  George,  engineer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  1  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Monterev,  Mexico,
21  Sept.,  1846.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1824,  and  entered  the  7th  infantry
as  2d  lieutenant. He  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant,


536


WILLIAMS


WILLIAMSON


30  April,  1833,  surveyed  the  site  for  a  fort  on  Pea
Patch  island,  in  Delaware  river,  in  1834,  and  was
promoted  brevet  captain  of  staff  in  the  topographi-
cal engineers  on  28  Jan.  in  the  same  year.  He
surveyed  the  route  for  a  ship-canal  around  the  Falls
of  Niagara  in  1835-'6.  and  performed  similar  ser-
vices on  Lake  Champlain,  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  and
at  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  He  went  in  1837  on  a  mili-
tary reconnoissance  to  the  country  of  the  Chero-
kees,  attained  the  rank  of  captain  of  engineers  in
1838,  and  during  the  eight  succeeding  years  was
engaged  in  making  triangulations  and  in  con-
structing harbor  works  on  Lake  Erie.  He  was
superintendent  of  the  survey  of  the  northwestern
lakes  and  of  the  boundary  between  Michigan  and
Wisconsin,  served  under  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  in
the  war  with  Mexico  as  chief  of  engineers,  and  was
mortally  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Monterey,  21
Sept.,  1846,  dying  the  same  day.  He  was  an  adept
in  painting,  and  his  literary  and  scientific  attain-
ments we're  of  a  high  order.

WILLIAMS,  William  R,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  14  Oct.,  1804 :  d.  there,  1  April,
1885.  His  father,  the  Rev.  John  Williams,  came
from  Wales  in  1795,  and  was  pastor  of  a  Bap-
tist church  in  New  York  from  1798  till  his  death
in  1825.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1822,  and  studied  law  with  Peter  A.  Jay,  whose

Eartner  be  became.  Religious  convictions  caused
im  to  leave  that  profession  and  to  devote  himself
to  the  Christian  ministry.  He  was  ordained  pastor
of  the  Amity  street  Baptist  church  in  1832.  In  this
relation  he  continued  until  his  death,  though  often
solicited  to  accept  various  chairs  in  colleges  and
theological  seminaries.  Dr.  Williams's  library  was
one  of  the  largest  and  choicest  private  collections  in
the  country.  Though  he  was  a  man  of  very  positive
convictions,  his  temper  was  gentle  and  eminently
catholic.  He  was  one  of  the  foremost  leaders  in
the  councils  of  his  own  denomination,  and  an  ac-
tive manager  in  the  great  societies  that  are  sup-
ported by  evangelical  Christians  in  general,  as  the
American  tract  society  and  the  American  Bible
society.  Columbia  gave  him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.
in  1837,  and  he  was  a  trustee  of  that  college  in
1838-'48.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  given  him  by
Union  in  1859.  His  chief  works,  besides  many
sermons  and  addresses,  are  "Miscellanies"  (New
York,  1850) ;  "  Religious  Progress  "  (1850) ;  and
"  Lectures  on  the  Lord's  Prayer"  (1851).  He  was
co-editor  also  of  the  "  Baptist  Library."

WILLIAMSON,  Hugh,  statesman,  b.  in  West
Nottingham,  Pa.,  5  Dec,  1735 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  22  May,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Col-
lege of  Philadelphia  in  1757,  studied  theology,  and
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1759  in  Connecticut.  He
was  subsequently  admitted  to  the  presbytery  of
Philadelphia,  and  preached  altogether  about  two
years,  but,  partly  in  consequence  of  ill  health,  he
was  never  ordained  nor  assumed  a  pastorate.  He
was  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  College  of
Philadelphia  in  1760-'3,  studied  medicine  at
Edinburgh  and  Utrecht,  where  he  took  his  de-
gree, and  on  his  return  to  this  country  practised
successfully  at  Philadelphia.  On  7  Jan.,  1769,  he
was  appointed  one  of  a  commission  of  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society,  to  which  he  had  been
elected  in  1768,  to  observe  the  transits  of  Ve-
nus and  Mercury,  his  account  of  which  is  con-
tained in  vol.  i.  of  the  "Philosophical  Transac-
tions." In  1772  he  visited  the  West  Indies  to  pro-
cure aid  for  the  academy  at  Newark,  Del.,  and  in
1773  he  proceeded  to  England  to  solicit  further
assistance  for  that  institution.  He  was  examined
in  February,  1774,  by  the  privy  council  on  the


iUt^M^^


subject  of  the  destruction  of  the  tea  in  Boston
harbor,  and  other  matters  relating  to  the  political
state  of  the  colonies.  He  afterward  spent  some-
time on  the  continent,  and  returned  to  this  coun-
try in  1776,  after  the  Declaration  of  Independ-
ence, bearing  im-
fortant  papers,
n  1777  he  engaged
in  mercantile  pur-
suits in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  with  a
younger  brother,
and  subsequently
he  practised  medi-
cine at  Edenton,
N.  C.  He  served
as  surgeon  in  the
militia  of  North
Carolina  in  1780-
'2,  and  rendered
aid  to  the  wound-
ed at  the  battle  of
Camden.  He  was
a  member  of  the
house  of  commons
of  North  Carolina  in  1782,  was  elected  to  the  Con-
tinental congress  in  1784,  1785,  and  1786,  and  was
a  delegate  to  the  convention  that  framed  the  con-
stitution of  the  United  States  in  1787,  as  well  as  to
the  State  convention  to  act  upon  it  in  1789.  He
was  elected  to  the  1st  congress  as  a  Federalist,  re-
elected to  the  second,  and  served  from  19  March,.
1790,  till  2  March,  1793,  when  he  removed  to  New
York.  He  married  there,  devoted  himself  to  lit-
erary pursuits,  and  was  associated  with  De  Witt
Clinton  in  organizing  the  Literary  and  philosophi-
cal society  in  1814.  He  was  an  advocate  of  the
New  York  canal  system,  and  an  active  promoter  of
philanthropic,  literary,  and  scientific  institutions.
Dr.  Williamson  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
transactions  of  learned  societies  in  Europe  and  the
United  States.  He  published  a  series  of  essays  on
"Paper  Currency"  in  1786;  fugitive  articles  on-
"Languages  in  Politics"  in  the  "American  Mu-
seum " ;  "  Observations  on  Navigable  Canals,"  an
essay  on  "  Comets  "  in  the  "  Transactions  "  of  the
Juiterary  and  philosophical  society  of  New  York ;
"  Discourse  on  the  Benefits  of  Civil  History  "  (New
York,  1810);  "Observations  on  the  Climate  of
America"  (1811);  and  "History  of  North  Caro-
lina "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1812).

WILLIAMSON,  Isaac  Dowd,  clergyman,  b.  in
Pomfret,  Vt.,  4  April,  1807;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
26  Nov.,  1876.  He  was  a  Universalist  minister,  on
10  Sept.,  1829,  at  Townsend,  Vt.,  was  pastor  at
Albany,  N.  Y.,  from  1830  till  1837,  and  subse-
quently held  charges  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  New
York  city,  Philadelphia,  Mobile,  Ala.,  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  Lowell,  Mass.,  and  Louisville,  Ky.  In  1873
he  again  became  pastor  at  Cincinnati.  He  com-
posed a  large  part  of  the  ritual  of  the  Order  of
Odd-Fellows,  of  which  he  was  chaplain  for  many
years.  At  different  times  he  was  editor  of  the
"Gospel  Banner,"  at  Troy,  N.  Y.,  the  "Religious
Inquirer,"  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  the  "  Herald  and
Era,"  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  the  "Star  in  the
West,"  at  Cincinnati.  He  published  "  Argument
for  the  Truth  of  Christianity"  (New  York,  1836);
••  Imposition  and  Defence  of  Universalism  "  (1840) ;
"  The  Crown  of  Life,  a  Series  of  Discourses"  (Bos-
ton, 1850) ;  "  Examination  of  the  Doctrine  of  End-
less Punishment "  (Cincinnati,  1854) :  "  The  Phi-
losophy of  Odd-Fellowship  "  (ia55) ;  "  The  Philoso-
phy of  Universalism"  (1866);  and  "Rudiments  of
Theological  and  Moral  Science  "  (1870).


WILLIAMSON


WILLIAMSON


537


WILLIAMSON,  Isaac  Halsted,  jurist,  b.  in
Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  in  1769 ;  d.  there,  10  July,
1844.  He  was  educated  at  the  local  schools  in  his
birthplace,  studied  law  with  tais  brother  Matthias,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1791.  Soon  after-
ward he  became  prosecuting  attorney  for  Morris
county,  and  rose  to  a  high  rank  at  the  bar  of  New
Jersey.  In  1817  he  was  elected  to  the  assembly,
and  he  was  governor  and  chancellor  of  the  state
from  6  Feb.,  1817,  till  October,  1830,  as,  previous
to  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  in  1844,  the
governor  was,  ex-officio,  chancellor.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  convention  that  was  called  to  revise  the
state  constitution  in  1844,  and  died  soon  after  the
convention  adjourned.

WILLIAMSON,  James,  Canadian  educator,  b.
in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  19  Oct.,  1806.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  "  Edinburgh  Presby-
terian Review,"  and  was  ordained  as  a  Presby-
terian minister  in  1845.  In  1842  he  became  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in
Queen's  college,  Kingston,  Canada,  and  he  was
afterward  vice-principal,  professor  of  astronomy,
and  for  many  years  director  of  the  Kingston  Ob-
servatory. He  has  been  given  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
by  Glasgow  university.  Dr.  Williamson  has  pub-
lished "  Inland  Seas  of  North  America  "  (Kingston,
1854),  and  abstracts  of  meteorological  observations
at  Kingston.  Canada.

WILLIAMSON,  James  Alexander,  soldier,  b.
in  Adair  county,  Ky.,  8  Feb.,  1829.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Knox  college,  111.,  but  was  not  graduated,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  was
mustered  into  the  military  service  of  the  United
States,  8  Aug.,  1861,  as  1st  lieutenant  and  adju-
tant of  the  4th  Iowa  infantry.  After  the  battle  of
Pea  Ridge,  where  he  was  wounded,  he  was  pro-
moted to  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  regiment  and
immediately  afterward  he  was  made  its  colonel.
At  the  battle  of  Chickasaw  Bayou,  near  Vicksburg,
on  28  Dec,  1862,  he  led  the  assault  of  Thayer's
brigade  on  the  enemy's  lines  and  was  seriously
wounded.  By  order  of  Gen.  Grant  he  was  allowed
to  inscribe  on  the  colors  of  his  regiment  "  First
at  Chickasaw  Bayou."  He  was  present  at  the
siege  of  Vicksburg,  and  immediately  after  the  sur-
render was  given  command  of  the  2d  brigade  of
the  1st  division  of  the  15th  army  corps.  Col.  Will-
iamson continued  in  command  of  a  brigade  or  di-
vision until  the  capture  of  Savannah,  when  he  was
made  a  full  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  13
Jan.,  1865,  having  previously  been  promoted  by
brevet  on  19  Dec,  1864.  He  was  also  brevetted
major-general  of  volunteers,  13  March,  1865.  After
the  capture  of  Savannah  he  was  ordered  to  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  to  take  command  of  the  district  of
Missouri,  where  he  remained  until  some  time  after
the  surrender  of  the  armies  of  the  Confederacy,
when  he  was  ordered  to  report  to  Gen.  Grenville
M.  Dodge  for  duty  in  a  military  and  inspecting  ex-
pedition of  posts  in  the  northwest,  on  Laramie,  Pow-
der, and  Bighorn  rivers.  While  on  this  duty  he
was  mustered  out  of  the  military  service ;  but  he
did  not  receive  the  order  until  his  return  to  St.
Louis  in  October,  1865.  Gen.  Williamson  then  re-
sumed his  profession,  and  was  commissioner  of  the
general  land-office  from  June,  1876,  till  June,  1881,
and  chairman  of  the  public  lands  commission
created  by  act  of  congress,  3  March,  1879.  He  was
elected  chairman  of  the  Iowa  delegation  to  the  Na-
tional Republican  convention  at  Baltimore  in  1864,
but  did  not  attend  in  consequence  of  his  military
duties,  and  he  was  again  elected  chairman  of  the
delegation  in  1868.  He  is  now  general  solicitor
for  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  railroad  company.


WILLIAMSON,  John,  artist,  b.  in  Toll  Cross,
near  Glasgow,  Scotland,  10  April,  1826  ;  d.  in  Glen-
wood-on-the-Hudson,  28  May,  1885.  His  parents
removed  to  this  country  when  he  was  a  child.  For
several  years  he  followed  his  profession  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  where  he  was  a  member  and  secretary
of  the  Art  association.  He  was  also  one  of  the
original  members  of  the  Artists'  fund  society,  and
in  1861  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy.  Many  of  his  paintings  are  scenes  near
Hudson  river  and  in  the  Catskills.  They  include
"Trout Fishing";  "American Trout";  "Summit of
Chocorua " ;  "  Autumn  in  the  Adirondacks " ;  "A
Passing  Shower,  Connecticut  Valley  "  (1869) ;  "Af-
ter the  Storm,  Blue  Ridge  "  (1877) ;  "  In  the  Mo-
hawk Valley  "  and  "  Sugar-Loaf  Mountain  "  (1878) ;
and  "  The  Palisades  "  (1879).

WILLIAMSON,  John,  British  physician,  lived
in  the  18th  and  19th  centuries.  He  was  a  fellow
of  the  Royal  college  of  physicians  of  Edinburgh,
and  at  one  time  surgeon  to  the  Caithness  High-
landers. In  1798  he  went  with  his  family  to  Jamaica,
W.  I.,  where  he  practised  nearly  fourteen  years  near
Spanish  Town,  returning  to  his  native  country
in  1812.  During  his  absence  he  kept  a  journal  of
his  cases  and  other  topics  of  interest,  which  he
utilized  in  the  preparation  of  his  "Medical  and
Miscellaneous  Observations  relative  to  the  West
India  Islands  "  (2  vols.,  Edinburgh,  1817).

WILLIAMSON,  Peter,  Scottish  author,  d.  in
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  19  Jan.,  1799.  He  was  kid-
napped when  a  boy  at  Aberdeen,  and  sent  to  this
country,  but  he  afterward  returned  to  Scotland,
where  he  recovered  damages  from  his  captors.  He
passed  much  time  among  the  Cherokees,  and  on
his  return  amused  the  public  with  descriptions  of
their  manners,  assuming  the  dress  of  a  chief  and
imitating  a  war-whoop.  He  instituted  a  penny-
post  at  Edinburgh,  for  which,  when  it  was  assumed
by  the  government,  he  received  a  pension,  and  he
was  also  the  first  to  publish  a  city  directory.  He
was  the  author  of  "  French  and  Indian  Cruelty
Exemplified"  (Glasgow,  1758),  and  "A  Brief  Ac-
count of  the  War  in  North  America  "  (1760).

WILLIAMSON,  Robert  Stockton,  soldier,  b.
in  New  York  in  1824 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
10  Nov.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1848,  assigned  to  the  topo-
graphical engineers,  and  took  part  in  various  sur-
veys on  the  Pacific  coast  till  1856,  when  he  became
1st  lieutenant.  From  that  time  till  the  civil  war
he  was  on  the  staff  of  the  commanding  general  of
the  Department  of  the  Pacific,  and  in  charge  of
military  roads  in  southern  Oregon,  with  meteoro-
logical observations  on  that  coast.  On  6  Aug.,
1861,  he  was  promoted  captain,  and,  after  recon-
noissances  on  the  lower  Potomac  till  March,  1862,
he  was  chief  topographical  engineer  in  the  opera-
tions in  North  Carolina,  being  brevetted  major,  14
March,  1862,  for  services  at  New  Berne,  and  lieu-
tenant-colonel on  26  April  for  the  siege  of  Fort
Macon.  He  then  served  with  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  of  which  he  was  chief  topographical  en-
gineer, from  21  Nov.  till  21  Dec,  1862,  and  held
that  post  in  the  Department  of  the  Pacific  from  9
Feb.  till  3  March,  1863,  when  he  was  transferred
to  the  corps  of  engineers,  in  which  he  was  made
major  on  7  May.  Afterward  he  served  on  the  Pa-
cific coast  as  superintending  engineer  of  various
surveys  of  rivers,  harbors,  and  sites  for  fortifica-
tions. On  22  Feb.,  1869,  he  was  promoted  lieuten-
ant-colonel. Col.  Williamson  published  "  Report
of  a  Reconnoissance  and  Survey  in  California  in
Connection  with  Explorations  for  a  Railway  Route
to  the  Pacific  "  in  vol.  lii.  of  "  Pacific  Railway  Re-


538


WILLIAMSON


W1LLICH


ports  "  (Washington,  1853) ;  "  On  the  Use  of  the
Barometer  on  Surveys  and  Reconnoissances  "  (New
York,  1868) ;  and  "  Practical  Tables  in  Meteor-
ology and  Hypsometry,"  being  an  appendix  to  the
foregoing  (1869).

WILLIAMSON,  Walter,  physician,  b.  in  New-
town, Delaware  co.,  Pa.,  4  Jan.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  19  Dec,  1870.  He  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1833,  and
in  1848  was  professor  of  obstetrics  in  the  Homoeo-
pathic medical  college  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1852
he  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of  materia  medica
and  therapeutics,  which  he  resigned  in  1855  on  ac-
count of  failing  health.  He  held  the  chair  of
obstetrics  again  in  1857-'9,  and  in  1860  was  made

Erofessor  emeritus,  which  post  he  continued  to
old  in  Hahnemann  medical  college  when  the  Ho-
moeopathic college  was  merged  in  it.  In  1869-'70
he  lectured  there  on  hygiene.  Dr.  Williamson  was
president  of  the  American  institute  of  homoeopathy
in  1846  and  of  the  state  homoeopathic  medical  so-
ciety in  1868.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Instructions
concerning  the  Diseases  of  Females,  and  the  Con-
duct to  be  observed  during  Pregnancy,  Labor,  and
Confinement"  (Philadelphia,  1849),  and  "Diseases  of
Females  and  Children,  and  their  Homoeopathic
Treatment "  (1854 ;  revised  ed.  by  George  N.  Epps,
London,  1857),  and  has  contributed  to  the  "  Ho-
moeopathic Materia  Medica  of  American  Drug
Provings  "  (Philadelphia,  1846),  and  to  the  "  North
American  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,"  of  which  he
was  an  assistant  editor.  He  also  edited  Dr.  Joseph
Laurie's  "  Parents'  Guide  "  (1849).

WILLIAMSON,  William  Durkee,  historian,
b.  in  Canterbury,  Conn.,  31  July,  1779 ;  d.  in  Ban-
gor, Me.,  27  May,  1846.  He  removed  with  his
father  in  boyhood  to  Amherst,  Mass.,  and  entered
Williams  coilege,  but  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1804.  He  studied  law  in  Amherst,  and  began  to
practise  in  Bangor,  Me.,  in  1807.  Afterward  he
served  as  attorney  for  Hancock  county  in  1808-'16,
and  as  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  senate  in
1816-'20.  On  the  separation  of  Maine  from  that
state  in  1820  he  was  the  president  of  its  first  state
senate,  and  he  thus  became  acting  governor  on  the
resignation  of  Gov.  William  King.  He  was  then
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  in
1821-'3.  In  1824-'40  he  was  probate  judge  for  his
county,  and  in  1838-'41  he  was  a  bank  commissioner.
Gov.  Williamson  was  for  some  time  president  of  the
Bangor  bank,  and  a  member  of  several  historical
and  literary  societies.  Besides  contributions  to  the
"  American  Quarterly  Register  "  and  to  the  "  Col-
lections" of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society,
he  published  a  valuable  "  History  of  the  State  of
Maine,  from  its  First  Discovery  to  the  Separation  "
(2  vols.,  Hallowell,  1832 ;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,  1839).

WILLIAMS-REBOLLEDO,  Juan,  Chilian  na-
val officer,  b.  in  Curacavi,  province  of  Santiago,  in
1826.  His  father  was  a  companion  of  Admiral
Cochrane.  The  son  entered  the  naval  service  of
his  country,  and  at  the  opening  of  the  war  against
Spain  had  obtained  the  rank  of  captain,  and  was
in  command  of  the  corvette  "  Esmeralda."  He
was  at  anchor  in  the  port  of  Papudo  on  26  Nov..
1865,  when the  Spanish gun-boat  "  Covadonga "

[>assed  with  despatches,  and,  after  a  short  chase  and
lalf  an  hour's  engagement,  Williams  captured  her
with  about  110  men.  For  this  victory  lie  was
raised  to  the  rank  of  post-captain,  and  presented
by  the  people  with  a  sword  of  honor.  He  was  later
a  member  of  the  municipality  of  Valparaiso  and
elected  to  congress.  When  the  war  against  Peru  and
Bolivia  began,  he  commanded  the  Chilian  fleet  as
rear-admiral,  and  on  29  March,  1879,  occupied  the


Bolivian  ports  of  Cobija  and  Tocopilla,  establish-
ing in  April  the  blockade  of  Iquique  with  his  flag-
ship, the  iron-clad  "  Blanco  Encalada,"  and  other
vessels  of  the  squadron.  But  after  the  destruction
of  the  "Esmeralda"  by  the  "Huascar,"  and  the
successful  cruise  of  the  Peruvian  fleet,  great  dis-
content arose  in  Chili  with  the  inactivity  of  their
powerful  squadron.  According  to  Admiral  Will-
iams, this  was  caused  by  the  condition  of  the  bot-
toms of  his  ships  and  their  defective  machinery,
so  that  he  was  unable  to  cope  in  speed  with  the
Peruvian  vessels.  Owing  to  this  and  on  account
of  ill  health,  Williams  resigned  in  September,  1880,
and  was  succeeded  by  Admiral  Galvarino  Riveros.
WILLICH,  Angust,  b.  in  Gorzyn,  in  the  Prus-
sian province  of  Posen,  in  1810;  d.  in  St.  Mary's,
Mercer  co.,  Ohio,  23  Jan.,  1878.  His  father,  a
captain  of  hussars  during  the  Napoleonic  wars,
died  when  August  was
three  years  old.  With
an  elder  brother,  the
boy  found  a  home  in
the  family  of  Fried-
rich  Schleiermacher,
the  famous  theolo-
gian, whose  wife  was
a  distant  relative.  He
received  a  military
education  at  Potsdam
and  Berlin,  and  at
eighteen  years  of  age
was  commissioned  2d
lieutenant  of  artillery
in  the  Prussian  army,
becoming  a  captain  in
1841.  In  1846,  in  com-
pany with  a  number  of
the  younger  and  more
ardent  officers  of  his
brigade,  he  became  so  imbued  with  republican  ideas
that  he  tendered  his  resignation  from  the  army  in
a  letter  written  in  such  terms  that,  instead  of  its
being  accepted,  he  was  arrested  and  tried  by  a
court-martial.  By  some  means  he  was  acquitted,
and  afterward  was  permitted  to  resign.  When
the  great  revolution  of  1848  threatened  the  over-
throw of  all  European  monarchies,  Willich,  with
several  former  army  friends,  among  whom  were
Franz  Sigel,  Friederich  K.  F.  Hecker,  Louis  Blenk-
er,  and  Carl  Schurz,  went  to  Baden  and  took  an
active  part  in  the  armed  attempt  to  revolutionize
Germany.  After  its  failure,  Willich  and  many  of
his  compatriots  became  exiles.  He  escaped  to
Switzerland,  but  afterward  made  his  way  to  Eng-
land, where  several  of  his  fellow-exiles  had  also
found  refuge.  Here  he  remained  till  1853,  devot-
ing much  of  his  time  and  labor  to  aiding  his  dis-
tressed countrymen  to  reach  the  United  Stales
He  had  learned  the  trade  of  a  carpenter  while  in
England,  and  so  earned  a  livelihood.  Coming  to
the  United  States  in  1853,  he  first  found  employ-
ment at  his  trade  in  the  navy-yard  at  Brooklyn.
Here  his  attainments  in  mathematics  and  other
scientific  studies  were  soon  discovered,  and  he
found  more  congenial  work  in  the  coast  survey.
In  1858  he  was  induced  to  go  to  Cincinnati  as
editor  of  the  "German  Republican,"  in  which
work  he  continued  till  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  in  1861.  He  enlisted,  at  the  first  call  to  arms,
in  the  1st  German  (afterward  9th  Ohio)  regiment,
which  within  three  days  mustered  about  1,500  men.
He  was  at  once  appointed  adjutant,  and,  on  28
May,  commissioned  major.  This  regiment  after-
ward became  one  of  the  best  in  the  service.  In  the
autumn  of  1861  Gov.  Oliver  P.  Morton,  of  Indiana,


A.\M^\


WILLING


WILLIS


539


■who  was  raising  a  German  regiment  in  that  state,
•commissioned  him  as  its  colonel.  This  was  the
-32d  Indiana  infantry,  famous  in  the  Army  of  the
Cumberland  for  its  drill  and  discipline,  as  well  as
for  its  gallantry  in  action.  Willich  devoted  him-
self to  this  regiment,  and  with  such  good  results
that,  on  26  Nov.,  1861,  three  companies,  deployed
.as  skirmishers,  repelled  in  confusion  a  regiment  of
Texan  rangers.  This  affair  gave  it  a  prestige  that
it  retained  to  the  end  of  the  war.  On  17  July,
1862,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers. At  the  battle  of  Stone  River,  31  Dec,  1862,
he  was  captured  almost  before  the  action  began,
a,nd  was  held  a  prisoner  for  several  months.  He
was  exchanged  in  season  to  take  part,  at  the  head
of  his  brigade,  in  the  battle  of  Chickamauga,  19
and  20  Sept.,  1863,  and  from  that  time  on  he
shared  in  all  the  movements  and  battles  of  the
army,  including  the  Atlanta  campaign  and  the
march  to  the  sea  and  through  the  Carolinas.  He
was  made  brevet  major-general,  21  Oct.,  1865,  and
was  mustered  out  of  service,  15  Jan.,  1866.  On  his
return  to  Cincinnati  he  was  chosen  county  auditor,
which  post  he  held  for  three  years.  He  was
visiting  his  old  home  in  Germany  at  the  beginning
of  the  Franco-Prussian  war,  and  at  once  offered
his  services  to  the  king,  whom  he  had  before  at-
tempted to  dethrone.  His  offer  was  gratefully
acknowledged,  but,  on  account  of  his  advanced  age,
it  was  not  accepted.  He  found  consolation,  if  not
more  congenial  occupation,  in  attending  lectures
on  philosophy  at  Berlin.  Returning  to  the  United
States,  he  chose  St.  Mary's,  Ohio,  as  his  residence.

WILLING,  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
19  Dec,  1731 ;  d.  there,  19  Jan.,  1821.  He  was
carefully  educated  at  Bath,  England,  and,  after
reading  law  in  the  Temple,  London,  in  1754,  be-
came the  head  of  the  mercantile  house  of  Willing
and  Morris,  one  of  the  largest  in  the  country,  his
partner  being  Robert  Morris,  the  financier  of  the
Revolution.  This  partnership  continued  until
1793.  During  the  Revolution  this  firm  were  the
agents  of  congress  for  supplying  naval  and  military
stores.  In  1755  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the
common  council  of  Philadelphia,  and  in  1759  was
made  alderman,  but  did  not  accept  until  1761.
On  2  Oct.,  1759,  he  was  made  an  associate  justice
of  the  city  court,  and  on  28  Feb.,  1761,  became
justice  of  the'  peace  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,
quarter  sessions,  and  orphans'  court,  and  was  re-
appointed in  1764.  On  4  Oct.,  1763,  he  was  elected
by  the  common  council  mayor  of  the  city,  and  from
14  Sept.,  1767,  till  1774  was  an  associate  justice
of  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania,  and  justice
of  the  oyer  and  terminer,  and  general  jail  delivery.
He  was  a  leader  in  the  movement  against  the
stamp-act,  and  one  of  the  committee  to  enforce  the
non-importation  agreement  of  1765.  He  presided
.at  a  mass-meeting  held  in  Philadelphia,  18  June,

1774,  to  take  action  for  a  general  congress  of  all
the  colonies,  and  was  appointed  one  of  the  com-
mittee of  correspondence.  On  15  July  he  was
chairman  of  a  patriotic  meeting  in  Carpenters'  hall.
He  was  afterward  a  member  of  the  committee  of
safety,  was  elected  a  representative  to  the  as-
sembly on  the  "moderate  men's"  ticket  in  April,

1775,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  con-
gress in  1775-6,  being  elected  in  the  place  of
Joseph  Galloway.  In  congress  he  voted  against
Richard  Henry  Lee's  preliminary  resolutions  and
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  because  he  con-
sidered the  act  premature  and  unnecessary,  and  the
colonies  not  ready  for  independence.  When  the
British  took  possession  of  Philadelphia  in  1777,  he
remained  during  their  occupation  and  held  com-


munication with  Lord  Howe.  At  a  critical  period
of  the  war,  in  1780,  when  there  was  great  danger
of  the  dissolution  of  the  American  army  for  want
of  provisions  to  keep  it  together.  Willing  and
others  in  Philadelphia  subscribed  £260,000  toward
the  foundation  of  the  Pennsylvania  bank  to  pro-
cure the  necessary  supplies  and  to  promote  the  re-
cruiting service.  Of  this  amount  he  subscribed
£5,000.  Upon  the  formation  of  the  Bank  of  North
America  in  1781,  which  was  the  first  bank  char-
tered in  this  country,  he  was  elected  its  presi-
dent, and  continued  to  serve  until  he  resigned,  9
Jan.,  1792.  He  was  also  first  president  of  the
Bank  of  the  United  States,  which  was  organized  in
1791.  With  his  many  public  duties  he  united  the
business  of  an  active  and  successful  merchant.

WILLIS,  Anson,  lawyer,  b.  in  Ulster  county,
N.  Y.,  28  Jan.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Portchester,  N.  Y.,  14
Dec,  1874.  He  was  self-taught,  studied  law,  and
was  for  forty  years  a  resident  of  New  York  city,
which  he  represented  in  the  assembly  in  1835-'6.
Afterward  he  served  two  terms  as  judge  of  the  6th
judicial  district  court  in  that  city.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  a  zealous  supporter  of  the  U.  S.
government.  Judge  Willis  published  "  Our  Rulers
and  Our  Rights,  or  Outlines  of  the  United  States
Government "  (Philadelphia,  1868),  and  left  un-
finished "  Origin  of  all  the  Nations  of  the  Earth."

WILLIS,  Michael,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Greenock,  Scotland,  in  1799 ;  d.  in  Aberdour,
Banffshire,  Scotland,  19  Aug.,  1879.  He  was  the
son  of  the  Rev.  William  Willis,  who  for  nearly
fifty  years  was  a  minister  first  in  Greenock  and
then  in  Stirling.  The  son  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Glasgow  and  at  the  Divinity  hall,
ordained  minister  of  the  Renfield  street  church,
Glasgow,  and  about  the  same  time  was  appointed
professor  of  divinity  for  the  secession  branch  of
the  Presbyterian  church,  to  which  both  he  and  his
father  belonged.  At  the  disruption  in  1843  Mr.
Willis  accompanied  the  Free  church,  and  soon
afterward  removed  to  Canada  as  a  deputy  of  that
body,  and  also  to  render  assistance  to  the  recently
established  Knox  college,  Toronto.  He  became
professor  of  theology  in  that  institution  in  1845,
which  chair  he  filled  till  1870,  when  he  resigned.
During  the  latter  years  of  his  connection  with  the
college  he  was  its  principal.  He  did  much  to  pro-
mote the  cause  of  Presbyterianism  in  Canada,  and
was  well  known  for  his  eloquence  as  a  preacher.
He  published  a  volume  of  "Pulpit  and  College
Discourses,"  and  many  pamphlets  and  sermons.

WILLIS,  Nathaniel  Parker,  poet,  b.  in  Port-
land, Me.,  20  Jan.,  1806 ;  d.  near  Cornwall-on-the-
Hudson,  N.  Y.,  20  Jan.,  1867.  He  came  of  a  race
of  printers  and  publishers.  His  great-grandfather
was  a  printer  in  Boston,  his  grandfather  was  the
proprietor  of  the  "Independent  Chronicle,"  the  "Po-
tomac Guardian,"  and  the  "  Sciota  Gazette,"  which
still  exists  in  the  town  of  that  name,  and  his  fa-
ther, Nathaniel  (1780-1870), established  the  "East-
ern Argus"  at  Portland,  Me.,  in  1803,  afterward
projected  and  conducted  in  Boston  (in  1816-'26)  the
"  Recorder,"  one  of  the  earliest  religious  papers  in
the  world,  and  also  founded  in  1827  the  "  Youth's
Companion,"  which  is  said  to  be  the  first  chil-
dren's paper  that  was  ever  published,  and  which
is  still  issued.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1827.  During  his  course  at  college  he  wrote  under
the  pen-name  of  "  Roy,"  for  his  father's  paper,  a
series  of  religious  narrative  poems  that  found  many
readers,  and  he  also  gained  the  prize  of  fifty  dollars
offered  for  the  best  poem  by  the  editor  of  "  The
Album."  After  leaving  college,  Willis  edited  for
Samuel  G.  Goodrich,  of  Boston,  two  illustrated  an-


540


WILLIS


WILLIS


^^2^^


nuals,  "  The  Legendary  "  (1828)  and  "  The  Token  "
(1829).  During  the  last-mentioned  year  he  estab-
lished "  The  American  Monthly  Magazine,"  which
ran  a  two  years'  career,  and  became  merged  in  the
"  New  York  Mirror."
This  weekly  publica-
tion, devoted  to  art,
literature,  and  soci-
ety, established  by
Samuel  Woodworth,
was  at  this  time
conducted  by  George
P.  Morris.  Its  most
readable  articles  were
extracts  from  Eng-
lish periodicals.  The
accession  of  such  con-
tributors as  Theodore
S.  Fay  and  Mr.  Wil-
lis, with  other  able
writers,  changed  the
character  of  this  pa-
per and  made  it  the
chief  organ  of  soci-
ety and  literature.  In  1831  both  Fay  and  Willis
departed  for  the  Old  World  and  became  weekly
correspondents  for  their  journal.  Willis  travelled
over  the  greater  part  of  Europe  and  into  Asia
Minor.  William  C.  Rives,  then  U.  S.  minister  at
the  court  of  France,  attached  him  formally  to  his
legation,  which  gave  the  young  poet  great  facilities
for  information  and  travel  and  an  entrance  into
distinguished  society.  In  1837  Mr.  Willis  married
the  daughter  of  Gen.  William  Stace,  commandant
of  the  Woolwich  arsenal,  and  in  the  same  year  re-
turned to  this  country.  They  settled  in  a  romantic
home,  which  the  poet  named  Glenmary,  near  Owego,
N.  Y.,  for  several  years  dispensing  open-handed
hospitality.  In  1839  the  author  made  a  brief  visit
to  England  in  the  interest  of  his  private  affairs,
and  in  1844,  on  the. death  of  his  wife,  Willis  again
crossed  the  Atlantic  for  the  purpose  of  recruiting
his  shattered  health.  In  1846  he  married  the  adopt-
ed daughter  of  Joseph  Grinnell,  of  New  Bedford,
and  settled  on  a  small  estate  which  he  called  Idle-
wild,  near  Cornwall-on-the-Hudson,  seen  in  the
vignette.  From  1823,  until  1842,  with  brief  inter-
ruptions, he  had  continued  his  connection  with  the
"  Mirror."  A  short  breach  occurred  between  him
and  Morris  in  1839,  when  Willis  united  his  interest
with  that  of  William  T.  Porter  to  publish  "  The
Corsair,"  a  short-lived  weekly.  The  then  unknown
William  M.  Thackeray  was  one  of  its  regular  con-
tributors. On  the  discontinuance  of  the  "  Mirror,"
Morris  and  Willis  issued  the  "  New  Mirror,"  but,
having  no  success,  their  paper  was  changed  in  form
and  feature  and  became  the  successful  "  Home  Jour-
nal," which  still  continues  to  prosper.  Both  edit-
ors conducted  it  until  the  time  of  their  death.  Al-
though far  from  being  handsome  in  person,  Willis
became  known  as  a  man  of  elegant  manners  who
dressed  in  the  extreme  of  fashion.  His  early
career  as  a  writer  was  one  of  remarkable  success.
His  scripture  versions  quickly  became  popular  and
they  were  quoted  from  the  pulpit.  "  Absalom  "  and
"  The  Leper  "  were  especial  favorites.  Among  his
secular  pieces,  "  The  Belfry  Pigeon,"  "Unseen  Spir-
its," and  "  Parrhasius  the  Painter  "  were  included
in  most  anthologies.  As  a  prose  writer  of  ease  and
elegance,  Willis  was  justly  admired.  He  was  an
observing  traveller  and  knew  how  to  present  his
ad  ventures  in  glowing  colors.  As  a  man  of  society
he  attracted  and  charmed  the  fashionable  world.
To  this  day  "  Pencillings  by  the  Way  "  can  be  read
with  pleasure,  and  his  thoughtful  "  Letters  from


under  a  Bridge,"  written  in  the  seclusion  of  Glen-
mary, continue  to  attract  the  attention  of  readers.
But  the  elegance  of  Willis's  prose  was  occasion-
ally marred  by  frivolous  conceits  and  affected  Gal-
licisms in  writing  for  effect  by  overstated  simple
truths,  and  he  made  merchandise  of  facts  and
opinions  that  he  gleaned  in  private  intercourse.
These  last  transgressions  eventually  led  to  quarrels
and  personal  encounters.  Lockhart  gave  him  a
severe  castigation  in  the  "  Quarterly  Review,"  and,
with  Capt.  Marryat,  then  editor  of  the  "  Metropoli-
tan Magazine,"  he  fought  a  bloodless  duel.  The
ephemeral  character  of  most  of  Willis's  books  is
indicated  by  their  titles ;  some  were  evidently  re-
vised collections  of  old  magazine  articles.  During
his  stay  in  England  he  contributed  to  "  Black-
wood," the  "  New  Monthly,"  and  other  periodicals.
His  early  prose  works,  published  in  London,  at-
tracted a  wide  circle  of  readers,  but  the  author's
ambitious  poems,  "  Melanie,"  "  The  Lady  Jane,"
and  "  Lord  lvon's  Daughter,"  were  failures,  as  was
also  his  novel,  "  Paul  Fane."  The  two  dramas,
"  Bianca  Visconti  "  and  "Tortesa,  the  Usurer,"  per-
formed for  several  nights  at  the  Park  theatre,  New
York,  strongly  cast  and  well  mounted,  were  with-
out dramatic  vigor  and  failed  to  interest  the  pub-
lic. Willis  was  a  careful  elaborator,  who  retouched
his  manuscripts  so  continuously  that  he  frequently
found  it  necessary  to  make  a  fresh  copy  for  the
printers.  On  various  occasions  Willis  delivered
poems  at  college  commencements,  and  in  1844,
at  the  New  York  Lyceum,  an  address  on  fashion
which  was  attended  by  Cooper,  Irving,  and  other
authors  and  poets  of  the  day.  Many  a  struggling
aspirant  for  literary  fame  received  aid  and  advice
from  Willis,  who,  as  Halleck  said,  "  was  one  of  .the
kindest  of  men."  Thackeray  asserted  that  "  it  is
comfortable  that  there  should  have  been  a  Willis."
Of  his  writings  it  has  been  remarked  :  "  The  prose
and  poetry  of  Mr.  Willis  are  alike  distinguished  for
exquisite  finish  and  melody.  His  language  is
pure,  varied,  and  rich,  his  imagination  brilliant,
and  his  wit  of  the  first  quality.  Many  of  his  de-
scriptions of  natural  scenery  are  written  pictures,


and  no  other  American  author  has  represented  with
equal  vivacity  and  truth  the  manners  of  the  age."
His  publications  include  "Scripture  Sketches"
(Boston,  1827) ;  "  Fugitive  Poetry  "  (1829) ;  "  Poem
delivered  before  the  Society  of  the  United  Breth-
ren "  (New  York,  1831) ;  "  Melanie,  and  other
Poems"  (London,  1835;  New  York,  1837);  "Pen-
cillings by  the  Way  "  (London,  1835 ;  New  York,
1836) ;  "  Inklings  of  Adventure  "  (1836) ;  "  Bianca
Visconti,"  a  drama  (1839) ;  "  Tortesa,  the  Usurer,"  a
drama  (1839) ;  "  Loiterings  of  Travel "  (New  York,
1839);  "11  Abri,  or  the  Tent  pitched"  (1839;
London,  1840) ;  "  Letters  from  under  a  Bridge  "
(London,  1840);  "Poems"  (New  York,  1843);
••  Lady  Jane,  and  other  Poems  "  (1844) ;  "  Dashes  at
Life  with  a  Free  Pencil "  (1845) ;  "  Rural  Letters  "


WILLIS


WILLISTON


541


(1849) ;  "  Life  Here  and  There  "  (1850) ;  "  People  I
have  Met  "  (1850) ;  "  Hurrygraphs  "  (1851) ;  "  Pun
Jottings  "  (1858) ;  "  A  Summer  Cruise  in  the  Medi-
terranean "  (1853) ;  "  A  Health  Trip  to  the  Trop-
ics "  (1854)  ;  "  Out  Doors  at  Idlewild  "  (1854)  ;
"  Famous  Persons  and  Places  "  (1854) ;  "  The  Rag-
Bag  "  (1855) ;  "  Paul  Fane,"  a  novel  (1857) :  "  Po-
ems  "  (1858) ;  and  "  The  Convalescent "  (1859).  He
also  edited  and  compiled  "  Scenery  of  the  United
States  and  Canada  "  (London,  1840) ;  "  Scenery  and
Antiquities  of  Ireland"  (1842);  "A  Life  of  Jennv
Lind*'  (Philadelphia,  1851);  and  "Trenton  Falls""
{New  York,  1851).  His  life  has  been  written  by
Henry  A.  Beers  in  the  "  American  Men  of  Letters  "
series  (Boston,  1885),  who  has  also  issued  "  Selec-
tions "  from  his  prose  writings  (New  York,  1885).
— His  only  son,  Bailey,  was  graduated  at  the  Co-
lumbia college  school  of  mines  in  1878,  and  is
now  an  assistant  on  the  U.  S.  geological  survey.
— His  brother,  Richard  Storrs,  journalist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  10  Feb.,  1819,  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1841,  and  adopted  literature  as  a  profes-
sion. He  has  edited  the  "New  York  Musical
"World  "  and  "  Once  a  Week,"  contributed  to  cur-
rent literature,  and  published  "  Church  Chorals  and
Choir  Studies  "  (New  York,  1854) ;  "  Our  Church
Music ;  a  Book  for  Pastors  and  People "  (1855) ;
and  "Carols  and  Music  Poems"  (15  nos.,  1860-1).
He  contributed  to  "National  Hymns"  (1861)  and
to  the  American  edition  of  the  "Life  of  Felix
Mendelssohn-Bartholdy  "  (1865).

WILLIS,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Haverhill,
Mass.,  31  Aug.,  1794;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  17  Feb.,
1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1813,  and
After  studying  law  was  admitted  to  the  Suffolk
bar  in  January,  1817,  Opening  an  office  in  Boston,
he  practised  there  till  April,  1819,  when  his  former
preceptor,  Prentiss  Mellen,  having  been  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  invited  Mr.  Willis  to  take
charge  of  his  practice.  In  1820,  on  the  organiza-
tion of  the  state  of  Maine,  Mr.  Mellen  became  its
first  chief  justice,  and  then  Mr.  Willis  continued
his  profession  alone  until  1835,  when  he  became
Associated  with  William  P.  Fessenden.  For  twenty
years  this  partnership  continued.  His  tastes  never
led  him  toward  court-practice,  but  rather  toward
•conveyancing  and  other  departments  of  real-estate
business,  in  which  he  was  considered  unusually
well  informed  and  accurate.  In  1855  he  was  elected
to  the  Maine  senate,  and  in  1859  he  became  mayor
of  Portland.  He  was  chosen  a  Republican  presi-
dential elector  in  1860,  and  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  Bowdoin  in  1867.  He
was  a  member  of  nearly  all  the  state  historical
societies,  including  that  of  Massachusetts,  of  which
in  1867  he  was  elected  vice-president,  and  in
1855-9  he  was  one  of  the  vice-presidents  of  the
New  England  historic-genealogical  society.  He
became  in  1828  a  member  of  the  Maine  historical
society,  of  which  he  was  successively  recording  sec-
retary, treasurer,  and  then  president  in  1856-'65.
He  was  also  chief  editor  of  all  the  publications  of
the  society,  nis  publications  include  "  The  History
of  Portland,  from  its  First  Settlement,  with  Notices
of  the  Neighboring  Towns,  and  of  the  Changes  of
the  Government  in  Maine,  Portland"  (2  parts,  Port-
land, 1831-'3:  enlarged  ed.  entitled  "The  History
of  Portland  from  1632  to  1864,"  1865);  "Report
of  the  Committee  on  the  Riot  in  Portland  "  (1855) ;
"  Introductory  Address  before  the  Maine  Historical
Society  "  (1855) ;  "  Inaugural  Address  before  the
Maine  Historical  Society  "  (1857) :  "  Genealogy  of
the  McKinstry  Family,  with  a  Preliminary  Essay  on
the  Scotch-Irish  Immigrations  to  America"  (Bos-
ton, 1858) ;  "  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  Books  and


Pamphlets  relating  to  Maine  "  (New  York,  1859) ;
and  "  A  History  of  the  Law,  the  Courts,  and  the
Lawyers  of  Maine  from  its  First  Colonization  to
the  Early  Part  of  the  Present  Century  "  (Portland,
1863).  See  "A  Tribute  to  the  Memory  of  Hon.
William  Willis,"  by  Charles  Henry  Hart  (Phila-
delphia, 1870).

WILLISTON,  Ebenezer  Bancroft,  educator,
b.  in  Tunbridge,  Vt.,  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Norwich,  Vt.,
27  Dec,  1837.  He  was  a  second  cousin  of  George
Bancroft.  He  spent  three  years  at  Dartmouth,
and  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Vermont
in  1823.  He  had  already  begun  to  teach  in  Capt.
Alden  Partridge's  military  academy  in  Norwich,
Vt.,  where  he  was  subsequently  a  professor.  Fee-
ble health  forced  him  to  spend  most  of  the  last
nine  years  of  his  life  at  the  south,  where  he  was  for
some  time  president  of  Jefferson  college,  Miss.  He
published  an  edition  of  Tacitus  (Hartford,  Conn..
1826)  and  "  The  Eloquence  of  the  United  States  "
(5  vols..  Middletown,  Conn.,  1827). — His  son,  Ed-
ward Bancroft,  a  major  in  the  3d  U.  S.  artillery,
received  four  brevets  for  gallantrv  in  the  civil  war.

WILLISTON,  Samuel,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Easthampton,  Mass.,  17  June,  1795;'  d.  there,  18
July,  1874.  His  father,  Rev.  Payson  Williston
(1763-1856),  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1783,  was
minister  of  Easthampton  from  1789  till  1833,  and
published  several  sermons.  The  son  began  to
study  at  Phillips  Andover  academy  with  a
view  to  the  ministry,  but  abandoned  his  purpose,
owing  to  weakness  of  the  eyes,  and  engaged  in  the
manufacture  of  buttons,  in  which  he  gained  a  large
fortune.  This  occupation  was  begun  at  his  own
home  by  his  wife,  and  extended  until  many  hun-
dred women  in  the  neighboring  towns  were  em-
ployed in  it  under  his  superintendence.  In  1831
Joel  Hayden  began  to  make  buttons  in  Williams-
burg, Mass.,  with  machinery  of  his  own  invention,
and,  Mr.  Williston  entering  into  partnership  with
him,  they  continued  the  business  there  till  1848,
when  Williston  bought  Hayden's  rights  and  re-
moved the  factory  to  Easthampton.  Afterward  he
engaged  also  in  the  manufacture  of  suspenders.
In  1840  he  established  at  his  native  place  Williston
seminary,  a  preparatory  school  of  high  grade,  to
which  he  gave  at  various  times  about  $270,000  and
bequeathed  $500,000  more.  He  also  gave  to  Am-
herst $150,000,  endowing  professorships  there  in
1858-'9,  gave  liberally  to  Mount  Holyoke  female
seminary,  and  three  times  erected  a  church  at
Easthampton,  which  was  twice  burned.  His  bene-
factions amounted  to  more  than  $1,500,000.  He
also  did  much  to  improve  the  appearance  of  his
native  town.  In  1841-3  Mr.  Williston  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Massachusetts  legislature.  His  widow
gave  to  the  seminary  that  bears  his  name  the
Williston  homestead  to  be  used  as  the  principal's
house  after  her  death,  which  occurred  in  1885.

WILLISTON,  Seth,  clergyman,  b.  in  Suffield,
Conn.,  4  April,  1770;  d.  in  Guilford  Centre,  Che-
nango co.,  N.  Y.,  2  March,  1851.  His  father  was  a
farmer  and  saddler,  and  the  son  assisted  him  in
both  occupations.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1791,  taught  at  Windsor  and  New  Lon-
don, Conn.,  and,  after  studying  theology  with  Rev.
Dr.  Charles  Backus  at  Somers,  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1794.  After  occupying  several  pulpits
in  Connecticut  temporarilv,  he  went  to  Chenango
county,  N.  Y.,  and  labored  as  an  evangelist,  being
ordained  in  1797.  He  organized  several  churches,
including  that  of  Lisle,  N.  Y.,  where  he  became
minister  in  1799.  On  4  July,  1810,  Mr.  Williston
was  installed  over  a  Presbyterian  church  in  Dur-
ham, N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  till  his  dismissal,


542


WILLS


WILMARTH


at  his  own  request,  on  22  Dec,  1828,  after  which
he  preached  in  various  places,  chiefly  in  the  state
of  New  York,  and  also  devoted  much  time  to  lit-
erature. Hamilton  college  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1838.  Dr.  Williston  published  "  Address
to  Parents  "  (Suffield,  Conn.,  1799 ;  Greenock,  Scot-
land, 1802) ;  "  Sermons  on  Doctrinal  and  Experi-
mental Religion  "  (1812) ;  "  Five  Discourses  on  the
Sabbath "  (1813) ;  "  Vindication  of  Some  of  the
Most  Essential  Doctrines  of  the  Reformation"
(1817);  "  Sermons  on  the  Mystery  of  the  Incarna-
tion and  the  Special  Influences  of  the  Spirit"
(1823);  "Sermons  adapted  to  Revivals  '  (1828);
"  Harmony  of  Divine  Truth  "  (1836) ;  "  Discourses
on  the  Temptations  of  Christ "  (1837) ;  "  Christ's
Kingdom  not  of  This  World,"  three  discourses
(1843) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Moral  Imperfections  of
Christians  "  (1846) ;  and  "  Millennial  Discourses,"
which  he  sold  for  the  benefit  of  missions  (1848).

WILLS,  James,  philanthropist,  b.  in  England
about  1760;  d.  in  Philadelphia  about  1830.  His
father  was  in  early  life  a  coachman,  but  subse-
quently amassed  a  fortune  in  business  in  Philadel-
phia, which  he  bequeathed  to  his  son.  James  was
a  member  or  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  never
married.  He  was  well  known  as  a  grocer  in  Phila-
delphia, where  his  integrity  and  uprightness  in
business  gained  him  the  esteem  of  the  whole  com-
munity. He  bequeathed  to  the  "  mayor  and  cor-
poration of  Philadelphia  and  to  their  successors
forever"  more  than  $122,000  to  found  "the  Wills
hospital  for  the  relief  of  indigent  blind  and  lame,"
giving  preference  to  those  in  Philadelphia  and  vicin-
ity. The  corner-stone  was  laid  on  2  April,  1832.

WILLSON,  Forceythe,  poet,  b.  in  Little  Gene-
see, Alleghany  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  April,  1837;  d.  in
Alfred,  N.  Y.,  2  Feb.,  1867.  He  was  christened
Byron  Forceythe,  but  dropped  the  first  name  in
early  manhood.  His  father,  Hiram  Willson,  a  na-
tive of  Vermont,  had  been  a  teacher,  was  afterward
postmaster  at  Little  Genesee,  and  was  engaged
in  the  lumber  business  there.  In  1846  he  placed
his  family  and  his  household  goods  on  a  raft,  and
descended  the  Alleghany  and  Ohio  rivers.  They
lived  for  six  years  at  Covington,  Ky.,  where  Mr.
Willson  was  the  chief  founder  of  the  common-
school  system.  Subsequently  they  removed  to
New  Albany,  Ind.,  where  he  died  in  1859,  leaving
a  comfortable  fortune  to  his  four  children.  For-
ceythe, the  eldest,  studied  at  Antioch  and  at  Har-
vard, but  failing  health  prevented  him  from  finish-
ing the  course.  He  became  an  editorial  writer  for
the  Louisville  "  Journal,"  vigorously  sustaining  the
National  cause  during  the  civil  war,  and  his  earli-
est poems  also  appeared  in  that  paper.  In  1864-'6
he  lived  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  to  superintend  the
education  of  a  younger  brother.  He  was  a  firm
believer  in  spiritualism.  His  best-known  poem  is
"  The  Old  Sergeant,"  originally  written  as  a  car-
rier's address  for  the  Louisville  "  Journal,"  1  Jan.,
1803.  which  tells  a  literally  true  story,  even  the
names  being  genuine.  He  published  a  small  vol-
ume, containing  all  of  his  poems  that  he  cared  to
preserve  (Boston,  1866).  —  His  wife,  Elizabeth
Conwell,  b.  in  New  Albany,  Ind.,  26  June,  1842;
d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  13  Oct.,  1864,  married  him
in  1863.  Her  maiden  name  was  Smith.  A  volume
of  her  poems  was  printed  privately  in  1865.  See
an  article  by  John  James  Piatt  in  the  "  Atlantic
Monthly"  for  March,  1875.

WILLSON,  .lames  Renwick,  clergyman,  b.
near  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  9  April,  1780 ;  d.  in  Colden-
ham,  N.  Y.,  29  Sept.,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at
Jefferson  in  1805  and  licensed  to  preach  as  a
Reformed Presbyterian  in 1807. He  then  took


charge  of  schools  in  Pennsylvania  till  1817,  when
he  became  pastor  of  the  Coldenham  and  New-
burg  congregations  in  New  York,  and,  with  the
exception  of  a  pastorate  at  Albany  in  1830-'3,  re-
tained the  former  charge  till  1840.  In  1838  he
had  been  appointed  professor  in  the  Eastern  theo-
logical seminary,  and  retained  his  chair  after  the
union  with  the  Western  seminary  till  1851.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1828  from  the
western  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He  edited
"  The  Evangelical  Witness  "  in  1822-'6,  the  "  Chris-
tian Statesman "  in  1827-'8,  and  the  "  Albany
Quarterly"  in  1831-'3.  In  connection  with  the
last  he  published  a  "  History  of  the  Church  of
Scoland."  His  other  published  works  are  "  An
Historical  Sketch  of  Opinions  on  the  Atonement "
(Philadelphia,  1817) ;  "  Prince  Messiah's  Claims  to
Dominion  over  all  Government"  (Albany,  1832);.
"  The  Written  Law  "  (1840) ;  and  many  single  ser-
mons and  addresses. — His  son,  James  McLeod,
clergyman,  b.  near  Elizabeth,  Allegheny  co.,  Pa.,.
17  Nov.,  1809;  d.  in  Allegheny,  Pa.,  31  Aug.,
1866,  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1829,  licensed
by  a  Reformed  presbytery  in  1834,  and  from  that
year  till  1862  held  a  pastorate  in  Philadelphia,
being  elected  professor  in  the  Reformed  Presby-
terian theological  seminary  at  Allegheny  in  1859.
From  Westminster  college,  Pa.,  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1865.  He  was  chairman  of
the  committee  that  published  "True  Psalmody"'
(Philadelphia,  1859),  and  edited  the  "Covenant-
er," a  monthly,  from  1845  till  1863,  when  it  was-
consolidated  with  the  "Reformed  Presbyterian."
of  which  he  was  co-editor  till  his  death.  Dr.  Will-
son  published  "  The  Deacon  "  (Philadelphia,  1841) ;
"  Bible  Magistracy  "  (1842) ;  "  Civil  Government "
(1853);  "Social  Religious  Covenanting"  (1856);
and  "  Witnessing  "  (1861). — James  McLeod's  son,
David  Burt,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
27  Sept.,  1842,  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1860  and  at  Jefferson  medical
college  in  1863,  serving  in  the  medical  corps  of
the  U.  S.  army  from  that  date  till  1865.  He  was
then  graduated  at  the  Allegheny  seminary  in  1869,
ordained  as  a  Reformed  Presbyterian,  and  was
pastor  in  Allegheny  from  1870  till  1875,  when  he
was  chosen  to  his  present  post  in  the  seminary
there  as  professor  of  theology.  Besides  publish-
ing occasional  addresses  he  edited  an  edition  of
"  Lyman's  Historical  Chart "  (Philadelphia,  1867),.
and  since  1874  has  been  an  editor  of  the  "  Reformed
Presbyterian  and  Covenanter  "  in  Pittsburg.

WILLSON,  Marcius,  author,  b.  in  West  Stock-
bridge,  Mass.,  8  Dec,  1813.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1836  and  became  a  teacher,  but
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839.
A  bronchial  affection  compelled  him  to  relinquish
both  professions  till  1849,  when  he  became  princi-
pal of  Canandaigua  academy,  and  remained  there
four  years.  Among  his  numerous  educational
works  are  "  Civil  Polity  and  Political  Economy ,r
(New  York,  1838);  "Perspective,  Architectural,
and  Landscape  Drawing "  (1839)  ;  series  of  his-
tories (1845-'54) ;  two  series  of  reading-books  (New
York,  1860-'72;  Philadelphia,  1881-'2);  spellers-
(1864-'70);  "New  Svstem  of  Plane  Trigonome-
try "  (1874) ;  "  Mosaics  of  Bible  History  "  (2  vols.,
1883);  "Mosaics  of  Grecian  History "  (1883);  and
"  The  Wonderful  Story  of  Old,"  an  illustrated  work
on  the  Bible  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1888).

WILMARTH,  Lemuel  Everett,  artist,  b.  in
Attleborough,  Mass.,  11  Nov.,  1835.  He  studied
at  the  academy  in  Munich  under  Wilhelm  von
Kaulbach  in  1859-63.  and  under  Jean  L.  Gerome
at  the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts,  Paris,  in 1864-'7.


WILMARTH


WILMER


543


Since  1870  he  has  had  charge  of  the  schools  of  the
National  academy,  of  which  he  was  elected  an  as-
sociate in  1871  and  an  academician  in  1873.
Among  his  works,  principally  genre  pictures,  are
"  Captain  Nathan  Hale  "  (1866) ;  "  Playing  two
Games  at  the  same  Time"  (1867):  "The  Home
Missionary"  (1869);  "Another  Candidate  for
Adoption"  (1871);  "Guess  what  I  have  brought
You  "  (1873) ;  "  Left  in  Charge  "  (1874) ;  "  Ingrati-
tude "  (1875) ;  "  Feat  of  Courage  "  (1876) ;  "  A  Plea
for  the  Homeless  "  (1877) ;  "  Pick  of  the  Orchard  "
(1878):  and  "Jack's  Return"  (1879).

WILMARTH,  Seth,  inventor,  b.  in  Brattle-
boro',  Vt.,  8  Sept.,  1810;  d.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,  5
Nov.,  1886.  He  became  a  machinist  in  Pawtucket,
R.  I.,  and  in  1855  was  appointed  superintendent
and  master-mechanic  of  the  Charlestown  navy-
yard.  During  the  twenty  years  of  his  service  there
he  made  many  valuable  improvements  in  various
departments,  the  most  important  being  the  large
planer  and  the  great  lathe  in  the  machine-shop,
which  were  then  the  largest  of  their  kind  in  the
world,  both  bearing  his  name  as  inventor.  Among
his  patents,  numbering  about  twenty,  were  those
for  his  revolving  turrets,  and  for  the  hydraulic  lift
for  raising  the  turret  shafts  on  monitor  vessels.
Soon  after  the  war  the  latter  was  submitted  to
the  navy  department,  and  was  rejected  as  being  of
questionable  utility,  if  not  dangerous,  its  purpose
having  been  efficiently  accomplished  by  the  means
of  a  sledge-hammer  and  screw-wedge  on  many  ex-
isting vessels.  About  1873  the  same  plan  was  pur-
chased bv  the  U.  S.  government  for  $50,000.

WILMER,  Lambert  A.',  author,  b.  about  1805  ;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  21  Dec,  1863.  In  early  life
he  edited  the  Baltimore  "  Saturday  Visitor,"  and
for  many  years  afterward  he  was  connected  with
"  The  Pennsylvanian,"  in  Philadelphia.  He  was
the  author  of  a  "  New  System  of  Grammar  " ;  "  The
Quacks  of  Helicon  "  (1851) ;  "  Life,  Travels,  and
Adventures  of  Ferdinand  de  Soto  "  (Philadelphia,
1858);  and  "Our  Press-Gang,  or  a  Complete  Ex-
position of  the  Corruptions  and  Crimes  of  the
American  Newspapers (1859).

WILMER,  William  Holland,  clergyman,  b.
in  Kent  county,  Md.,  29  Oct.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Williams-
burg, Va.,  24  July,  1827.  His  ancestors  were  early
settlers  of  Maryland,  and  his  uncle,  James  J.  Wil-
mer,  a  clergyman  of  the  Episcopal  church,  was
secretary  of  the  first  meeting  of  the  clergy  of  the
United  States  in  1783. .  On  his  motion  the
"  Church  of  England  in  the  colonies  "  adopted  the
name  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  Will-
iam was  educated  at  Washington  college  in  Kent
county,  and  was  for  some  time  occupied  in  mer-
cantile pursuits.  He  was  admitted  to  orders  in
1808  by  Bishop  Claggett,  and  was  rector  of  Chester
parish,  Md.,  in  1808-'12,  and  of  St.  Paul's,  Alexan-
dria, Va.,  in  1812-'22.  He  was  elected  rector  of  St.
John's,  Washington  city,  in  1816,  but  declined.  In
1819  he  began  the  publication  of  the  "  Washington
Theological  Repertory,"  and  he  continued  in  con-
nection with  it  until  1826.  During  his  pastorate
in  Alexandria  he  built  the  present  St.  Paul's
church,  was  an  originator  of  the  Education  society
of  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  its  president  for
several  years,  aiding  in  preparing  for  orders  the
first  graduates  of  the  Virginia  Protestant  Episco-
pal seminary,  of  which  he  was  a  founder.  When
it  was  removed  from  Fairfax  Court-House  to  Alex-
andria in  1823,  he  was  appointed  professor  of  sys-
tematic theology,  ecclesiastical  history,  and  church
polity,  and  he  was  chosen  assistant  rector  of  the
Monumental  church,  Richmond,  Va.,  in  1826,  but
declined. The  same  year  he  became  president  of


William  and  Mary  college,  and  rector  of  the  church
in  Williamsburg,  which  posts  he  held  till  his  death.
Dr.  Wilmer  was  very  active  and  efficient  in  trying
to  resuscitate  the  Episcopal  church  in  Virginia,
and  used  his  pen  freely  and  effectually.  He  was  a
delegate  to  general  conventions  in  1821-6,  and
president  of  the  house  of  clerical  and  lay  deputies.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown  in
1820.  He  published  numerous  sermons  on  special
occasions  (1813-20);  many  able  articles  in  the
"Theological  Repertory"  (1819-26);  "Episcopal
Manual  "  (1815) ;  and  "  Controversy  with  Baxter,  a
Jesuit  Priest "  (1818). — His  son,  Richard  Hooker,
P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  15  March,  1816,
was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1836,  and
at  the  Theologi-
cal seminary  of
Virginia  in  1839,
was  ordained  in
the  Monument-
al church,  Rich-
mond, Va.,  on
Easter-day,  1840,
and  was  rector  of
numerous  church-
es, chiefly  in  Vir-
ginia, till  1864,
when  he  was  con-
secrated bishop  of
Alabama  in  St.
Paul's  church,
Richmond,
6  March,  1862
He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  William  and  Mary  college,
Va.,  in  1850,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Uni-
versity of  Oxford,  England,  in  1867,  and  from
the  University  of  Alabama  in  1880.  At  the  close
of  the  civil  war  Bishop  Wilmer  recommended  to
the  clergy  of  his  diocese  the  omission  of  the
prayer  "for  the  president  and  all  in  civil  author-
ity," on  the  ground  that  only  military  govern-
ment existed  in  Alabama,  whereupon  Gen.  George
II.  Thomas  suspended  him  and  his  clergy  from
their  functions;  but  the  order  was  afterward  set
aside  by  President  Johnson.  He  is  the  author  of
"  The  Recent  Past,  from  a  Southern  Standpoint :
Reminiscences  of  a  Grandfather"  (New  York,  1887).
— William  Holland's  nephew,  Joseph  Pere  Bell,
P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Kent  county,  Md.,  11  Feb.,
1812;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  2  Dec,  1878,  was
educated  at.  Kenyon  college,  and  the  Protestant
Episcopal  theological  seminary,  Alexandria,  Va.
He  was  ordered  deacon  in  July,  1834,  and  ordained
priest  in  May,  1838,  and,  after  serving  for  a  few
months  as  chaplain  at  the  University  of  Virginia,
was  appointed  in  1839  a  chaplain  in  the  U.  S.
army.  He  resigned  his  commission  in  1843,  was
in  charge  successively  of  Hungar's  parish,  North-
ampton co.,  and  St.  Paul's  parish,  Goochland  co.,
Va.,  became  rector  of  St.  Mark's  church,  Phila-
delphia, in  1848,  continuing  there  till  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war,  when  he  resigned,  and  set-
tled on  his  plantation  in  Albemarle  county,  Va.
He  went  to  England  in  1863  to  purchase  Bibles
for  the  Confederate  army,  was  captured  on  his  re-
turn voyage,  and  for  a  short  time  confined  in  the
old  Capitol  prison,  Washington,  D.  C.  He  became
bishop  of  Louisiana  in  1866.  The  diocese  at  that
time  was  in  a  disorganized  condition,  but  he  de-
voted himself  with  great  energy  to  reconstructing
churches  that  had  been  burned,  and  supplying  va-
cant pulpits,  and  was  successful  in  restoring  the
affairs  of  the  diocese  to  a  prosperous  condition.


544


WILMOT


WILMOT


Bishop  Wilraer  was  popularly  classed  with  the
high  church  party.  He  was  noted  as  an  eloquent
speaker,  and  a  popular  pulpit  orator.

WILMOT,  David,  jurist,  b.  in  Bethany,  Pa.,  20
Jan.,  1814;  d.  in  Towanda,  Pa.,  16  March,  1868.
He  received  an  academical  education  at  Bethany
and  at  Aurora,  N.  Y.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at
Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  in  1834,  and  soon  began  practice
at  Towanda,  where  he  afterward  resided.  His  sup-
port of  Martin  Van  Buren  in  the  presidential  can-
vass of  1836  brought  him  into  public  notice,  and  he
was  subsequently  sent  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
serving  from  1  Dec,  1845,  to  3  March,  1851.  Dur-
ing the  session  of  1846,  while  a  bill  was  pending
to  appropriate  $2,000,000  for  the  purchase  of  a  part
of  Mexico,  he  moved  an  amendment  "  that  neither
slavery  nor  involuntary  servitude  shall  ever  exist
in  any  part  of  said  territory."  This,  which  became
known  as  the  "  Wilmot  proviso,"  passed  the  house,
but  was  rejected  by  the  senate,  and  gave  rise  to
the  free-soil  movement.  Mr.  Wilmot  was  presi-
dent-judge of  the  13th  district  of  Pennsylvania  in
1853-'61,  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican
conventions  of  1856  and  1860,  acting  as  temporary
chairman  of  the  latter,  was  defeated  as  the  Repub-
lican candidate  for  governor  of  Pennsylvania  in
1857,  and  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Republi-
can, in  place  of  Simon  Cameron,  who  resigned  to
become  secretary  of  war  in  President  Lincoln's  cabi-
net, serving  from  18  March,  1861,  to  3  March,  1863.
In  that  body  he  was  a  member  of  the  committees
on  pensions,  claim's,  and  foreign  affairs.  He  was
appointed  by  President  Lincoln  judge  of  the  U.  S.
court  of  claims  in  1863,  and  died  in  office.

WILMOT,  Lemuel  Allan,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  the  county  of  Sunbury,  New  Bruns-
wick, 31  Jan.,  1809 ;  "d.  in  Fredericton,  20  May,
1878.  He  was  educated  at  New  Brunswick  univer-
sity, Fredericton,  be-
came an  attorney  in
1830,  and  two  years
later  was  called  to  the
bar  of  New  Bruns-
wick. In  1834  he
was  elected  to  par-
liament by  acclama-
tion for  the  county
of  York.  From  the
first  he  espoused  the
side  of  the  Liberals,
opposing  the  Family
compact  party,  and
advocating  the  prin-
ciples of  responsi-
ble government.  He
soon  became  the  ac-
knowledged leader  of  the  Reformers  of  his  prov-
ince. In  1836  Mr.  Wilmot  went  to  England  as  a
delegate  with  William  Crane  on  the  subject  of
crown  revenues  and  the  civil  list.  The  colonial
secretary,  Lord  Glenelg,  received  the  delegates
cordially  and  drafted  a  bill  granting  the  reforms
that  they  asked;  but  the  lieutenant-governor  of
New  Brunswick,  Sir  Archibald  Campbell,  withheld
his  approval,  and  tendered  his  resignation.  The
delegates  were  again  despatched  to  England,  with
an  address  to  the  king,  by  whom  they  were  favor-
ably received.  Sir  Archibald  Campbell's  resigna-
tion was  accepted,  the  civil-list  bill  became  law,
and  a  vote  of  thanks  to  the  diplomats  was  passed
by  the  legislature.  Mr.  Crane  was  called  to  the  ex-
ecutive council,  and  Mr.  Wilmot  became  a  queen's
counsel.  In  1844  he  accepted  a  seat  in  the  execu-
tive council,  without  portfolio  ;  but  when  the  lieu-
tenant-governor, Sir  William  Colebrooke,  without


<=><uUjLu&Juyy)


consulting  his  advisers,  appointed  his  son-in-law
to  the  office  of  provincial  secretary,  Mr.  Wilmot,
with  three  colleagues,  resigned  his  place  in  the
cabinet.  In  1847  Earl  Grey,  the  colonial  secretary,
declared  that  the  members  of  the  executive  coun-
cil should  hold  office  only  while  they  possessed  the
confidence  of  a  majority  of  the  people.  In  1848
the  New  Brunswick  house  of  assembly  passed  a
resolution  approving  of  Earl  Grey's  despatch,  after
a  long  and  spirited  debate.  Mr.  Wilmot,  who
made  the  great  speech  of  the  occasion,  was  called
on  to  form  a  government.  He  accepted  the  task,
and  his  cabinet  became  a  coalition  ministry,  with
Liberal  tendencies.  As  premier  and  attorney-gen-
eral he  became  identified  with  the  consolidation  of
the  criminal  laws  and  the  municipal  law.  In  1850
he  attended  the  International  railway  convention
at  Portland,  Me.  In  the  same  year  he  visited
Washington  in  a  similar  capacity,  on  the  subject
of  reciprocity.  In  1851-68  he  was  a  puisne  judge
of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Brunswick,  during
which  time  he  employed  the  interval  of  leisure  at
his  command  in  lecturing  and  in  forwarding  the
cause  of  education,  and  benevolent  and  religious
institutions.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  sen-
ate of  the  University  of  New  Brunswick,  which
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.  When  the  ques-
tion of  union  arose  in  1865,  Judge  Wilmot  was
ready  to  espouse  the  side  of  the  Unionists,  but
took  no  very  active  part  in  the  contest.  After
the  confederation  was  consummated  he  was  se-
lected to  preside  over  his  province  as  the  first
native  governor.  This  office  he  held  from  27
July,  1868,  until  14  Nov.,  1873,  when  he  received  a
pension  as  a  retired  judge.  In  1875  he  became
second  commissioner  under  the  Prince  Edward  isl-
and purchase  act  of  that  year,  and  he  was  also
named  one  of  the  arbitrators  in  the  Ontario  and
northwest  boundary  commission,  but  death  pre-
vented him  from  serving  in  the  latter  capacity. —
His  cousin,  Robert  Duncan,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  in  Fredericton,  New  Brunswick,  16  Oct.,  1809,  is
the  son  of  John  M.  Wilmot,  for  several  years  a
member  of  the  provincial  assembly.  The  son,  at
the  age  of  five  years,  left  his  native  town  with  his
father  to  reside  at  St.  John,  where  he  attended
school.  On  reaching  manhood  he  engaged  in  ship-
ping and  milling.  Afterward  he  went  to  Liver-
pool, England,  where  he  resided  until  1840,  when
he  returned  to  St.  John.  He  entered  the  parlia-
ment of  his  province  in  1846,  and  held  his  seat  for
fifteen  years.  He  was  a  strong  Protectionist,  and
an  uncompromising  advocate  of  the  greenback
system  of  banking.  In  1849  he  was  mayor  of  St.
John.  In  1851  he  was  asked  to  enter  the  New
Brunswick  government,  and  he  filled  the  office
of  surveyor-general  from  that  year  until  1854.  In
1856-'7  he  held  the  office  of  provincial  secretary
in  the  Wilmot-Grey  administration.  In  1865  Mr.
Wilmot  opposed  the  scheme  of  union,  and  with
his  colleagues  he  succeeded  in  defeating  the  ad-
ministration ;  in  the  new  government  he  held
his  old  portfolio.  He  attended  the  Colonial  con-
ference in  London,  England,  on  the  union  question
in  1866-'7,  and  when,  in  1867,  the  union  was  con-
summated, Mr.  Wilmot  was  called  to  the  senate  of
Canada  by  royal  proclamation.  He  holds  a  patent
of  rank  and  precedence  from  the  queen  as  an  ex-
councillor  of  New  Brunswick.  On  8  Nov.,  1878,
on  the  formation  of  Sir  John  Macdonald's  minis-
try, he  was  sworn  a  member  of  the  privy  council
of  Canada,  without  portfolio.  On  the  same  day  he
succeeded  David  Christie  as  speaker  of  the  senate.
This  government  adopted  the  policy  of  protection
to  Canadian  industries,  which  Mr.  Wilmot  aided


WILMOT


WILSON


545


in  formulating.  In  February,  1880,  he  resigned
the  presidency  of  the  senate  to  accept  the  lieuten-
ant-governorship of  New  Brunswick,  which  post  he
held  until  1885.

WILMOT,  Samuel,  Canadian  pisciculturist,  b.
in  Clarke,  West  Durham  co.,  Ont.,  22  Aug.,  1822.  He
was  educated  at  Upper  Canada  college,  Toronto,
and  became  a  farmer.  Mr.  Wilmot  has  been  war-
den of  the  united  counties  of  Durham  and  North-
umberland, a  member  of  the  agricultural  and  art
associations  of  Ontario,  and  presided  over  the  first
Dominion  exposition  of  agriculture,  arts,  and
manufactures,  at  Ottawa  in  1879.  For  many  years
he  has  given  great  attention  to  the  subject  of  fish-
culture,  and  in  1873  received  through  the  French
government  a  medal  from  the  Societe  d'acclimata-
tion  for  the  services  he  had  rendered  in  that  de-
partment of  practical  science.  He  also  obtained
the  gold  medal  for  excellence  in  piscicultural  ex-
hibits in  the  Dominion  exposition  of  agriculture
and  arts  at  Ottawa  in  1879.  Mr.  Wilmot  is  super-
intendent of  fish-culture  operations  for  the  Do-
minion government,  and  collected  the  exhibit  of
the  fishery  products  of  the  Dominion  for  the
World's  fishery  exposition  in  London  in  1883,
where  he  acted  as  chairman  of  the  Canadian  com-
mission, and  obtained  by  his  system  of  fish-breeding
the  gold  medal  for  "  the  best  and  most  complete
fish-breeding  establishment  in  the  great  Interna-
tional fisheries  exposition."

WILMSHURST,  Zavarr,  author,  b.  in  Tun-
bridge  Wells,  England,  25  Nov.,  1824;  d.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  27  Jan.,  1887.  His  name  was  William
Bennett,  but  he  early  adopted  by  legal  right  the
name  he  afterward  bore.  In  youth  he  was  one  of
the  literary  associates  of  the  Countess  of  Blessing-
ton,  and  at  that  time  attracted  special  attention  by
his  translations  of  Norse  poems.  He  was  subse-
quently a  clergyman  for  several  years.  On  coming
to  the  United  States,  he  became  connected  with  the
New  York  press,  and  was  associated  editorially  for
many  years  with  "  The  Atlas,"  "  The  Industrial
Monitor,"  and  "  The  Insurance  Times,"  while  for  a
short  time  he  edited  the  "  New  York  Weekly  Re-
view." He  wrote  for  the  stage,  and  also  contributed
stories  and  religious  poetry  to  periodicals.  Many
of  his  hymns  are  much  admired.  Among  his  plays
are  a  drama  on  Hawthorne's  "  Scarlet  Letter,"  and
"  Nitocria,"  a  tragedy.  His  other  writings  are
"  The  Viking,"  an  epic  (London,  1849) :  "  The
Winter-  of  the  Heart,  and  other  Poems "  (New
York,  1874);  "The  Siren  "  (San  Francisco,  1876);
and  '-Ralph  and  Rose."  a  poem  (New  York,  1879).

WILSON,  Sir  Adam,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Ed-
inburgh, Scotland,  22  Sept.,  1814.  He  emigrated
to  Canada  in  1830,  and  during  the  succeeding  three
years  was  employed  in  the  mills  and  store  of  his
uncle,  George  Chalmers,  in  Trafalgar,  Plalton  co.
In  1834  he  began  to  study  law  under  Robert  Bald-
win Sullivan  in  Toronto,  and  in  1839  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  of  Upper  Canada.  In  1840  he  en-
tered into  partnership  with  Robert  Baldwin,  leader
of  the  Reform  party,  and  on  28  Nov.,  1850,  was  ap-
pointed a  queen's  counsel,  being  the  same  year
elected  a  bencher  of  the  Law  society  of  Upper
Canada.  He  was  appointed  in  1856  a  commis-
sioner for  revising  the  statutes  of  Canada  and  of
Upper  Canada,  elected  mayor  of  Toronto  in  1859
and  1860.  and  was  the  first  to  hold  that  office  by
popular  election.  He  was  in  the  Canada  assembly
for  North  York  in  1859,  and  from  May,  1862.  till
May,  1863,  was  solicitor-general  in  the  Sandfield-
Macdonald  government,  with  a  seat  in  the  execu-
tive. On  11  May,  1863,  he  was  appointed  puisne
judge  of  the  court  of  queen's  bench.  Three  months
vol.  vi. — 35


afterward  he  was  transferred  to  the  common  pleas.
He  was  reappointed  to  the  queen's  bench  in  1868,
became  chief  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas
in  1878,  and  in  1884  was  made  chief  justice  of  the
court  of  queen's  bench.  In  1871  he  was  appointed
a  member  of  the  law  reform  commission.  He  was
knighted,  20  Dec,  1887.  As  a  judge  he  has  been
noted  for  his  learning  and  his  mastery  of  the  prin-
ciples of  law.  He  has  published  "  A  "Sketch  of  the
Office  of  Constable"  (Toronto,  1861).

WILSON,  Alexander,  ornithologist,  b.  in  Pais-
ley, Renfrewshire,  Scotland,  6  July,  1766;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  Aug.,  1813.  His  father,  a
master  weaver,  had  intended  that  Alexander  should
be  a  minister,  but
family  cares  and  al-
tered circumstances
interfered.  He  at-
tended the  gram-
mar-school, and  his
father  imbued  his
mind  with  a  passion
for  reading  and  a
love  for  the  beauties
of  nature,  which
clung  to  him  for  life.
In  1779,  when  thir-
teen years  of  age,  he
was  bound  appren-
tice as  a  weaver  to
his  brother-in-law,
and  after  serving
his  time  he  contin-
ued working  at  the
loom  as  a  journey-
man for  four  years
more.  During  leisure  hours  he  continued  his  studi-
ous habits,  and  indulged  in  solitary  rambles,  giving
utterance  to  his  thoughts  in  verse.  Many  of  his  early
effusions  appeared  in  the  Glasgow  "Advertiser"
(now  the  "  Herald  ").  His  brother-in-law,  Duncan,
finding  the  weaving-trade  inadequate  for  the  sup-
port of  his  family,  now  resolved  to  try  that  of  a  ped-
dler. He  continued  this  wandering  life  for  about
three  years,  at  the  end  of  which  he  had  accumulated
as  much  material  in  verse  as  would  make  a  volume.
He  accordingly  returned  to  Paisley  and  published
it  (1790).  Taking  copies  of  his  book  with  him,  he
again  set  out  with  his  pack,  but  met  with  so  little
success  that  he  resumed  weaving.  A  second  edition
of  his  poems  appeared  in  1791,  but  its  sale  was  still
very  limited.  In  1792  Wilson's  admirable  narrative
poem, "  Watty  and  Meg,"  was  published  anonymous-
ly as  a  penny  chapbook,  and  had  an  enormous  circu-
lation. Its  authorship  was  generally  ascribed  to
Burns.  Wilson,  however,  is  greater  as  an  ornitholo-
gist than  as  a  poet,  but  his  poems  entitle  him  to  a  re-
spectable place  among  the  minor  bards  of  Scotland.
Lis  verse  is  mostly  descriptive — terse  and  true,  with-
out being  of  a  high  or  imaginative  order.  In  Paisley,
a  dispute  having  arisen  between  the  manufactu-
rers and  weavers,  Wilson  joined  in  the  fray  by  writ-
ing some  stinging  personal  lampoons,  for  which
he  was  prosecuted  and  imprisoned.  This  induced
him  to  leave  the  country.  He  walked  to  Port
Patrick,  crossed  to  Belfast^  and  there  embarked  in
a  vessel  bound  for  New  Castle,  Del.,  sleeping  on  the
deck  of  the  crowded  vessel  during  the  voyage.  He
landed,  with  his  fowling-piece  in  his  hand  and  only
a  few  shillings  in  his  pocket,  on  14  July,  1794,  and
set  out  at  once  to  walk  to  Philadelphia.  There  he
found  employment  from  a  copper-plate  printer  for
a  few  weeks,  then  took  to  weaving  for  about  a  year,
and,  having  saved  a  little  money,  resumed  his  pack,
and  so  traversed  the  greater  part  of  New  Jersey.


546


WILSON


WILSON


successfully  disposing  of  his  wares.  Then  he  be-
came a  school-master,  teaching  successively  at
Frankfort,  Pa.,  Millstone,  Pa.,  Bloomfield,  N.  J.,
and  lastly,  in  1802,  at  Kingsessing,  near  Philadel-
phia. Here  he  was  welcomed  by  William  Bartram,
the  botanist,  and  by  Alexander  Lawson,  the  en-
graver. The  former  gave  him  access  to  his  gar-
den and  library,  and  the  latter  gave  him  practical
instructions  in  drawing,  coloring,  and  etching.
After  trying  to  draw  various  objects  with  indiffer-
ent success,  he  began  to  delineate  birds,  and  in  this
walk  he  rapidly  attained  such  a  degree  of  profi-
ciency that  he  far  outstripped  his  teacher.  This
marked  success  seems  to  have  fortified,  if  it  did  not
suggest,  his  resolution  to  make  a  collection  of  birds.
In  October,  1804,  accompanied  by  his  nephew  and
another  friend,  he  set  out  on  a  walking  expedition
to  Niagara,  which  he  satisfactorily  accomplished.
His  companions  left  him,  but  he  persevered,  and
reached  home  after  an  absence  of  fifty-nine  days
and  a  walk  of  1,260  miles.  He  graphically  de-
scribed this  journey  in  a  long  poem  called  '•  The
Foresters."  On  his  return  he  set  about  making
preparations  for  his  great  work,  and  with  his  own
hands  etched  two  plates  from  his  drawings,  color-
ing them  from  nature.  At  this  time  he  was  em-
ployed in  editing  a  new  edition  of  Rees's  "  Cyclo-
paedia," by  Thomas  Bradford,  who  cordially  en-
tered into  his  scheme  and  undertook  to  issue
his  "  American  Ornithology,"  the  first  volume  of
which  made  its  appearance  in  1808.  On  its  pub-
lication Wilson  set  out  with  a  copy  to  obtain  sub-
scribers, but  the  cost — $120  for  the  completed
work — was  a  serious  barrier.  In  1810  the  second
volume  was  published,  and  Wilson  again  set  out
on  a  journey,  this  time  lasting  for  six  months,  both
to  obtain  subscribers  and  to  collect  material  for
succeeding  volumes.  On  his  way  to  New  Orleans
he  had  sailed  720  miles  down  the  Ohio  alone  in  a
little  open  skiff,  walked  long  distances,  and  ridden
through  wildernesses  well-nigh  impassable,  slept
for  weeks  in  the  woods,  subsisting  the  while  on
biscuits  and  dried  beef,  and  drinking  water.  His
reputation  was  now  spreading  over  the  world. In

1812  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society,  and  similar  honors  were  con-
ferred on  him  by  other  learned  bodies.  In  1813
the  seventh  volume  of  the  "  Ornithology  "  was  pub-
lished, and  the  eighth  was  also  nearly  ready,  but
kept  back  by  the  want  of  proper  assistants  to  color
the  plates.  In  this  emergency  Wilson  himself  un-
dertook the  work  of  this  department,  in  addition  to
all  his  numerous  other  duties.  Intense  application
and  excessive  labor  weakened  his  constitution. In

1813  he  swam  a  river  with  his  clothes  on,  in  pur-
suit of  a  rare  bird,  which  he  succeeded  in  cap-
turing; but  he  took  cold.  Dysentery  seized  him,
and  he  died  after  an  illness  of  ten  days.  He  was
buried  in  the  cemetery  of  the  Swedish  church,
Philadelphia,  with  public  honors,  and  a  simple
marble  monument  was  placed  over  his  grave.  In
personal  appearance  Wilson  was  tall  and  handsome,
his  dark-brown  hair  hung  over  his  shoulders,  his
countenance  was  thoughtful  and  expressive,  his
eye  full  of  intelligence  and  fire,  and  his  conver-
sation remarkable  for  vividness  and  originality.
The  plates  for  the  ninth  volume  of  the  "Orni-
thology "  had  all  been  completed  under  Wilson's
own  eye.  and  the  letter-press  was  supplied  by
Mr.  George  Ord,  who  had  been  Wilson's  com-
panion in  several  expeditions.  Ord  also  furnished
a  memoir  of  the  deceased  naturalist.  Three  sup-
plementary volumes  of  the  "  Ornithology,"  con-
taining American  birds  not  described  by  Wilson,
were  added  by  Charles  Lucien  Bonaparte. An  edi-


tion in  three  volumes,  with  illustrative  notes,  and
a  life  of  Wilson  by  Sir  William  Jardine,  was  after-
ward published  (3  vols.,  London,  1832).  Numerous
lives  of  Wilson  have  appeared,  including  one  by
William  B.  O.  Peabody,  in  Sparks's  "American
Biography";  an  anonymous  one  prefixed  to  the
Belfast  edition  of  Wilson's  poems  (1857);  those  by
C.  Lucy  Brightwell  (London,  1860),  and  Allan
Park  Paton  (1863) ;  and  the  memoir  prefixed  to
the  latest  collected  edition  of  "Wilsons  Miscella-
neous Prose  Works  and  Poems,"  by  the  Rev.  Alex-
ander B.  Grosart,  LL.  I).  (2  vols.,  London,  1876).

WILSON,  Allen  Benjamin,  inventor,  b.  in
Willet,  N.  Y.,  18  Oct.,  1824 ;  d.  in  WToodmont,  Conn.,
29  April,  1888.  He  was  a  cabinet-maker,  and  in
1849.  while  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  invented  a  sewing-
machine  without  ever  having  seen  one  before.  It
used  a  double-pointed  shuttle  in  combination  with
the  needle,  which  made  a  stitch  at  each  forward
and  backward  movement  of  the  shuttle,  instead
of  one  at  each  throw  of  the  shuttle,  as  in  Elias
Howe's  machine.  His  first  patent  bears  the  date
of  12  Nov.,  1850,  and  is  the  fifteenth  on  the  patent-
office  record  for  an  improved  sewing-machine.  This
included  the  double-pointed  shuttle  and  the  two-
motion  feed-bar.  In  1851'  he  secured  a  patent  for
the  rotating  hook,  which  was  designed  to  supersede
the  shuttle,  and  to  make  the  lock-stitch  with  greater
rapidity,  neatness,  and  economy  of  power.  A  year
later  he  devised  the  four-motion  feed,  which  was
subsequently  adopted  in  all  machines.  In  his
device  the  hook  seizes  the  loop  of  thread  in  the
needle  when  it  has  descended  to  its  lowest  point,
opens  it  out,  and  carries  it  around  the  bobbin,  so
that  the  thread  is  then  passed  through  the  loop  of
the  stitch.  This  is  then  drawn  up  with  the  thread
in  the  needle,  so  that  the  two  are  looped  together
about  half  way  through  the  cloth,  forming  the
strongest  possible  seam,  showing  the  stitching  ex-
actly even  upon  both  sides,  with  no  threads  above
the  surface  to  wear  off  and  allow  the  seam  to  rip.
On  the  completion  of  his  machine,  Mr.  Wilson
entered  into  partnership  with  Nathaniel  Wheeler,
a  practical  manufacturer,  and  they  began  to  make
their  machines  in  a  small  shop  in  Watertown.
Their  first  machine,  completed  early  in  1851.  was
sold  for  $125,  and  for  a  time  this  output  was  lim-
ited to  eight  or  ten  machines  a  week,  but  the  de-
mand soon  increased,  and  they  removed  to  Bridge-
port, where  they  established  the  largest  factory  of
its  kind  in  the  world,  making  600  machines  a  day.
In  1852  the  firm  was  organized  as  the  Wheeler  and
Wilson  sewing-machine  company,  and  Mr.  Wilson
withdrew  from  the  business  and  settled  in  Water-
bury,  where  he  engaged  in  other  enterprises.

WILSON,  Alpheus  Waters,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1834.  His  father.  Rev.  Nor-
val  Wilson,  was  a  well-known  minister  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  Maryland  and  Vir-
ginia. The  son  was  educated  in  Baltimore  and
Washington,  and  pursued  the  study  of  medicine,
but  left  it  for  the  ministry.  When  he  was  about
nineteen  years  old  he  united  with  the  Baltimore
conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and
rose  rapidly,  taking  some  of  the  best  appointments
in  Baltimore  and  other  parts  of  the  conference.
His  labors  having  impaired  his  health,  he  pursued
the  study  of  law,  but  as  soon  as  his  physical
condition  improved  resumed  the  ministry.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  the  Baltimore  conference  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  was  organ-
ized, and  he  identified  himself  with  it,  and  has
been  elected  four  times  to  its  general  conference.
In  1878  he  became  secretary  of  the  Board  of  mis-
sions, and  a  great  change  took  place  under  his


WILSON


WILSON


547


administration.  In  1881  he  attended  as  a  delegate
the  ecumenical  conference  in  London,  reading  a
paper  on  the  "  Influence  of  Methodism  on  other
Denominations,"  which  was  published  in  the
transactions  of  the  conference,  and  gave  great
satisfaction.  He  has  also  written  a  work  on  "  Mis-
sions" (Nashville,  1882).  In  1882  he  was  elected
to  the  episcopacy,  being  chosen  on  the  first  ballot.
Bishop  Wilson  is  a  remarkable  preacher,  and,  ex-
cept when  compelled  by  sickness  to  suspend  his
labors,  has  been  attentive  and  successful  in  every
work  committed  to  his  care.  In  1888  he  set  out  on
an  episcopal  tour  around  the  world.

WILSON,  Sir  Daniel,  Canadian  educator,  b.
in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  5  Jan.,  1816.  His  brother,
Dr.  George  Wilson,  was  the  famous  chemist  and
professor  of  technology  in  the  University  of  Edin-
burgh. Daniel  received  his  education  at  the  high-
school  of  his  native  city  and  at  Edinburgh  uni-
versity, where  he
won  high  encomi-
ums. At  the  age
of  twenty-one  he
left  college  and  re-
moved to  London,
where  he  adopted
literature  and  jour-
nalism as  his  means
of  support.  A  few
years  afterward  he
returned  to  Edin-
burgh, where  he
resumed  his  pen,
pursued  the  science
of  archaeology,  be-
came the  secretary
of  the  Scottish  so-

editorship  of  the
proceedings  of  that  institution.  He  also  devoted
himself  to  art  with  much  skill  and  became  proficient
as  a  draughtsman.  Wilson  was  offered  the  post  of
professor  of  history  and  English  literature  in  Uni-
versity college,  Toronto,  in  1853.  He  had  held
the  post  but  a  short  time  when  the  authorities  of
McGill  university,  Montreal,  offered  him  the  prin-
cipalship  of  that  institution,  but  he  declined  to
leave  Toronto.  In  addition  to  his  regular  work,
he  continued  to  devote  himself  to  archaeology  and
ethnology.  These  he  prosecuted  with  untiring
industry,  and  always  with  excellent  results,  his
lectures  and  discourses  on  those  subjects,  as  well
as  on  history  and  literature,  being  characterized  by
breadth  of  view  and  ripeness  of  scholarship  and
thought.  As  an  examiner  his  tact  and  discern-
ment served  him  well,  and  as  a  teacher  he  at  once
took  a  high  place.  In  his  capacity  of  lecturer  he
spoke  with  great  clearness  and  vigor,  and  his
public  addresses  always  attracted  large  audiences.
His  plea  before  the  committee  of  the  Canadian
parliament  in  behalf  of  University  college  and
non-sectarian  endowments  is  remembered  as  one
of  the  most  effective  addresses  ever  heard  before  a
public  body.  In  1880  he  was  called  to  the  presi-
dency of  Toronto  university,  which  post  he  still
holds.  In  1882,  on  the  formation  of  the  Royal
society  of  Canada  by  the  Marquis  of  Lome,  Dr.
Wilson  was  selected  by  the  governor  -  general  to
preside  over  the  second  section  of  that  body,  the
department  devoted  to  history*,  archaeology,  and
English  literature.  In  1885  he  succeeded  to  the
presidency  of  the  society.  He  has  contributed
many  valuable  papers  on  ethnology  and  archaeology
to  the  annual  volumes  of the  "  Proceedings  "  of


that  society,  which  have  attracted  attention  abroad.
Dr.  Wilson  is  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  societies  of
Edinburgh,  Italy,  and  Copenhagen,  and  member
of  the  Royal  historical  society  of  Great  Britain,
and  many  other  learned  bodies  in  both  hemispheres.
In  1885  McGill  university  conferred  on  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  Other  colleges  have  honored
him  in  a  similar  way  before  and  since  that  date.  In
1888  the  same  degree  was  conferred  on  him  by
Princeton.  In  1888  the  queen  offered  him  the
dignity  of  knighthood,  which  he  declined  for  per-
sonal reasons.  This  act  her  majesty  declined  to
entertain,  and  on  1  Aug.  she  issued  letters-patent
declaring  him  a  knight  of  the  United  Kingdom.
For  many  years  he  has  been  president  of  the
Young  men's  Christian  association  of  Toronto,  and
all  schemes  of  a  benevolent  and  charitable  nature
have  ever  found  in  him  a  devoted  advocate.  The
Newsboys'  home  of  Toronto  was  founded  by  him.
For  several  years  he  has  been  chairman  of  the
Ontario  teachers'  association,  and  twice  he  was
elected  by  the  high-school  masters  as  their  repre-
sentative in  the  old  council  of  public  instruction.
Besides  voluminous  contributions  to  periodical
literature,  and  the  proceedings  of  societies  of
which  he  is  a  member,  he  is  the  author  of  "  Me-
morials of  Edinburgh  in  the  Olden  Time,"  illus-
trated by  himself  (2  vols.,  Edinburgh,  1846-'8);
'•Oliver  Cromwell  and  the  Protectorate"  (London,
1848);  "The  Archaeology  and  Prehistoric  Annals
of  Scotland,"  with  illustrations  by  the  author,
which  established  his  reputation  as  an  archaeolo-
gist of  the  first  rank  (Edinburgh,  1851  ;  revised
ed.,  entitled  "  Prehistoric  Annals  of  Scotland,"  2
vols..  London,  1863) ;  "  Prehistoric  Man  "  (2  vols.,
1862 ;  revised  ed.,  1865) ;  "  Chatterton :  a  Bio-
graphical Study"  (London,  1869);  "Caliban:  the
Missing  Link  "  (1873) ;  and  "  Reminiscences  of  Old
Edinburgh  "  (2  vols.,  1878).  He  has  also  published
two  volumes  of  poems,  the  second  entitled  "Spring
Wild  Flowers"  (London,  1873),  and  has  written
many  of  the  important  articles  on  Canadian  topics
in  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Britannica."

WILSON,  David,  author,  b.  in  West  Hebron,
Washington  co.,  N.  Y..  17  Sept.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  9  June.  1887.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1840,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1843,  and  practised  at  Whitehall.  N.  Y.,
until  his  health  failed  and  he  was  compelled  to  re-
linquish his  profession,  after  which  he  devoted  him-
self largely  to  literary  employments.  He  was  a
member  of  the  assembly  in  1852,  and  in  1854  de-
clined a  nomination  for  congress.  He  removed  to
Albany  in  1857  on  being  appointed  deputy  state
treasurer,  and  in  the  following  year  was  elected
clerk  of  the  assembly.  He  was  deputy  clerk  of  the
court  of  appeals  in  1861-4,  and  afterward  engaged
in  the  brewing  and  malting  business.  Mr.  Wilson
published  "Life  in  Whitehall:  a  Tale  of  Ship-
Fever  Times"  (Auburn,  1850);  "Solomon  North-
rup.  or  Twelve  Years  a  Slave,"  a  narrative  of  the
abduction  and  enslavement  of  a  free  negro  of  Wash-
ington county  (1853) ;  "  Life  of  Jane  McCrea,"  in-
cluding an  account  of  Gen.  John  Burgoyne's  cam-
paign (1854);  "Life  of  Henrietta  Robinson,  the
Veiled  Murderess  "  (1855) ;  and  "  A  Narrative  of
Nelson  Lee,  a  Captive  among  the  Comanches"
(1859).  He  collected  materials  for  a  history  of  the
Six  Nations,  but  did  not  live  to  complete  the  work.

WILSON,  Ephraini  King,  senator  b.  in  Snow
Hill,  Md.,  22  Dec,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at
Jefferson  college  in  1841,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  in  1847  was  elected  to  the  legisla-
ture. He  established  himself  at  Snow  Hill,  and
practised  with  success  in  the  Maryland  courts  till


548


i

WILSOX


WILSON


1868.  In  1852  he  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Democratic  ticket.  Pour  years  after  retiring  from
legal  practice  he  was  elected  to  the  National  house
of  representatives,  serving  from  1  Dec,  1873,  till
3  March,  1875.  He  was  a  judge  of  the  Maryland
circuit  court  from  1878  till  1884,  when  he  was
elected  United  States  senator  for  the  term  that
will  end  3  March,  1891.

WILSON,  Franklin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  8  Dec,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1841,  studied  theology  in  Newton  theo-
logical seminary,  and  was  ordained  to  the  Baptist
ministry  in  1846,  but  lias  held  no  pastorate,  and  has
preached  irregularly,  on  account  of  physical  in-
firmities. He  has  served  various  worthy  causes
gratuitously,  besides  giving  to  them  large  sums  of
money.  For  many  years,  beginning  with  1851,  he
was  the  editor  of  "  The  True  Union,"  a  Baptist
weekly  paper  published  in  Baltimore,  and  he  has
long  been  a  trustee  of  Columbian  university,  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  He  is  the  author  of  a  prize  essay  on
"The  Duties  of  Churches  to  their  Pastors,"  and  of
several  essays  and  tracts.  In  1865  Columbian  uni-
versity conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.

WILSON,  George  Francis,  manufacturer,  b.
in  Uxbridge,  Mass.,  7  Dec,  1818 ;  d.  in  East  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  19  Jan.,  1883.  He  was  apprenticed  to
the  trade  of  wool-sorting  at  the  age  of  seventeen,
and  at  the  end  of  three  years  became  an  expert  in
the  business  and  familiar  with  all  the  machinery
in  the  mill.  Being  ambitious  of  obtaining  a  bet-
ter education,  he  entered  the  academy  at  Shelburne
Falls,  Mass.,  where  he  subsequently  became  a
teacher.  In  1844  he  removed  to  Chicago,  where
he  opened  an  academy  that  soon  became  a  flour-
ishing institution.  He  returned  to  the  east  in
1848  and  settled  in  Providence,  where  he  devoted
himself  to  the  manufacturing  business.  In  1855,
with  Eben  N.  Horsford,  he  began  the  manufacture
of  chemicals,  under  the  style  of  George  F.  Wilson
and  Co.,  and  two  year's  later  their  establishment
became  known  as  the  Rumford  chemical  works.
The  direct  management  of  the  works  was  controlled
by  him,  and  by  his  knowledge  of  mechanics  he  was
able  to  devise  various  improvements  in  the  ma-
chinery, resulting  in  the  more  economical  manu-
facture of  the,  goods.  He  also  invented  an  im-
provement in  the  manufacture  of  steel,  a  revolving
boiler  for  paper  manufacture,  and  several  improve-
ments in  illuminating  apparatus  for  light-houses.
Mr.  Wilson  devoted  considerable  attention  to  agri-
culture, to  methods  of  fertilization  of  soils,  and  to
the  breeding  of  stock,  while  the  range  of  his  scien-
tific knowledge  was  unusual  for  one  whose  life  was
almost  entirely  devoted  to  business  pursuits.  The
degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Brown  in
1872.  He  was  a  member  of  the  city  school  com-
mittee, and  was  twice  elected  to  represent  Provi-
dence in  the  general  assembly.  During  his  resi-
dence in  East  Providence,  whither  he  removed  in
1861,  he  was  for  many  years  associated  with  the
management  of  municipal  affairs.  He  left  $100,000
to  Brown  university,  and  $50,000  to  Dartmouth
college,  to  be  used  for  scientific  purposes.

WILSON,  George  Henry,  musical  writer,  b.
in  Lawrence,  Mass.,  18  Feb.,  1854.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Lawrence  high-school,  and  since  1874
has  been  a  clerk  in  the  custom-house  at  Boston.
He  is  also  the  musical  critic  of  the  Boston  "  Trav-
eller," and  in  1883  began  the  "  Boston  Musical
Year-Book,"  the  title  of  which  was  changed  in  1886
to  the  "  Musical  Year-Book  of  the  United  States."
Since  1885  he  has  prepared  annually  an  analytical
and  historical  programme  of  the  concerts  of  the
Boston  symphony  orchestra.


WILSON,  Henry,  statesman,  b.  in  Farming-
ton.  N.  H..  16  Feb.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
22  Nov.,  1875.  He  was  the  son  of  a  farm-laborer,
whose  ancestors  were  from  the  north  of  Ireland,
and  at  the  age  of  ten  was  apprenticed  to  a  farmer
till  the  age  of  twenty- one.  During  those  eleven
years  of  service
he  received  not
more  than  twelve
months'  school-
ing altogether,
but  read  more
than  a  thousand
volumes.  When
his  apprentice-
ship terminated
in  December,
1833,  he  set  out
from  Farming-
ton  on  foot  in
search  of  work,
which  he  found
at  Natick,  Mass.,
in  the  house  of  a

shoemaker. On /^r  //£?  '  /7

attaining  his  ma- /t^^l^p  /rtsttfCn^
jority  he  had  his  >^

name,  which  was  &

originally  Jeremiah  Jones  Colbaith,  changed  by
legislative  enactment  to  the  simpler  one  of  Henry
Wilson.  He  learned  the  trade  of  his  employer  and
followed  it  for  two  years,  earning  enough  money
to  return  to  New  Hampshire  and  study  in  the
academies  at  Stafford,  Wolfborough,  and  Concord
At  the  same  time  he  made  his  appearance  in  public
life  as  an  ardent  Abolitionist  during  the  attempts
that  were  made  in  1835  to  stop  the  discussion  of
the  slavery  question  by  violent  means.  The  person
to  whom  he  had  intrusted  his  savings  became  in-
solvent, and  in  1838,  after  a  visit  to  Washington,
where  his  repugnance  to  slavery  was  intensified  by
the  observation  of  its  conditions,  he  was  compelled
to  relinquish  his  studies  and  resume  shoemaking  at
Natick.  In  1840  he  appeared  in  the  political  can-
vass as  a  supporter  of  William  Henry  Harrison,
addressing  more  than  sixty  Whig  meetings,  in
which  he  was  introduced  as  the  "  Natick  cobbler."
In  that  year  and  the  next  he  was  elected  to  the
Massachusetts  house  of  representatives,  and  then
after  a  year's  intermission  served  three  annual
terms  in  the  state  senate.

He  was  active  in  organizing  in  1845  a  conven-
tion in  Massachusetts  to  oppose  the  admission  of
Texas  into  the  Union  as  a  slave  state,  and  was
made,  with  John  Greenleaf  Whittier,  the  bearer  of
a  petition  to  congress  against  the  proposed  annexa-
tion, which  was  signed  by  many  thousands  of  Mas-
sachusetts people.  In  the  following  year  he  pre-
sented in  the  legislature  a  resolution  condemnatory
of  slavery,  supporting  it  with  a  comprehensive  and
vigorous  speech.  In  1848  he  went  as  a  delegate  to
the  Whig  national  convention  in  Philadelphia,  and
on  the  rejection  of  anti-slavery  resolutions  spoke
in  protest  and  withdrew.  On  his  return  he  de-
fended his  action  before  his  constituents,  and  soon
afterward  bought  the  Boston  "  Republican  "  news-
paper, which  he  edited  for  two  years,  making  it  the
leading  organ  of  the  Free-soil  party.  He  was  chair-
man of  the  Free-soil  state  committee  in  1849-52.
In  1850  he  returned  to  the  state  senate,  and  in  the
two  following  years  he  was  elected  president  of
that  body.  He  presided  over  the  Free-soil  nation-
al convention  at  Pittsburg  in  1852,  and  in  the  en-
suing canvass  acted  as  chairman  of  the  national
committee  of  the  party. As  chairman  of  the  state


WILSON


WILSON


549


committee  he  had  arranged  a  coalition  with  the
Democrats  by  which  George  S.  Boutwell  was  elected
governor  in  1851  and  Charles  Sumner  and  Robert
Rantoul  were  sent  to  the  U.  S.  senate.  He  was  a
candidate  for  congress  in  1852,  and  failed  of  elec-
tion by  oidy  ninety-three  votes,  although  in  his
district  the  majority  against  the  Free-soilers  was
more  than  7,500.  In  1853  he  was  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  and  proposed  a  pro-
vision to  admit  colored  men  into  the  militia  organ-
ization. In  the  same  year  he  was  defeated  as  the
Free-soil  candidate  for  governor.  He  acted  with
the  American  party  in  1855,  with  the  aid  of  which
he  was  chosen  to  succeed  Edward  Everett  in  the
U.  S.  senate.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  American
national  convention  in  Philadelphia  in  that  year,
but,  when  it  adopted  a  platform  that  countenanced
slavery,  he  and  other  Abolitionists  withdrew.  He
had  delivered  a  speech  in  advocacy  of  the  repeal  of
the  fugitive-slave  law  and  the  abolition  of  slavery
in  the  District  of  Columbia  shortly  after  taking  his
seat  in  the  senate  in  February,  1855.  On  the  dis-
ruption of  the  American  organization  through  the
secession  of  himself  and  his  friends,  he  took  an
active  part  in  the  formation  of  the  Republican
party,  with  the  programme  of  opposition  to  the
extension  of  slavery.  On  23  May,  1856,  the  morn-
ing after  his  colleague  in  the  senate,  Charles  Sum-
ner, was  assaulted  by  Preston  S.  Brooks,  Mr.  Wil-
son denounced  the  act  as  "  brutal,  murderous,  and
cowardly."  For  this  language  he  was  challenged
to  a  duel  by  Brooks ;  but  he  declined  on  the  ground
that  the  practice  of  duelling  was  barbarous  and
unlawful,  at  the  same  time  announcing  that  he  be-
lieved in  the  right  of  self-defence.

During  the  next  four  years  he  took  part  in  all
the  important  debates  in  the  senate,  delivering
elaborate  speeches  on  the  admission  of  Kansas,  the
treasury-note  bill,  the  expenditures  of  the  govern-
ment, the  Pacific  railroad  project,  and  many  other
topics.  His  speeches  bore  the  impress  of  practical,
clear-sighted  statesmanship,  and  if  the  grace  of
oratory  and  polished  diction  was  wanting,  they
always  commanded  attention  and  respect.  The
congressional  records  during  his  long  term  of  ser-
vice in  the  senate  show  that  he  was  one  of  the
most  industrious  and  efficient  members  of  that
body,  and  that  his  name  stands  connected  with
nearly  all  the  important  acts  and  resolves.  Strong
in  his  convictions,  he  was  fearless  in  their  expres-
sion, but  he  was  scrupulously  careful  in  his  state-
ments, and  the  facts  he  adduced  were  never  suc-
cessfully disputed.  In  March,  1859,  he  made  a
notable  reply  to  James  H.  Hammond,  of  South
Carolina,  in  defence  of  free  labor,  which  was  print-
ed and  widely  circulated  through  the  northern
states.  He  had  been  continued  in  the  senate  for  a
full  term  by  an  almost  unanimous  vote  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature  in  the  preceding  Janu-
ary. In  March,  1861,  he  was  made  chairman  of
the  committee  on  military  affairs,  of  which  he  had
been  a  member  during  the  preceding  four  years.
He  induced  congress  to  authorize  the  enlistment
of  500,000  volunteers  at  the  beginning  of  hostili-
ties between  the  states,  and  during  the  entire
period  of  the  war  he  remained  at  the  head  of  the
committee,  and  devised  and  carried  measures  of
the  first  importance  in  regard  to  the  organization
of  the  army  and  the  raising  and  equipment  of
troops,  as  well  as  attending  to  the  many  details
that  came  before  the  committee.  He  had  been
connected  with  the  state  militia  as  major,  colonel,
and  brigadier-general  from  1840  till  1851,  and  in
1861  he  raised  the  22d  regiment  of  Massachusetts
volunteers,  and  marched  to  the  field  as  its  colonel,


serving  there  as  an  aide  to  Gen.  George  B.  Mc-
Clellan  till  the  reassembling  of  congress.

During  the  session  of  1861-'2  he  introduced  the
laws  that  abolished  slavery  in  the  District  of  Colum-
bia, put  an  end  to  the  "  black  code,"  allowed  the
enrolment  of  blacks  in  the  militia,  and  granted
freedom  to  slaves  who  entered  the  service  of  the
United  States  and  to  their  families.  During  the
civil  war  he  made  many  patriotic  speeches  before
popular  assemblages,  lie  took  a  prominent  part
in  the  legislation  for  the  reduction  of  the  army
after  the  war  and  for  the  reconstruction  of  the
southern  state  governments,  advocating  the  policy
of  granting  full  political  and  civil  rights  to  the
emancipated  slaves,  joined  with  measures  of  con-
ciliation toward  the  people  who  had  lately  borne
arms  against  the  United  States  government.  He
was  continued  as  senator  for  the  term  that  ended
in  March,  1871,  and  near  its  close  was  re-elected
for  six  years  more.  He  was  nominated  for  the
office  of  vice-president  of  the  United  States  in
June,  1872,  on  the  ticket  with  Ulysses  S.  Grant,
and  was  elected  in  the  following  November,  re-
ceiving 286  out  of  354  electoral  votes.  On  3
March,  1873,  he  resigned  his  place  on  the  floor  of
the  senate,  of  which  he  had  been  a  member  for
eighteen  years,  in  order  to  enter  on  his  functions
as  president  of  that  body.  The  same  year  he  was
stricken  with  paralysis,  and  continued  infirm  till
his  death,  which  was  caused  by  apoplexy.

It  is  but  just  to  say  of  Henry  Wilson  that  with
exceptional  opportunities  which  a  less  honest
statesman  might  have  found  for  enriching  himself
at  the  government's  expense,  or  of  taking  advan-
tage of  his  knowledge  of  public  affairs  and  the
tendency  of  legislation  upon  matters  of  finance
and  business,  he  died  at  his  post  of  duty,  as  he  had
lived,  rich  only  in  his  integrity  and  self-respect.
Among  his  many  published  speeches  may  be  men-
tioned "  Personalities  and  Aggressions  of  Mr.  But-
ler "  (1856) ;  "  Defence  of  the  Republican  Party  "
(1856);  "Are  Workingmen  Slaves?  "(1858);  "The
Pacific  Railroad  "  (1859) ;  and  "  The  Death  of  Sla-
very is  the  Life  of  the  Nation  "  (1864).  He  was  the
author  of  a  volume  entitled  "  History  of  the  Anti-
Slavery  Measures  of  the  Thirty-seventh  and  Thirty-
eighth  United  States  Congresses,"  in  which  he  re-
lates the  progress  of  the  bills  relating  to  slavery
and  cites  the  speeches  of  their  friends  and  oppo-
nents (Boston,  1865) ;  of  a  history  of  legislation  on
the  army  during  the  civil  war,  with  the  title  of
"Military  Measures  of  the  United  States  Con-
gress" (1866);  of  a  small  volume  called  "  Testi-
monies of  American  Statesmen  and  Jurists  to  the
Truths  of  Christianity,"  being  an  address  that  he
gave  before  the  Young  men's  Christian  associa-
tion at  Natick  (1867) ;  of  a  "  History  of  the  Recon-
struction Measures  of  the  Thirty-ninth  and  Forti-.
eth  Congresses,  1865-8"  (1868)  ;  of- a  series  of
articles  on  Edwin  M.  Stanton  that  were  reprinted
from  a  magazine,  with  those  of  Jeremiah  S.  Black,
with  the  title  of  "A  Contribution  to  History"
(Easton.  Pa.,  1868) ;  of  a  published  oration  on
"  The  Republican  and  Democratic  Parties  "  (Bos-
ton, 1868) ;  and  of  a  great  work  bearing  the  title
of  "  History  of  the  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Slave
Power  in  America,"  on  which  he  labored  indefati-
gably  during  his  last  illness,  yet  was  not  quite
able  to  complete  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1872-5).  See
his  "  Life  and  Public  Services,"  which  was  written
by  his  friend,  Thomas  Russell,  and  Rev.  Elias  Na-
son,  who  was  his  pastor  for  many  years  (1872).
Congress  directed  to  be  printed  a  volume  of
"  Obituary  Addresses,"  that  were  delivered  in  both
houses,  on  21  Jan.,  1876  (Washington,  1876).


550


WILSON


WILSON


WILSON,  Henry  Parke  Custis,  physician,  b.
in  Workington,  Somerset  co.,  Md.,  5  March,  1827.
His  Scotch-Irish  ancestors  emigrated  to  this  coun-
try in  1700  from  Ireland,  being  driven  out  by  re-
ligious persecution,  and  founded  the  first  Presby-
terian church  in  this  country  at  Rehoboth,  Somer-
set co.,  Md.  Henry  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1848,  studied  medicine  at  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia and  the  University  of  Maryland,  and  settled
in  Baltimore.  Dr.  Wilson  has  contributed  numer-
ous articles  on  gynecology  and  obstetrics  to  the
medical  journals  and  the  transactions  of  medical
societies,  and  has  invented  important  and  useful
gynecological  instruments.  In  1856-'7  he  was
physician  to  the  Baltimore  county  and  city  alms-
house. He  is  president  and  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Baltimore  gynecological  and  obstetrical  society,
has  been  president  of  the  medical  and  chirurgical
faculty  of  Maryland  and  the  Baltimore  academy
of  medicine,  vice-president  and  one  of  the  founders
of  the  American  gynecological  society,  and  vice-

E  resident  of  the  American  medical  association.
Ie  is  a  fellow  of  the  British  gynecological  society
and  the  British  medical  association,  and  of  numer-
ous other  local  and  national  medical  societies.

WILSON,  James,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  near  St.  Andrew's,  Scotland,  14
Sept.,  1742;  d.  in  Edenton,  N.  C,  28  Aug.,  1798.
After  receiving  a  university  education  at  St.  An-
drew's, Glasgow,  and  Edinburgh,  he  emigrated  to

this  country  about
1763,  remained  for
some  time  in  New
York  city,  and  in
1766  went  to  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  where
he  was  for  several
months  tutor  in
Latin  at  the  City
college,  which  was
afterward  merged
in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania.  He
left  this  employ-
ment to  study  law
with  John  Dickin-
son, was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1767,
began  practice  in
Reading,  but  soon  removed  to  Carlisle,  and  was
established  in  his  profession  before  the  Revolu-
tion, having  made  his  reputation  by  an  argument
in  an  important  land  case  against  the  proprietors
of  Pennsylvania.  He  espoused  the  popular  cause
from  the  beginning  of  the  difficulties  with  the  Brit-
ish government,  contributing  many  essays  to  the
controversy.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Provincial
meeting  of  deputies  of  15  July,  1774,  and  a  dele-
gate to  the  Provincial  convention  of  23  Jan.,  1775.
When  three  representatives  were  added  to  the  Penn-
sylvania delegation  on  6  May,  1775,  he  was  selected
with  Benjamin  Franklin  and  Thomas  Willing,  and
was  present  at  the  opening  of  congress  on  10  May.
He  was  successively  re-elected  on  3  Nov.,  1775,  20
July,  1776,  and  10  March,  1777,  but  was  superseded
at  the  election  of  14  Sept.,  1777,  because  he  had
hesitated  to  declare  for  independence  while  there
remained  a  prospect  of  obtaining  justice  from  par-
liament. He  had  resisted  separation  on  8  June,
1776.  after  the  legislature  of  Pennsylvania  had
withdrawn  its  restrictions  on  the  votes  of  its  rep-
resentatives;  yet  on  1  July  he  and  John  Morton
were  the  first  of  the  Pennsylvania  delegates  to
vote  for  independence,  and  they  were  the  only
ones,  except  Benjamin  Franklin,  who  voted  for


-MX-


the  adoption  of  the  declaration  on  4  July.  He
took  an  important  part  in  the  discussion  of  mili-
tary and  commercial  questions,  and  opposed  the
views  of  the  southern  delegates  on  questions  of
slavery  and  taxation,  believing  it  to  be  the  duty  of
congress  to  discourage  slave-holding. In  July,

1775,  when  the  Indians  were  divided  into  three
departments,  he  was  appointed  by  congress  com-
missioner and  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs  for
the  middle  department.  He  was  a  member  of
committees  to  consider  the  state  of  the  colonies
and  measures  for  their  defence,  to  supply  the
treasury,  to  investigate  the  condition  of  the  army,
to  suppress  internal  enemies,  to  re-enforce  Wash-
ington's army,  and  to  strengthen  the  American
cause  in  Canada;  was  one  of  the  authors  of  an  ap-
peal to  the  assembly  of  Jamaica,  a  letter  to  the
people  of  Canada,  and  an  address  to  the  United
colonies,  and  served  on  the  standing  committees
for  Indian  affairs  and  for  hearing  appeals  on  libels
from  the  decisions  of  the  state  admiralty  courts,  as
well  as  on  the  first  board  of  war.  When  hostilities
began,  Wilson  was  chosen  colonel  of  a  battalion  of
militia  that  was  raised  in  Cumberland  county,  with
which  he  took  part  in  the  New  Jersey  campaign  of

1776,  but  afterward  he  took  no  part  in  active  opera-
tions, owing  to  his  civil  appointments.  When  party
spirit  caused  his  removal  from  the  Pennsylvania
delegation  in  congress,  he  went  to  Annapolis,  Md.,
and  practised  there  for  a  year,  at  the  end  of  which
he  settled  permanently  in  Philadelphia.  On  5  June,
1779,  he  was  appointed  advocate-general  for  the
French  government  in  the  United  States,  the  ap-
pointment being  confirmed  by  letters-patent  from
the  king  on  18  Feb.,  1781.  On  31  Dec,  1781.  he  was
appointed  by  congress  a  director  of  the  Bank  of
North  America.  He  made  himself  obnoxious  to  the
democracy  by  denying  the  right  of  the  town  council
to  regulate  the  price  of  food,  opposing  the  more
liberal  provisions  of  the  constitution,  and  acting
as  counsel  for  Tories  who  were  prosecuted  for  trea-
son, and  when  he  and  other  citizens  of  conserva-
tive views  were  threatened,  they  gathered  in  his
house,  where,  on  4  Oct.,  1779,  they  were  attacked
by  the  mob  and  militia,  and,  after  many  shots  were
exchanged,  were  rescued  by  the  city  troop.  There
was  loss  of  life  on  both  sides,  and  the  feeling
against  Wilson  was  such  that  he  absented  himself
from  the  city  for  a  time.  On  23  May,  1782,  he  was
appointed  a  brigadier-general  of  militia.  Me  acted
as  counsel  for  Pennsylvania  before  the  court  of  arbi-
tration that  in  November,  1782,  decided  against
the  claims  of  Connecticut  to  the  lands  of  the  Wy-
oming settlement.  On  12  Nov.  of  that  year  he  was
re-elected  to  congress,  taking  his  seat  on  2  Jan.,  1783.
He  proposed  the  plan  of  general  taxation  which
was  adopted  on  12  Feb.,  1783.  He  was  not  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1784,  but  was  returned  in  1785,
and  continued  by  re-election  till  the  adoption  of
the  present  constitution.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Federal  convention,  and  in  its  debates  sup-
ported direct  popular  suffrage  and  a  single  execu-
tive. He  exercised  much  influence  in  determining
the  character  of  the  constitution,  and  was  appointed
on  the  committee  of  detail.  He  explained  and
defended  the  constitution,  as  finally  framed,  in  the
Pennsylvania  convention  for  its  ratification.  Hav-
ing been  the  chief  of  the  Republican  party  in  Penn-
sylvania, which  approved  a  firmer  government  than
the  Federation,  and  was  bitterly  opposed  by  the
Constitutional  party,  Mr.  Wilson  now  became  a
leader  of  the  Federalists.  In  the  convention  of
1789-90  for  framing  a  new  state  constitution  he
successfully  advocated  the  plan  of  the  direct  elec-
tion of  state  senators. He  was  appointed  on  tho


WILSON


WILSON


551


drafting  committee,  and  prepared  the  form  of  the
instrument.  In  October,  1789,  President  Washing-
ton appointed  him  an  associate  justice  of  the  U.  S.
supreme  court,  and  he  remained  in  this  office  till
his  death.  In  1790  he  was  appointed  professor  of
law  in  Philadelphia  college,  which  conferred  on  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  that  year,  and  in  the  two
following  winters  he  delivered  lectures.  In  March,
1791,  he  was  appointed  by  the  state  house  of  repre-
sentatives to  revise  and  digest  the  laws  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and  after  the  senate  had  refused  to  concur  he
continued  the  work  as  a  private  undertaking,  but
died  before  completing  the  digest.  He  published,
besides  other  pamphlets,  an  "  Address  to  the  Citi-
zens of  Philadelphia"  (Philadelphia,  1784),  and,
with  Thomas  McKean,  "  Commentaries  on  the  Con-
stitution of  the  United  States  "  (London,  1792).  His
"  Works,"  comprising  law  lectures,  speeches,  and
legal  disquisitions,  were  published  under  the  direc-
tion of  Bird  Wilson  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1803-4).
— His  son,  Bird,  clergyman,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  8
Jan.,  1777;  d.  in  New  York  city.  14  April,  1859,
was  graduated  in  1792  at  the  College  of  Philadel-
phia, studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
Philadelphia  in  1797.  He  was  appointed  commis-
sioner of  bankrupt  law,  and  in  1802  was  made
president-judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
the  counties  of  Chester,  Delaware,  Montgomery,
and  Bucks.  He  resigned  his  post  in  1818,  studied
theology  under  Bishop  White,  and  was  ordained
deacon  in  Christ  church,  Philadelphia,  12  March,
1829.  and  priest  a  year  later,  by  the  same  bishop.
Mr.  Wilson  was  rector  of  St.  John's  church,  Norris-
town,  and  St.  Thomas's  church,  Whitemarsh,  Pa.,
in  1819— '21.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1821,  and  that
of  LL.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1845.  He  was  elected
professor  of  systematic  divinity  in  the  Episcopal
general  theological  seminary  in  1821,  which  post
he  held  for  nearly  thirty  years.  He  was  secretary
of  the  house  of  bishops  in  1829-'41.  The  last  few
years  of  his  life  were  passed  in  retirement  in  New
York  city.  Dr.  Wilson  was  an  able  theologian
of  the  school  of  Hooker,  Tillotson,  Waterland,
and  other  like  divines  of  the  Church  of  England,
and  prepared  numerous  valuable  tractates  for
the  classes  under  his  charge.  His  chief  publica-
tions were  "  Abridgment  of  the  Law  by  Matthew
Bacon"  (7  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1811-13),  and  "  Me-
moir of  the  Life  of  the  Right  Rev.  William  White,
D.  D.,  Bishop  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church
in  the  State  of  Pennsylvania  "  (1839).  See  a  "  Me-
morial of  the  Rev.  Bird  Wilson,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.,"  by
W.  White  Bronson  (1864).  —  James's  kinsman,
William,  poet,  b.  in  Perthshire,  Scotland,  25  Dec,
1801;  d.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y,  25  Aug.,  1860.
At  an  early  age  he  was  imbued  with  a  passionate
love  of  poetry,  derived  from  his  mother,  who  sang
with  great  beauty  the  Jacobite  songs  and  ballads
of  her  native  land.  While  a  school-boy  he  lost  his
father,  the  generous  merchant's  death  being  pre-
ceded by  his  failure  in  business,  and  a  bachelor
brother's  fortune  in  Jamaica  was  in  some  way  lost
to  his  children,  for  whom  it  was  intended,  so  that
Wilson's  early  life  was  accompanied  by  many  depri-
vations, including  the  completion  of  his  educa-
tion. At  twenty-two  he  became  the  editor  of  the
Dundee  "  Literary  Olio,"  a  large  proportion  of
which,  both  in  prose  and  verse,  was  from  his  pen.
In  1826  he  was  induced  by  influential  friends  to
remove  to  Edinburgh,  where  he  established  himself
in  business.  In  the  same  year  he  lost  his  young
wife,  and  he  sought  relief  from  his  great  sor-
row in  composition.  His  contributions  were  wel-
comed in  the  '•  Edinburgh  Literary  Journal "  and


M^


other  leading  periodicals.  In  1830  Wilson  married
Miss  Sibbald,  of  Borthaugh,  a  descendant  of  Sir
Andrew  Sibbald  and  a  niece  of  James  Sibbald,  the
literary  antiquary  and  editor  of  the  "  Chronicle
of  Scottish  Poetry,"
also  the  friend  of
Robert  Burns.  At
this  period  the
youngpoet'scharm-
ing  conversation
and  manners  made
him  a  welcome
guest  in  the  liter-
ary circles  of  Edin-
burgh. At  the  house
of  Mrs.  Grant,  of
Laggan,  he  was  a
constant  visitor,
and  she  claimed
the  privilege  of
possessing  his  por-
trait by  Sir  John
Watson  Gordon,
from  which  the  ac-
companying vig-
nette is  copied.
When  thirty -two
years  of  age  Wilson

removed  to  the  United  States  and  settled  at  Pough-
keepsie, on  the  Hudson,  where  he  engaged  in  book-
selling and  publishing,  which  he  continued  till  his
death,  a  portion  of  the  time  in  partnership  with
the  elder  brother  of  Bishops  Alonzo  and  Horatio
Potter,  and  later  with  his  son,  James  Crant.  In
the  New  World,  Wilson  occasionally  contributed  in
prose  and  verse — generally  anonymously — to  vari-
ous American  periodicals,  and  sometimes  sent  a
contribution  to  "  Blackwood  "  or  "  Chambers's  Jour-
nal." Selections  of  his  poems  appeared  in  "The
Cabinet,"  "  Modern  Scottish  Minstrel,"  and  Long-
fellow's "  Poems  of  Places,"  but  he  never  issued
them  in  a  volume,  or  even  collected  them,  and  it
was  not  till  1869  that  a  portion  of  his  poems  were
published  in  Poughkeepsie  with  a  memoir  by  Ben-
son J.  Lossing.  A  second  edition,  with  additional
poems,  appeared  in  1875,  and  has  since  been  fol-
lowed by  a  third.  Willis  pronounced  one  of  Wil-
son's poems  "  the  best  modern  imitation  of  the  old
ballad  style  that  he  had  ever  met  with,"  and  Bryant
said  "  the  song  in  which  the  writer  personates  Rich-
ard the  Lion-hearted  during  his  imprisonment  is
more  spirited  than  any  of  the  ballads  of  Aytoun."
All  of  Wilson's  sons  by  his  second  marriage  served
in  the  civil  war,  the  eldest,  with  whom  the  idea  of
this  work  originated  in  1879,  attaining  the  rank  of
brigadier-general ;  the  second  fell  at  the  head  of
his  company  at  Fredericksburg,  and  the  youngest,
leaving  his  studies  at  sixteen,  volunteered  with
several  of  his  classmates  and  went  to  the  front.
— His  son,  James  Grant,  b.  in  Edinburgh,  28
April,  1832,  was  educated  at  College  Hill,  Pough-
keepsie, continuing  his  studies  in  the  languages,
music,  and  drawing,  under  private  teachers,  joined
his  father  in  business,  later  becoming  his  partner.
In  1855  he  went  abroad,  and  soon  after  his  return
established  in  Chicago  the  first  literary  paper  pub-
lished in  the  northwest,  and  became  known  as  a
public  speaker.  In  1862  he  disposed  of  his  journal
and  was  commissioned  major  of  the  15th  Illinois
cavalry,  becoming  soon  after  acting  colonel  of  the
regiment,  and  taking  part  in  many  engagements,
and  in  the  Vicksburg  campaign.  In  August,  1863,
he  accompanied  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant  to  New  Or-
leans, and  there  accepted,  by  his  advice,  the  colo-
nelcy of  the  4th  regiment,  United  States  colored


552


WILSON


WILSON


cavalry,  and  was  assigned  to  duty  as  aide-de-camp
to  the  commanding  general  of  the  Department  of
the  Gulf,  with  whom  he  remained  till  April,  1865,
taking  part  in  the  Teche,  Texas,  and  Red  River
campaigns,  and  in  the  latter  aiding  Lieut.-Col.
Joseph  Bailey  in  the  construction  of  the  Red  River
dam.  During  the  same  period  of  nearly  two  years
he  acted  as  military  agent  in  Louisiana  for  the
state  of  New  York.  When  Gen.  Banks  was  re-
lieved,  Col.  Wilson  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
and  sent  to  Port  Hudson,  where  for  a  time  he  was
in  command,  and  in  July  he  resigned  and  returned
to  New  York  city,  where  he  has  since  resided,  pur-
suing a  literary  career,  with  the  exception  of  several
years  spent  with  his  family  in  Europe.  Since  18.74
he  has  been  a  delegate  from  St.  James's  church  to
the  New  York  diocesan  conventions,  and  he  was  a
member  of  the  General  convention  that  met  in  Rich-
mond, Va.  In  1879  he  was  appointed  a  member  of
the  board  of  visitors  to  the  U.  S.  naval  academy,
and  the  following  year  he  was  a  visitor  to  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  delivering  the  address  to  the
cadets,  and  preparing  the  reports  of  both  boards.
Gen.  Wilson  was  appointed  in  1882,  by  the  governor,
chairman  of  the  committee  to  collect  $40,000  as
the  state's  contribution  to  the  Garfield  monument.
(See  vol.  ii.,  p.  604.)  Since  1885  he  has  been  presi-
dent of  the  New  York  genealogical  and  biographi-
cal society,  is  a  vice-president  of  the  Association  for
the  reform  and  codification  of  the  law  of  nations,
a  member  of  the  executive  committee  of  the  Society
for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals,  and  an  hon-
orary member  of  many  American  and  foreign  his-
torical and  other  societies.  He  was  instrumental
in  erecting  a  monument  over  the  grave  of  Fitz-
Greene  Halleck  at  Guilford,  Conn.,  and  a  statue  in
Central  park,  New  York,  the  first  in  honor  of  an
American  poet,  and  is  active  in  the  movement  for
the  New  York  statue  of  Columbus.  (See  vol.  i.,  p.
698.)  He  has  published  numerous  addresses,  includ-
ing those  on  Col.  John  Bayard,  Com.  Isaac  Hull,
Chief-Justice  Kirkpatrick,  and  Bishop  Samuel  Pro-
voost,  and  contributed  upward  of  a  hundred  arti-
cles to  "  Harper's  "  and  other  American  and  Eng-
lish magazines.  Among  the  principal  works  that
he  has  written  or  edited  are  "  Biographical  Sketches
of  Illinois  Officers"  (Chicago,  1862;  3d  ed.,  1863)
"  Love  in  Letters:  Illustrated  in  the  Correspond-
ence of  Eminent  Persons"  (New  York,  1867)
"  Life  of  Gen.  IT.  S.  Grant "  (1868 ;  3d  ed.,  enlarged
1885);  u  Life  and  Letters  of  Fitz-Greene  Halleck '
(1869):  "Sketches  of  Illustrious  Soldiers"  (1874)
u  Poets  and  Poetry  of  Scotland,  from  the  Earliest
to  the  Present  Time"  (2  vols.,  London  and  New
York,  1876) ;  "  Centennial  Historv  of  the  Diocese
of  New  York,  1785-1885  "  (New  York,  1886) ;  "  Bry-
ant and  his  Friends :  Some  Reminiscences  of  the
Knickerbocker  Writers "  (12mo ;  illustrated  ed.,
8vo,  1886);  "  Appletons'  Cyclopaedia  of  American
Biography  "  (6  vols.,  1886-9) ;  and  "  Com.  Isaac
Hull  and  the  Frigate  '  Constitution ' "  (1889).

WILSON,  James  F.,  senator,  b.  in  Newark,
Ohio,  19  Oct.,  1828.  He  received  a  classical  edu-
cation, studied  law,  and  in  1853  began  practice
in  Iowa,  making  Fairfield  his  residence.  He  was
a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention
in  1856,  and  in  the  following  year  entered  the
legislature.  He  passed  into  the  state  senate  in
1859,  was  chosen  its  president  in  1861,  and  in  the
same  year  was  elected  to  congress  to  fill  the  vacancy
that  was  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Samuel  R.
Curtis,  taking  his  seat  on  2  Dec.  He  was  re-elected
for  the  following  term,  serving  as  chairman  of  the
judiciary  committee,  and  on  his  second  and  third
re-election  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  same


^J&U4^/&%^ffc


committee,  and  of  that  on  unfinished  business.  In
1868  he  was  one  of  the  managers  of  the  impeach-
ment trial  of  President  Andrew  Johnson.  In  1869
he  was  made  a  commissioner  for  the  Pacific  rail-
road. He  was  elected  a  senator  from  Iowa  for  the
term  that  will  expire  on  4  March,  1889,  and  was
appointed  on  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs.

WILSON,  James  Harrison,  soldier,  b.  near
Shawneetown,  111.,  2  Sept.,  1837.  His  grandfather,
Alexander,  a  Virginian  by  birth,  was  one  of  the
founders  of  Illinois,  and  his  father,  Harrison,  was
an  ensign  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  captain  during
the  Black  Hawk
war.  The  son  was
educated  at  the
common  schools,
at  McKendree  col-
lege, and  at  the
U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he
was  graduated  in
1860  and  assigned
to  the  corps  of  top-
ographical engi-
neers. He  served
at  the  headquar-
ters of  the  Depart-
ment of  Oregon
until  June,  1861,
when  he  became
2d  lieutenant,  and
on  19  Sept.,  1861,
he  was  made  1st
lieutenant.  He  was
on  duty  as  chief
topographical  engineer  of  the  Port  Royal  expedi-
tion till  March,  1862,  then  served  in  the  Depart-
ment of  the  South,  including  the  bombardment  of
Fort  Pulaski,  and  was  an  acting  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  George  B.  McClellan  in  September,  1862,  being
present  at  the  battles  of  South  Mountain  and  An-
tietam.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  in
the  volunteer  staff  of  the  army  in  November,  1862,
and  served  as  chief  engineer  and  inspector-general
of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  till  October,  1863,
being  active  in  the  operations  before  and  during
the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  He  became  captain  of
engineers  in  May,  1863,  and  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  31  Oct.,  1863,  and  was  engaged  in  the
operations  near  Chattanooga,  the  battle  of  Mis-
sionary Ridge,  and  the  relief  of  Knoxville,  con-
structing bridges  till  December,  1863.  Gen.  Wil-
son, after  a  short  tour  of  duty  at  Washington  in
charge  of  the  cavalry  bureau,  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  3d  division  of  the  cavalry  corps  in
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  bore  a  conspicuous
part  in  the  operations  under  Gen.  Philip  H.  Sheri-
dan from  May  till  August,  1864,  including  the
Richmond  raid  and  combats  near  Petersburg.  He
also  led  his  division  during  the  Shenandoah  cam-
paign, including  the  battle  of  the  Opequan,  till
October,  1864,  when  he  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  the  cavalry  corps  of  the  military  division
of  the  Mississippi,  organizing  a  body  of  15,000
mounted  men,  and  contributing  largely  to  the  suc-
cess that  attended  the  armies  in  the  west  under
Gen.  George  H.  Thomas  and  Gen.  William  T.
Sherman,  particularly  by  the  assault  and  capture
of  Selma,  Ga.,  Montgomery,  Ala.,  and  Columbus
and  Macon,  Ga.,  on  20  April,  1865,  the  date  of  his
promotion  as  major-general  of  volunteers.  In
twenty-eight  days  he  captured  five  fortified  cities,
twenty-three  stand  of  colors,  288  guns,  and  6,820
prisoners,  among  whom  was  Jefferson  Davis.  Hav-
ing been  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service  in


WILSON


WILSON


553


January,  1866,  Gen.  Wilson  was  for  four  years
engaged  in  the  improvement  of  Mississippi  river.
He  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
35th  infantry,  28  July,  1866,  and  brevetted  to  the
grade  of  major-general,  U.  S.  army,  "for  gallant
and  meritorious  services  "  in  the  capture  of  Fort
Pulaski,  the  battles  of  Chattanooga,  the  Wilder-
ness, and  Nashville,  and  capture  of  Selma,  respect-
ively. He  was  honorably  discharged,  at  his  own
request,  31  Dec,  1870.  He  has  been  largely  engaged
in  railroad  and  engineering  operations  since  his
retirement  from  the  army.  He  is  the  author  of
"China:  Travels  and  Investigations  in  the  Middle
Kingdom"  and  "Life  of  Andrew  J.  Alexander"
(New  York,  1887) :  also,  in  conjunction  with  Charles
A.  Dana,  "  Life  of  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant "  (Springfield,
Mass.,  1868). — His  brother,  Bluford,  served  during
the  civil  war  as  assistant  adjutant-general  of  vol-
unteers, and  afterward  was  solicitor  of  the  U.  S.
treasury  during  the  "  whiskey- ring"  prosecutions.

WILSON,  James  Jefferson,  senator,  b.  in  Es-
sex county,  N.  J.,  in  1775 ;  d.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  28
July,  1824.  He  received  a  common-school  educa-
tion, was  for  many  years  clerk  of  the  New  Jersey
legislature,  of  which  he  was  a  member  in  1809-'ll,
and  edited  the  "  True  American  "  at  Trenton.  He
was  also  adjutant-general  of  the  state  in  1810— '12
and  1814,  and  captain  of  a  company  of  infantry  in
service  on  the  coast  of  New  Jersey  during  the  war
of  1812-'15.  .  He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
and  served  from  4  Dec,  1815,  till  1821,  when  he  re-
signed on  being  appointed  postmaster  at  Trenton.
He  sat  in  the  legislature  in  1822,  and  in  December
of  that  year  he  sustained  severe  injuries  while  he
was  delirious  from  illness.

WILSON,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Windsor,
England,  in  1588;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  7  Aug.,
1667.  He  was  the  son  of  Dr.  William  Wilson,
prebendary  of  St.  Paul's,  of  Rochester  and  of
Windsor,  who  had  been  chaplain  to  Edmund  Grin-
dall,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  grandnephew
of  Sir  Thomas  Wilson,  secretary  of  state  to  Queen
Elizabeth.  Young  Wilson  was  educated  at  Eton
and  at  Cambridge,  where  he  was  graduated  about
1606.  He  studied  law  three  years  at  one  of  the  inns
of  court,  and  took  orders  in  the  Church  of  Eng-
land, but  soon  became  conspicuous  for  his  Puritani-
cal leanings.  He  preached  at  Mortlake,  Henley,
Bumstead,  Stoke,  Clare,  and  Candish,  and  for  sev-
eral years  was  minister  of  Sudbury,  Essex,  where
he  was  repeatedly  suspended  or  silenced  by  the
bishop's  court  for  his  opinions,  but  was  befriend-
ed by  Robert  Rich,  Earl  of  Warwick.  Becom-
ing interested  in  the  colonization  of  Massachu-
setts, he  and  many  of  his  neighbors  embarked
on  8  April,  1630,  in  the  great  fleet  with  John
Winthrop  and  his  associates  of  the  Massachu-
setts company.  He  landed  at  Salem  on  12  June,
and  soon  afterward  removed  to  Charlestown,
where  he  preached  under  a  tree,  and  on  30  July
organized  what  was  subsequently  the  1st  church  in
Boston,  to  which  place  the  majority  of  the  mem-
bers soon  removed.  He  was  ordained  teacher  of
the  church  on  27  Aug.  by  imposition  of  hands  by
the  several  communicants.  In  1631  he  sailed  for
England,  where  he  remained  until  May,  1632,  and
was  ordained  pastor  in  November  of  the  latter
year.  He  again  visited  England  in  the  autumn  of
1634,  and  remained  absent  a  year.  Soon  after  his
return  the  Antinomian  controversy  arose  in  his
congregation,  and  Gov.  Winthrop  and  Wilson
fought  stoutly  against  the  faction  that  was  led  by
Anne  Hutchinson.  While  this  discussion  was
pending,  an  expedition  was  sent  against  the  Pe-
quots,  and  Mr.  Wilson  was  selected  by  lot  as  its


chaplain.  For  this  service  he  received  a  grant  of
1,000  acres  of  land  in  what  is  now  Quincy.  He
also  accompanied  the  Indian  apostle,  John  Eliot,
in  his  visit  to  the  native  settlements,  and  labored
among  the  savages.  He  outlived  two  colleagues  in
the  ministry,  John  Cotton  and  John  Norton,  and
was  left  at  the  age  of  seventy-six  with  the  entire
charge  of  his  congregation  on  his  hands.  He  con-
tinued in  the  active  discharge  of  his  duties  until
finally  disabled  by  a  fatal  disease.  Of  his  charac-
ter Cotton  Mather  has  said :  "  Indeed,  if  the  pic-
ture of  this  good  and  therein  great  man  were  to  be
exactly  given,  great  zeal  with  great  love  would  be
the  two  principal  strokes  that,  joined  with  ortho-
doxy, should  make  up  his  portraiture."  Besides
many  occasional  productions,  the  titles  of  which
are  unknown,  Mr.  Wilson  published  "  Some  Helps
to  Faith,"  a  theological  treatise  (London,  1625) ;
"  Famous  Deliverances  of  the  English  Nation,"  a
poem  (1626;  new  ed.,  Boston,  1680);  a  Latin  poem
to  the  memory  of  John  Harvard ;  and  a  tract,  "  The
Day  Breaking,  if  not  the  Sun  Rising,  of  the  Gospel
with  the  Indians  in  New  England"  (1647;  new  ed.,
New  York,  1865).

WILSON,  John,  printer,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scot-
land, 16  April,  1802;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  3
Aug.,  1868.  Although  of  humble  birth  and  enjoy-
ing but  meagre  educational  advantages,  he  became
later  in  life  a  learned  man,  having  mastered  He-
brew, Greek,  Latin,  French,  German,  and  other  lan-
guages. He  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer,  and  in
1846  removed  to  Boston,  Mass.,  where  he  established
himself  in  business,  and  became  widely  known  for
his  excellent  work.  He  subsequently  removed  to
Cambridge,  Mass.,  and  was  the  founder  of  the  pres-
ent firm  of  John  Wilson  and  Son,  that,  for  several
years,  has  had  charge  of  the  University  press.
Wilson  was  also  a  sturdy  champion  of  Unitarian-
ism,  and  wrote  several  books  in  its  defence  that
have  been  highly  commended.  His  principal  pub-
lication is  connected  with  his  art,  being  a  "Trea-
tise on  Grammatical  Punctuation  "  (Belfast,  1826 ;
new  ed.,  entitled  "A  Treatise  on  English  Punc-
tuation," Boston,  1850).  Of  this  work,  of  which
over  twenty  editions  have  been  issued,  it  has
been  said  that  it  "  places  punctuation  on  a  clear
and  intelligible  grammatical  basis,  and  so  com-
pletely exhausts  the  subject  as  to  leave  nothing  to
be  desired."  He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from
Harvard  in  1866.  He  also  prefixed  an  "  Essay  on
the  Character  and  Writings  of  Robert  Burns"  to
an  edition  of  that  poet's  works  (Belfast,  1837),  and
delivered  an  "  Address  on  Burns,"  which  is  con-
tained in  the  "Report  of  the  Burns  Centenary
Meeting  "  (Boston,  1859).  His  other  publications
comprise  "Scripture  Proofs  and  Scripture  Illus-
trations of  Unitarianism  "  (1833;  3d  ed.,  London
and  Manchester.  1846;  abridged,  Boston,  part  i.-;
new  ed.,  New  York,  1847);  "The  Concessions  of
Trinitarians"  (Manchester,  1842;  Boston,  1845);
"  Unitarian  Principles  Confirmed  by  Trinitarian
Testimonies"  (Boston,  1855-7);  and  "The  Ele-
ments of  Punctuation,"  an  abridgment  of  the
first-named  work  (1856).

WILSON,  John  Allston,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Phcenixville,  Pa.,  24  April,  1837.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  in  1856,
and  in  1857-8  served  as  topographer  on  surveys  in
Central  America  for  the  Honduras  interoceanic
railway.  In  1858  he  entered  the  service  of  the
Pennsylvania  railroad  as  assistant  engineer,  and  in
1861-4  he  was  principal  assistant  engineer  in
charge  of  construction,  after  which  he  was  chief
engineer  for  the  Pennsylvania  railroad  company
on  their  main  line  or  on  affiliated  roads  until  1875.


554


WILSON


WILSON


Meanwhile,  in  1863,  he  served  as  aide  on  the  staff
of  Gen.  Darius  N.  Couch  (then  in  command  of  the
Department  of  the  Susquehanna),  and  had  charge
of  the  construction  of  fortifications  at  Harrisburg
and  vicinity.  In  1875  he  was  engaged  as  consult-
ing engineer  on  the  construction  of  the  buildings
for  the  World's  fair  in  Philadelphia,  and  since
January,  1876,  he  has  been  a  partner  in  the  firm
of  Wilson  Brothers  and  Company,  civil  engineers
and  architects.  Mr.  Wilson  has  been  chief  engi-
neer for  various  railroads  in  Pennsylvania  and  New
York ;  also  has  been  connected  with  lumber-manu-
facturing and  coal-mining  interests  in  Pennsyl-
vania. A  large  number  of  railway  structures,  in-
cluding bridges,  have  been  built  by  him,  especially
along  the  lines  of  the  roads  with  which  he  has  been
connected.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Franklin  insti-
tute, the  American  institute  of  mining  engineers,
the  American  society  of  civil  engineers,  and  other
technical  societies. — His  brother,  Joseph  Miller,
civil  engineer,  b.  in  Phoenix ville,  Pa.,  20  June,
1838,  was  graduated  at  the  Rensselaer  polytechnic
institute  in  1858,  and  studied  chemistry.  He  en-
tered the  service  of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad  in
March,  1860,  as  assistant  engineer,  and  in  1867
was  given  jurisdiction  as  engineer  of  bridges  and
building  over  all  lines  that  were  controlled  by
the  Pennsylvania  company  from  New  York  on  the
east  to  Pittsburg  on  the  west,  and  from  Canan-
daigua,  N.  Y.,  »n  the  north  to  Quantico,  Va.,  on
the  south.  This  office  he  resigned  in  1886.  In
1874-'6  he  was  joint  engineer  and  architect  with
Henry  Pettit  for  the  main  exhibition  building  and
machinery  hall  of  the  World's  fair  in  Philadel-
phia, and  in  January,  1876.  in  association  with  his
brother,  he  organized  the  firm  of  Wilson  Brothers
and  Company,  with  which  he  is  still  connected.
Among  the  important  structures  that  he  has  built
are  the  Susquehanna  bridge  at  Harrisburg,  the
Schuylkill  river  bridge  of  the  Filbert  street  line
in  Philadelphia,  and  bridges  at  Trenton,  and
New  Brunswick,  N.  J.  Mr.  Wilson  designed  the
Drexel  bank  and  the  Drexel  building  in  Phila-
delphia, the  St.  Francis  de  Sales  industrial  school
in  Eddington,  Pa.,  and  other  buildings.  He  re-
ceived medals  and  awards  for  his  plans  of  bridges
and  buildings  at  the  World's  fair  in  1876,  and  the
degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1877.  He  is  a  member
of  the  London  institution  of  civil  engineers,  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers,  and  other  so-
cieties, and  was  president  of  the  Franklin  insti-
tute in  1887-'8,  and  of  the  Engineers'  club  of
Philadelphia  in  1888.  In  addition  to  various  tech-
nical papers  in  scientific  journals,  he  wrote  the
mechanical,  scientific,  and  historical  parts  of  the
"  Illustrated  Catalogue  of  the  International  Ex-
hibition of  1876"  (Philadelphia,  1876-'8).

WILSON,  John  Grover,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mid-
dletown,  New  Castle  co.,  Del.,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  Phil-
adelphia, Pa.,  20  Feb.,  1885.  He  was  educated  at
Delaware  college,  and  became  a  minister  of  the
Methodist  Protestant  church.  This  connection  he
severed  in  1855,  but  while  affiliating  with  the  sect
called  Christians,  or  Campbellites,  he  never  formally
joined  them.  On  the  contrary,  he  and  the  church
to  which  he  ministered  in  Philadelphia  continued
until  his  death  to  be  free  from  any  denominational
associations.  The  society  still  exists,  and  is  known
as  the  "  Ebenezer  Independent  Christian  church."
Mr.  Wilson  never  used  the  prefex  M  Rev."  in  writ-
ing his  name,  but  instead  preferred  the  initials
V.  D.  M.,  a  contraction  for  "  Verbi  Dei  Minister"
— minister  of  the  word  of  God.  He  expounded
his  peculiar  views  in  various  periodicals,  and  es-


pecially in  the  "  Homiletic  Magazine  and  Reposi-
tory of  Pastoral  Theology  "  (1843-'4),  which  was
founded  by  him.  From  1842  till  1845  he  was
secretary  of  the  Baltimore  annual  conference  of
the  Methodist  Protestant  church.  He  published,
among  other  works,  "  Discourses  on  Prophecy "
(Philadelphia,  1850)  ;  "  A  Vindication  of  the
Scheme  of  Redemption  "  (1858) ;  "  Writings  in
Prose  and  Verse "  (1860) ;  "  The  Gospel  of  the
Epiphany  "and  "The  Branch  of  David"  (1867);
"  The  Sabbath  and  its  Law " ;  "  Lyre  of  my
Youth";  and  "God,  All  in  All,"  a  prize  poem.

WILSON,  John  Henry,  Canadian  educator,  b.
near  Ottawa,  14  Feb.,  1833.  He  was  educated  at
the  Grammar-school,  St.  Thomas,  and  at  the  Uni-
versity of  the  city  of  New  York,  and  was  graduated
as  a  physician  at  Victoria  university,  Cobourg,  Ont..
in  1858.  He  subsequently  became  professor  of
anatomy  in  Victoria  university,  and  was  a  member
of  the  legislative  assembly  of  Ontario  from  1871
till  1879.  He  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment in  1882,  and  re-elected  in  February,  1887.

WILSON,  John  Laird,  journalist,  b.  in  Croft-
head,  Bridge  of  Weir,  Renfrewshire,  Scotland,  20
Sept.,  1832.  He  is  the  eldest  son  of  Alexander
Wilson,  an  architect  and  surveyor.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Glasgow  in  1852,  studied
at  the  Theological  hall  of  the  United  Presbyterian
church  in  Edinburgh,  and  was  licensed  as  a  preacher
of  the  gospel  in  1857.  In  the  same  year  he  accepted
a  call  to  the  west  of  Scotland.  After  several  years'
successful  work  he  resigned  this  charge,  on  account
of  feeble  health,  and  went  to  Egypt,  where  he  re-
gained his  strength.  In  the  summer  of  1866  Mr.
Wilson  came  to  this  country,  and  was  on  the  edi-
torial staff  of  the  New  York  "  Herald  "  before  the
close  of  the  year.  In  1874  he  retired  from  the
"  Herald,"  and,  at  the  head  of  a  joint-stock  com-
pany, established  the  New  York  "Scotsman,"  but
the  following  year  he  abandoned  the  enterprise.
He  has  contributed  largely  to  periodicals,  and  has
published  "The  Battles  of  the  Civil  War"  (2  vols.,
New  York,  1878),  and  "John  WyclifTe,  Patriot  and
Reformer — a  Biography"  (1884).  He  is  now  pre-
paring a  history  of  the  Huguenots.

WILSON,  John  Leighton,  missionary,  b.  in
Sumter  county,  S.  C,  25  March,  1809;  d.  near
Mayesville,  S.  C.,  13  July,  1886.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1829,  and  at  the  Columbia  (S.
C.)  theological  seminary  in  1833,  being  a  member
of  the  first  class
that  was  educated
in  that  institution.
He  was  ordained
as  a  missionary
the  same  year,
and,  after  study-
ing Arabic  at  An-
dover  seminary,
sailed  in  Novem-
ber on  a  voyage
of  exploration  to
western  Africa,  re-
turning in  the
following  spring.
As  a  result  of  his
investigations,  he
decided  that  Cape  /  / • y

Palmas  was  a  y*^'*£*-*^/JE+^Cji£y0-*.
promising  field  for

missionary  work.  In  May,  1834.  he  was  married,
and  returned  with  his  wife  to  Africa  before  the
close  of  that  year.  Here  they  labored  until  1841,
during  which  period  they  organised  a  church  of
forty  members,  educated  more  than  one  hundred


WILSON


WILSON


555


native  youth,  and  reduced  the  Grebo  language  to
writing,  publishing  a  grammar  and  dictionary,  and
translating  the  gospels  of  Matthew  and  John,  to-
gether with  several  small  volumes,  into  the  native
tongue.  In  1842  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilson  removed  to
the  Gaboon  river,  1,200  miles  southeast  of  Cape
Pulmas,  and  began  a  new  mission  among  the
Mpongwe  people.  Here  again  the  language  was
reduced  to  writing  for  the  first  time,  and  a  gram-
mar, a  vocabulary,  parts  of  the  Bible,  and  several
small  volumes  were  published.  In  the  spring  of
1858.  owing  to  failing  health,  he  and  his  wife
returned  to  the  United  States.  The  following
autumn  he  became  secretary  of  the  board  of  for-
eign missions  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  and  con-
tinued to  discharge  his  duties  until  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war,  when  he  returned  to  his
home  in  the  south.  On  the  organization  of  the
Southern  Presbyterian  church,  Dr.  Wilson  was  ap-
pointed secretary  of  foreign  missions,  and  contin-
ued to  act  as  such  until  1885,  when  he  was  made
secretary  emeritus.  For  seven  years  during  this
period  the  home  mission  work  was  combined  with
that  of  foreign  missions,  he  taking  charge  of  both.
In  1852  a  strong  effort  was  made  in  the  British
parliament  to  withdraw  the  British  squadron  from
the  African  coast,  under  the  impression  that  the
foreign  slave-trade  could  not  be  suppressed.  To
prove  that  this  view  was  erroneous,  Dr.  Wilson
wrote  a  pamphlet,  and  pointed  out  what  was  neces-
sary to  make  the  crusade  against  the  traffic  success-
ful. The  pamphlet,  falling  into  the  hands  of  Lord
Palmerston,  was  republished  in  the  "  United  Ser-
vice Journal,"  and  also  in  the  parliamentary  "  Blue
Book,"  an  edition  of  10,000  copies  being  circulated
throughout  the  United  Kingdom.  Lord  Palmer-
ston subsequently  informed  Dr.  Wilson  that  his
protest  had  silenced  all  opposition  to  the  squadron's
remaining  on  the  coast,  and  in  less  than  five  years
the  trade  itself  was  brought  to  an  end.  Dr.  Wil-
son edited  "  The  Foreign  Record  "  (New  York,
1853-'61),  which  gave  an  account  of  the  progress  of
work  in  the  foreign  missionary  field,  and  "  The
Missionary"  (Baltimore,  1861-'85).  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Lafayette  college  in  1854.
While  in  Africa  he  sent  to  the  Boston  society
of  natural  history  the  first  specimen  of  the  gorilla
that  was  sent  from  there.  He  contributed  to  the
"Southern  Presbyterian  Review"  and  other  periodi-
cals. He  also  published  "Western  Africa:  its  His-
tory, Condition,  and  Prospects  "  (New  York,  1857).
WILSON,  John  Lyde,  lawyer,  b.  in  Marlbor-
ough district,  S.  C,  24  May,  1784 ;  d.  in  Charleston,
S.  0.,  12  Feb.,  1849.  He  received  a  good  academic
education,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  in  1807.  He  began  to  prac-
tise in  Georgetown,  and  in  1808  he  was  returned  to
the  South  Carolina  house  of  representatives  from
Prince  George  Winyaw.  He  was  repeatedly  re-
elected and  subsequently  was  chosen  senator.  In
1822  he  was  made  president  of  the  senate,  and  dur-
ing the  same  year  elected  governor  and  commander-
in-chief.  Before  his  election  as  governor  he  pub-
lished a  severe  attack  on  the  court  of  appeals,
which  is  believed  to  have  contributed  materially  to
the  abolition  of  that  tribunal.  Gov.  Wilson  re-
mained in  office  until  1824.  In  1827  he  was  again
elected  to  the  senate.  He  was  also  a  member  of
the  Nullification  convention  of  1832,  and  advocated
the  most  violent  of  the  measures  that  were  pro-
posed then  and  during  the  session  of  1833.  In
1838  he  published  a  "  Code  of  Honor,"  which  he
affirmed  was  the  means  of  saving  life,  but  which
seemed  to  be  intended  rather  to  regulate  duels,  in
several  of  which  he  took  part. Gov.  Wilson's  in-


tellectual powers  were  remarkable,  and  his  speeches,
political  and  legal,  were  always  prepared  with  the
greatest  care.  He  also  possessed  the  art  of  extem-
poraneous speaking.  His  voice  was  good  and  his
manner  graceful.  He  published  a  "  Speech  on  the
Codification  of  the  Laws  of  the  State  "  (New  York,
1827),  and  "  Cupid  and  Psyche  :  from  the  '  Golden
Ass'  of  Apuleius"  (Charleston,  1842).

WILSON,  Matthew,  clergyman,  b.  in  East  Not-
tingham, Chester  co.,  Pa.,  15  Jan.,  1781 ;  d.  in
Lewes,  Sussex  co.,  Del.,  30  March,  1790.  He  was
licensed  to  preach  in  1754,  and  in  1756  was  in-
stalled pastor  of  the  congregations  at  Lewes  and
Cool  Spring,  Del.  By  consent  of  his  two  congre-
gations, he  began,  in  1767,  to  preach  every  third
Sabbath  at  the  neighboring  town  of  Indian  River.
For  this  extensive  parish  he  continued  to  minister
until  his  death.  As  he  had  received  a  medical  as
well  as  a  theological  training,  Dr.  Wilson  divided
his  time  between  the  two  professions,  and  few  phy-
sicians of  his  day  displayed  more  learning,  skill,  or
achieved  greater  success.  In  the  "  Old  Side  "  and
"  New  Side  "  controversy  that  preceded  the  "  Plan
of  Union,"  that  restored  peace  to  the  Presbyterian
church  in  1758,  he  took  part  with  the  former,  al-
though his  piety  and  amiable  character  made  him
esteemed  by  both  parties.  In  the  Revolutionary
struggle  he  held  decided  views  in  favor  of  the  in-
dependence of  the  colonies.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1786. — His  son,  James  Patriot,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lewes,  Sussex  co.,  Del.,  21  Feb.,  1769;  d.  in  Bucks
county,- Pa.,  9  Dec,  1830,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1788,  and  was  at  once
offered  the  chair  of  assistant  professor  of  mathemat-
ics in  that  institution,  but  declined  on  account  of
feeble  health.  Subsequently,  and  after  teaching  in
his  native  town,  he  studied  law  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Sussex  county,  Del.,  in  1790.  He  also
acted  for  some  time  as  surveyor-general  of  the
state.  Although  he  rose  to  eminence  in  his  pro-
fession, the  sudden  death  of  his  wife  and  the  mur-
der of  his  brother  combined  to  turn  his  attention
to  the  subject  of  religion,  and  he  abandoned  his
profession  for  the  pulpit.  He  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1804,  and  the  same  year  was  installed  as  pastor
of  the  three  congregations  over  which  his  father
had  so  long  presided.  In  May,  1806,  he  was  called
to  the  charge  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  in
Philadelphia.  Here  he  remained  until  May,  1828,
when  he  retired  to  his  farm,  about  twenty  miles
from  that  city,  on  account  of  failing  health.  He
preached  occasionally  until  1830,  when  his  resigna-
tion was  accepted.  Dr.  Wilson  was  noted  for  ec-
centricities of  character,  but  they  were  overlooked
in  view  of  his  sterling  worth.  As  a  preacher  he
was  deliberate  and  unimpassioned,  and  spoke  with-
out notes.  He  Was  probably  the  only  clergyman
of  his  country  and  time  who  had  not  only  read  all
the  volumes  extant  of  Patristic  theology,  but  liter-
ally lived  among  them.  On  a  blank  leaf  of  his
copy  of  Henry  Ware's  tract  on  "Extemporaneous
Preaching"  he  wrote:  "I  have  preached  twenty
years,  and  have  never  written  a  full  sermon  in  my
life,  and  never  read  one  word  of  a  sermon  from  the
pulpit,  nor  opened  a  note,  nor  committed  a  sen-
tence, and  have  rarely  wandered  five  minutes  at  a
time  from  my  mental  arrangement  previously
made."  "  I  heard  him  preach  one  sermon,"  says  a
writer,  who  knew  Dr.  Wilson,  "  and  it  was  through-
out as  consecutive  and  condensed  as  the  demon-
stration of  a  problem  of  Euclid."  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1807.  His  publications  include  "  Lec-
tures upon  Some  of  the  Parables  and  Historical


556


WILSON


WILSON


Passages  of  the  New  Testament "  (Philadelphia,
1810) ;  "  An  Easy  Introduction  to  the  Knowledge
of  the  Hebrew  Language"  (1812);  "  Ridgely's
'  Body  of  Divinity,'  with  Notes,  Original  and  Se-
lected "  (1814);  "An  Essay  on  Grammar "  (1817) :
"  An  Essay  on  the  Probation  of  Fallen  Men  "
(1827) ;  "  Common  Objections  to  Christianity  "  and
the  "  Hope  of  Immortality  "  (1829) ;  and  u  A  Free
Conversation  on  the  Unpardonable  Sin  "  (1830).

WILSON,  Matthew,  artist,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 17  July,  1814.  He  came  to  this  couutry  in
1832,  and  for  several  years  painted  miniatures  in
Philadelphia.  He  then  became  a  pupil  of  Henry
Inman,  and  in  1835  went  to  Paris,  where  he  stud-
ied with  Edouard  Dubufe.  He  was  elected  an  as-
sociate of  the  National  academy  in  1843.  Among
his  numerous  portraits  are  those  of  Samuel  J.  Til-
den  ;  Gov.  Thomas  G.  Pratt,  of  Maryland ;  Secre-
taries Gideon  Welles,  George  M.  Robeson,  and
William  E.  Chandler,  for  the  U.  S.  navy  depart-
ment ;  Albert  Gallatin,  for  the  treasury  depart-
ment; Washington  Irving;  James  Fenimore  Coop-
er ;  Henry  Wilson ;  and  Thaddeus  Stevens.  He
also  painted  the  last  portrait  of  Abraham  Lincoln
two  weeks  before  the  president's  death,  and  has
since  executed  a  full-length  picture  of  Mrs.  Wash-
ington for  the  White  House.

WILSON,  Oliver  Morris,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lo-
gansport,  Ind.,  16  Aug.,  1836.  He  was  graduated
at  Hamilton  college  in  1858  and  studied  law.
After  serving  in  the  civil  war  as  captain  and  ma-
jor of  Indiana  volunteers,  he  was  secretary  of  the
Indiana  senate  in  1865-'9,  assistant  U.  S.  attorney
for  the  state  in  1869-'71,  and  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  the  latter  year.  He  was  adjutant-general
of  the  Grand  army  of  the  republic  for  Indiana  in
1866-'8,  and  organized  the  first  department  in  that
order.  Maj.  Wilson  has  published  "  Digest  of  Par-
liamentary Law"  (Philadelphia,  1869),  and  "In-
diana Superior  Court  Reports"  (1875).

WILSON,  Peter,  educator,  b.  in  Ordiquhill,
Banff,  Scotland,  23  Nov.,  1746 ;  d.  in  New  Barba-
does,  N.  J.,  1  Aug.,  1825.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Aberdeen,  where  he  paid  particular
attention  to  classical  studies.  Removing  to  New
York  city  in  1763,  he  soon  found  employment
as  a  teacher,  and  was  called  to  be  the  principal
of  Hackensack  (N.  J.)  academy,  where,  over  the
front  windows  of  his  residence,  his  own  and  his
wife's  name  are  still  to  be  seen  cut  in  the  stone.
In  1775  he  threw  himself  with  great  zeal  into  the
political  movements  that  preceded  the  Revolu-
tion, and  from  1777  till  1783  he  served  in  the
New  Jersey  legislature.  In  the  latter  year  he  was
appointed  to  revise  and  codify  the  laws  of  that
state.  In  1789  he  was  elected  professor  of  Greek
and  Latin  in  Columbia,  and  he  held  the  office
until  1792,  when  he  resigned  to  become  principal
of  Erasmus  Hall,  Flatbush,  L.  I.  In  1797  he
was  recalled  to  Columbia  as  professor  of  Greek
and  Latin  and  of  Grecian  and  Roman  antiquities,
which  chair  he  filled  until  1820,  when  he  was  re-
tired with  a  pension  by  the  trustees.  He  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Union  in  1798.  He
published  "  Rules  of  Latin  Prosody,  for  the  Use  of
Schools  "  (New  York,  1810) ;  "  Introduction  to  Greek
Prosody  "  and  "  Compendium  of  Greek  Prosody  "
(1817);  together  with  editions  of  Sallust,  Longi-
nus,  the  Greek  Testament,  and  revised  Dr.  Alex-
ander Adams'  "  Roman  Antiquities  "  (1826).

WILSON,  Samuel  Farmer,  journalist,  b.  in
Connecticut  in  1805;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  11
March,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1822,  studied  law  in  New  York  city,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  there  in  1826,  and  at  Raleigh,  N.  C,  in


1828,  removed  from  that  place  to  New  Berne,  and
from  there  to  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  1832,  where  he  aban-
doned law  to  become  joint  editor  of  the  "  Register."
He  went  to  New  Orleans  in  1849,  and  joined  the
staff  of  the  "  Crescent,"  connected  himself  with
the  "Picayune"  in  the  following  year,  and  became
a  joint  owner  and  the  chief  editorial  writer  of  that
newspaper.  For  several  terms  he  was  a  member
of  the  Louisiana  legislature.  He  was  the  author
of  a  "  History  of  the  American  Revolution,"  which
passed  through  several  editions  (Baltimore,  1834).
WILSON,  Theodore  Delavan,  naval  construct-
or, b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  11  May,  1840.  He  served
an  apprenticeship  as  a  shipwright  at  the  Brooklyn
navy-yard,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
was  a  non-commissioned  officer  in  the  13th  New
York  militia  regiment  for  three  months.  Upon
his  return  he  was  appointed  a  carpenter  in  the
navy,  3  Aug.,  1861,  and  he  served  in  the  steamer
"  Cambridge,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading
squadron,  in  1861-4,  and  with  Rear-Admiral  Greg-
ory as  inspector  of  vessels  in  the  private  establish-
ments near  New  York  city.  After  passing  the  re-
quired examination  he  was  commissioned  as  an  as-
sistant naval  constructor,  17  May,  1866.  He  served
at  the  Pensacola  navy-yard  in  1866-'7,  and  at  Phila-
delphia in  1867-'9,  and  was  instructor  in  naval
architecture  and  ship-building  at  the  U.  S.  naval
academy  in  1869-'73.  He  was  commissioned  naval
constructor,  1  July,  1873,  and  served  at  the  Ports-
mouth navy-yard  in  1873-'82.  He  was  elected  a
member  of  the  Institute  of  naval  architects  of  Eng-
land, being  the  first  American  member  of  that  sci-
entific body.  He  was  appointed  chief  of  the  bu-
reau of  construction  and  repair,  3  March,  1872,  and
reappointed  for  a  second  term  of  four  years,  15  Dec,


1886.  In  1870  he  received  a  patent  for  "  air-pi  >rts."'
which  have  been  adopted  in  the  naval  service  and
merchant-ships,  and  in  1880  he  patented  a  bolt-
extractor,  which  is  in  general  use.  While  chief
of  the  bureau  of  construction  and  repair  he  has
designed  several  of  the  modern  ships  that  have
been  recently  built  and  are  now  building.  He  de-
signed the  "  Chicago,"  "  Boston,"  and  "  Atlanta,"
to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  advisory  board,
and  the  cruisers  "  Newark,"  "  San  Francisco,"
"  Concord,"  "  Yorktown,"  "  Bennington,"  "  Pe-
trel," and  "  Maine,"  the  latter  of  which  is  shown
in  the  illustration.  He  is  the  author  of  "Ship-
Building,  Theoretical  and  Practical,"  which  is  used
as  a  text-book  at  the  naval  academy  and  by  the
profession  generally  (New  York,  1873).

WILSON,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  England
in  1761 ;  d.  in  Washington  county,  Ky.,  in  1824.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Dominican  order,  and  was
president  of  its  college  at  Bornheim,  Belgium,  in
1803,  when  the  building  was  attacked  and  plun-
dered by  the  French  troops.  He  escaped  to  Eng-
land, where  he  petitioned  the  general  of  the  order
to  be  allowed  to  establish  a  house  in  the  United
States.  He  was  employed,  for  several  years  after
his  arrival  in  this  country,  on  missions  in  Mary-
land and  the  neighboring  states,  and  it  was  not  till
1808  that  the  first  Dominican  convent  in  the  United


WILSON


WILSON


557


States,  that  of  St.  Rose,  was  founded  in  Washing-
ton county,  Ky.  Shortly  afterward,  Father  Wil-
son was  appointed  provincial  of  his  order,  and
superior  of  the  convent  and  college.  In  1809  he
established  a  novitiate,  in  which  he  trained  a  large
number  of  priests  for  the  Kentucky  mission.  He
continued  at  the  head  of  these  institutions  until
the  close  of  his  life.

WILSON,  Thomas,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  about  1708;  d.  there  about  1828.  He  learned
the  printer's  trade,  wrote  extensively  for  the  press,
removed  in  1811  to  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  there  con-
ducted a  newspaper,  returning  in  1810  to  Phila-
delphia. He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Biography
of  the  Principal  American  Military  and  Naval  He-
roes "  (New  York,  1821) ;  and  "  The  Picture  of  Phil-
adelphia in  1824"  (Philadelphia,  1824).

WILSON,  Thomas,  merchant,  b.  in  Harford
County,  Md.,  5  Feb.,  1789 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  2  Sept.,
1879.  His  parents  were  members  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  and  removed  to  Baltimore  in  1798.  The
son  received  a  plain  education,  and  at  the  age  of  sev-
enteen was  apprenticed  to  Thorndick  Chase,  a  mer-
chant of  Balti  more,  trading  with  the  West  Indies  and
the  Spanish  Main.  He  was  advanced  by  Mr.  Chase
to  the  post  of  chief  clerk  before  he  was  nineteen,
and  upon  attaining  his  majority  became  a  partner
in  the  firm  of  Brown  and  Wilson.  He  spent  much
of  his  time  from  1811  till  1810  at  La  Guayra,  Vene-
zuela, as  resident  partner  of  his  firm ;  but  during
the  war  of  1812  he  returned  to  Baltimore  and  or-
ganized a  line  of  small  vessels  to  run  from  Boston
to  Folly  Landing,  Va.,  whence  their  cargoes  were
transported  overland  to  Onancock,  and  thence  by
boats  to  Baltimore.  While  engaged  in  these  ven-
tures he  narrowly  escaped  capture  by  the  British
on  several  occasions.  In  1857  he  retired  from
mercantile  business,  and  confined  his  operations  to
dealing  in  securities.  He  was  identified  with  many
of  the  manufacturing  interests  of  Maryland  and
Pennsylvania,  was  a  member  of  the  Maryland  colo-
nization society,  and  for  many  years  president  of
the  Baltimore  manual  labor  school,  in  which  char-
ity he  took  great  interest.  During  the  civil  war
of  1801-'5  he  was  a  firm  supporter  of  the  National
cause.  By  his  will  he  devoted  $025,000  to  various
charities,  endowing  the  Thomas  Wilson  sanita-
rium for  children — an  institution  designed  to  take
care  of  sick  children  during  the  summer  months —
with  $500,000 ;  and  a  fuel-saving  society — to  aid
deserving  poor  people  to  purchase  their  fuel  cheap-
ly, and  sewing-women  to  obtain  sewing-machines
at  low  cost— with  $100,000.

WILSON,  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  County  Tyrone,
Ireland,  10  May,  1827.  He  was  brought  to  the
United  States  in  1839,  was  graduated  at  Allegheny
college  in  1852,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  Meadville,  Pa.,  in  1855.  and  settled  in
Winona,  Minn.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Con-
stitutional convention  of  Minnesota  in  1857,  was
elected  a  district  judge,  and  took  his  seat  on  the
bench  in  1858,  on  the  organization  of  the  state
government.  In  the  spring  of  1804  he  was  ap-
pointed a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  in  the
autumn  of  the  same  year  he  was  elected  chief
justice  for  the  term  of  seven  years.  In  1809  he
resigned,  and  has  since  followed  the  practice
of  his  profession.  He  was  elected  to  the  state
house  of  representatives  in  1880,  and  in  1882,  after
declining  a  nomination  for  congress,  was  elected
to  the  state  senate,  and  served  till  1885.  In  the
latter  year  he  was  the  Democratic  candidate  for  a
seat  in  the  United  States  senate,  and  in  1880  he
was  elected  to  the  National  house  of  representa-
tives, taking  his  seat  on  5  Dec,  1887.


WILSON,  Thomas  Bellerhy,  physician,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  Jan.,  1807;  d.  in  Newark,
Del.,  15  March,  1805.  He  was  educated  at  the
Friends'  school  in  Philadelphia,  and  then  studied
medicine,  which  he  practised  in  his  native  city
with  considerable  success.  Subsequently  he  de-
voted himself  to  natural  history,  and  paid  special
attention  to  birds,  of  which  he  made  a  remarkable
collection.  In  1832  he  was  elected  to  the  Academy
of  natural  sciences  of  Philadelphia,  and  at  once
took  an  active  part  in  its  proceedings.  Its  library
was  largely  created  through  his  liberality,  and  his
collection  of  birds,  which  then  ranked  as"  the  third
in  the  world,  was  presented  by  him  to  the  academy,
of  which  he  was  president  in  1803-'4.

WILSON,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Scotland
in  1755 ;  d.  in  Clermont,  Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  in
December,  1828.  He  was  the  brother  of  Sir  Alex-
ander Wilson,  bart,  of  Bath,  England.  He  was
educated  at  the  University  of  Glasgow,  where  he
received  the  degrees  of  A.  B.  and  M.  D.,  and  came
to  the  United  States  in  1784,  bringing  letters  of  in-
troduction to  Chancellor  Robert  R.  Livingston
and  other  citizens.  The  chancellor,  feeling  the
need  of  a  skilled  medical  man  in  his  part  of  the
country,  induced  Dr.  Wilson  to  take  up  his  resi-
dence at  Clermont,  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  until
his  death.  When  Mr.  Livingston  went  to  Europe
in  1800  as  minister  to  France  he  left  his  extensive
estates  in  the  care  of  Dr.  Wilson,  and  afterward  ap-
pointed him  one  of  his  executors.  On  the  organi-
zation of  the  County  medical  society,  he  was  made
its  president,  and  subsequently  held"  the  same  post
in  the  Medical  association  of  the  state  of  New
York.  In  1804  Dr.  Wilson  was  named  first  judge
of  Columbia  county,  being  the  second  incumbent
of  that  office,  the  duties  of  which  he  continued  to
discharge  until  he  was  disqualified  by  age.  The
latter  part  of  his  life  was  spent  in  agricultural  pur-
suits, and  he  was  mainly  instrumental  in  organiz-
ing the  Farmers'  club  of  Dutchess  and  Columbia
counties,  N.  Y.,  which  is  believed  to  have  been  the
first  purely  agricultural  association  in  the  state. —
His  son,  Stephen  Bayard,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Cler-
mont, Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  18  Aug.,  1790 ;  d.  in
Hudson.  N.  Y.,  15  March,  1803,  entered  the  navy  as
a  midshipman,  1  Jan.,  1812,  and  served  at  Norfolk
for  a  short  time,  and  then  on  the  lakes  during  the
war  until  1810.  In  1817  he  was  attached  to  the
ship  "Independence"  at  Boston.  He  cruised  on
the  Mediterranean  station  in  the  frigate  "Guer-
riere"  and  the  ship  "Washington"  in  1818— '21,
was  stationed  at  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  in  1822,
and  served  in  the  Musquito  fleet  in  1823-'7  for  the
suppression  of  piracy  in  the  West  Indies.  He  was
commissioned  a  lieutenant,  13  Jan.,  1825,  served  at
the  naval  rendezvous  at  Baltimore  in  1827-'30,
cruised  in  the  frigate  "  Potomac,"  of  the  Pacific
squadron,  in  1831-4,  in  the  "  John  Adams"  on  the
Mediterranean  station  in  1835-'7,  in  the  ship  "  Mace-
donian," in  the  West  Indies  in  1838-'40.  He  was
promoted  to  commander,  8  Sept.,  1841,  and  had
the  frigate  "  Columbus,"  of  the  Brazil  station,  in
1843-'4.  He  served  at  the  Boston  navy-yard  in
1845-7,  commanded  the  sloop  "John  Adams,"  in
1847-'8,  during  the  latter  part  of  the  Mexican  war,
and  after  the  war  continued  cruising  for  some  time
on  the  Gulf  coast  of  Mexico.  He  participated  in
the  expedition  that  captured  Tuspan.  He  served
at  the  New  York  navy-yard  in  command  of  the
receiving-ship  in  1850-'l.  On  14  Sept.,  1855,  he
was  promoted  to  captain,  and  commanded  the
frigate  "  Columbia "  on  the  home  station  for  a
few  months  after  his  promotion.  His  health
failed,  and  he  was  on  waiting  orders  until  he  was


558


WILSON


WIMAN


retired  by  operation  of  law,  21  Dec,  1861,  because
of  his  age.  He  saw  no  service  during  the  civil  war,
on  account  of  his  feeble  health.

WILSON,  William  Dexter,  clergyman,  b.  in
Stoddard,  N.  H.,  28  Feb.,  1816.  He  was  graduated
at  Walpole  academy,  where  he  became  teacher  of
mathematics,  entered  the  Harvard  divinity-school
in  1835.  and  was  graduated  in  1838.  Becoming
dissatisfied  with  Unitarianism,  he  took  orders  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  was  ordained
deacon  in  St.  Anne's  church,  Lowell,  Mass.,  7
April,  1842,  by  Bishop  Griswold,  and  priest  in
Trinity  church,  Rutland,  Vt.,  21  Sept.,  1847,  by
Bishop  Hopkins.  He  was  minister  of  Christ  church,
Sherburne,  N.  Y..  from  1842  till  1850,  when  he  was
elected  professor  of  moral  and  intellectual  philoso-
phy in  Geneva  (now  Hobart)  college.  On  the
opening  of  Cornell  university  in  1868,  he  became
professor  of  philosophy  in  that  institution,  which
post  he  held  until  1886,  when  he  was  retired  as
emeritus  professor.  He  now  resides  in  Syracuse,
N.  Y.,  and  is  deacon  of  St.  Andrew's  divinity-school
in  that  city.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Geneva  college  in  1849,  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Bed-
ford university,  Tenn.,  in  1868,  and  that  of  L.  H.  D.
from  the  regents  of  the  University  of  the  state  of
New  York  in  1872.  Dr.  Wilson  has  been  active  in
the  affairs  of  the  church  in  various  ways,  and  has
contributed  to  reviews  and  magazines  during  forty
years.  His  chief  publications  are  "The  Church
Identified  "  (Utica,  1848) ;  "  Elementary  Treatise  on
Logic  "  (New  York,  1856) ;  "  Psychology,  Compara-
tive and  Human  "  (1871) ;  "  Text-Book  of  Logic  "
(1872) ;  "  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  History  of
Philosophy  "  (1872) ;  "  Live  Questions  in  Psychology
and  Metaphysics  "  (1877) ;  and  "  The  Foundations
of  Religious'Belief,"  Paddock  lectures  (1883).

WILSON,  William  Lyne,  congressman,  b.  in
Jefferson  county,  Va.,  3  May,  1843.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Columbian  college  in  1860,  afterward
studied  in  the  University  of  Virginia,  served  in
the  Confederate  army,  was  professor  of  Latin  in
Columbian  college  from  1865  till  1871,  studying
law  at  the  same  time,  and  on  being  admitted  to
the  bar  in  the  latter  year  engaged  in  practice  at
Charlestown,  W.  Va.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Democratic  national  convention  and  a  presidential
elector  in  1880.  In  1882  he  became  president  of
West  Virginia  university,  but  he  resigned  in  order
to  take  his  seat  in  congress  on  1  Dec,  1883.  He
was  re-elected  for  the  three  following  terms,  and
served  on  the  ways  and  means  committee  that  pre-
pared the  Mills  tariff  bill,  taking  an  active  part  in
the  debates  on  that  measure  in  1888.  He  was  a
regent  of  the  Smithsonian  institution  in  1883-'7,
and  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Columbian
university  in  1883.

WILSON,  Woodrow,  educator,  b.  in  Staunton,
Va.,  28  Dec.  1856.  He  is  a  son  of  the  Rev.  Joseph
B.  Wilson,  D.  I).,  and  nephew  of  the  Rev.  James
Woodrow,  D.  D.,  of  Columbia,  S.  C.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Princeton  in  1879,  studied  law  at  the
University  of  Virginia,  and  practised  at  Atlanta,
Ga.,  in  1882-3.  Preferring  to  devote  himself  to
special  studies,  he  abandoned  the  legal  profession
and  took  a  post-graduate  course  in  history  and
politics  at  Johns  Hopkins  university  in  1883-5,  re-
ceiving the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  that  institution
in  1886,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Wake  Forest  col-
lege, N.  C.  in  1887.  He  was  associate  in  history
at  Bryn  Mawr  college,  Pa.,  in  1885-'6,  and  asso-
ciate professor  of  history  and  political  science  in
the  same  college  in  1886-8.  In  the  latter  year  he
was  elected  to  the  chair  of  history  and  politi-
cal economy  in  Wesleyan  university. Prof.  Wil-


son has  published  "  Congressional  Government :
a  Study  in  American  Politics  "  (Boston,  1885).
This  work  has  attracted  attention  in  England,
Belgium,  and  Germany.  In  England  it  has  been
accepted  as  an  authority  on  American  institutions.
It  has  also  been  epitomized  by  Prof.  Emile  de
Laveleye  in  the  "  Revue  des  Deux-Mondes."  He
has  contributed  to  a  collection  of  essays  by  Ameri-
can economists,  entitled  "  The  National  Revenues  "
(Chicago,  1888),  and  articles  on  political  and  ad-
ministrative subjects  to  periodicals.

WILSTACH,  John  Augustine  (wil'-stack),  au-
thor, b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  14  July,  1824.  He
was  educated  in  a  military  and  academical  in-
stitute that  was  taught  by  Ormsby  M.  Mitchel,
and  in  Cincinnati  college,  studied  law,  and  began
practice  in  1850.  From  1852  till  1862  he  was  a
master  in  chancery.  In  1867  he  was  sent  to  the
Paris  universal  exposition  as  commissioner  for
Indiana,  and  from  that  year  till  1872  he  was  com-
missioner of  immigration  for  the  same  state.  He
has  devoted  his  attention  to  philological  studies,
and  has  made  the  only  complete  translation  of  the
works  of  Virgil  into  English  verse,  with  various
readings  and  notes  (Boston,  1884).  He  also  pub-
lished a  review  of  the  literature  relating  to  Virgil
under  the  title  of  "  The  Virgilians  "  (1884).  More
recently  he  has  prepared  a  poetical  translation  of
the  "  Divine  Comedy "  of  Dante  Alighieri,  with
notes  and  illustrations  (1888),  and  a  volume  of  criti-
cism entitled  "  Dante,  the  Danteans,  and  Things
Dantean  "  (1889).  Mr.  Wilstach  has  invented  a
new  character  (ai)  to  represent  the  Greek  diph-
thong eu,  which  was  first  used  in  typography  in
his  translation  of  the  "  Divina  Commedia."  He  has
almost  completed  a  free  translation  of  the  entire
Bible  from  the  original  languages. — His  son,  Jo-
seph Walter,  author,  b.  in  Lafayette,  Ind.,  28
June,  1857,  was  educated  at  St.  John's  college,
Fordham,  N.  Y.,  studied  law,  and  established  him-
self in  practice  at  Lafayette,  Ind.  He  has  made  a
translation  of  some  of  the  "  Odes "  of  Horace
(printed  privately,  New  York,  1883),  and,  besides
review  articles,  has  published  a  "  Biography  of
Count  Charles  d'Alembert "  (1885).

WIMAN,  Erastus,  capitalist,  b.  in  Churchville,
Peel  co.,  Ont.,  21  April,  1834.  He  received  a  scanty
education  in  a  country  school,  removed  to  Toronto,
and,  after  working  four  years  as  a  printer,  became
a  reporter  on  the  Toronto  "  Globe,"  and  in  1854-'7
was  commercial  editor  of  that  paper.  He  edited
the  Montreal  "  Trade  Review  "  in  1864-5.  In  1856
he  entered  the  service  of  R.  G.  Dun  and  Co.'s  mer-
cantile agency,  and  in  1867  became  a  partner  in  its
New  York  house,  and  subsequently  its  principal
manager.  He  became  president  of  the  Great
Northwestern  telegraph  company  of  Canada  in
1881,  is  a  director  of  the  Western  Union  telegraph
company,  and  president  of  the  Staten  Island  Rapid
Transit  railway  company  in  1884,  and  succeeded  in
carrying  through  congress  the  authorization  of  the
Arthur  Kill  bridge  between  New  Jersey  and  Staten
island,  which  makes  ten  miles  of  water  front  in
New  York  harbor  accessible  to  trunk  railroads.
Mr.  Wiman  was  mainly  instrumental  in  establish-
ing the  Canadian  club  of  New  York  in  1885,  and
was  its  first  president.  Through  his  influence
chiefly  the  project  of  the  commercial  union  of
Canada  with  the.  United  States  assumed  public  im-
portance in  the  former  country,  and  was  finally
adopted  in  the  winter  of  1888  as  the  main  clause
in  the  platform  of  the  Canadian  Liberals,  under
its  changed  name  of  unrestricted  reciprocity.  He
was  instrumental  in  securing  in  1886  the  aboli-
tion of  imprisonment  for  debt  in  New  York  state.


WIMMER


WINCHELL


559


WIMMER,  Boniface,  R.  C.  prelate,  b.  in  Thai-
massing,  Bavaria,  9  Jan.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Westmoreland
county,  Pa..  8  Dec.,  1887.  He  received  a  classical
education,  took  an  academic  course  at  Ratisbon,
and  entered  the  Munich  university  with  the  in-
tention of  studying  law,  but,  changing  his  mind,
pursued  a  theological  course  in  the  Ratisbon  sem-
inary. On  81  July,  1831,  he  was  ordained  priest;
and  in  the  following  year  he  was  admitted  to  the
Benedictine  monastery  in  Metten,  Bavaria,  chang-
ing his  baptismal  name  Sebastian  to  Boniface.
During  1833-'6  he  labored  as  professor  and  priest
in  Edenstetler,  Augsburg,  in  1840  became  profes-
sor in  the  Louis  gymnasium,  Munich,  and  in  1846
arrived  in  the  United  States  with  four  theological
students  and  fifteen  artisans,  for  the  purpose  of
establishing  an  abbey  for  the  education  of  German
youth  for  the  Roman  Catholic  priesthood.  He  set-
tled near  Beatty,  Westmoreland  co.,  Pa.,  and  on  28
Sept.,  1848,  laid  the  foundation  of  the  present  St.
Vincent's  abbey.  Two  years  afterward  he  founded
St.  Mary's  priory  in  Elk  county,  Pa.  Pope  Pius
IX.  raised  his  original  settlement  to  the  dignity
first  of  a  monastery,  then  of  an  abbey,  and  ap-
pointed him  superior  of  St.  Vincent's,  21  May,  1852,
abbot  ad  triermium,  17  Sept.,  1855,  and  abbot  for
life  and  president  of  the  American  congregation,
27  July,  1866.  When  the  parent  abbey  was  fully
established  and  provided  with  a  variety  of  manu-
facturing industries  for  its  support,  he  set  about
founding  branches  in  the  south,  and  organized  col-
onies in  Louisiana,  North  Carolina,  Alabama,  and
Georgia  in  18?6-'7,and  in  southern  Illinois  in  1881.
On  29  Dec,  1883,  he  celebrated  the  fiftieth  anni-
versary of  his  Benedictine  profession  amid  cere-
monies in  which  members  of  the  order  from  all
parts  of  the  world  participated,  and  on  that  occa-
sion Pope  Leo  XIII.  elevated  him  to  the  dignity  of
arch-abbot.  He  was  a  man  of  attractive  manner,
fine  business  abilitv,  and  large  scholarship.

WIMPFFEN  ■  BERNEBURG,  Alexander
Stanislaus,  explorer,  b.  in  Deux-Ponts  in  1748;
d.  in  Paris  in  1819.  He  was  a  younger  brother
of  the  two  French  generals,  Francois  Louis  and
Felix,  received  his  education  in  his  native  city,
entered  the  French  army,  and  served  in  this  coun-
try as  a  captain  under  Count  Rochambeau  in
1781-'2.  He  was  afterward  employed  in  the  West
Indies,  but  resigned  in  1788,  and  visited  the  West
Indies  and  Mexico.  In  1804  he  secured  an  em-
ployment in  the  military  household  of  Napoleon  I.,
which  he  retained  till  1814,  when  he  retired  to
private  life.  He  wrote  "  Voyage  a,  Saint  Domingue
dans  les  annees  1788,  1789,  and  1790"  (2  vols.,
Paris,  1797),  which  was  translated  into  German  as
"Reisen  nach  St.  Domingo"  (Erfurt,  1798),  and
into  English  (London,  1797);  "Voyage  dans  les
Antilles  Franeaises  et  Espagnoles"  (Paris,  1799);
"  Impressions  de  voyage  et  essai  sur  le  royaume  de
la  Nouvelle  Espagne"  (1802);  and  "Histoire  na-
turelle  du  Cacao  et  du  Sucre"  (1805).

WINANS,  Ross,  inventor,  b.  in  Vernon,  N.  J.,
in  October,  1796;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  11  April,
1877.  He  began  life  as  a  farmer,  and  exhibited  at
an  early  age  great  inventive  genius.  One  of  his
first  devices  was  a  plough.  Afterward  he  invented
the  friction-wheel  for  cars,  and  the  outside  bearing
on  axles,  now  almost  indispensable  to  the  use  of
railways.  He  was  also  the  inventor  of  the  eight-
wheeled  car  system.  He  was  sent  to  England  by
the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad  company  to  study
the  English^ systems,  and  spent  a  year  in  making
observations  that  proved  of  great  value  to  the  com-
pany. He  built  the  first  successful  locomotive  used
on  this  railroad,  and  also  invented  the  camel-back


locomotive.  He  established  in  Baltimore  the  largest
railway  machine-shops  in  the  country,  and  his  sons
were  associated  in  their  management.  Mr.  Winans
was  solicited  by  the  Russian  government,  through
the  agency  of  George  W.  Whistler,  to  go  to  Russia
and  build  rolling-stock  for  the  railroad  between
Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg,  but  declined  to  go  him-
self, and  sent  his  two  sons.  During  the  civil  war
he  took  an  active  part  in  politics,  and  was  chosen
to  represent  Baltimore  in  the  extra  session  of  the
Maryland  legislature  in  1861 ;  but  ho  was  arrested
and  imprisoned  in  Fort  McIIenry.  He  made  nu-
merous compilations  of  gleanings  from  the  works
of  eminent  writers,  upon  philosophical  subjects,
and  was  himself  the  author  of  various  pamphlets
on  religious  subjects,  and  of  "  One  Religion,  Many
Creeds"  (Baltimore,  1870). — His  son,  Thomas  Re
Kay,  engineer,  b.  in  Vernon,  N.  J.,  6  Dec,  1820:
d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  11  June,  1878,  showed  when  a
child  great  fondness  for  mechanical  toys,  which
taste  his  father  encouraged,  and  apprenticed  him
in  his  youth  to  a  machinist.  On  reaching  his  ma-
jority, he  became  associated  in  business  with  his
father,  and,  with  his  brother  William  Lewis,  was
sent  to  Russia  to  arrange  the  contracts  for  furnish-
ing and  managing  the  equipment  of  the  railroad
between  Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg.  In  1843,  with
Andrew  M.  Eastwick  and  Joseph  Harrison,  they
concluded  a  contract  with  the  Russian  government
for  $3,000,000,  and  subsequently  they  held  other
contracts,  from  which  the  profits  were  very  large.
With  his  father  and  brother  he  invented  a  system
of  steam  navigation  commonly  called  the  "cigar-
ship,"  and  for  many  years  conducted  elaborate,  ex-
pensive, and  successful  experiments,  principally  in
European  waters.  After  his  return  to  the  United
States,  he  devoted  his  attention  to  the  study  of  new
inventions  of  the  most  diverse  kinds.  He  devised  a
great  improvement  in  the  construction  of  organs,  in-
vented a  tubular  adjustment  by  which  young  trout
could  be  more  readily  fed,  and  built  a  chimney  100
feet  high  to  ventilate  his  residence  in  Baltimore.

WINANS,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pennsyl-
vania, 3  Nov.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Amite  county.  Miss.,  31
Aug.,  1857.  He  entered  the  Western  conference  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1808,  went  to
Mississippi  as  a  missionary  in  1812,  was  a  pioneer
of  his  church  in  that  state,  and  Louisiana,  and  took
a  conspicuous  part  in  the  organization  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south.  He  exerted  a
wide  influence  in  his  denomination,  and  took  part
in  the  discussion  of  political  questions.  He  pub-
lished "Discourses  on  Fundamental  Religious
Subjects,"  edited  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  O.  Summers,
I).  I).  (Nashville).

WINCHELL,  James  Manning,  clergyman,  b.
in  North  East,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1791 :
d.  in  Boston,  Mass..  22  Feb.,  1820.  He  entered
Union  college  in  1808,  but,  deciding  to  become  a
minister,  preferred  to  finish  at  a  Baptist  institu-
tion, and  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1812.  Mr.
Winchell  was  licensed  by  the  Baptist  church  in
North  East  on  4  Oct.,  1812,  and  accepted  an  in-
vitation to  supply  the  pulpit  in  Bristol,  R.  I.,  for
a  year.  He  was  then  called  to  the  1st  Baptist
church  in  Boston,  and  was  publicly  recognized  in
that  place  on  14  March,  1814.  Here  he  remained
until  his  death,  and  won  a  high  reputation  for  elo-
quence, and  suavity  and  grace  of  manner.  Mr.
Winchell  was  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  American
Baptist  Magazine,"  and  published  "Jubilee  Ser-
mons: Two  Discourses,  exhibiting  an  Historical
Sketch  of  the  First  Baptist  Church  in  Boston  from
1665  to  1818  "  (Boston,  1819),  and  "  Watts's  Psalms
and  Hymns,  with  a  Supplement"  (1820). The  lat-


560


WINCHELL


WINCHESTER


ter,  known  as  "  Winchell's  Watts,"  was  long  used
by  the  Baptist  churches  in  this  country. — His
nephew,  Alexander,  geologist,  b.  in  North  East,
Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  31  Dec,  1824,  was  graduated
at  Wesleyan  in  1847,  and  spent  the  following  year
in  teaching  natural  science  in  Pennington  semi-
nary, N.  J.  In  1848  he  became  teacher  of  natural
science  in  the  Amenia  (N.  Y.)  seminary,  but  in  1850
he  removed  to  Alabama,  and  had  charge  succes-
sively of  several  institutions.  He  was  called  to  the
chair  of  physics  and  civil  engineering  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Michigan  in  1854,  and  a  year  later  was
transferred  to  the  chair  of  geology,  zoology,  and
botany,  which  he  then  held  until  1873.  In  1866-'9
he  filled  a  similar  professorship  in  the  University
of  Kentucky.  Meanwhile  he  made  a  survey  of  a
railroad  from  Ann  Arbor  to  Manchester,  and  was
appointed  in  1859  director  of  the  geological  survey
of  Michigan.  The  beginning  of  the  civil  war  prac-
tically brought  the  survey  to  a  close,  although  Prof.
Winchell  made  palaeontological  researches  in  the
material  that  it  had  accumulated,  and  in  his  pub-
lications established  seven  new  genera  and  304  new
species,  most  of  which  were  fossil.  In  1869  the
geological  survey  resumed  its  work,  and  he  was
designated  as  its  director,  but  he  resigned  in  1871.
He  accepted  the  chancellorship  of  Syracuse  uni-
versity in  1873,  but  at  the  end  of  the  year  retired
from  this  office  to  become  professor  of  geology,
zoology,  and  botany.  In  1875  he  was  invited  to
fill  a  similar  chair  in  Vanderbilt  university,  and
thereafter  until  1878  continued  to  divide  his  time
between  the  two  institutions.  As  he  had  con-
tributed by  editorial  request  certain  articles  to  the
"  Northern  Christian  Advocate,"  in  which  he  de-
fended a  belief  in  the  existence  of  a  preadamite
race,  and  as  he  was  understood  to  hold  the  doctrine
of  evolution,  his  resignation  from  the  professorship
at  Vanderbilt  was  asked  by  Bishop  Holland  N.
McTyeire,  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of
that  university.  Prof.  Winchell  refused,  and  his
lectureship  was  declared  abolished  by  the  college
authorities.  In  1879  he  was  recalled  to  the  chair
of  geology  and  palaeontology  in  the  University  of
Michigan,  which  he  still  retains.  He  was  actively
connected  in  1886-'7  with  the  geological  survey  of
Minnesota.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  by  Wesleyan  in  1867,  and  his  name  has
been  assigned  to  fourteen  new  species.  Prof.  Win-
chell has  lectured  extensively  on  geology,  and  con-
tributed to  numerous  periodicals.  By  his  investi-
gations he  has  established  the  Marshall  group  in
American  geology.  His  bibliography  includes
about  200  titles.  In  addition  to  his  reports  on
geology,  he  has  published  "Genealogy  of  the
Family  of  Winchell  in  America"  (Ann  Arbor,
1869) ;  "  Sketches  of  Creation  "  (New  York,  1870) ;
"A  Geological  Chart "  (1870) ;  "  Michigan,"  being
condensed  popular  sketches  of  the  topography,
climate,  and  geology  of  the  state  (1873) ;  "  The
Doctrine  of  Evolution  "  (1874) ;  "  Reconciliation  of
Science  and  Religion  "  (1877) ;  "  Preadamites,  or  a
Demonstration  of  Existence  of  Men  before  Adam  "
(Chicago,  1880) ;  "  Sparks  from  a  Geologist's  Ham-
mer" (1881);  "World  Life,  or  Comparative  Geol-
ogy "  (1883) ;  "  Geological  Excursions,  or  the  Rudi-
ments of  Geology  for  Young  Learners"  (1884);
"  Geological  Studies,  or  Elements  of  Geologv "
(1886);  and  "Walks  and  Talks  in  the  Geologi-
cal Field"  (1886). — Alexander's  brother,  Newton
Horace,  geologist,  b.  in  North  East,  Dutchess  co.,
N.  Y.,  17  Dec,  1839,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Michigan  in  1866.  In  1860  he  had  been
assistant  on  the  geological  survey  of  Michigan,  for
which  he  reported  a  complete  "  Catalogue  of  the


Plants  of  the  State  of  Michigan."  In  1866  he  be-
came superintendent  of  public  schools  in  Adrian,
Mich.,  but  resigned  in  July,  1869,  to  accept  the
office  of  assistant  state  geologist  of  Michigan.  A
year  later  he  joined  the  geological  survey  of  Ohio,
where  he  remained  until  1872,  when  he  became
state  geologist  of  Minnesota,  in  connection  with
which  he  is  also  professor  of  mineralogy  and  geol-
ogy in  the  University  of  Minnesota.  Prof.  Win-
chell is  president  of  the  Minnesota  academy  of
natural  sciences.  In  1887  he  was  appointed  a  mem-
ber of  the  U.  S.  assay  commission,  and  he  is  man-
aging editor  of  "  The  American  Geologist,"  issued
at  Minneapolis.  His  bibliography  includes  nearly
fifty  titles,  and  comprises  "  Annual  Reports  on  the
Geology  and  Natural  History  Survey  of  Minnesota  "
(15  vols.,  Minneapolis.  1872-'88),  and  "  Geology  of
Minnesota"  (2  vols.,  1884-'8).

WINCHESTER,  Elhanan,  clergyman,  b.  in
Brookline,  Mass.,  30  Sept.,  1751 :  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  18  April,  1797.  He  began  to  preach  about
1769,  and  in  1771  was  ordained  pastor  of  an  open-
communion  church  at  Rehoboth,  Mass.  About  a
year  later,  adopting  the  views  of  the  close-com-
munionists,  he  was  excommunicated  by  his  church,
and  after  residing  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1774-'80,
he  became  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in
Philadelphia.  In  1781,  with  the  majority  of  his
congregation,  he  founded  a  Universalist  church
there.  In  1787-94  he  preached  successfully  in
England.  Among  his  numerous  publications  are
"  New  Book  of  Poems  on  Several  Occasions  "  (Bos-
ton, 1773);  "Hymns"  (1776);  "The  Universal
Restoration,  Exhibited  in  Four  Dialogues  "  (Lon-
don, 1788 ;  4th  ed.,  with  notes  by  William  Vidler,
1799);  "Course  of  Lectures  on  the  Prophecies  that
Remain  to  be  Fulfilled"  (4  vols.,  1789;  American
ed.,  2  vols.,  1800) ;  "  Oration  on  the  Discovery  of
America,"  delivered  in  London  (1792) ;  "  The  Three
Woe  Trumpets"  (1793);  "The  Progress  and  Em-
pire of  Christ,"  a  poem  (1793) ;  and  "  Plain  Politi-
cal Catechism  for  Schools  "  (1795).  A  sketch  of  his
life  and  review  of  his  writings  was  issued  after  his
death  by  William  Vidler  (1797),  and  his  life  was
also  written  bv  Edwin  M.  Stone  (Boston,  1836).

WINCHESTER,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  White
Level  (now  Westminster),  Md.,  6  Feb.,  1752;  d.
near  Gallatin,  Tenn.,  27  July,  1826.  He  served  in
the  Revolution,  being  commissioned  lieutenant  in
the  3d  Maryland  regiment,  27  May,  1778,  was  cap-
tured by  the  British,  and  exchanged,  22  Dec,
1780.  He  then  settled  in  Sumner  county,  Tenn.,
where  he  married  and  resided  on  a  large  estate.
On  27  March,  1812,  he  was  appointed  a  brigadier-
general  in  the  regular  army,  and  on  18  Sept.  he
relieved  Gen.  William  Henry  Harrison  of  his  com-
mand at  Fort  Wayne,  much  to  the  dissatisfaction
of  the  soldiers,  some  of  whom  refused  at  first  to
serve  under  the  new  commander.  On  24  Sept.,
Harrison  was  given  command  of  the  Northwestern
army,  including  the  force  under  Winchester.  The
latter  had  already  set  out,  on  22  Sept.,  for  Maumee
rapids  with  2,000  men.  He  was  opposed  by  about
1,200  British  and  Indians  under  Maj.  Muir ;  but
Muir,  alarmed  by  exaggerated  reports  of  Win-
chester's strengtfi,  fled  without  offering  battle.
Winchester  was  afterward  joined  at  Fort  Defiance
by  Harrison,  who,  having  quelled  a  mutiny  among
the  troops,  left  him  there  in  command  of  the  left
wing  of  the  army,  with  which  he  intended  to  move
on  Detroit.  Winchester  now  moved  on  Maumee
rapids  as  he  had  been  ordered,  and  though  Har-
rison soon  afterward  recommended  the  abandon-
ment of  the  movement,  in  view  of  reports  that
Tecumseh  was  in  position  to  cut  off  his  supplies,


WINCHESTER


WINDER


561


the  march  was  continued,  and  the  rapids  were
occupied  and  fortified  on  10  Jan.,  1813.  On  17
Jan.  he  sent  forward  a  detachment  of  about  700
men,  who  drove  a  party  of  British  and  Indians
from  Frenchtown  (now  Monroe,  Mich.),  on  Raisin
river,  with  a  loss  of  only  12  killed  and  55  wounded.
On  the  20th  Winchester  followed  with  300  men,  and
encamped  outside  the  town.  Col.  Henry  Proctor,
who  was  then  at  Fort  Maiden,  eighteen  miles  dis-
tant, now  approached  secretly  with  1,500  British
and  Indians ;  but,  though  the  American  commander
was  informed  of  their  advance,  he  refused  to  believe
it.  His  camp  was  surprised  on  the  evening  of  the
22d,  and  after  a  bloody  conflict  he  surrendered  his
force,  including  those  in  the  town  who  had  re-
pelled the  enemy  and  seemed  likely  to  hold  their
position.  Proctor  agreed  to  make  provision  for  the
protection  of  the  prisoners  against  savage  bar-
barity ;  but  this  was  not  done,  and  the  surrender
was  followed  by  a  massacre  of  the  sick  and  wounded
who  had  been  left  in  the  town.  This  outrage  was
keenly  felt  in  Kentucky,  where  most  of  the  vic-
tims resided,  and  excited  great  indignation  through-
out the  United  States.  The  battle-cry  of  the  Ken-
tucky soldiers  during  the  remainder  of  the  war
was  "  Remember  the  River  Raisin  ! "  The  Ameri-
can loss  was  934  men  out  of  an  army  of  about
1,000,  while  that  of  the  British  was  180.  Those
British  writers  that  make  any  mention  of  the  mas-
sacre at  Frenchtown  try  to  shield  Proctor  by
affirming  that  he  neither  accepted  the  surrender
on  any  conditions,  nor  agreed  to  protect  the
wounded;  but  their  statements  are  controverted
by  the  testimony  of  many  witnesses,  and  by  the
report  of  Gen.  Winchester,  which  was  written  at
Maiden  on  the  day  after  the  battle.  Gen.  Win-
chester was  taken  as  a  prisoner  to  Quebec,  and  con-
fined at  Beauport,  near  that  city,  till  his  exchange
in  1814.  On  21  March,  1815,  he  resigned  his  com-
mission in  the  army,  and  he  afterward  resided  on
his  Tennessee  estate.

WINCHESTER,  Oliver  Fisher,  manufacturer,
b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  30  Nov.,  1810;  d.  in  New  Ha-
ven, Conn.,  10  Dec.,  1880.  After  receiving  a  lim-
ited education,  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  carpenter,
and  in  1830  became  a  master-builder  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  but  left  his  trade  in  1833,  entered  business  in
that  city,  and  in  the  following  year  established  the
first  men's  furnishing-store  in  Maryland.  About
1848  he  removed  to  New  Haven,  Conn.,  and  began
the  manufacture  of  shirts,  which  he  was  probably
the  earliest  to  undertake  in  this  country.  The
business,  in  which  he  was  associated  with  John  M.
Davies,  grew  to  be  one  of  the  largest  in  the  United
States.  About  1856  he  became  interested  in  fire-
arms, and  in  1857  he  was  a  large  stockholder  in
the  Volcanic  arms  company,  which  had  just  been
formed  to  manufacture  the  repeating  rifle  of  Ben-
jamin T.  Henry,  one  of  the  earliest  magazine  arms
in  this  country.  The  company  was  unsuccessful,
and  in  1860  Mr.  Winchester  bought  it  out  and  or-
ganized the  New  Haven  arms  company,  of  which
he  became  president.  In  1865  the  company  was
reorganized  as  the  Winchester  repeating  arms  com-
pany, and,  selling  his  interest  in  the  shirt-factory,
Mr.  Winchester  gave  the  former  his  entire  atten-
tion. The  Henry  rifle  was  improved  more  and
more,  until  its  name  was  changed  to  the  Winches-
ter repeating  arm,  and  in  1872  the  company  also
began  to  make  metallic  cartridges,  of  which  its
plant  can  produce  half  a  million  a  day.  The  build-
ings of  the  company  in  New  Haven  cover  an  area
of  four  acres.  They  furnished  many  rifles  for  the
French  government  during  the  war  with  Germany,
and  for  Turkey  in  the  Russo-Turkish  war.  Mr.
vol.  vi. — 36


Winchester  was  a  Republican  presidential  elector
in  1864,  and  in  1866  was  chosen  lieutenant-governor
of  Connecticut.  He  took  a  deep  interest  in  relig-
ious and  educational  affairs,  which  he  aided  liber-
ally. Besides  large  donations  to  the  scientific  and
theological  departments  of  Yale,  he  gave  to  the
university  property  whose  value  at  the  time  was
about  $100,000,  and  will  increase  to  many  times
that  amount,  for  the  foundation  of  the  Yale  ob-
servatory. Though  this  was  called  at  first  the
Winchester  observatory,  Gov.  Winchester  specially
requested  that  his  name  should  not  be  used  in  the
title.  One  of  the  chief  features  of  the  observatory
is  its  heliometer,  which  is  the  only  one  in  the  coun-
try, and  at  the  time  of  its  purchase  was  the  largest
in  the  world.  The  institution  is  also  known  for
its  horological  and  thermometric  bureaus,  by  which
many  hundreds  of  watches  and  thermometers  are
examined  yearly,  and  their  peculiarities  certified.
Gov.  Winchester  was  also  much  interested  in  hor-
ticulture, and  his  residence  and  grounds  in  New
Haven  were  among  the  finest  in  the  city.

WINCHESTER,  Samuel  Gover,  clergyman,
b.  in  Rock  Run,  Harford  co.,  Md..  17  Feb.,  1805 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  31  Aug.,  1841.  He  attended
school  at  Bel  Air  and  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  began
the  study  of  law  in  the  University  of  Maryland  in
1825,  but  abandoned  it  for  theology,  studied  in
Princeton  seminary,  and  in  1830-'7  was  pastor  of  a
Presbyterian  church  in  Philadelphia.  From  the
latter  year  till  his  death  he  had  charge  of  a  con-
gregation in  Natchez,  Miss.  Besides  frequently
contributing  to  current  religious  literature,  he  pub-
lished "  Companion  for  the  Sick  "  (1833) ;  "  Chris-
tian Counsel  to  the  Sick"  (1836);  "Family  Re-
ligion" (1841);  and  "The  Theatre"  (1841).

WINDER,  Levin,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.  in
1756 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  7  July,  1819.  He  was
appointed  major  of  the  4th  Maryland  regiment,
and  before  the  close  of  the  Revolutionary  war
attained  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  Subse-
quently he  became  a  brigadier-general  of  the  Mary-
land militia.  He  also  was  speaker  of  the  house  of
delegates,  and  in  1816  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate

WINDER,  William  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Som-
erset county,  Md..  18  Feb.,  1775;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  24  May,  1824.  He  was  educated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania,  studied  law,  and  settled  in
Baltimore,  where  he  continued  from  1798  until  the
war  with  Great  Britain.  In  March,  1812,  he  was
appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  14th  U.  S.
infantry,  and  on  6  July  was  given  command  of
that  regiment.  He  had  charge  of  a  successful  ex-
pedition sent  from  Black  Rock  to  the  Canada
shore  below  Fort  Erie  on  28  Nov.,  1812,  and  was
made  brigadier-general  on  12  March,  1813.  At
the  battle  of  Stony  Creek,  1  June,  1813,  his  com-
mand repelled  the  British  attack,  but  he  was  cap-
tured. In  May,  1814,  he  was  appointed  adjutant-
and  inspector-general,  and  commanded  at  the  bat-
tle of  Bladensburg.  He  was  unable  to  prevent  the
occupation  of  Washington,  and  on  the  reduction
of  the  army  in  June,  1815,  he  was  retired.  He  re-
turned to  his  profession  and  served  in  the  Mary-
land senate. — His  son,  John  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in
Maryland  in  1800;  d.  in  Branch ville,  S.  C,  9  Feb.,
1865,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1820,  and  after  various  services  became  captain
in  the  1st  artillery  on  7  Oct.,  1842.  He  took  part
in  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  was  at  the  battles  of
Contreras  and  Churubusco,  the  storming  of  Chapul-
tepec,  and  the  capture  of  Mexico,  gaining  for  his
gallantry  the  brevets  of  major  and  lieutenant-
colonel. On  22  Nov.,  1860,  he  was  promoted  major,


562


WINDOM


WINEBRENXER


/^^&JW


but  he  resigned  on  27  April,  1861,  and  entered  the
Confederate  service.  He  was  made  brigadier-gen-
eral and  given  command  of  Richmond,  where  he
had  charge  of  Libby  prison  and  Belle  Isle.  Sub-
sequently he  was  sent  to  command  the  prison-pen
at  Anderson ville,  Ga.,  where  his  cruelties  to  the
prisoners  made  his  name  a  reproach.

WINDOM,  William,  senator,  b.  in  Belmont
county,  Ohio,  10  May,  1827.  He  received  an  aca-
demic education,  studied  law  at  Mount  Vernon,
Ohio,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1850.  In
1852 he  became  prosecuting  attorney  for  Knox

county,  but  in
1855  he  removed
to  Minnesota,  and
soon  afterward  he
was  chosen  to  con-
gress from  that
state  as  a  Repub-
lican, serving  from
1859  till  1869.
In  that  body  he
served  two  terms
as  chairman  of
the  committee  on
Indian  affairs  and
also  was  at  the
head  of  the  spe-
cial committee  to
visit  the  western
tribes  in  1865,  and
of  that  on  the
conduct  of  the
commissioner  of  Indian  affairs  in  1867.  In  1870
he  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the
unexpired  term  of  Daniel  S.  Norton,  deceased,
and  he  was  subsequently  chosen  for  the  term  that
ended  in  1877.  He  was  re-elected  for  the  one  that
closed  in  1883,  and  resigned  in  1881  to  enter  the
cabinet  of  President  Garfield  as  secretary  of  the
treasury,  but  retired  on  the  accession  of  President
Arthur  in  the  same  year,  and  was  elected  by  the
Minnesota  legislature  to  serve  the  remainder  of
his  term  in  the  senate.  In  that  body  Mr.  Windom
acted  as  chairman  of  the  committees  on  appropria-
tions, foreign  affairs,  and  transportation.

WINDS,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Southhold,
Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  in  1727;  d.  in  Rockaway,  Mor-
ris co.,  N.  J.,  12  Oct.,  1789.  While  yet  a  young
man  he  fixed  his  residence  in  New  Jersey,  pur-
chasing a  large  tract  of  land  in  Morris  county,
where,  by  reason  of  his  wealth  and  natural  abili-
ties, he  became  a  leader  of  the  people.  Hundreds
of  traditions  are  still  repeated  in  relation  to  him,
many  of  which  are  doubtless  true,  and  all  of  which
represent  him  as  a  man  of  great  courage,  as  well
as  of  rare  physical  and  mental  powers.  He  first
became  prominent  at  the  age  of  thirty  when  he
served  as  a  captain  in  the  brigade  that  was  raised
in  New  Jersey,  in  1758,  to  aid  in  the  conquest  of
Canada.  Many  stories  are  related  of  his  exploits
in  the  old  French  war,  but  they  are  not  so  fully
authenticated  as  to  give  them  a  place  in  history.
In  1765  he  was  one  of  the  king's  justices  of  the
peace  for  Morris  county,  and  it  is  said  that  in  his
official  transactions  he  boldly  resisted  the  enforce-
ment of  the  stamp-act.  substituting  the  bark  of  the
white  birch  for  the  stamped  paper,  no  one  daring
to  call  in  question  the  validity  of  any  legal  instru-
ment that  he  prepared  on  no  matter  what  kind  of
material.  In  1772  and  1775  he  represented  Morris
county  in  the  general  assembly  of  New  Jersey,  and
he  was  also  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  Provincial
congress  that  assembled  in  New  Brunswick  in
1776. Under  the  first  call  for  troops  from  New


Jersey  by  this  congress,  he  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  1st  battalion,  7  Nov.,  1775,  Lord
Stirling  being  colonel.  On  7  March,  1776,  he  was
promoted  colonel  of  the  same,  and  on  4  March,
1777,  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  militia.
Under  his  first  appointment  he  was  stationed  at
Perth  Amboy,  N.  J.,  and  while  there  held  in  his
custody,  as  a  prisoner,  Gov.  William  Franklin,  the
last  of  the  royal  governors  of  New  Jersey.  On
being  made  brigadier-general,  he  was  ordered  to
the  north  on  the  expedition  against  Canada,  and
was  among  the  few  that  survived  that  campaign.
Subsequentlv  he  served  in  New  Jersev.

WINDSHIP,  George  Barker,  athlete,  b.  in
Roxbury,  Mass.,  3  Jan.,  1834;  d.  there,  14  Sept.,
1876.  His  father,  grandfather,  and  great-grand-
father were  all  physicians;  the  last-named.  Dr.
Amos  Windship,  was  surgeon  on  the  "Alliance,"
under  John  Paul  Jones.  George  entered  Harvard
in  1850,  and  in  his  freshman  year  was  induced  to
pay  special  attention  to  physical  training  by  ridi-
cule of  his  weakness  and  small  stature.  He  was
graduated  in  1854,  and  at  the  medical  department
in  1857,  and  while  engaged  in  active  practice  kept
himself  in  training  and  gave  particular  attention
to  lifting,  devising  a  harness  with  which,  by  con-
stantly increasing  his  load,  he  finally  succeeded  in
raising  from  the  ground  2,600  pounds,  a  greater
weight  than  any  one  else  had  ever  lifted.  He  gave
public  lectures  on  "  Physical  Culture  "  illustrating
them  with  feats  of  strength,  and  thus  attained  a
wide  reputation.  Out  of  his  experiments  has  grown
the  modern  system  of  health-lifting ;  but  he  carried
them  too  far,  and  was  attacked  by  a  paralytic  affec-
tion, which  resulted  in  his  death.  Besides  his  lift-
ing-apparatus, Dr.  Windship  invented  a  system  of
graduated  dumb-bells.

WINEBRENNER,  John,  founder  of  a  sect,  b.
in  Frederick  county,  Md.,  24  March,  1797;  d.  in
Harrisburg,  Pa..  12  Sept.,  1860.  He  was  partly
educated  at  Dickinson  college,  Carlisle,  Pa.,  stud-
ied theology  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  ordained  by
the  synod  of  the  German  Reformed  church  in
September,  1820,  at  Hagerstown,  Md.  The  same
year  he  was  called  to  the  Salem  church  at  Harris-
burg, Pa.,  and  at  the  same  time  he  ministered  to
churches  in  the  neighborhood.  He  retained  his
connection  with  the  Harrisburg  charge  till  1827,
when,  owing  to  his  religious  views  on  revivals,
Sunday-schools,  and  the  early  temperance  and
anti-slavery  movements,  and  to  his  allowing  non-
ordained  persons  to  preach  in  his  pulpit,  he  became
obnoxious  to  his  congregation,  and  a  separation
took  place.  His  connection  with  the  Reformed
church  ceased  by  the  action  of  the  synod  in  Sep-
tember, 1828.  In  several  pamphlets  that  he  subse-
quently issued  he  defended  his  principles  from  the
attacks  of  his  opponents  and  continued  active  as  a
preacher.  In  October,  1830,  he  established  a  new
denomination  that  he  called  the  "Church  of  God,"
whose  members  were  at  that  time  known  as  Wine-
brennerians.  They  hold  that  there  are  three  posi-
tive ordinances  of  perpetual  standing :  baptism  bf
immersion,  the  washing  of  feet,  and  the  Lord's
supper.  Baptism,  however,  they  do  not  regard  as
necessarily  preceding  church  fellowship,  faith  in
Christ  being  considered  the  prerequisite  to  admis-
sion into  their  communion.  Washing  the  feet  of
disciples  they  hold  as  being  obligatory  on  all  Chris-
tians, and  they  also  approve  of  fasts,  experience-
meetings,  and  camp-meetings.  Mr.  Winebrenner
met  with  remarkable  success  as  the  founder  of  a
new  sect.  The  ministers  of  that  denomination  now
(1889)  number  about  500.  and  the  membership  prob-
ably 65,000. They  have  a  foreign  and  domestic


WINES


WING


563


missionary  society,  a  book  depository,  and  a  printing
establishment  at  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  where  a  weekly
paper,  the  "  Church  Advocate,"  and  a  Sunday-school
paper,  "  The  Gem,"  are  published.  For  several
years  he  edited  the  "  Gospel  Publisher  "  (now  the
"  Church  Advocate  "),  and  with  Isaac  Daniel  Rupp,
issued  "  The  History  of  all  the  Religious  Denomina-
tions in  the  United  States  "  (Hartford,  1844).  He
also  published  "  Pronouncing  Testament  and  Gaz-
etteer "  (Harrisburg,  1836) ;  "  Brief  Views  of  the
Church  of  God"  (1840);  "A  Treatise  on  Regen-
eration" (1844);  "The  Seraphina,"  a  music-book
(1853) ;  "  Practical  and  Doctrinal  Sermons  "  (1860) ;
and  pamphlets  and  separate  sermons.  He  was  the
compiler  and  editor  of  the  "  Church  Hymn-Book."
WINES,  Enoch  Cobb,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Han-
over, N.  J.,  17  Feb.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
10  Dec,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in
1827,  and  in  1829  was  commissioned  teacher  of
midshipmen  in  the  U.  S.  navy.  In  1832  he  pur-
chased Edgehill  school,  at  Princeton,  N.  J.  After-
ward he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  was
a  professor  in  the  City  high-school,  and  subse-
quently he  purchased  a  classical  school  at  Burling-
ton, N.  J.  He  then  studied  theology,  and  was
pastor  of  Congregational  churches  in  Cornwall,
vt.,  and  East  Hampton,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.  In
1853  he  was  chosen  to  the  chair  of  ancient  lan-
guages in  Washington  college,  Pa.,  and  in  1859  to
the  presidency  of  the  City  university  of  St.  Louis,
Mo.  He  accepted,  in  1862,  the  secretaryship  of  the
New  York  prison  association,  and  from  that  date
until  his  death  his  talents  and  energy  were  devoted
to  the  study  of  penology,  and  to  the  promotion  of
reform  in  the  administration  of  criminal  law,  and
in  the  conduct  of  penal  institutions  throughout  the
world.  In  1866,  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Theodore
W.  Dwight,  of  Columbia  law-school,  he  made  a  tour
of  inspection  of  the  prisons  and  reformatories  of
the  United  States,  of  which  they  submitted  a  report,
in  1867,  to  the  legislature  of  New  York.  In  1870,
through  his  personal  efforts,  the  first  National
prison  congress  assembled  at  Cincinnati,  at  which
was  formed  the  National  prison  association,  of
which  Dr.  Wines  was  unanimously  chosen  secre-
tary, which  post  he  filled  until  the  close  of  his
life.  Similar  National  congresses  were  organized  by
him  at  Baltimore  in  1872,  at  St.  Louis  in  1874,  and
in  New  York  in  1876.  In  1871  the  New  York  legis-
lature authorized  the  appointment  of  three  com-
missioners, to  investigate  the  question  of  the  rela-
tions between  prison  and  free  labor.  Dr.  Wines
was  appointed  a  member  of  this  commission,  and
wrote  its  report,  which  was  pronounced  in  its  oppo-
sition to  maintaining  convicts  in  idleness.  In  this
same  year  Dr.  Wines  was  appointed  by  President
Grant,  under  authority  of  a  joint  resolution  of  con-
gress, U.  S.  commissioner  to  organize  an  Interna-
tional penitentiary  congress  at  London,  and  he  was
sent  abroad  for  the  purpose  of  making  the  necessary
diplomatic  representations  to  foreign  governments.
When  the  congress  assembled,  4  July,  1872,  dele-
gates were  present  from  twenty-six  nations,  Dr.
Wines  representing  both  the  United  States  and
Mexico.  At  the  second  congress,  at  Stockholm,
in  1878,  he  was  chosen  honorary  president.  At
the  International  penitentiary  congress  which  as-
sembled in  Rome  in  November,  1885,  Count  di
Foresta,  an  Italian  senator,  said  of  him :  "  It  is  to
him  more  than  to  any  other  individual  that  we
owe  the  initiation  of  the  movement  for  the  reforma-
tion of  prisoners,  which  is  the  glory  of  the  latter
half  of  the  19th  century."  Middlebury  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1853  and  Washington  that
of  LL.  D.  in  1857. His  works  include  "  Two  Years


and  a  Half  in  the  Navy"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1832) ;  "  A  Trip  to  China  "  (Boston,  1832) ;  "  Hints
on  Popular  Education,"  believed  to  be  the  first  sys-
tematic treatise  on  this  subject  published  in  the
United  States  (Philadelphia,  1838) ;  "  How  shall  I
govern  my  School  ?  "  (1838) ;  "  Commentaries  on
the  Laws  of  the  Ancient  Hebrews"  (New  York,
1852);  "Adam  and  Christ"  (1855);  "Historical
and  Farewell  Discourses  "  (1859) ;  "  The  True  Peni-
tent" (Philadelphia,  1862);  "  Treatise  on  Regenera-
tion "  (1863) ;  "  An  Essay  on  Temptation  "  (1865) ;
"The  Prisons  and  Reformatories  of  the  United
States  and  Canada"  (1867);  "The  Promises  of
God  "  (1868) ;  and  "  State  of  Prisons  and  Child-
saving  Institutions"  (Cambridge,  1880). — His  son,
Frederick  Howard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  9  April,  1838,  was  graduated  at  Wash-
ington college,  Pa.,  in  1857,  served  as  tutor  there,
and  afterward  studied  at  Princeton  theological
seminary,  but  left  because  of  weakness  of  the  eyes.
He  was  licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  St.  Louis  in
1860,  and  in  1862  was  commissioned  hospital  chap-
lain in  the  National  army.  He  was  on  duty  at  Spring-
field, Mo.,  till  1864,  and  participated  in  the  battle  of
Springfield,  8  Jan.,  1 863,  being  mentioned  by  name
in  the  official  report  for  bravery  on  the  field.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  seminary  in  1865,  and
called  to  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  of  Spring-
field, 111.,  where  he  remained  four  years.  In  1869
he  became  secretary  of  the  newly  created  board  of
State  commissioners  of  public  charities  for  the  state
of  Illinois,  which  post  he  still  holds.  Mr.  Wines
was  active  in  effecting  an  organization  of  similar
boards  throughout  the  country,  under  the  name  of
the  National  conference  of  charities  and  correction,
of  which  at  Louisville,  in  1883,  he  was  the  presi-
dent. In  1879  lie  conducted  the  investigations  as
to  the  number  and  condition  of  the  defective,  de-
pendent, and  delinquent  classes  in  the  United
States,  and  his  report  constitutes  a  separate  volume
of  the  "  Tenth  Census."  In  1886  he  established  a
monthly  journal  entitled  "  The  International  Rec-
ord of  Charities  and  Correction,"  which  is  published
in  New  York  and  London.  He  represented  Illinois
in  the  International  penitentiary  congress  at  Stock-
holm, in  1878.  The  result  of  his  observations
there  was  embodied  in  a  report  to  the  legislature,
and  he  recommended  the  construction  of  the  new
Hospital  for  the  insane,  at  Kankakee.  111.,  on  the
"  detached  ward  "  or  "  village  "  system,  an  event
which  marks  an  era  in  the  history  of  the  care  of
the  insane  in  this  country.  In  1887  Mr.  Wines  was
elected  secretary  of  the  National  prison  association,
and  succeeded  to  the  post  that  was  formerly  held
by  his  father.  His  writings,  apart  from  reports,
have  been  chiefly  pamphlets.  Among  them  are
"The  County  Jail  System,  an  Argument  for  its
Abolition,"  read  at  the  New  York  prison  congress
(1878) ;  "  The  Kankakee  Hospital  '*  (1882) ;  "  Pro-
vision for  the  Insane  in  the  United  States,"  an  his-
torical sketch  (1885) ;  "  Conditional  Liberation,  or
the  Paroling  of  Prisoners,"  written  for  the  Atlanta
prison  congress  (1886) ;  and  "  American  Prisons  in
the  Tenth  Census  "  (1888).

WING,  Conway  Phelps,  clergyman,  b.  near
Marietta,  Ohio,  12  Feb.,  1809.  He  was  graduated
at  Hamilton  college  in  1828  and  at  Auburn  theo-
logical seminary  in  1831,  and  was  ordained  and  in-
stalled pastor  of  the  church  at  Sodus,  Wayne  co.,
N.  Y.,  by  the  presbytery  of  Geneva  in  1832.  remain-
ing there  till  1836.  He  was  afterward  pastor  at
Ogden,  N.  Y.,  at  Monroe,  Mich.,  where  he  is  now
pastor  emeritus,  at  Huntsville,  Ala.,  and  at  Carlisle,
Pa.  Mr.  Wing  took  an  active  part  in  the  revivals
of  1832-5,  and  in  the  anti-slavery  agitation  in


564


WINGATE


WINGFIELD


western  New  York,  and  was  zealous  in  his  opposi-
tion to  slavery  in  Tennessee  and  Alabama.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Dickinson  col-
lege in  1857.  He  was  an  adherent  to  the  new-
school  branch  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  but
an  earnest  supporter  of  the  reunion  in  1869  and
1870,  and  was  a  member  of  the  joint  committee
of  reconstruction  for  the  church  in  the  latter  year.
He  has  translated  from  the  German  "  A  History  of
the  Christian  Church,"  by  Dr.  Charles  Hase,  with
Dr.  Charles  E.  Blumenthal  (New  York,  1856);  and
published  "  History  of  the  Presbyteries  of  Donegal
and  Carlisle"  (Carlisle,  1876);  "History  of  the
First  Presbyterian  Church  of  Carlisle"  (1877);
"  History  of  Cumberland  County,  Pa."  (1879) ;  and
"  Historical  and  Genealogical  Register  of  the  De-
scendants of  John  Wing,  of  Sandwich  "  (New  York,
1885 ;  2d  ed.,  1888).

WINGATE,  George  Wood,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  1  July,  1840.  He  was  educated  in  New
York,  and  at  the  age  of  thirteen  entered  a  law-
office,  where  he  continued  until  his  admission  to  the
bar  in  1861.  During  the  civil  war  he  served  with  the
22d  New  York  National  guards,  which  he  entered
as  a  private,  and  was  promoted  until  he  became
captain.  His  experience  in  the  field  impressed  him
with  the  necessity  of  greater  training  in  marks-
manship, and  he  specially  instructed  his  company
in  that  subject.  After  the  war  he  wrote  frequently
on  rifle-practice,  and  his' efforts  resulted  in  the
formation  of  the  National  rifle  association  in  1871,
of  which  he  became  secretary.  In  that  capacity
he  drafted  its  regulations  and  aided  largely  in  the
establishment  and  management  of  the  Creedmoor
rifle-range.  Subsequently  he  became  president  of
the  association,  and  held  that  office  until  1888.  In
1874  he  was  appointed  general  iwpector  of  rifle-
practice  of  New  York  state,  with  the  rank  of
brigadier-general,  but  resigned  in  1879.  In  this
office  he  organized  and  carried  into  successful
operation  the  system  of  instruction  in  rifle-prac-
tice that  has  since  been  followed  by  the  National
guard,  as  well  as  by  the  U.  S.  army.  He  was
the  first  president  of  the  Amateur  rifle-club  in
1872,  and  captain  of  the  first  American  rifle-team
in  1874,  and  has  been  connected  with  all  the  Inter-
national rifle-matches.  From  the  part  he  took  in
these  matters  he  has  been  frequently  called  "  the
father  of  rifle-practice  in  America."  He  was
president  of  the  National  guard  association  of  the
United  States  since  1879,  and  has  been  active  in  his
profession.  Gen.  Wingate  is  the  author  of  the
"  Last  Campaign  of  the  Twenty-second  Regiment "
(New  York,  1864) ;  a  "  Manual  of  Rifle-Practice,"
of  which  seven  editions  have  been  issued  (1872) ;
and  "  On  Horseback  through  the  Yellowstone "
(1886). — His  brother,  Charles  Frederick,  sanitary
engineer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  5  March,  1847,  was
educated  in  the  public  schools,  and  early  devoted
his  attention  to  journalism.  For  five  years  he  was
New  York  correspondent  of  the  Springfield  "  Re-

gublican,"  under  the  signature  of  "  Carlfried."
'rom  1874  till  1882  he  edited  successively  the
"  Paper-Trade  Journal,"  the  "  American  Station-
er," "  The  Housekeeper,"  and  "  The  Sanitary  Engi-
neer." Since  that  time  he  has  followed  the  profes-
sion of  a  sanitary  engineer,  and  has  paid  special
attention  to  the  problem  of  working-men's  homes
in  cities,  on  which  he  has  written  voluminously  in
the  New  York  daily  press.  In  1887  he  was  instru-
mental in  securing  the  passage  of  a  bill  to  amend
the  tenement-house  law  and  the  small-parks  bill.
He  organized  the  Twilight  club  in  1883,  and  has
since  been  its  secretary.  Mr.  Wingate  contributed
articles  on  the  "History  of  the  Iweed  Ring"  to


the  "  North  American  Review  "  in  1874,  and  has
edited  "  Views  and  Interviews  on  Journalism "
(New  York.  1875),  and  "Twilight  Tracts"  (1886).

WINGATE,  Paine,  senator,  b.  in  Amesburv,
Mass..  14  May,  1739 ;  d.  in  Stratham,  N.  II..  "7
March,  1838.  He  was  a  great-grandson  of  John
Wingate,  of  Dover  (1660),  grandson  of  Col.  Joshua,
who  was  at  the  capture  of  Louisburg,  and  son  of
Rev.  Paine  Wingate,  minister  of  Amesbury.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1759,  studied
theology,  and  was  ordained  a  minister  of  the  Con-
gregational church  at  Hampton  Falls,  N.  H.,  14
Dec.,  1763,  where  he  preached  till  his  dismissal,  18
March,  1776.  He  then  removed  to  Stratham,  N.  H.,
and  became  a  farmer.  He  was  a  member  of  the
New  Hampshire  legislature,  a  delegate  from  that
state  to  the  Continental  congress  in  1787-'8,  and
was  U.  S.  senator  from  New  Hampshire  from  4
March,  1789,  till  2  March,  1793.  He  served  in  con-
gress from  New  Hampshire  in  1793-'5,  and  was  a
judge  of  the  state  superior  court  from  1798  till
1809.  He  was  the  last  survivor  of  the  original
members  of  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  was  for  several
years  the  oldest  graduate  of  Harvard.

WINGFIELD,  Edwin  Maria,  English  mer-
chant, b.  in  England  about  1570 ;  the  date  of  his
death  is  unknown.  He  was  of  a  family  of  wealth
and  distinction,  became  a  merchant  in  London,
and  took  an  active  part  in  colonizing  Virginia,
under  the  patent  of  10  April,  1606.  He  sailed  with
the  first  company  of  emigrants,  19  Dec,  1600,  and
was  named  first  president  of  the  colony  in  the
sealed  instructions  that  were  opened  on  the  pas-
sage. Having  quarrelled  with  his  associates,  espe-
cially with  Capt.  John  Smith,  he  was  deposed,  and
returned  to  England,  after  which  no  further  de-
tails of  his  life  are  known.  Charles  Deane  edited,
with  notes  and  an  introduction,  "  A  Discourse  of
Virginia,"  by  Wingfield,  from  the  original  manu-
script in  the  Lambeth  librarv  (Boston,  1860).

WINGFIELD,  John  Henry  Ducachet,  P.  E,
bishop,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  Va.,  24  Sept.,  1833.  At
the  age  of  thirteen  he  entered  St.  Timothy's  col-
lege, Maryland,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1850.
He  served  as  tutor  there  for  two  years,  joined  the
senior  class  of  William  and  Mary  college,  Va.,  in
1852,  and  was  graduated  in  1853.  Returning  to
St.  Timothy's,  he  spent  another  year  in  teaching,
and  in  the  autumn  of  1854  removed  to  New
York  and  became  a  tutor  in  the  Churchill  mili-
tary academy  at  Sing  Sing.  In  1855  he  entered
the  Theological  seminary  of  Virginia,  where  he
remained  only  one  year,  removing  to  Arkansas,
and  accepting  the  office  of  principal  of  Ashley  in-
stitute, at  Little  Rock.  He  was  ordained  priest,
in  the  chapel  of  the  Theological  seminary  of  Vir-
ginia, 1  July,  1859,  by  Bishop  Johns.  In  July,
1858,  he  became  assistant  to  his  father,  who  was-
rector  of  Trinity  church,  Portsmouth,  Va.  He  was
rector  of  Christ  church,  Rock  Spring,  Harford  co.,
Md.,  in  1864.  but  returned  to  Portsmouth  to  hi»
old  post  in  1866.  Two  years  afterward  he  be-
came rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Petersburg.  Va.,
where,  in  1871,  he  founded  St.  Paul's  school  for
young  ladies.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
upon  him  by  William  and  Mary  college  in  1869,
and  that  of'LL.  D.  by  the  same  college  in  1874.
In  that  year  he  removed  to  California,  and  was  rec-
tor of  Trinity  church,  San  Francisco.  During  the
session  of  the  general  convention  at  New  York  in
1874  he  was  elected  missionary  bishop  of  northern
California,  and  he  was  consecrated  in  St.  Paul's
church,  Petersburg,  Va.,  on  2  Dec,  1874,  but  re-
mained in  charge  of  his  parish  until  April,  1875.
He  became  president  of  the  missionary  college  of


WINKLER


WINSER


565


St.  Augustine,  Benicia,  and  in  1876  head  of  St.
Mary's  of  the  Pacific,  a  school  for  girls,  and  rector
of  St.  Paul's  church  in  that  city.  He  was  elected
bishop  of  Louisiana  in  1879.  but  declined.

WINKLER,  Edwin  Theodore,  clergyman,  b.
in  Savannah,  Ga.,  13  Nov.,  1823 ;  d.  in  Marion,
Ala.,  10  Nov.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown
in  1843,  and  received  his  theological  education  at
Newton  theological  seminary.  Having  been  or-
dained to  the  Baptist  ministry,  he  preached  in  Co-
lumbus and  Albany,  Ga.,  and  in  Gillisonville,  S.  C.
In  1852  he  became  corresponding  secretary  of  the
Southern  Baptist  publication  society,  and  editor  of
the  "  Southern  Baptist,"  residing  in  Charleston,
S.  C.  In  1854  he  was  called  to  the  pastorate  of  the
1st  Baptist  church  in  that  city.  Subsequently  he
was  pastor  of  the  Citadel  square  church.  In  1872
he  took  charge  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Marion,
Ala.,  and  in  1874  he  was  made  editor-in-chief  of
the  "Alabama  Baptist."  In  1858  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Furman  university.  Dr.
Winkler  was  the  author  of  a  catechism  for  the  in-
struction of  colored  people,  and  of  several  published
sermons,  addresses,  and  essays.

WINKLEY,  Henry,  donor,  b.  in  Barrington,
N.  H.,  9  Nov.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  9  Aug.,
1888.  He  was  educated  at  district  schools  and
at  Pembroke  academy.  On  the  completion  of  his
studies  he  went  to  Boston,  Mass.,  and  was  employed
in  a  crockery-store.  Subsequently  he  engaged  in
that  business  for  himself,  and  was  an  importer  of
china-ware  in  New  York  and  Philadelphia  from
1831  till  1852.  In  the  latter  year  he  retired  from
business,  and  thereafter  devoted  himself  to  the
study  of  religious,  social,  and  political  economy,
in  the  pursuit  of  which  he  travelled  throughout
the  world.  He  was  not  married,  and  divided  his
fortune  among  such  educational  institutions  as  he
considered  orthodox.  Mr.  Winkley  gave  to  Will-
iams college,  $50,000 ;  to  Phillips  Exeter  academy,
$30,000;  to  Bowdoin  college,  $70,000;  to  the  Theo-
logical seminary  at  Bangor,  Me.,  $30,000 ;  to  that
at  Andover,  $45,000 ;  and  to  the  one  at  Yale,  50,-
000 ;  to  Dartmouth  college,  $80,000 ;  and  to  Am-
herst college,  $30,000.  All  these  bequests  are  di-
rected by  the  will  to  constitute  permanent  funds,
the  income  of  which  is  to  be  applied  for  the  benefit
and  purposes  of  the  institutions  as  the  trustees
may  think  best.  Mr.  Winkley  left  to  the  American
Bible  society  $20,000,  and  to  the  Young  men's
Christian  association  of  Philadelphia  $20,000.  His
remains  were  interred  in  Mount  Auburn,  where  he
had  built  a  granite  mausoleum  in  a  lot  that  was
the  only  piece  of  real  estate  he  ever  owned.

WINXOCK,  Joseph,  astronomer,  b.  in  Shelby
county,  Ky.,  6  Feb.,  1826 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
11  June,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Shelby  col-
lege, Ky.,  in  1845,  where  he  was  appointed  professor
of  mathematics  and  astronomy.  In  1852-7  he  was
one  of  the  computers  in  the  office  of  the  "  Ameri-
can Ephemeris  and  Nautical  Almanac "  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  and  then  he  was  appointed  professor
of  mathematics  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy,  An-
napolis, Md.,  but  he  soon  returned  to  Cambridge  as
superintendent  of  the  "  Nautical  Almanac."  In  1859
he  relinquished  this  office  to  take  charge  of  the
mathematical  department  of  the  U.  S.  naval  acad-
emy ;  but  on  the  removal  of  that  institution  to
Newport,  R.  I.,  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,
he  resumed  charge  of  the  "  Almanac."  He  was  ap-
pointed in  1866  professor  of  astronomy  in  Har-
vard, and  director  of  the  observatory,  and  subse-
quently he  was  professor  of  geodesy  in  the  Law-
rence scientific  and  mining  schools  of  the  univer-
sity. His  first  work  after  taking  charge  of  this


observatory  was  the  reduction  and  publication  of
the  unfinished  work  of  his  predecessors,  thus  com-
pleting the  volume  on  sun-spots,  the  catalogue  of
zone  stars,  and  of  polar  and  clock  stars  that  has
since  been  published.  Meanwhile  the  instrumental
appliances  were  carefully  studied  and  largely  in-
creased, not  only  by  the  accumulation  of  new  forms,
but  by  the  introduction  of  improved  apparatus  of
his  own  device.  The  meridian  circle  was  procured
through  his  influence  at  a  cost  of  $12,000.  In  1870,
when  the  new  instrument  was  ready  for  use,  it  was
directed  upon  the  zone  of  stars  between  50°  and
55°  of  north  declination,  which  was  the  field  as-
signed to  the  Harvard  observatory  by  the  Astrono-
mische  Gesellschaft.  His  other  work  included  a
catalogue  of  new  double  stars  and  much  labor  on
stellar  photometry.  He  was  further  active  in  the
efforts  that  have  resulted  in  furnishing  standard
time  to  Boston.  In  1872  he  began  the  preparation
of  a  series  of  astronomical  engravings  to  represent
the  most  interesting  objects  in  the  heavens  as  they
appeared  in  the  powerful  instrument  of  the  ob-
servatory. Thirty-five  plates  were  completed  at  the
time  of  his  death,  and  included  representations  of
the  planets,  sun-spots,  protuberances,  and  corona ;
the  moon's  craters  and  geography,  seven  of  the
most  famous  clusters  and  nebulaa,  the  Donati  comet
of  1858  and  Coggia's  comet  of  1874.  He  held  the
office  of  consulting  astronomer  of  the  U.  S.  coast
survey,  and  in  1874  was  appointed  chairman  of  the
commission  that  was  established  by  act  of  congress
for  making  inquiries  into  the  causes  of  steam-boiler
explosions.  Prof.  Winlock  had  charge  of  the  party
that  was  sent  by  the  U.  S.  coast  survey  to  Kentucky
to  observe  the  total  solar  eclipse  of  August,  1869,
and  conducted  the  expedition  to  Spain,  under  the
same  auspices,  to  observe  the  eclipse  in  December,
1870.  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Harvard  in  1868,  and  he  was  a  member  of  vari-
ous scientific  societies,  including  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences.  In  1863  he  was
named  by  act  of  congress  as  one  of  the  corporate
members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  His
published  works  consist  chiefly  of  a  set  of  "  Tables
of  Mercury,"  of  other  publications  from  the  office
of  the  "  American  Ephemeris,"  and  of  brief  papers
in  astronomical  journals  and  in  the  proceedings  of
scientific  societies  of  which  he  was  a  member.

WINSER,  Henry  Jacob,  journalist,  b.  in  the
island  of  Bermuda,  23  Nov.,  1833.  His  father,
Francis  J.  Winser,  was  an  officer  in  the  British
navy.  He  attended  the  Springfield  academy,  Ber-
muda, came  to  New  York  in  1851,  entered  a  print-
ing-office as  proof-reader,  and  later  became  a  re-
porter on  the  "  Times."  At  the  opening  of  the
civil  war  he  accompanied  Col.  Ephraim  E.  Ells-
worth as  military  secretary,  and  afterward  was  war-
correspondent  of  the  New  York  "Times."  After
the  war  he  served  for  a  period  as  city  and  night
editor  of  the  New  York  "  Times,"  and  then  as  day-
manager  of  the  editorial  department.  In  1867  he
attended  the  French  exposition  at  Paris  as  regular
correspondent  for  the  "  Times,"  and  made  the  trip
to  Cherbourg  in  the  iron-clad  "  Dunderberg."  In
May,  1869,  Mr.  Winser  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul
at  Sonneberg,  Germany,  and  during  his  twelve
years'  service  he  made  several  valuable  reports  to
the  state  department,  including  one  on  forest-cul-
ture. In  1882  he  was  made  chief  of  the  bureau  of
information  of  the  Northern  Pacific  railway  com-
pany, but  on  the  retirement  of  Henry  Villard  he
returned  to  journalism,  first  as  assistant  editor  of
the  New  York  "  Commercial  Advertiser  "  and  after-
ward as  managing  editor  of  the  Newark  "  Adver-
tiser," with  which  he  is  still  associated.


566


WINSLOW


WINSLOW


WINSLOW,  Benjamin  Davis,  clergyman,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  13  Feb.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Burlington,
N.  J.,  21  Nov.,  1839.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1835  and  at  the  Episcopal  general  theo-
logical seminary,  New  York,  in  1838,  and  the  same
year  became  assistant  to  his  uncle,  Rev.  Dr.  (after-
ward Bishop)  George  W.  Doane,  in  the  pastorate  of
St.  Mary's  church,  Burlington,  N.  J.  He  was  or-
dained deacon  in  May,  1838,  and  priest  in  March,
1839.  Mr.  Winslow  was  a  graceful  writer  and  ac-
complished preacher.  His  "Sermons  and  Poetical
Remains  "  were  edited  by  Bishop  Doane,  who  pre-
fixed a  notice  entitled  "  The  True  Catholic  Church-
man in  his  Life  and  Death  "  (New  York,  1841).

WINSLOW.  Charles  Frederick,  physician,  b.
in  Nantucket,  Mass.,  in  1811.  He  was  graduated
as  a  physician  at  Harvard  in  1834.  Dr.  Winslow
was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Payta,  Peru,  in  1862,
served  for  several  years,  visited  the  Sandwich
islands  and  other  countries,  and  was  for  many
years  a  resident  of  California.  He  contributed  to
periodicals,  and  published  "  Cosmography,  or  Phil-
osophical View  of  the  Universe  "  (Boston,  1853) ;
"  Preparation  of  the  Earth  for  the  Intellectual
Races,"  a  lecture  (1854) ;  "  The  Cooling  Globe  "
(1865);  and  "Force  and  Nature:  Attraction  and
Repulsion,  etc.,"  (Philadelphia,  1869).

WINSLOW,  Edward,  governor  of  Plymouth
colony,  b.  in  Droitwich,  near  Worcester,  England,
18  Oct.,  1595 ;  d.  at  sea,  8  May,  1655.  He  was  de-
scended from  an  ancient  English  family.  When
he  was  a  traveller  on  the  continent  he  met  Rev.
John  Robinson,  of  Leyden,  with  whose  church  he

united  in  1617.
He  sailed  in
the  "  Mayflower  "
with  the  band  of
first  settlers  at
Plymouth,  and  on
22"  March.  1621,
he  was  deputed
to  negotiate  with
Massasoit,  making
a  treaty  that  re-
mained intact  till
it  was  broken  by
King  Philip  in
1675.  In  July,
1621,  Winslow
conducted  the
first  embassy  to
the  Indians,  which
was  also  the  first
attempt  of  the
English  to  explore  the  interior.  When,  in  March,
1628,  Massasoit  was  likely  to  die,  he  was  sent  to
the  sachem,  and  by  his  skilful  treatment  saved  the
life  of  the  valuable  ally,  who  in  his  gratitude  in-
formed Winslow's  guide  of  the  plots  among  the
surrounding  tribes  to  cut  off  Thomas  Weston's
colony.  He  sailed,  10  Sept.,  1623,  for  England,
where  he  prepared  for  publication  the  following
year  his  "  Good  Newes  from  New  England."  which
drew  much  attention  to  the  colony.  On  16  March,
1624,  he  imported  the  first  neat-cattle  brought  into
New  England.  At  the  election  that  year  he  was
chosen  an  assistant  governor,  in  which  office  he
was  continued  till  1647,  excepting  1633,  163(5,  and
1644,  when  he  was  chosen  governor.  Contrary  to
the  advice  of  Winslow,  the  adventurers  in  London
had  sent  John  Lyford,  a  preacher,  to  Plymouth,
who  wrote  letters  "full  of  slander  and  falsehood  to
people  in  England.  He  therefore  sailed  that  sum-
mer (1624;  for  England,  presented  the  matter  at  a
meeting,  and  returned  to  Plymouth  with  the  evi-


dence against  Lyford,  who,  with  John  Oldham,
was  promptly  banished.  The  principal  oversight
of  the  commercial  transactions  of  the  colony  was
in  his  keeping  during  its  period  of  development.
Upon  coming  to  the  chief  magistracy  in  1633.  he
found  that  disputes  had  arisen  with  the  Dutch  in
New  York  respecting  the  trade  with  the  Connecti-
cut-river Indians.  The  Massachusetts  colony  de-
clining to  unite  in  establishing  a  trading-fort  on
the  river,  Gov.  Winslow  despatched  a  vessel,  which
went  a  mile  beyond  the  Dutch  fort,  on  the  site  of
Hartford,  and  erected  the  first  house  in  Connecti-
cut. In  1635  he  sailed  for  England  to  defend  the
Plymouth  and  Massachusetts  colonies  against  the
accusations  of  Thomas  Morton,  and  to  represent  to
the  government  the  encroachments  of  the  French
on  the  east  and  the  Dutch  on  the  west.  Archbishop
Laud,  then  at  the  head  of  the  special  commission
established  in  1634,  secured  his  imprisonment  on
a  frivolous  pretence ;  but,  after  seventeen  weeks
of  confinement,  obtaining  his  release  by  the  privy
council,  he  addressed  an  able  paper  to  that  body
upon  the  object  of  his  mission  to  the  government.
Under  Winslow  as  governor,  the  court  of  associates,
in  November,  1636,  enacted  the  elaborate  code  of
laws  and  statutes  that  placed  the  government  on  a
stable  foundation.  About  1  April,  1637.  in  behalf
of  the  government,  he  replied  to  Winthrop's  letter
for  advice  in  the  conduct  of  the  proposed  Pequot
war,  and  was  selected  to  meet  the  authorities  in
Boston  on  12  May,  to  whom  he  declared  the  war
was  none  of  Plymouth's  quarrel.  In  the  estab-
lishment of  the  confederation  known  by  the  name
of  the  United  Colonies  of  New  England,  he  was
commissioner  from  his  colony.  This  act  of  1643
he  seems  to  have  anticipated  in  1631.  when  he  pe-
titioned the  royal  commission  for  a  warrant  to  the
colonies  to  defend  themselves  unitedly  against  all
foes.  The  Massachusetts  government  intrusted
him  in  1646  with  the  mission  to  answer  the  charges
of  Samuel  Gorton  and  others  in  England,  and  to
defend  the  colony  from  the  accusation  of  religious
intolerance.  His  book,  "  Hypocrisie  Unmasked,"
was  considered  a  complete  vindication.  Winslow
advocated  the  civilization  and  conversion  of  the
Indians,  and  published  an  address  to  parliament
and  council,  with  intelligence  from  New  England
upon  the  subject ;  and  by  his  influence  an  act
was  passed,  19  July,  1649,  incorporating  the  So-
ciety for  propagating  the  gospel  in  New  England.
The  government  appointed  him  one  of  three  com-
missioners in  1654  to  adjust  the  claims  against
Denmark  for  losses  to  English  shipping.  Much
light  is  thrown  upon  the  important  service  in
which  he  was  engaged  on  behalf  of  the  colonies,
during  his  sojourn  in  England  (1646-"54),  by  the
recent  publication  of  the  "  Calendar  of  State  Pa-
pers. (  olonial  Series.  1574-1660,"  edited  by  W.  Noel
Sainsbury  (5  vols.,  London,  1860-80).  When  Crom-
well planned  an  expedition  against  the  Spaniards
in  the  West  Indies  under  Gen.  Venables  and  Ad-
miral Penn,  he  appointed  Winslow  head  commis-
sioner at  a  salary  of  £1,000.  The  general  and  ad-
miral disagreed  in  their  tempers  and  views,  the
control  of  the  commission  was  of  no  avail,  and  the
army  was  defeated  at  Santo  Domingo.  The  fleet
sailed  for  Jamaica,  but  on  the  passage  Winslow
died  of  a  fever,  and  his  body  was  committed  to  the
deep  with  the  honors  of  war.  Among  his  accom-
plishments was  a  consummate  address,  which  never
failed  him  as  the  diplomatist  of  the  colony.  His
piety  was  fervent,  and  for  a  day  of  in  toleration  he
was  often  singularly  tolerant  to  those  who  differed
with  him  in  matters  of  belief.  Gov.  Winslow  mar-
ried at  Leyden,  16  May,  1618,  Elizabeth  Barker,


WINSLOW


WINSLOW


567


who  died,  24  March,  1621,  at  Plymouth.  He  mar-
ried, 12  May,  1621,  Mrs.  Susanna  White,  who  had
given  birth  to  the  first  white  child  born  in  New
England,  was  now  the  first  bride,  and  destined  to

be  the  wife  of  a  gov-
ernor and  mother  of
another  governor.
By  her  he  had  two
children,  Elizabeth
and  Josiah.  His
brothers,  John,  Ken-
elm,  and  Josiah,
identified  with  the
early  history  of  the
colony,  are  the  an-
cestors of  a  numer-
ous family.  His
family-seat  was  es-
tablished in  1636-
'7  at  Greenharbor
(now  Marshfield),
afterward  the  estate
of  Daniel  Webster.
The  engraving  of
Gov.  Winslow  is
from  the  only  au-
thentic portrait  of
any  of  the  Pilgrims.
It  was  executed  in
London  in  1651  and  is  now  preserved  at  Plymouth.
The  engraving  above  represents  the  monument  in
Plymouth  to  the  memory  of  the  pilgrims.  Gov.
Winslow's  pen  has  left  some  valuable  and  substan-
tial writings  to  indicate  his  versatility  in  narration
and  argument.  What  is  called  "  Bradford's  and
Winslow's  Journal,"  or  by  others  "  A  Diary  of  Oc-
currences "  (London,  1622),  covering  the  first  year  of
the  colony,  is  admirably  supplemented  by  "  Wins-
low's Relation,"  which  brings  down  the  history  to
10  Sept.,  1623.  This  work,  also  known  as  "  Good
Newes  from  New  England,"  appeared  complete  in
Alexander  Young's  " Chronicles  of  the  Pilgrims"
(Boston,  1841).  His  letter  to  George  Morton  as  advi-
sory for  such  as  proposed  voyaging  to  Plymouth,  the
letters  to  John  Winthrop,  in  Thomas  Hutchinson's
"  Collection  of  Papers,"  and  those  to  Sec.  Thurlow
("  State  Papers,"  iii.)  from  the  Barbadoes,  1654-'5,
are  among  the  most  valuable  of  his  briefer  remains.
His  "  Brief  Narration,"  or  "  Hypocrisie  Unmasked,"
in  opposition  to  Samuel  Gorton  (1646),  appears,
in  part,  in  Young's  "  Chronicles."  This  trenchant
book  was  followed  by  another,  under  the  title  of
"  New  England's  Salamander,"  as  an  answer  to
aspersions  cast  upon  New  England  (1647).  "  The
Glorious  Progress  of  the  Gospel  amongst  the  Indi-
ans in  New  England  "  (1649),  dedicated  to  parlia-
ment, contained  also  letters  from  John  Eliot  and
Thomas  Mayhew.  "  A  Platform  of  Church  Disci-
pline in  New  England  "  (1653)  is  his  last  publica-
tion extant  or  of  which  we  have  knowledge.  See
Moore's  "  Governors  of  New  Plymouth " ;  Bay-
lies's  "  New  Plymouth  " :  "  The  Winslow  Memo-
rial," by  David  P.  and  Frances  K.  Holton  (New
York,  1877);  Samuel  G.  Drake's  "History  of  Bos-
ton "(Boston,  1856);  and  John  G.  Palfrev's  "His-
tory of  New  England"  (3  vols.,  1858-'64).— His
son,  Josiah,  governor  of  Plymouth  colony,  b.
in  Plymouth  in  1629 ;  d.  at  Marshfield,  Mass.,  18
Dec,  1680,  was  chosen  deputy  to  the  general  court
from  Marshfield  in  1643.  In  1657,  two  years
after  the  death  of  his  father,  he  was  made  an  as-
sistant governor,  which  post  he  filled  till  his  elec-
tion as  governor  in  1673.  This  last  office  he  held
till  his  death.  In  1658  he  was  chosen  one  of  the
commissioners  of  the  United  Colonies,  and  re-elect-


ed for  fourteen  years.  On  5  Sept.,  1672,  he  was
one  of  the  six  signers  of  the  new  articles  of  con-
federation of  the  New  England  colonies,  and  on
9  Sept.,  1675,  he  signed  the  declaration  of  war
against  King  Philip,  made  by  the  commissioners.
In  1652  he  commanded  the  military  company  of
Marshfield,  in  1659  he  was  appointed  military  com-
mander of  the  colony,  and  in  1675  he  was  elected
general-in-chief  of  the  whole  military  forces  of  the
United  Colonies,  being  the  first  native-born  gen-
eral as  well  as  governor  in  New  England.  During
his  chief  magistracy  in  1674-'5  the  first  public
school  of  the  colony  was  established,  and  in  1680
the  first  lieutenant-governor  was  elected.  The
general  court  ordered  in  1675  that  four  halberdiers
should  attend  the  governor  and  magistrates  at
elections,  and  two  during  the  court  sessions.  The
government  now  maintained  a  state  that  was  hith-
erto unknown  in  the  colony.  Gov.  Winslow  lived
at  Careswell,  the  family-seat  in  Marshfield,  where
he  enjoyed  the  distinction  of  being  the  most  ac-
complished gentleman  in  the  colony.  His  hospi-
tality was  generous,  and  the  attractions  of  the
festive  and  social  board  were  not  a  little  height-
ened by  the  charms  of  his  beautiful  wife.  In  1657
James  Cudworth  was  displaced  by  the  colony  from
his  official  post  for  refusing  to  sign,  as  a  commis-
sioner, the  proceedings  against  the  Quakers.  When
first  a  commissioner,  in  1658,  Winslow  refused  to
sanction  the  "  horrible  recommendation "  of  that
year  against  the  Quakers,  and  in  1674,  by  his  active
friendship  and  powerful  influence  as  governor,
Cudworth  was  rescued  from  the  disgrace  to  which
Gov.  Prince  and  others  had  subjected  him.  He
showed  that  he  had  a  just  spirit  in  the  active  part
he  bore  in  the  preliminaries  to  the  war  against
Philip,  in  which  he  was  afterward  commander-in-
chief.  On  1  May,  1676.  he  wrote  to  the  commis-
sioners in  Boston  that  the  land  in  his  colony  had
all  been  honestly  purchased  of  the  Indians,  and,
to  protect  the  natives  from  wrong,  no  settler  was
allowed  to  receive  land  except  by  permission  of
the  court.  His  capture  of  Alexander  in  1662,
the  brother  of  Philip,  and  for  two  years  sachem
after  Massasoit's  death,  illustrates  his  courage  and
personal  daring  as  a  soldier.  His  last  public  act,
on  5  Sept.,  1680,  was  to  solicit  a  charter  for  Plym-
outh from  the  crown,  Cudworth  being  appointed
to  present  the  ad-
dress to  the  king.
Gov.  Winslow  cele-
brated the  memory
of  Gov.  Bradford  in
a  poem  that  is  pub-
lished in  George
Morton's  "  Memo-
riall."  He  married,
in  1657,  Penelope
Pelham,  daughter
of  Herbert  Pelham,
who  came  to  Bos-
ton in  1645,  and
was  first  treasurer
of  Harvard  college,
and  assistant  gov-
ernor in  1646-'9.
The  portrait  of
Gov.  Winslow  giv-
en herewith  is  from  a  painting  probably  executed
during  his  visit  to  London  in  1651,  which,  with
the  portrait  of  his  wife,  is  preserved  in  Pilgrim
hall,  Plymouth.  A  son  and  a  daughter  survived
him. — The  former,  Isaac,  b.  in  1670 ;  d.  at  Cares-
well,  6  Dec,  1738,  was  military  commander  of  the
colony,  a  member  of  the  council  more  than  twenty


7/falaJi/WsriKZG


Lc2£r3


568


WINSLOW


WINSLOW


years,  some  of  the  time  its  president,  judge  of  pro-
bate, and  chief  justice  the  latter  part  of  his  life. —
Isaac's  son,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,
27  May,  1702 ;  d.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  17  April,
1774,  with  the  exception  of  Sir  William  Pepperell,
was  the  most  distinguished  military  leader  in  New
England  at  that  period.  The  council  appointed
him,  on  14  Aug.,  1740,  captain  of  the  company  that
was  raised  in  Boston  to  serve  in  the  expedition
against  Cuba.  He  went  as  a  commissioner  in  1752
to  Fort  St.  George,  Me.,  to  adjust  territorial  and
other  disputes  with  the  Indians.  While  a  major-
general  of  militia  and  captain  in  the  British  army
in  1755,  he  was  directed  by  Gov.  William  Shirley,
who  was  advised  by  Gov.  Lawrence,  of  Nova  Sco-
tia, to  proceed  to  that  province  to  remove  the
Acadians.  The  most  responsible  persons  for  the
manner  in  which  that  act  was  accomplished  appear
to  have  been  Lawrence  and  his  council,  and  Admi-
rals Boscawen  and  Moysteyn.  Winslow  acted  un-
der written  and  positive  instructions,  and  he  said
to  the  Acadians,  before  reading  the  decree,  that  it
was  "  very  disagreeable  to  his  natural  temper  and
make,"  but  that  it  was  not  his  business  to  "  ani-
madvert, but  to  obey  such  orders  as  he  should  re-
ceive." The  following  year  he  took  the  field  with
about  8,000  men  to  serve  against  the  French.  Re-
ceiving from  Gov.  Hardy,  of  New  York,  in  July,
a  commission  as  major-general  and  commander-in-
chief,  he  established  himself  at  Fort  William
Henry  on  Lake  George ;  but  Montcalm,  fearing  to
risk  the  encounter,  turned  aside  to  capture  Oswego.
That  general  then  returned  to  Canada,  and  the
army  of  Winslow  to  Massachusetts.  He  served
again  as  major-general  against  the  French  in  the
expedition  of  1758-9  to  the  Kennebec.  In  1762  he
was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  in  Plymouth  county.  He  participated  as  a
commissioner  in  the  first  effort  that  was  made  to
solve  the  vexed  question — Which  is  the  true  river
St.  Croix? — in  determining  the  easterly  line  of
Maine  with  James  Otis  and  William  Brattle,  in
1762.  During  the  stamp-act  troubles  he  was  a
councillor  of  the  province  in  the  legislature,  and
was  associated  on  various  occasions  with  Samuel  Ad-
ams and  others  in  preparing  documents  upon  that
controversy.  The  town  of  Winslow  in  Maine  was
named,  in  1771,  in  his  honor.  His  house  in  Plym-
outh is  still  standing,  and  in  Pilgrim  Hall  are  his
sword  and  a  portrait  of  him  in  military  dress.
— Edward,  loyalist,  brother  of  Gen.  John,  b.  7
June,  1714;  d.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  8  June,
1784,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  college  in  1736,
was  successively  clerk  of  the  courts,  registrar  of
probate,  and  collector  of  the  port,  at  Plymouth,  and
removed  to  Halifax  at  the  evacuation  of  Boston.
— Edward's  son,  Edward,  governor  of  New  Bruns-
wick, b.  in  Plymouth  in  1746;  d.  in  Fredericton,
New  Brunswick,  in  1815,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1765,  and  served  as  clerk  of  the  county
court  in  his  native  place.  In  1775  he  was  ap-
pointed colonel  in  the  royal  army  at  Boston,  and
in  1782  he  became  muster-master-general  for  North
America  of  the  American  forces  in  the  service  of
the  crown.  After  the  war  he  settled  in  New
Brunswick,  was  a  member  of  the  first  council  of
that  colony,  and,  successively,  surrogate-general,
judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  governor  of  the
province.  He  was  a  founder  and  eminent  spirit
of  the  Old  Colony  club,  under  whose  auspices  the
long  line  of  celebrations  began,  and  he  delivered
the  first  anniversary  oration,  22  Dec,  1770.

WINSLOW,  Edward  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in
Augusta,  Me.,  28  Sept.,  1837.  He  was  educated  at
the  Augusta  high-school,  removed  in  1856  to  Mount


Pleasant,  Henry  co.,  Iowa,  and  soon  afterward  be-
came interested  in  the  construction  of  railways.
He  was  a  captain  in  the  4th  Iowa  cavalry  in
1861,  and  was  promoted  major,  3  Jan.,  1863,  and
colonel  on  the  day  that  Vicksburg  fell.  He  then
took  part  in  the  campaign  against  Gen.  Joseph  E.
Johnston,  and  soon  afterward  was  appointed  by
Gen.  Sherman  chief  of  cavalry,  and  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  cavalry  forces  of  the  15th  corps,
which  posts  he  held  till  March,  1864.  In  Febru-
ary, 1864,  he  commanded  the  cavalry  of  Gen.  Sher-
man's army  in  the  campaign  against  Gen.  Leo-
nidas  Polk,  and  successfully  attacked  the  Confed-
erate cavalry  near  Jackson.  He  was  in  command  of
a  brigade  of  cavalry  in  the  engagement  at  Gun-
town,  Miss.,  in  1864,  and  after  the  defeat  of  the
National  forces  covered  the  retreat.  In  October,
1864,  Col.  Winslow's  brigade  formed  part  of  Gen.  Al-
fred Pleasonton's  force  in  pursuit  of  Gen.  Sterling
Price.  He  was  severely  wounded  at  Big  Blue  river
on  22  Oct.,  and  was  unable  to  resume  his  command
till  November.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  12  Dec,  1864,  with  his  brigade
participated  in  the  expedition  against  Selma,
Montgomery,  Columbus,  and  Macon  in  the  spring
of  1865,  and  on  16  April  took  Columbus,  Ga.,  by
assault.  Soon  after  retiring  to  civil  life  he  en-
gaged in  the  construction  of  railways.  On  1  Nov.,
1879,  as  vice-president  and  general  manager  of  the
Manhattan  elevated  railway  in  New  York  city,  he
took  charge  of  that  property  and  unified  the  sys-
tem of  control  and  management  of  its  lines;  but,
having  been  elected  president  of  the  St.  Louis  and
San  Francisco  railway  company  and  vice-president
of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  railway  company,  he
severed  his  connection  with  the  Manhattan  com-
pany, 31  March,  1880.  He  was  also  for  several
years  president  of  the  New  York,  Ontario,  and
Western  railway  company,  and  formed  an  associa-
tion for  the  purpose  of  building  the  West  Shore
railway,  which  he  completed  in  about  three  years.

WINSLOW,  James,  banker,  b.  in  Connecticut
in  1816 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  18  July,  1874.  After
having  been  employed  in  the  hardware-store  of
Erastus  Corning  in  Albany,  he  removed  to  New
York  and,  after  following  the  hardware  business
for  several  years,  entered  the  banking-firm  of  Wins-
low, Lanier  and  Co.,  which  had  been  established
by  his  brother  and  his  father-in-law,  and  which
rendered  important  services  to  the  government
during  the  administration  of  President  Lincoln  in
connection  with  war  loans.  He  was  subsequently
identified  with  the  rise  of  national  banks,  and  was
connected  as  an  officer  with  several.

W'INSLOW,  Jens  Olaus,  Danish  explorer,  b.
in  Flinen  island  in  1739 ;  d.  in  Copenhagen  in
1794.  He  was  a  lieutenant  in  the  navy  when  he
was  appointed  in  1780  to  the  command  of  the
Danish  colonies  in  Africa.  In  1784  he  was  sent
on  a  voyage  around  the  world,  visiting  the  West
Indies,  Brazil,  and  the  Spanish  possessions  on  the
Pacific  coast,  Manila,  India,  and  returned  to  Co-
penhagen in  June,  1787,  with  valuable  charts  and
rich  collections  in  natural  history.  After  his  pro-
motion as  post-captain  he  again  explored  the  West
Indies  in  1788-'90,  and  in  particular  studied  the
condition  of  the  negroes  and  the  African  slave-
trade.  He  wrote  "  Reise  omkring  Verden  "  (3  vols..
Copenhagen,  1787,  illustrated);  "Journal  holden  i
skibet  Christianstad  paa  reisen  til  Cuba,  Puerto
Rico  ogVestIndien"(2vols., 1790);  and  presented  to
the  Academy  of  sciences  of  Copenhagen  a  memoir
on  the  condition  of  the  negroes  in  the  West  Indies  as
compared  with  the  life  of  the  negroes  on  the  west
coast  of  Africa,  which  was  published  in Olaus


WINSLOW


WINSLOW


569


Gyldendal's  collection  (Copenhagen,  1792),  and
translated  into  French  under  the  title  "  Etat,  con-
dition, et  usages  des  negres  des  Antilles,  compare
avec  la  condition  des  negres  de  la  cote  d'or  "  (Am-
sterdam, 1795).

WINSLOW,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
29  Oct.,  1753 ;  d.  there,  29  Nov.,  1819.  He  saved
the  communion-plate  of  the  Old  South  church  from
the  British  by  burying  it,  and  from  its  steeple  wit-
nessed the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill.  Upon  going  to
the  battle-field  he  was  the  first  person  to  discover
the  body  of  Gen.  Joseph  Warren.  Disguising  him-
self in  sailor's  clothes,  he  shipped  on  a  British  man-
of-war  bound  to  Newport,  where  he  escaped,  en-
tered the  American  army,  and  shortly  received  the
appointment  of  deputy  paymaster-general.  He
saved  the  public  chest  and  important  papers  at  the
defeat  of  the  army  under  Montgomery  at  Quebec
and  at  the  battle  of  Ticonderoga ;  in  charge  also
of  a  battery  in  the  campaign  against  Burgoyne,  at
his  surrender  he  took  account  of  the  captured
stores,  being  subsequently  stationed  at  West  Point
and  White  Plains.  On"  21  March,  1799,  he  was
■elected  brigadier-general  of  the  Boston  brigade,
and  in  1809  chosen  by  the  legislature  major-gen-
eral of  the  militia.  In  1788  he  was  lieutenant,  and
in  1792  and  1798  captain,  of  the  Ancient  and  hon-
orable artillery  company.  An  infantry  company
was  formed  and  named  the  '•  Winslow  blues."  He
was  an  original  member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cin-
cinnati and  its  treasurer,  and  was  also  treasurer
of  Suffolk  county  the  last  seven  years  of  his  life.

WINSLOW,  John  Ancrura,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Wilmington,  N.  C,  19  Nov.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  29  Sept.,  1873. He  was  descended  from  a

brother  of  Gov.
Edward  Winslow,
of  Plymouth  colo-
ny. He  entered
the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman, 1  Feb.,
1827,  became  a
passed  midship-
man, 10  June,
1833,  and  was  com-
missioned a  lieu-
tenant, 9  Feb.,
1839.  During  the
Mexican  war  he
took  part  in  the  ex-
peditions against
Tabasco,  Tampico,
/  .  t  and  Tuspan,  and

(L4£  ^  *?£  ^P-i^O-i^-^ was  present  at  the

fall  of  Vera  Cruz.
For  his  gallantry  in  action  he  was  allowed  to  have
■command  of  the  schooner  "  Union,"  which  had  been
captured  at  Tampico,  and  was  taken  into  service  and
named  the  "Morris";  but  she  was  poorly  equipped,
and  was  lost  on  a  reef  off  Vera  Cruz,  16  Dec.  1846.
He  was  executive  of  the  sloop  "  Saratoga  "  in  the
Gulf  of  Mexico  in  1848-'9,  at  the  Boston  navy-yard
in  1849-'50,  and  in  the  frigate  "  St.  Lawrence,"  of
the  Pacific  station,  in  1861-5.  He  was  promoted  to
commander,  14  Sept.,  1855,  and  joined  the  Mississippi
river  flotilla  in  1861,  but  was  not  able  to  remain  on
duty  because  of  a  serious  accident  which  disabled
him.  He  was  commissioned  captain,  16  July,  1862,
and  commanded  the  steamer  "Kearsarge"  on  spe-
cial service  in  1863-'4  in  pursuit  of  the  "Alabama."
•Capt.  Winslow  arrived  off  Cherbourg;  14  June,
1864,  where  he  found  the  "Alabama"  and  block-
aded her  in  the  harbor.  The  "  Alabama "  made
preparations  for  fight,  and  Capt.  Raphael  Semmes
caused  Winslow  to  be  informed  of  this  intention


through  the  U.  S.  consul.  On  Sunday,  19  June,
1864,  he  was  lying  three  miles  off  the  eastern  en-
trance of  the  harbor  when  the  "  Alabama "  came
out,  escorted  by  a  French  iron-clad  and  the  English
yacht  "  Deerhound."  Winslow  steamed  off  seven
miles  from  the  shore  so  as  to  be  beyond  the  neu-
tral ground,  and  then  steamed  toward  the  "  Ala-
bama." The  armament  of  the  "Kearsarge"  was
seven  guns,  and  that  of  the  "Alabama"  eight  guns,
including  a  100-pound  Blakely  rifle.  The  "  Kear-
sarge "  was  slightly  faster,  and  had  163  men,  while
the  "  Alabama  "  had  149.  When  Winslow  turned
to  approach,  the  "  Alabama "  opened  fire  from
a  raking  position  at  a  distance  of  one  mile  at
10.57  A.  m.  He  kept  on  at  full  speed,  receiving  a
second  broadside  and  part  of  a  third,  when  he
sheered  off  and  returned  the  fire  from  his  star-
board battery.  Both  vessels  circled  around  a  com-
mon centre,  and  neared  each  other  to  within  600
yards.  The  sides  of  the  "  Alabama  "  were  torn  out
by  the  shells,  and  at  noon,  after  the  action  had
continued  for  one  hour,  she  headed  for  the  shore
to  get  into  neutral  waters,  then  five  miles  distant.
This  exposed  her  port  side,  and  she  could  only
bring  two  guns  to  bear.  The  ship  was  filling,  and
Winslow  approached  so  rapidly  that  Semmes
hauled  down  his  flag.  Winslow  stopped  the  ship,
but  continued  to  fire,  uncertain  whether  the  "  Ala-
bama "  had  surrendered  or  the  flag  had  been  shot
away.  A  white  flag  was  then  shown,  and  Winslow
ceased  firing.  The  "  Alabama  "  again  renewed  her
firing,  and  Winslow  also  opened  and  fired  three  or
four  times,  though  the  white  flag  was  still  flying.
A  boat  from  the  "  Alabama  "  then  came  alongside
to  announce  the  surrender,  and  was  allowed  to  go
back  to  bring  off  the  "Alabama's"  officers  and
crew,  but  she  did  not  return.  The  yacht  "  Deer-
hound  "  then  came  up,  and  Winslow  asked  her  to
assist  in  rescuing  the  officers  and  crew  of  the  "Ala-
bama." which  was  then  sinking  fast.  The  "  Deer-
hound  "  picked  up  thirty-nine  persons,  including
Semmes  and  fourteen  of  his  officers,  after  which
she  went  off  and  sailed  to  Southampton.  Wins-
low's  officers  begged  him  to  throw  a  shell  at  the
"  Deerhound,"  but  he  refused.  The  engagement
lasted  an  hour  and  twenty  minutes.  After  the
last  shot  was  fired  the  "  Alabama "  sank  out  of
sight.  She  had  about  forty  killed,  and  seventy  were
made  prisoners,  so  that  thirty-nine  escaped.  Only
three  men  were  wounded  in  the  "  Kearsarge,"  one
of  whom  died.  Only  twenty-eight  projectiles  struck
the  "  Kearsarge  "  out  of  the  370  that  were  fired  by
the  "  Alabama,"  and  none  of  these  did  any  mate-
rial damage.  One  100-pound  shell  exploded  in  the
smoke-stack,  and  one  lodged  in  the  stern-post  of  the
"  Kearsarge,"  but  did  not  explode.  The  "  Kear-
sarge "  fired  173  projectiles,  and  few  failed  to  do
some  injury.  This  was  the  only  important  sea-fight
of  the  war  between  two  ships.  Honors  were  show-
ered upon  Winslow  throughout  the  country  for  his
victory.  He  received  a  vote  of  thanks  from  con-
gress, and  was  promoted  to  commodore  with  his
commission  dated  19  June,  1864,  the  date  of  the
victory.  He  commanded  the  Gulf  squadron  in
1866-'7,  was  a  member  of  the  board  of  examiners
in  1868-'9,  and  commander-in-chief  of  the  Pacific
squadron  in  1870-2.  He  was  promoted  to  rear-
admiral,  2  March,  1870,  and  after  his  return  from
the  cruise  in  the  Pacific  resided  temporarily  at  San
Francisco,  after  which  he  removed  to  Boston,  Mass.,
where  he  resided  until  his  death.

WINSLOW,  John  Flack,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Bennington,  Vt.,  5  Nov.,  1810.  He  was  educated
at  select  schools  of  Albany,  was  a  clerk  in  com-
mercial houses  in  New  York  from  1827  till  1831,


570


WINSLOW


WINSLOW


and  in  the  latter  year  became  agent  of  the  New
Jersey  iron  company.  In  1833  he  engaged  in  the
production  of  pig-iron  in  Bergen  and  Sussex
counties,  N.  J.,  and  in  1837  he  formed  a  connec-
tion with  Erastus  Corning,  of  Albany,  which  lasted
under  various  firm-names  for  thirty  years.  The
firm,  controlling  the  Albany  and  Rensselaer  iron-
works, was  one  of  the  largest  producers  of  railroad
and  other  iron  in  the  United  States.  During  his
visits  to  Europe,  Mr.  Winslow  purchased  the  right
to  manufacture  and  sell  Bessemer  steel  in  this  coun-
try. The  TJ.  S.  government  contracted  with  his
firm  for  the  construction  of  the  "  Monitor,"  which
was  begun  in  October,  1861,  at  Greenpoint,  Long
Island,  was  launched,  30  Jan.,  1862,  and  delivered
to  the  government,  5  March,  1862.  In  1867  Mr.
Winslow  retired  from  active  business.  In  1863-'7
he  was  president  of  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute.
He  has  been  president  of  the  Poughkeepsie  and
Eastern  railway,  and  of  the  company  for  construct-
ing the  Poughkeepsie  bridge  over  Hudson  river.

WINSLOW,  Joshua,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  23  Jan.,  1727;  d.  in  Quebec  in  1801.
He  served  with  distinction  in  the  capture  of  Louis-
burg  in  1745,  and  was  commissary-general  in  the
expedition  to  Acadia  in  1755.  His  diary  of  the
expedition  to  Nova  Scotia  in  1750  is  to  appear  in
Holton's  "  Genealogy  of  John  Winslow's  Descend-
ants." At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  re-
moved to  Halifax,  became  paymaster-general  of  the
British  forces  in  North  America,  and  subsequently
resided  in  Quebec.  His  widow  returned  to  the
United  States,  and  died  at  Medford,  Mass.,  16
April,  1816.  Two  portraits,  by  John  S.  Copley,  of
Gen.  Winslow  (one  taken  in  1755,  in  the  undress  uni-
form of  a  British  officer)  are  now  in  the  possession
of  J.  F.  Trott,  Esq.,  of  Niagara  Falls.  The  journal
of  his  daughter,  Anna  Green,  b.  29  Nov.,  1759;
d.  in  1779,  during  1771-'3,  in  Boston,  is  a  curiosity
in  its  description  of  the  customs  and  doings  of  that
day.  Most  of  it  appeared  in  the  "  Bulletin  of  Pil-
grim Record,"  Nos.  3,  4,  and  5  (1877).

WINSLOW,  Miron,  missionary,  b.  in  Willis-
ton,  Vt.,  11  Dec,  1789;  d.  at  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
22  Oct.,  1864.  He  was  descended  from  a  brother  of
Gov.  Edward  Winslow. After  graduation  at  Mid-

dlebury  in  1815,
and  at  Andover
theological  semi-
nary in  1818,  he
sailed  in  1819  for
Ceylon,  where  he
established  a  mis-
sion and  afterward
a  seminary  at  Oo-
dooville.  In  1836
he  founded  the
mission  at  Madras,
where  he  spent  the
remainderof  his  life
establishing  seven
vernacular  schools
and  a  native  col-
lege. Harvard  con-

nmtu**&^ — »  Sd."1  ftfS

1858.  His  chief
books  are  "  Sketch  of  the  Missions "  (Andover,
1819) ;  "  Memoir  of  Harriet  Lathrop  Winslow,"  his
wife  (New  York,  1835;  republished  in  London,
France,  and  Turkey);  "Hints  on  Missions  to  In-
dia" (New  York,  1856);  a  translation  of  the  Bible
into  Tamil ;  and  a  "  Comprehensive  Tamil  and
English  Dictionary,"  in  part  from  manuscript
materials  of  the  late  Rev.  Joseph  Knight  (Madras,


1862).  This  great  work,  costing  $20,000  and  more
than  twenty  years  of  toil,  averaging  three  hours
a  day,  contains  68,000  words  and  definitions,  of
which  about  half  owe  their  lexicographic  birth  and
position  to  the  author. — His  first  wife,  Harriet
Lathrop,  b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  9  April,  1796;  d.
in  Oodooville,  Ceylon,  14  Jan.,  1833,  married,  11
Jan.,  1819,  and  sailed  for  Ceylon,  8  June,  1819,
where  she  was  distinguished  for  her  educational
labors  in  connection  with  her  husband's  work. —
Their  son,  Charles  Lathrop,  b.  in  Oodooville,
Ceylon,  12  Jan.,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York,  24  May,
1832.  His  memoir,  first  published  by  the  Ameri-
can tract  society  (1834),  was  republished  in  Eu-
rope. It  contains  the  well-known  lines  of  Mrs.
Sigourney  on  his  death. — Catherine  Waterbury
Carman,  Miron's  second  wife,  b.  in  1799;  d.  near
Madras,  23  Sept.,  1837,  married  Mr.  Winslow,  23
April,  1835.  She  was  one  of  the  most  accomplished
women  and  extensive  travellers  in  Europe  in  her
day.  The  "  Remains  of  Mrs.  Winslow,"  edited  by
Rev.  Jared  B.  Waterbury,  were  published  (Boston,
1851). — His  brother,  Hubbard,  author,  b.  in  Wil-
liston,  Vt.,  30  Oct.,  1799;  d.  there,  13  Aug.,  1864,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1825,  studied  two  years
at  Andover,  and  completed  his  theological  course
at  Yale.  He  was  settled  over  churches  at  Dover,
N.  H.,  Boston,  Mass.,  and  Geneva,  N.  Y.  At  Bos-
ton he  was  Lyman  Beecher's  successor  in  the  Bow-
doin  street  church.  From  1844  till  1853  he  con-
ducted the  Mount  Vernon  institute  in  Boston,
devoting  himself  during  this  period  and  for  much
of  his  life  to  the  advancement  of  higher  education
in  Boston  and  among  the  colleges.  His  published
volumes  are  "  History  of  the  First  Church,  Dover,
N.  H."  (Dover,  1831) ;  "  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  "
(1831) ;  "  Controversial  Theology  "  (Boston,  1832) :
"Philosophical  Papers "  (1833) ;  "Christianity  ap-
plied to  our  Civil  and  Social  Relations  "  (1835) ;
"  Young  Man's  Aid  to  Knowledge  "  (1836) ;  "  Aids
to  Self-Examination"  (1837);  "Mental  Cultiva-
tion "  (1839) ;  "  Lectures  to  Sunday-School  Teach-
ers "  (1839) ;  "  The  Appropriate  Sphere  of  Woman  "
(1840);  "  Natural  Science  and  Revelation  "  (1841) ;
"  Design  and  Mode  of  Baptism  "  (1842) ;  "  Chris-
tian Doctrines  "  (1844) ;  "  Intellectual  Philosophy  "
(1852);  "Moral  Philosophy"  (New  York,  1856);
and  "Hidden  Life"  (1863).  The  "Young  Man's
Aid,"-  published  in  England  also,  had  a  sale  of
100,000  copies,  and  more  than  250,000  copies  of
his  tract,  "  Are  You  a  Christian  ? "  were  issued.
Among  Dr.  Winslow's  minor  publications  are  his
eulogy  on  Daniel  Webster  (1853)  and  "  History  of
the  Presbyterian  Church,  Geneva,  N.  Y."  (1858).
With  Jacob  Abbott  and  Ethan  A.  Andrews  he  edit-
ed the  "  Religious  Magazine "  (Boston,  1837-'8).
— Another  brother,  Gordon,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wil-
liston,  Vt.,  12  Sept.,  1803;  d.  in  "Potomac  river,
7  June.  1864,  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church,  and  was  settled  succes-
sively at  Troy  and  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  Annapolis,  Md.,
and  Staten  island.  He  enlisted  as  chaplain  of  the
5th  New  York  regiment,  of  which  his  son  Cleveland
afterward  became  colonel,  and  was  instrumental
with  Dr.  Henry  W.  Bellows  and  others  in  estab-
lishing the  sanitary  commission,  holding  the  post
of  its  inspector  for  the  Armv  of  the  Potomac.  He
was  a  member  of  scientific  bodies  and  contributor
to  their  published  proceedings,  and  active  in  phil-
anthropic work.  New  York  university  gave  him
in  1863  the-  honorary  degree  of  M.  I).,  both  because
of  his  distinguished  service  in  the  sanitary  com-
mission and  his  capabilities  in  caring  for  the  sick
and  wounded. — His  son,  Cleveland,  soldier,  b.  in
Medford,  Mass.,  in  1836 ;  d.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  7


WINSLOW


WINSTON


571


July,  1864,  was  an  officer  in  the  71st  New  York
regiment  when  the  civil  war  opened.  He  raised  a
company,  and  was  with  the  5th  New  York  in  all  its
engagements,  beginning  with  Big  Bethel,  till  he
received  his  mortal  wound,  which  terminated  his
life  before  his  nomination  as  brigadier-general  for
gallant  conduct  and  efficient  service  could  be  acted
upon.  He  died  from  a  wound  that  he  received  at
Mechanicsville,  while  leading  his  regiment,  as  its
colonel,  into  battle. — His  brother,  Gordon,  b.  in
1839,  a  captain  in  the  same  regiment,  is  now  a  cap-
tain in  the  regular  army.  Their  mother,  Cath-
erine Fish  Winslow,  was  a  cousin  of  Hamilton
Fish. — Hubbard's  son,  William  Copley,  archae-
ologist, b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  13  Jan.,  1840,  was
graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in  1862,  and  at
the  Protestant  Episcopal  general  theological  semi-
nary, New  York  city,  in  1865.  He  has  since  been
engaged  in  preaching,  lecturing,  and  writing  for
the  press,  and  was  assistant  editor  of  the  New
York  "  World  "  in  1862-'3,  and  of  the  "  Christian
Union"  in  1864.  Since  1870  he  has  resided  in
Boston,  and  has  had  temporary  charge  of  churches
there  and  in  Taunton  and  Weymouth.  He  is  vice-
president  and  honorary  treasurer  of  the  Egypt  ex-
ploration fund  for  America,  and  by  his  efforts  has
created  a  widespread  interest  in  its  work.  He  has
written  numerous  articles  for  the  reviews  and  jour-
nals on  exploration  and  cognate  subjects,  and  is
regarded  as  an  authority  on  biblical,  and  particu-
larly Egyptological,  explorations.  Through  his
efforts  the  Boston  museum  of  fine  arts  has  received
a  colossal  statue  of  Ramses  II.,  the  Pharaoh  of  the
oppression,  discovered  in  the  suburbs  of  the  site  of
the  biblical  Zoan.  He  is  actively  connected  with
various  learned  societies,  and  received  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  from  Hamilton  college  in  1866,  that  of
LL.  D.  from  St.  Andrew's,  Scotland,  in  1886,
L.  H.  I),  from  Columbia  in  1887,  and  D.  D.  from
Amherst  in  1887.

WINSLOW,  Stephen  Noyes,  journalist,  b.  in
Hartland,  Vt.,  14  April,  1826.  He  was  graduated
in  1843  at  the  high-school  in  Philadelphia,  where
he  had  already  been  a  reporter  for  newspapers
since  1841.  He  has  been  for  forty-seven  years
commercial  editor  of  the  "  Inquirer,"  occupied  the
same  editorial  chair  on  the  "  Bulletin  "  for  thirty-
five,  was  connected  also  with  the  "  Evening  Tele-
graph "  for  fifteen,  and  has  long  been  the  editor
and  proprietor  of  the  "  Commercial  List  and  Price
Current."  Mr.  Winslow  is  the  author  of  "  Biog-
raphies of  Successful  Philadelphia  Merchants"
(Philadelphia,  1864).

WINSLOW,  Warren,  member  of  congress,  b.
in  Fayetteville,  N.  C,  1  Jan.,  1810;  d.  there,  11
June,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  North  Carolina  in  1827,  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar,  and  practised  at  Fayetteville.  In
1854  he  was  appointed  by  President  Pierce  a  con-
fidential agent  to  Madrid,  and  bore  despatches  re-
garding "  The  Black  Warrior  "  difficulty.  He  was
elected  to  the  state  senate  during  his  absence,  was
chosen  speaker  of  that  body  after  his  return,  and
became  acting  governor  of  North  Carolina  in  1854,
when  Gov.  David  S.  Reid  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate.  He  served  in  congress  by  successive  re-
elections  from  3  Dec,  1855,  till  3  March,  1861.

WINSOR,  Justin,  librarian,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1831.  He  studied  at  Harvard  during
1853,  and  then  at  Heidelberg,  Germany.  In  1868
he  became  superintendent  of  the  Boston  public
library,  where  he  remained  until  1877.  He  then
became  librarian  of  Harvard,  which  post  he  still
holds.  He  was  the  first  president,  in  1876-86,  of
the  American  library  association,  and  has  also  held


the  office  of  president  in  the  American  historical  as-
sociation, and  that  of  secretary  in  the  Massachu-
setts historical  society.  The  University  of  Michigan
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1886.  Besides
numerous  magazine
articles  and  address-
es, mostly  on  sub-
jects connected  with
American  history,  he
has  written  "  History
of  Duxbury,  Massa-
chusetts "  (Boston,
1849)  ;  "  Songs  of
Unity,"  compiled
with  Rev.  George
H.  Hepworth  (1859) ;
"  Bibliography  of  the
Original  Quartos  and
Folios  of  Shake-
speare, with  Partic-
ular Reference  to
Copies  in  America  "
(1876)  ;  "  Readers
Hand-Book  of  the
American  Revolu-
tion, 1761-'83"  (1880);  "Was  Shakespeare  Shap-
leigh?  A  Correspondence  in  Two  Entanglements"
(1887);  and  several  pamphlets,  including  "Gov.
Bradford's  Manuscript  History  of  Plymouth  Plan-
tation" (Cambridge,  1881);  "Arnold's  Expedition
against  Quebec,  1775-1776  .  .  ."  (1886) ;  "  The  Man-
uscript Sources  of  American  History  "  (New  York,
1887) ;  and  "  Notes  on  the  Spurious  Letters  of
Montcalm  "  (Cambridge,  1887).  He  edited  the
"  Memorial  History  of  Boston "  (4  vols.,  Boston,
1880-'l)  ;  "  Narrative  and  Critical  History  of
America,"  of  which  vols.  ii.  to  vii.  have  been  issued
(1884-'8) ;  "  Harvard  University  Bulletin  "  (since
1877)  ;  and  "  Library  of  Harvard  University  :
Bibliographical  Contributions"  (begun  in  1887).
To  the  last  he  has  contributed  "Shakespeare's
Poems :  Bibliography  of  the  Earlier  Editions "
(1878-'9) ;  "  Pietas  et  Gratulatio :  Inquiry  into  the
Authorship  of  the  Several  Pieces  "  (1879) ;  "  Halli-
wel  liana :  a  Bibliography  of  the  Publications  of
J.  0.  Halliwell-Phillips  "  (1881) ;  «  Bibliography  of
Ptolemy's  Geography  "  (1884) ;  "  The  Kohl  Collec-
tion of  Early  Maps  "  (1886) ;  and  a  "  Calendar  of
the  Sparks  Manuscripts  in  Harvard  College  Libra-
ry" (1888).  He  also  edited  the  "Record  of  the
250th  Anniversary  of  the  Founding  of  Harvard
College"  (1887).

WINSTON,  John  Anthony,  governor  of  Ala-
bama, b.  in  Madison  county,  Ala.,  4  Sept.,  1812 ;  d.
in  Mobile,  Ala.,  21  Dec,  1871.  He  was  educated
at  La  Grange  college,  Ala.,  and  Nashville  univer-
sity. Tenn.,  and  became  a  cotton-planter  and  com-
mission-merchant. In  1840  and  1842  he  was  chosen
to  the  lower  branch  of  the  legislature,  and  in  1845
he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  of  which  he  was
president  for  several  years.  In  1846  he  raised  two
companies  of  troops  for  the  Mexican  war,  and  was
elected  colonel  of  the  first  Alabama  volunteers:
but  on  account  of  some  technicality  the  regiment
was  not  accepted.  In  1853  he  was  chosen  governor
of  Alabama,  and,  by  opposing  state  aid  to  railroads
and  the  reissue  of  state  bank-notes  as  a  loan  to
railroad  companies,  gained  the  name  of  the  "veto
governor."  Bills  for  both  purposes  were  passed  over
his  vetoes ;  but  the  attorney-general  gave  an  opin-
ion that  they  were  unconstitutional,  and  the  gov-
ernor ordered  the  state  treasurer  to  pay  out  no
money  for  such  purposes.  He  was  re-elected  in
1855,  and  the  legislature  of  that  year  approved  his
course. In  1860  Gov.  Winston  was  a  candidate


572


WINSTON


WINTHROP


for  presidential  elector  on  the  Douglas  ticket.
Though  he  had  opposed  secession,  he  entered  the
Confederate  army  in  1861  as  colonel  of  the  8th  Ala-
bama regiment,  and  commanded  a  brigade  in  the
peninsular  campaign.  Soon  afterward  he  resigned
his  commission  on  account  of  physical  disability,
and  devoted  himself  to  aiding  the  poor  and  desti-
tute. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional
convention  of  1866,  and  was  afterward  chosen  to
the  U.  S.  senate,  but  was  refused  a  seat.  After  this
he  repeatedly  declined  to  be  a  candidate  for  gov-
ernor, and  lived  in  retirement.  Gov.  Winston  was
tall  and  thin,  and  in  early  years  erect  and  active,
but  his  later  life  was  a  long  struggle  with  disease.
He  had  few  equals  as  a  debater,  being  gifted  with
great  powers  of  satire  and  possessing  much  readi-
ness and  boldness  in  controversy.  In  his  power
over  his  friends  and  his  hostility  to  his  enemies  he
has  been  compared  to  Andrew  Jackson.

WINSTON,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Louisa
county,  Va.,  17  June,  1746;  d.  near  Germantown,
N.  C,  21  April,  1815.  His  ancestor  was  one  of  five
brothers  from  Winston  Hall,  Yorkshire,  England,
who  came  to  Hanover  county,  Va.,  in  the  17th
century.  Joseph  received  a  fair  education,  and  at
the  age  of  seventeen  joined  a  company  of  rangers.
While  pursuing  a  party  of  hostile  Indians  they  fell
into  an  ambuscade,  and  young  Winston  was  twice
wounded,  one  of  the  balls  remaining  in  his  body
till  his  death.  The  savages  put  the  rangers  to
flight,  but  Winston  escaped  and  was  carried  on  a
comrade's  back  for  three  days,  till  they  reached  a
frontier  cabin.  He  was  afterward  pensioned  by
the  legislature,  and  in  1766  removed  to  Surry
county,  N.  C.  In  1775  he  was  a  member  of  the
Hillsborough  convention,  and  in  February,  1776,
he  was  in  the  expedition  against  the  Scotch  Tories.
In  the  same  year  he  was  made  ranger  of  Surry
county  and  major  of  militia,  serving  against  the
Cherokees,  and  in  1777  he  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  and  of  the  commission  that  made  a
treaty  with  that  tribe  on  Holston  river.  In  1780
he  took  part  again  in  partisan  warfare  with  the
Tories,  and  at  King's  Mountain  he  led  the  right
wing,  and  was  conspicuous  for  his  bravery,  con-
tributing greatly  toward  the  victory.  For  his  ser-
vices on  this  day  the  legislature  afterward  gave
him  a  sword.  After  defeating  a  band  of  loyalists
in  a  running  fight  in  February,  1781,  he  took  part
in  the  battle  of  Guilford  in  March.  He  represent-
ed Surry  county  in  the  state  senate  for  three  terms,
and  when  Stokes  county  was  formed  became  the
first  senator  from  that  county,  serving  five  times
between  1790  and  1812.  In  1793-5,  and  again  in
1803-'7,  he  was  a  member  of  congress.  The  county-
seat  of  Forsyth  county,  N.  C,  is  named  for  him. —
His  son,  Joseph  (1788-1840),  served  in  the  war  of
1812,  was  many  years  in  the  legislature,  and  was  a
major-general  of  militia.  William  Winston  Seaton,
the  journalist,  was  the  elder  Joseph's  nephew.

WINTER,  William,  author,  b.  in  Gloucester,
Mass.,  15  July,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Harvard  law-school,  but  began  his  career  as  a
journalist  and  literary  and  dramatic  reviewer.  As
such  he  wrote  for  the'New  York  journals,  and  con-
tributed literary  articles  to  various  magazines.
Since  August,  1865,  Mr.  Winter  has  been  attached
to  the  New  York  " Tribune"  as  dramatic  reviewer,
and  as  such  has  secured  for  himself  a  higli  reputa-
tion. Within  that  time  he  has  also  written  and
delivered  poems  on  numerous  public  occasions.
Partly  in  the  interest  of  his  profession,  Mr.  Win-
ter has  made  several  visits  to  Europe.  In  1886,  in
commemoration  of  the  death  of  his  son,  he  found-
ed a  library  at  the  academy  in  Stapleton,  Staten


island,  N.  Y.  Mr.  Winter's  publications  include
"  The  Convent,  and  other  Poems  "  (Boston,  1854) ;
"  The  Queen's  Domain,  and  other  Poems  "  (1858) ;
"Mv  Witness:  a  Book  of  Verse"  (1871);  "Sketch
of  the  Life  of  Edwin  Booth"  (1871);  "Thistle-
down :  a  Book  of  Lyrics "  (1878) ;  "The  Trip  to
England  "  (1879) ;  "  Poems  :  Complete  Edition  "
(1881) ;  "  The  Jeffersons  "  (1881) ;  "  Henrv  Irving  "
(New  York,  1885) ;  "  The  Stage-Life  of  Mary  An-
derson "  (1886)  ;  "  English  Rambles  and  other
Fugitive  Pieces "  (Boston,  1884) ;  and  "  Shake-
speare's England  "  (Edinburgh,  1886).  He  has
edited,  with  memoirs  and  notes,  "  The  Poems  of
George  Arnold  "  (Boston,  1866) ;  "  Life,  Stories,
and  Poems  of  John  Brougham  "  (1881) ;  and  "  The
Poems  and  Stories  of  Fitz- James  O'Brien  "  (1881).
WINTHROP,  John,  governor  of  Massachusetts,
b.  in  Edwardston,  near  Groton,  Suffolk,  England,
22  Jan.,  1588 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  26  March,  1649.
The  manor  of  Groton  had  been  purchased  in  1544
by  his  grandfather,  Adam  Winthrop,  a  rich  clothier
of  Suffolk,  who  had  also  a  city  home  in  St.  Michael's,
Cornhill,  and  who  was  for  several  years  master  of
the  famous  Cloth-workers'  company  of  London.  A
portrait  of  him,  ascribed  to  Hans  Holbein,  indicates
a  man  of  culture,  decision,  and  great  strength  of
character.  One  of  his  daughters  became  the  wife
of  Sir  Thomas  Mildmay,  nephew  of  the  founder  of
Emmanuel  college ;  and  another  was  the  mother
of  Dr.  William  Alabaster,  who  is  styled,  in  "  Full-
er's Worthies,"  "  a  most  rare  poet  as  any  our  age
or  nation  has  produced :  witnesse  his  Tragedy  of
Roxana."  Of  this  Adam  Winthrop  the  third  son,
also  named  Adam,  was  a  lawyer  by  profession,
a  graduate  of  Magdalen  college,  Cambridge,  and
for  many  years  the  auditor  of  Trinity  and  St.
John's  colleges.  His  first  wife  was  a  sister  of  Dr.
John  Still,  bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells,  but  she  died
early  without  offspring.  His  second  wife  was
Anne  Browne,  of  Edwardston,  and  of  this  marriage
John  Winthrop,  the  subject  of  this  notice,  was  the
only  son.  His  parents  lived  until  within  a  few
years  of  his  coming  to  this  country,  his  mother
dying  only  one  year  before  he  embarked.  Of  the
school  or  schools  which  he  attended  as  a  boy  there
is  no  record,  but  we  find  him  admitted  to  Trinity
college,  Cambridge,  on  18  Dec,  1602,  when  he  was
not  quite  fourteen  years  of  age,  and  he  remained
there  for  more  than  two  years.  But  his  college
life  was  brought  prematurely  to  a  close,  before  he
was  entitled  to  a  degree,  by  his  early  engagement
and  marriage.  On  26  April,  1605,  he  married  Mary
Forth,  daughter  and  sole  heir  of  John  Forth,  of
Great  Stambridge,  in  Essex.  She  was  of  a  wealthy
family,  one  of  whom  was  knighted  in  1604,  and  is
said  to  have  brought  to  her  husband  "  a  large  por-
tion of  outward  estate."  It  is  matter  of  tradition
that  he  was  made  a  justice  of  the  peace  on  arriving
at  eighteen  years  of  age,  and  tnat  "  he  was  ex-
emplary for  his  grave  and  Christian  deportment."
As  early  as  1809,  when  he  had  just  attained  his
majority,  he  is  recorded  in  his  father's  diary  as
holding  "  his  first  court  in  Groton  Hall."  The  wife
of  his  youth  was  taken  away  within  eleven  years
after  their  marriage,  having  borne  him  six  children,
of  whom  two  had  died  in  their  earliest  infancy ;
and  a  second  wife,  of  the  old  Clopton  family,  had
been  buried,  with  her  infant,  only  a  year  and  a  day
after  wedlock.  He  was  sorely  oppressed  by  soon
successive  bereavements,  and  found  consolation
only  in  a  more  earnest  cultivation  of  the  Christian
hope  and  faith  which  he  had  cherished  from  his
childhood.  There  is  reason  for  thinking  that  he
had  contemplated  becoming  a  clergyman  at  this
period,  and  his  "  Experiences,"  as  written  at  the


D.APPLETOH  fcC5


WINTHROP


WINTHROP


573


time  and  still  extant,  evince  a  deep  susceptibility
to  religious  impressions,  not  without  a  tinge  of
superstition.  But  he  gradually  gave  himself  up
to  the  profession  of  his  father,  engaged  actively  in
the  practice  of  the  law  and  in  the  discharge  of  his
duties  as  a  magistrate,  and  in  1626  was  appointed
by  Sir  Robert  Naun  ton  one  of  the  attorneys  in  the
court  of  wards  and  liveries,  over  which  Sir  Robert
presided.  His  professional  services  brought  him
also  into  connection  with  the  parliamentary  pro-
ceedings of  the  time,  in  preparing  bills  for  legisla-
tive committees ;  and  as  late  as  1628  we  find  record
of  his  special  admission  to  the  Inner  Temple,  of
which  his  eldest  son  had  been  admitted  a  member
four  years  previously.  Meantime  he  was  once  more
established  in  domestic  life,  having  married  in  1618
Margaret,  daughter  of  Sir  John  Tyndal,  knight,  of
Great  Maplested,  in  Essex,  who  was  happily  spared
to  him  for  nearly  thirty  years,  and  who  was  to  be
his  companion  and  support  for  seventeen  of  those
years  in  the  New  World.

The  coming  over  of  John  Winthrop  to  America
seems  not  to  have  been  the  result  of  any  long  pre-
vious deliberation.  The  earliest  intimation  of  such
a  step  is  found  in  a  letter  dated  15  May,  1629,  in
which  he  says :  "  My  dear  wife,  I  am  veryly  per-
suaded God  will  bringe  some  heavye  Affliction  upon
this  lande.  and  that  speedylye:  but  be  of  good
comfort,  the  hardest  that  can  come  shall  be  a
meanes  to  mortifie  this  bodye  of  corruption,  which
is  a  thousand  tymes  more  dangerous  to  us  than
any  outward  tribulation,  and  to  bring  us  into
nearer  communion  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
and  more  assurance  of  his  kingdome.  If  the  Lord
seeth  it  will  be  good  for  us,  he  will  provide  a  shelter
and  a  hidinge  pla6e  for  us  and  others,  as  a  Zoar  for
Lott,  Sarephtah  for  his  prophet,"  etc.  At  this
moment  he  was  privately  preparing  a  careful  state-
ment of  the  "  Reasons  to  be  considered  for  juste-
fieing  the  undertakeres  of  the  intended  Plantation
in  New  England,  and  for  incouraginge  such  whose
hartes  God  shall  move  to  joyne  with  them  in  it."
This  is  the  paper  that  he  communicated  for  con-
sideration to  his  eldest  son  (afterward  governor
of  Connecticut)  in  August  of  the  same  year,  and
which  elicited  from  him  the  memorable  response :
"  For  the  business  of  New  England  I  can  say  no
other  thing  but  that  I  believe  confidently  that  the
whole  disposition  thereof  is  of  the  Lord,  who  dis-
poseth  all  alterations  by  his  blessed  will,  to  his  own
glory  and  the  good  of  his;  and  therefore  do  assure
myself  that  all  things  shall  work  together  for  the
best  therein.  .  .  .  The  Conclusions  which  you  sent
down  I  showed  my  uncle  and  aunt,  who  liked  them
well.  I  think  they  are  unanswerable."  In  less
than  a  year  from  the  date  of  that  letter  John  Win-
throp, the  father,  was  established  in  New  England,
having  been  elected  governor  of  Massachusetts  by
the  company  in  London,  on  30  Oct.,  1629,  and
having  arrived  at  Salem,  with  the  charter  and
company,  in  a  fleet  of  eleven  ships,  of  which  the
"Arbelfa"  was  "the  admiral,"  on  22  June,  1630.
A  few  days  later  he  went  to  what  is  now  called
Charlestown,  and  soon  afterward  to  the  site  and
settlement  of  Boston.

Both  the  religious  and  the  political  condition  of
Old  England  at  that  period  were  repulsive  to
minds  like  those  of  Winthrop  and  his  associates.
The  king  was  systematically  assuming  and  assert-
ing despotic  authority,  and  reducing  the  power
of  parliament  to  a  nullity.  Indeed,  from  March,
1629,  no  parliament  was  convoked  for  eleven
years.  It  was  the  period  of  high  commission,
star  chamber,  tonnage  and  poundage,  forced  loans,
and  taxation  without  representation. Not  a  few


distinguished  men  who  opposed  such  a  policy  and
resisted  such  exactions  were  seized  and  impris-
oned. Sir  John  Eliot,  to  whom  Winthrop  was
no  stranger,  was  sent  to  the  Tower  for  free  speech
in  parliament,  to  die  there  after  several  years  of
suffering.  The  Puritan  spirit,  with  which  Win-
throp strongly  sympathized,  was  sternly  repressed.
Laud,  as  bishop  of  London,  was  already  manifest-
ing the  bigoted  and  proscriptive  policy  which  he
displayed  a  few  years  later  as  archbishop  of  Canter-
bury, and  which  at  last  brought  him  to  the  block.
Meantime  the  New  World  was  open  to  freedom,  and
the  little  pioneer  Pilgrim  band  was  already  sending
over  tidings  of  religious  liberty  from  Plymouth
Rock.  All  this  will  sufficiently  explain  the  great
Suffolk  emigration,  of  which  Winthrop  was  the
chosen  leader.  The  Massachusetts  company  had
already  established  a  plantation  at  Salem,  and  John
Endicott  had  been  deputed  by  them  to  govern  the
little  colony  in  subordination  to  the  governor  and
companyin  London.  But  theynowsolemnly  resolved
to  transfer  the  whole  government  to  the  American
soil,  and  Winthrop  was  made  the  leader  and  gov-
ernor to  effect  and  carry  out  that  transfer,  the  com-
pany "  having  received,  as  the  record  says,  extra-
ordinary great  commendations  of  his  integrity  and
sufficiency."  Nineteen  years  intervened  between  the
arrival  of  Gov.  Winthrop  at  Salem  and  his  death
in  Boston  in  1649,  during  twelve  of  which  he  was
the  governor  of  the  colony,  and  during  every  year
of  which  he  was  actively  engaged  in  its  affairs.  He
was  annually  elected
governor  till  1634,
and  held  the  office
again  in  1637-'40,
1642-'4,  and  from
1646  till  his  death.
In  1636,  when  Sir
Harry  Vane  was
chosen  governor,
Winthrop  was  depu-
ty, and  he  led  the
opposition  to  Vane
in  the  Anne  Hutchin-
son controversy,  on
which  issue  he  was
elected  over  Vane  in
1637.  He  was  an
earnest  opponent  of
the  new  Antinomian
doctrines,  and  was  active  in  the  banishment  of
Mrs.  Hutchinson  and  her  followers.  In  1644-'5  he
was  again  deputy  governor.  During  that  year  he
was  virtually  impeached,  but  his  acquittal  and
the  speech  which  followed  it,  with  his  celebrated
definition  of  liberty,  are  among  his  most  memor-
able triumphs.  Winthrop  lived  to  see  Boston,
which  he  had  founded,  a  thriving  and  prosperous
capital ;  and  the  state,  of  which  he  brought  over
the  charter,  extended  by  successive  settlements
over  a  wide  territory,  and  represented,  in  its  little
legislature,  by  deputies  from  nearly  thirty  separate
towns.  Other  colonies  had  planted  themselves
around  Massachusetts,  and  a  New  England  con-
federation had  been  formed  under  his  auspices,  of
which  he  was  the  first  president.  Free  schools  had
been  established,  and  a  college  incorporated  and
organized.  Above  all,  religion  had  taken  deep  root
in  all  the  settlements,  and  churches  were  gathered
wherever  there  was  an  adequate  population.  Al-
though he  was  a  member  of  the  Church  of  England
as  long  as  he  resided  in  the  mother  country,  and
had  united  in  an  affectionate  farewell  to  that
church  on  his  departure,  he  was  a  man  who  held
Christianity  to  be  above  all  churches.  He  soon  saw


574


WINTHROP


WINTHROP


clearly  that  Congregationalism  was  the  best  and
only  mode  of  planting  and  propagating  Christian-
ity in  this  part  of  the  country  and  in  those  old
Puritan  times,  and  he  was  henceforth  a  Congrega-
tionalist  until  his  death.  Bancroft  says  of  him :
"  It  was  principally  the  calm  decision  of  Winthrop
which  sustained  the  courage  of  his  companions."
Palfrey  concludes  a  notice  of  him,  in  his  "  History
of  New  England,"  as  follows :  "  Certain  it  is  that,
among  the  millions  of  living  men  descended  from
•those  whom  he  ruled,  there  is  not  one  who  does  not,
through  efficient  influences,  transmitted  in  society
and  in  thought  along  the  intervening  generations,
owe  much  of  what  is  best  within  him  and  in  the
circumstances  about  him  to  the  benevolent  and
courageous  wisdom  of  John  Winthrop."

He  kept  a  careful  journal  of  all  that  was  done
by  himself  and  others,  which  he  designed  to  have
revised  and  perfected  at  his  leisure ;  but  no  leisure
ever  came  to  him.  The  first  volume  was  published
from  family  manuscripts  (Hartford,  1790).  The
continuation  was  discovered  in  1816  in  the  tower
of  the  Old  South  church  in  Boston,  and  placed  in
the  hands  of  James  Savage,  who  published  the
whole  journal  as  "  The  History  of  New  Eng-
land from  1630  to  1649,  by  John  Winthrop,"  with
notes  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1825-6 ;  -2d  ed.,  with  addi-
tions, 1853).  It  furnishes  the  most  authentic  rec-
ord of  the  early  days  of  Massachusetts.  Among
other  writings  is  an  essay  entitled  "  Arbitrary
Government  described;  and  the  Government  of
the  Massachusetts  vindicated  from  that  Asper-
sion." It  was  written  by  him  in  1644,  but  it  saw
the  light  only  in  1869.  His  "Modell  of  Chris-
tian Charity,"  written  on  board  the  "  Arbella,"  on
his  way  to  this  country,  is  printed  in  the  "  Massa-
chusetts Historical  Collections."  His  "  Life  and
Letters  "  were  published  by  Robert  C.  Winthrop  (2
vols.,  Boston.  1864-'7).  There  is  a  portrait  of  him,
ascribed  to  Vandyck,  in  the  senate-chamber  of  Mas-
sachusetts, and  reproduced  in  the  accompanying
steel  engraving;  a  statue  by  Richard  Greenough  in
the  U.  S.  capitol  at  Washington,  another  in  Boston
and  one  in  the  chapel  at  Mount  Auburn  cemetery,
seen  in  the  illustration  on  page  573. — His  eldest
son,  John,  known  as  John  Winthrop  the  younger,
b.  in  Groton  Manor,  12  Feb.,  1606  ;  d.  in"  Boston,
Mass.,  5  April,  1676,  after  being  educated  at  Bury
St.  Edmunds  school  and  Trinity  college,  Dublin,

entered  the  Inner
Temple,  but,  find-
ing the  study  of
law  little  to  his
taste,  obtained  tem-
porary employment
in  the  naval  ser-
vice and  sailed  un-
der the  Duke  of
Buckingham  in  the
unfortunate  expe-
dition for  the  relief
of  the  Protestants
of  Rochelle.  A  lit-
tle later  he  made
a  prolonged  tour
of  Europe,  passed
some  time  in  Pa-
dua, Venice,  and
Constantinople,  re-
<-»'''  turning home in

1629,  to  find  his  friends  busy  with  the  great  Massa-
chusetts enterprise,  in  which  he  was  soon  actively
enlisted.  In  1631  he  followed  his  father  to  New
England,  and  he  was  shortly  afterward  elected  an
assistant  of  the  Massachusetts  colony,  which  post  he


/n^^vvt^cti.


retained  for  eighteen  successive  years.  In  1633  he
took  the  chief  part  in  the  settlement  of  Ipswich,
Mass.,  where  he  acquired  a  considerable  estate.  In
1634  he  went  to  England  on  public  business,  and  he
returned,  in  1635,  with  a  commission  from  Lords
Say,  Brooke,  and  others,  empowering  him  to  build
a  fort  at  the  mouth  of  Connecticut  river,  and  con-
stituting him  governor  of  that  region  for  one  year
from  his  arrival.  At  the  expiration  of  this  term
he  preferred  to  return  to  Massachusetts,  where  he
busied  himself  in  scientific  researches,  in  trying  to
develop  the  mineral  resources  of  the  colony,  and
in  building  salt-works.  The  journal  of  Gov.  Win-
throp the  elder  speaks  of  his  son  John  at  this
period  as  possessing  in  Boston  a  library  of  more
than  1,000  volumes,  several  hundred  of  which  are
still  preserved,  and  bear  testimony  to  the  learning
and  broad  intellectual  tastes  of  their  original  own-
er. In  1640  he  obtained  a  grant  of  Fisher's  island,
which  was  subsequently  confirmed  by  royal  patent.
In  1641  he  went  again  to  England  on  a  long  ab-
sence, bringing  back  with  him,  in  1643,  workmen
and  machinery  with  which  he  established  iron-
works at  Lynn  and  Braintree.  In  1646  he  began
the  plantation  at  Pequot,  better  known  as  New
London,  and,  having  gradually  acquired  much
landed  property  in  that  neighborhood,  he  trans-
ferred thither  his  principal  residence  in  1650,  ex-
changing the  duties  of  a  Massachusetts  for  those
of  a  Connecticut  magistrate.  In  1657  he  was  elect-
ed governor  of  Connecticut,  and,  with  a  single
year's  exception,  he  held  that  office  till  his  death,
nineteen  yeai*s  later.  From  the  autumn  of  1661
till  the  spring  of  1663  he  was  chiefly  in  London  on
business  of  the  colony,  where  he  became  widely
known  as  an  accomplished  scholar,  one  of  the  ear-
liest and  most  active  members  of  the  Royal  society,
and  the  personal  friend  of  many  of  the  chief  natu-
ral philosophers  of  Europe,  his  correspondence  with
whom  is  in  print.  The  ability  and  tact  that  he
displayed  at  the  court  of  Charles  II.  resulted  in
his  obtaining  from  that  monarch  a  charter  uniting
the  colonies  of  Connecticut  and  New  Haven,  with
the  most  ample  privileges,  under  which  the  free-
men of  that  colony  became  entitled  to  all  the
rights  and  immunities  of  Englishmen.  In  this
charter  Winthrop  was  named  first  governor,  and
in  the  administration  of  it  he  passed  his  remaining
years.  His  death  occurred  in  Boston,  where  he
had  gone  to  attend  a  meeting  of  the  commissioners
of  the  united  colonies  and  where  he  was  buried  in
his  father's  tomb.  He  had  not  the  latter's  heroic
cast  of  character,  and  his  tastes  were  rather  those
of  a  student  than  a  statesman ;  but  he  was  a  man
of  singularly  winning  qualities  and  great  modera-
tion, whose  Puritanism  was  devoid  of  bigotry  or
asceticism,  and  who  knew  how  to  retain  the  esteem
of  those  from  whom  he  differed  most  widely  in  opin-
ion. By  Indians  he  was  revered  for  his  justice,
and  by  Quakers  gratefully  remembered  for  his
lenity.  In  chemistry  and  medicine  he  was  par-
ticularly skilled,  and  in  the  dearth  of  medical  prac-
titioners in  the  colony  his  advice  was  sought  far
and  wide.  He  married, in  1631,  his  cousin  Martha,
daughter  of  Thomas  Fones,  of  London,  and  step-
daughter of  Rev.  Henry  Painter;  she  died  in  Ips-
wich, without  surviving  issue,  in  1634.  He  mar-
ried, in  1635,  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Edimmd
Reade,  of  Wickford  in  Essex,  and  step-daughter
of  the  famous  Hugh  Peters;  this  lady,  so  lovingly
alluded  to  in  the  letters  of  Roger  Williams,  died  in
Hartford  in  1672.  leaving  two  sons  and  five  daugh-
ters. Much  of  the  correspondence  of  her  husband
and  sons  is  printed  in  the  publications  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts historical  soeietv. — The  second  John's


WINTHROP


WINT.HROP


575


elder  son,  John,  known  as  Fitz-John,  b.  in  Ips-
wich, Mass.,  19  March,  1639 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
27  Nov.,  1707,  left  Harvard  without  taking  a  de-
gree in  order  to  accept  a  commission  in  the  par-
liamentary army,  in  which  his  father's  brother,
Stephen,  and  his  mother's  brother,  Thomas  Reade,
were  colonels.  After  seeing  active  service  in  Scot-
land, where  he  was  for  some  time  in  command  at
Cardross,  he  accompanied  Gen.  George  Monk  on
his  famous  march  to  London ;  but  his  regiment
was  disbanded  at  the  Restoration,  and  he  returned
to  New  England  in  16G3,and  passed  the  remainder
of  his  life  in  the  military  and  civil  employment  of
Connecticut.  He  served  with  distinction  in  the  In-
dian wars,  sat  in  the  council  of  Sir  Edmund  An-
dres,, and  was  appointed  in  1690  major-general
commanding  the  joint  expedition  against  Canada.
The  lukewarm  support  of  the  New  York  govern-
ment and  the  bad  faith  of  its  Indian  allies
made  this  campaign  a  failure,  but  Fitz-John  re-
ceived a  vote  of  thanks  from  Connecticut,  and  in
1693  was  made  agent  of  that  colony  in  London,
where  he  passed  four  years  at  the  court  of  William
III.  His  services  in  this  capacity  were  so  highly
.appreciated  that,  soon  after  his  return  in  1698,  he
was  elected  governor  of  Connecticut,  continuing  in
•office  till  his  death  nearly  ten  years  later,  while  on
.a  visit  to  his  brother  in  Boston.  His  own  princi-
pal residence  was  at  New  London,  where  he  was
noted  for  his  hospitality.  He  was  neither  a  great
scholar  like  his  father,  nor  a  great  statesman  like
his  grandfather,  but  he  was  deservedly  respected
as  a  gallant  soldier,  a  skilful  administrator,  and  a
man  of  conspicuous  integrity  and  patriotism.  He
married,  somewhat  late  in  life,  Elizabeth,  daugh-
ter of  George  Tongue,  of  New  London,  and  left  an
only  child,  Mary,  who  married  Col.  John  Living-
ston, of  Albany,  but  died  without  issue. — Another
son  of  the  second  John,  Wait  Still,  jurist,  b.  in
Boston,  27  Feb.,  1643 ;  d.  there,  7  Nov.,  1717,  was
early  in  the  military  service  of  Connecticut,  and
took  part  in  Indian  wars;  but  after  his  father's
death  he  resided  chiefly  in  Massachusetts,  where
he  was  for  about  thirty  years  a  member  of  the
executive  council  and  major-general  of  the  pro-
vincial forces,  besides  holding,  for  shorter  periods,
the  offices  of  judge  of  admiralty,  judge  of  the
superior  court,  and  chief  justice.  He  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  the  overthrow  of  Sir  Edmund  Andros,
and  an  effort  was  made  by  the  popular  party  to
have  him  appointed  governor,  in  place  of  Joseph
Dudley.  Judge  Sewall  speaks  of  him  as  "the
great  stay  and  ornament  of  the  council,  a  very
pious,  prudent,  courageous  New  England  man ;
for  parentage,  piety,  prudence,  philosophy,  love  to
New  England  ways  and  people  very  eminent."  In
the  intervals  of  public  duty  he  devoted  himself  to
agriculture  and  the  study  of  medicine,  often  prac-
tising gratuitously  among  his  neighbors. — Wait
Still's  son,  John  (1681-1747),  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1700,  served  for  some  time  as  a  magis-
trate of  Connecticut,  and  was  afterward  a  fellow
of  the  Royal  society  of  London,  to  whose  "  Trans-
actions "  he  was  a  contributor,  and  one  of  whose
volumes  was  dedicated  to  him. — John,  physicist,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  19  Dec,  1714 :  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  3  May,  1779,  was  the  son  of  Chief-Justice
Adam  Winthrop.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1732,  and  from  1738  till  his  death  was  profes-
sor of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  there.
The  range  of  his  acquirements  was  great,  and  he
did  good  original  work  in  several  departments  of
science.  It  seems  likely  that  we  owe  in  part  to
his  influence  the  attention  of  Benjamin  Frank-
lin and  of  Benjamin  Thompson,  Count  Rumford,


to  physical  science.  He  was  in  the  18th  cen-
tury the  foremost  teacher  of  science  in  this  coun-
try. In  1740  he  observed  the  first  of  the  transits
of  Mercury  that  took  place  in  that  century.  In
1761  he  observed  the  second  transit,  making  a
journey  to  Newfoundland  for  this  purpose.  The
voyage  was  made  in  a  vessel  in  the  provincial
service  and  the  expenses  were  defrayed  by  the
colonial  government.  This  is  believed  to  have
been  the  earliest  purely  scientific  expedition  sent
out  by  any  American  state.  In  the  development
of  astronomy  Prof.  Winthrop  made  other  important
observations  in  the  matter  of  comets,  the  results
of  which  were  published  by  means  of  two  printed
lectures  (1759).  He  had  an  opportunity  to  ob-
serve the  facts  connected  with  the  great  earth-
quake that  occurred  in  New  England  on  18  Nov.,
1755.  It  was  his  habit  to  publish  the  more  popular
and  interesting  parts  of  his  work  in  public  lectures
in  the  college  chapel.  His  observations  on  this
phenomenon  were  contained  in  a  discourse  printed
in  Boston  within  a  month  after  the  catastrophe.
The  observations  recorded  in  this  memoir  and  the
scientific  considerations  that  he  based  on  them
show  that  Winthrop  had  a  clearer  conception  of
earthquake  movements  than  any  of  his  predeces-
sors. He  recognized  the  fact  that  the  movement
was  essentially  a  wave  in  the  earth's  crust,  and  per-
ceived that  the  buildings  affected  by  the  shock  took
on  a  pendulum  movement.  Observing  that  the
bricks  were  thrown  from  the  chimney  of  his  house.
which  had  a  height  of  thirty-two  feet,  so  that  they
fell  at  a  point  thirty  feet  from  the  column,  he  com-
puted the  speed  of  their  motion,  and  ascertained  it
to  be  twenty-one  feet  a  second.  He  also  perceived
the  fact  that  the  shorter  the  vibrations  the  quicker
they  performed  the  movement.  He  saw  also  the
analogy  between  the  vibrations  of  the  earth  and
those  of  the  chord  of  a  musical  instrument.  In
this  and  many  other  observations  he  showed  a
capacity  for  observation  and  for  the  application
of  computative  methods  to  this  class  of  phenom-
ena that  was  unusual  in  the  scientists  of  his  time.
It  appears  probable  that  he  was  the  first  person
to  apply  computations  to  earthquake  phenomena.
If  this  be  the  case,  it  may  be  claimed  for  him  that
he  laid  the  foundations  of  the  important  science
of  seismology.  Prof.  Joseph  Lovering,  in  his  ac-
count of  "  Boston  and  Science  "  in  the  "  Memorial
History  of  Boston,"  says  that  "  Prof.  Winthrop's
views  of  the  nature  of  heat  were  greatly  in  advance
of  the  science  of  his  day."  We  find  in  his  lecture
on  earthquakes  that  he  looked  to  the  action  of
heat  for  an  explanation  of  seismic  disturbances.
He  had  a  considerable  share  in  the  public  life  of
the  colony  where  he  lived.  He  was  several  years
judge  of  probate  for  Middlesex  county,  a  member
of  the  governor's  council  in  1773-'4,  and  in  the
Revolution  threw  his  influence  with  the  patriots.
The  University  of  Edinburgh  gave  him  the  honor-
ary degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1771,  and  the  Royal  society
of  London  made  him  a  member.  Although  Prof.
Winthrop  has  left  no  work  of  any  importance  to
modern  physicists,  his  influence  in  determining  a
scientific  spirit  in  New  England  was  great.  He  laid
the  foundations  of  scientific  inquiry  in  Harvard.
Though  not  the  earliest  of  the  Massachusetts  men
of  science — for  he  was  preceded  by  Thomas  Brat-
tle, Zabdiel  Boylston,  and  others — he  deserves  the
first  place  among  the  pioneers  of  natural  science  in
New  England.  His  publications  include  "  Lecture
on  Earthquakes"  (1755);  "'Answer  to  Mr.  Prince's
Letter  on  Earthquakes  "  (1756) ;  "  Account  of  some
Fiery  Me.teors"  (1765);  and  "Two  Lectures  on
the  Parallax"  (1769). His  paper  "Cogitata  de


576


WINTHROP


WINTHROP


Coraetes  "  was  communicated  to  the  Royal  society
by  Benjamin  Franklin  (London,  1766).  —  Prof.
Winthrop's  son,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  in  1752;  d.  there,  26  Sept.,  1821,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1769,  and  was  wounded  at
Bunker  Hill.  He  was  librarian  of  Harvard  from
1772  till  1787;  for  several  years  a  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas;  and  long  register  of
probate.  He  bequeathed  his  valuable  library  to
Alleghany  college,  Meadville,  Pa.  He  published
"  Attempt  to  translate  the  Prophetic  Part  of  the
Apocalypse  of  St.  John  into  Familiar  Language  "
(Boston,  1794) ;  "  Systematic  Arrangement  of  Sev-
eral Scripture  Prophecies  relating  to  Antichrist "
(1795) ;  "  Attempt  to  arrange,  in  the  Order  of  Time,
Scripture  Prophecies  yet  to  be  Fulfilled"  (Cam-
bridge, 1803);  and  scientific  and  literary  contribu-
tions to  current  literature. — John  Winthrop  the
younger's  great-grandson,  Thomas  Lindall,  mer-
chant, b.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  6  March,  1760;
d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  Feb.,  1841,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1780,  and  in  1786  married  Elizabeth
Bowdoin  Temple,  a  granddaughter  of  Gov.  James
Bowdoin  and  the  daughter  of  Sir  John  Temple,
British  consul-general  in  the  United  States.  In
early  life  he  was  an  active  Federalist,  but  he
joined  the  Republicans  at  the  beginning  of  the
war  of  1812-'15,  and  was  successively  a  state
senator,  lieutenant-governor  of  Massachusetts  in
1826-'32,  and  a  presidential  elector.  Few  men  of
his  time  were  so  widely  esteemed  throughout  New
England  for  integrity,  public  spirit,  and  unosten-
tatious hospitality.  Among  his  many  posts  of
public  usefulness  were  those  of  president  of  the
Massachusetts  agricultural  society,  the  Massachu-
setts historical  society,  and  the  American  anti-
quarian societv. — Thomas  Lindall's  youngest  son,
Robert  Charles,  statesman,  b.  in  Boston,  12  May,
1809,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1828,  studied
*law  with  Daniel  Webster,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1831,  but  after  a  brief  professional  career  be-
came active  in  local  politics  as  a  Henry  Clay  Whig.
From  1834  till  1840  he  was  a  member  of  the  lower
house  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  of  which
he  was  chosen  speaker  in  1838, 1839,  and  1840.  In
the  last-named  year  he  was  elected  to  congress,
where  he  served  ten  years  with  much  distinction,
maintaining  the  reputation  he  had  already  ac-
quired as  a  ready  debater  and  accomplished  par-
liamentarian, and  adding  to  it  by  a  series  of  im-
pressive speeches  upon  public  questions,  many  of

which  are  still  con-
sulted as  authori-
ties. The  earliest
resolution  in  favor
of  international
arbitration  by  a
commission  of  ci-
vilians was  offered
by  him.  In  1847-'9
he  was  speaker  of
the  house,  but  he
was  defeated  for  a
second  term  by  a
plurality  of  two,
after  a  contest  that
lasted  three  weeks.
In  1850  he  was
appointed  by  the
governor  of  Massa-
chusetts to  Daniel
Webster's  seat  in  the  senate,  when  the  latter  be-
came secretary  of  state.  His  course  on  the  slavery
question  was  often  distasteful  to  men  of  extreme
opinions  in  both  sections  of  the  Union,  and  in


^Srt^^^L^


1851  he  was  defeated  for  election  to  the  senate
by  a  coalition  of  Democrats  and  Free-soilers,  after
a  struggle  of  six  weeks-  In  the  same  year  he  was
Whig  candidate  for  governor  of  the  state,  and
received  a  large  plurality;  but  the  constitution
then  required  a  majority,  and  the  election  was
thrown  into  the  legislature,  where  the  same  co-
alition defeated  him.  This  occasioned  a  change
in  the  state  constitution,  which  now  requires
merely  a  plurality,  but  Mr.  Winthrop  declined  to
be  a  candidate  again,  and  successively  refused
various  other  candidacies  and  appointments,  pre-
ferring gradually  to  retire  from  political  life  and
devote  himself  to  literary,  historical,  and  philan-
thropic occupations.  From  time  to  time,  however,
his  voice  was  still  heard  in  presidential  elections,
and  lie  gave  active  and  influential  support  to  Gen.
Winfield  Scott  in  1852,  to  Millard  Fillmore  in
1856,  to  John  Bell  in  1860,  and  to  Gen.  McClellan
in  1864,  when  a  speech  of  his  at  New  London  was
the  last,  but  not  the  least  memorable,  of  his  politi-
cal addresses.  Of  the  Boston  provident  associa-
tion he  was  the  laborious  president  for  twenty-five
years,  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society  for
thirty  years,  of  the  Alumni  of  Harvard  for  eight
years,  besides  serving  as  chairman  of  the  overseers
of  the  poor  of  Boston,  and  in  many  other  posts  of
dignity  and  usefulness.  He  was  the  chosen  coun-
sellor of  George  Peabody  in  several  of  his  munifi-
cent benefactions,  and  has  been  from  the  outset
at  the  head  of  the  latter's  important  trust  for
southern  education.  It  is  as  the  favorite  orator  of
great  historical  anniversaries  that  Mr.  Winthrop
has  long  been  chiefly  associated  in  the  popular
mind,  and  he  has  uniformly  received  the  com-
mendation of  the  best  judges,  not  merely  for  the
scholarship  and  finish  of  these  productions,  but
for  the  manifestation  in  them  of  a  fervid  eloquence
that  the  weight  of  years  has  failed  to  quench.
They  may  be  found  scattered  through  four  vol-
umes of  "  Addresses  and  Speeches,"  the  first  of
which  was  published  in  1852  and  the  last  in  1886.
Among  the  most  admired  of  them  have  been  an
"  Address  on  laying  the  Corner-Stone  of  the  Na-
tional Monument  to  Washington"  in  1848, and  one
on  the  completion  of  that  monument  in  1885,  the
latter  prepared  at  the  request  of  congress;  an
"Address  to  the  Alumni  of  Harvard,"  in  1857;  an
"  Oration  on  the  250th  Anniversary  of  the  Landing
of  the  Pilgrims,"  in  1870;  the  "Boston  Centennial
Oration,"  4  July,  1876;  an  address  on  unveiling
the  statue  of  Col.  Prescott  on  Bunker  Hill,  in
1881 ;  and,  in  the  same  year,  an  oration  on  the
hundredth  anniversary  of  the  surrender  of  Corn-
wallis  at  Yorktown,  delivered  by  invitation  of
congress.  He  has  been  thought  equally  to  excel
in  shorter  and  less  formal  utterances.  Several
speeches  of  his  on  Boston  common  during  the  civil
war  excited  much  enthusiasm  by  their  patriotic
ring;  while  his  brief  tributes  to  John  Quincy
Adams,  John  C.  Calhoun,  Edward  Everett,  Daniel
Webster,  Abraham  Lincoln,  and  many  other  emi-
nent men  with  whom  he  had  been  associated  at
different  periods,  are  models  of  graceful  and  dis-
criminating eulogy.  Besides  the  collected  works
already  cited,  he  is  the  author  of  the  "  Life  and
Letters  of  John  Winthrop"  (2  vols.,  Boston.  1864),
and  •'  Washington,  Bowdoin,  and  Franklin  "  (1876).
A  portrait  of  him,  in  the  capitol  at  Washington,
presented  by  citizens  of  Massachusetts,  commemo-
rates at  once  his  speakership  and  his  Yorktown
oration;  while  another,  in  the  hall  of  the  Massachu-
setts historical  society,  is  a  fit  reminder  of  his  ser-
vices to  New  England  history. — Thomas  Lindall's
nephew,  Benjamin  Robert,  capitalist,  b.  in  New


WINTHROP


WINTHROP


577


York  city,  18  Jan.,  1804 ;  d.  in  London,  England,
26  July,  1879,  was  in  early  life  a  clerk  in  the  bank-
ing-house of  Jacob  Barker,  but  afterward  devoted
himself  to  the  care  of  a  large  inherited  estate  and
to  furthering  the  interests  of  public  institutions  of
education,  charity,  and  religion  in  his  native  city.
He  was  a  trustee  of  the  old  Public  school  society,
and  on  its  dissolution  in  1853  became  a  school
■commissioner  and  member  of  the  board  of  educa-
tion ;  was  an  earnest  friend  of  the  New  York
hospital,  the  Lying-in  hospital,  and  other  similar
institutions;  and  by  his  care  and  liberality  did
much  to  advance  the  prosperity  of  the  Institution
for  the  deaf  and  dumb.  He  was  recording  secretary
And  vice-president  of  the  New  York  historical
society,  and  for  many  years  a  vestryman  of  Trinity
«hurch,  as  a  member  of  whose  cemetery  committee
he  originated  the  plan  of  displaying  plants  in  the
<murch-yards  of  the  parish.  Among  his  publica-
tions is  an  address  on  "  Old  New  York,"  which  he
read  before  the  Historical  society  (New  York,  1862).
— The  second  John's  descendant,  Theodore,
Author,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  22  Sept.,  1828 ;  d.

near  Great  Bethel,
Va.,  10  June,  1861,
was  the  son  of
Francis  Bayard
Winthrop.  His
mother  was  Eliza-
beth Woolsey,  a
niece  of  President
Timothy  Dwight,
and  sister  of
President  Theo-
dore Woolsey,  for
whom  Theodore
was  named.  He
was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1848,  with
the  Clark  scholar-
ship, on  which  he
continued  there  a
year,  studying
mental  science,
languages,andhis-
tory.  In  1849  he  went  to  recruit  his  health  in  Eu-
rope, where  he  remained  until  January,  1851.  There
he  became  acquainted  with  William  H.  Aspinwall,
whose  children  he  taught  for  some  time,  and  through
him  Winthrop  entered  the  employ  of  the  Pacific
mail  steamship  company,  to  whose  offices  in  Pana-
ma he  was  transferred  in  1852.  In  the  following
year  he  visited  California  and  Oregon,  and  thence
he  returned  overland  to  New  York.  In  December,
1853,  he  joined,  as  a  volunteer,  the  expedition  under
Lieut.  Isaac  G.  Strain  to  survey  a  canal-route  across
the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  and  soon  after  his  return
in  March,  1854,  he  began  to  study  law  with  Charles
Tracy.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1855,  and
in  the  following  year,  during  a  vacation-trip  in
Maine,  made  political  speeches  there  in  advocacy
of  John  C.  Fremont.  After  this  he  spent  most  of
his  time  in  literary  pursuits,  for  which  he  had
always  had  a  fondness.  The  first  of  his  writings
that  appeared  in  print  was  a  description  of  his
friend  Frederic  E.  Church's  painting,  "  The  Heart
of  the  Andes,"  whose  progress  he  had  watched  at
the  easel.  For  several  years  Winthrop  worked
•carefully  on  his  novels,  recasting  them  after  each
rejection  by  a  publisher.  One,  "  Cecil  Dreeme "
was  finally  accepted,  but  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  delayed  its  appearance.  Another,  "  John
Brent,"  was  also  accepted  on  condition  that  the
author  should  omit  the  episode  of  the  death  of  the
horse  Don  Fulano.  which  he  refused  to  do.  At
vol.  vi. — 37


the  opening  of  the  civil  war  Winthrop  enlisted  in
the  7th  New  York  regiment,  which  he  accompanied
to  Washington.  Soon  afterward  he  went  with
Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler  to  Fort  Monroe  as
military  secretary,  with  the  rank  of  major,  and
with  his  commanding  officer  he  planned  the  attack
on  Little  and  Great  Bethel,  in  which  he  took  part.
During  the  action  at  the  latter  place  he  sprang
upon  a  log  to  rally  his  men,  and  received  a  bullet
in  his  heart.  Shortly  before  his  departure  for  the
seat  of  war  his  tale  "  Love  and  Skates  "  had  been
accepted  for  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly"  by  its  editor,
James  Russell  Lowell,  who  then  asked  the  author
to  furnish  an  account  of  his  march  to  Washington
for  the  magazine.  This  he  did  in  two  articles,
which  attracted  much  attention,  and  made  Win-
throp so  well  fcnown  that  the  sudden  end  of  his
career  soon  afterward  occasioned  wide-spread  sor-
row. Immediately  after  his  death  his  novels  ap-
peared in  quick  succession,  and  were  very  favorably
received.  They  have  held  their  place  in  American
literature,  and  it  is  probable  that  had  Winthrop
lived  he  would  have  taken  high  rank  as  a  writer.
Prof.  John  Nichol,  of  Glasgow,  says  of  "  Cecil
Dreeme  " :  "  With  all  its  defects  of  irregular  con-
struction, this  novel  is  marked  by  a  more  distinct
vein  of  original  genius  than  any  American  work  of
fiction  known  to  us  that  has  appeared  since  the
author's  death."  His"  books  include  the  three
novels  "  Cecil  Dreeme "  (Boston,  October,  1861),
"  John  Brent "  (January,  1862),  and  "  Edwin
Brothertoft "  (July,  1862) ;  and  the  collections  of
sketches  "  The  Canoe  and  the  Saddle  "  (November,
1862),  and  "  Life  in  the  Open  Air,  and  other
Papers  "  (May,  1863).  These  have  passed  through
many  editions,  and  were  reprinted  in  the  "  Leisure-
Hour  Series,"  with  the  addition  of  his  "  Life  and
Poems,"  edited  by  his  sister,  Laura  Winthrop
Johnson  (New  York,  1884).  See  also  a  memoir
by  George  William  Curtis,  prefixed  to  the  earlier
editions  of  "  Cecil  Dreeme." — Theodore's  brother,
William  Woolsey,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  3  Aug.,  1831,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1851,  and  at  the  law-school  in  1853,  and  after-
ward continued  his  legal  studies  at  Harvard.  He
was  admitted  to  the  Massachusetts  bar  in  1854,
and  practised  until  April,  1861,  when  he  entered
the  7th  New  York  regiment  as  a  private.  He  was
commissioned  1st  lieutenant  of  sharp-shooters,  1
Oct.,  1861,  became  captain,  22  Sept.,  1862,  was
made  major  and  judge-advocate,  19  Sept.,  1864,
and  at  the  close  of  the  war  brevetted  colonel  for
meritorious  service.  On  25  Feb.,  1867,  he  was
commissioned  major  in  the  regular  army,  and  on  5
July,  1884,  he  became  lieutenant-colonel  and  depu-
ty judge-advocate-general.  He  is  now  professor  of
law  in  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  Col.  Winthrop
is  the  author  of  "  Digest  of  Opinions  of  the  Judge-
Advocates-General  of  the  Armv "  (Washington,
1865;  enlarged  eds.,  1866  and  1868;  greatly  en-
larged and  annotated,  1880);  and  "Treatise  on
Military  Law  "  (2  vols.,  1886 ;  condensed  into  one
volume  for  the  use  of  the  cadets  at  the  military
academy  as  "Abridgment  of  Military  Law,"
1887).  He  has  also  translated  the  "  Military  Penal
Code  of  the  German  Empire  "(1873). — Their  sister,
Laura,  author,  b.  in  New  Haven.  Conn.,  13  Sept.,
1825,  was  educated  at  private  schools  in  her  native
place,  and  in  1846  married  W.  Templeton  Johnson.
Besides  the  above-mentioned  "Life  and  Poems"
of  her  brother  Theodore,  she  has  published  "  Little
Blossom's  Reward,"  a  book  for  children,  under
the  pen-name  of  "Emily  Hare"  (Boston,  1854);
"  Poems  of  Twentv  Years  "  (New  York,  1874) ;  a
"  Longfellow  Prose'Birth-day  Book  "  (Boston,  1888);


578


WIRT


WIRT


and  various  articles  in  magazines.  —  Theodore's
cousin,  Frederick,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  citv,
3  Aug.,  1839 ;  d.  near  Five  Forks,  Va.,  1  April,
1865,  was  the  son  of  Thomas  C.  Winthrop.  He
was  commissioned  a  captain  in  the  12th  U.  S.  in-
fantry, 26  Oct.,  1861,  and  received  the  brevet  of
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  1  Aug.,  1864.
He  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Five  Forks,  where
he  commanded  a  brigade  in  the  5th  corps.  In
1867  the  brevet  of  major-general  of  volunteers  was
conferred  on  him,  among  the  few  brevets  that  were
given  after  death.  It  was  dated  back  -to  1  April,
1865,  the  day  of  the  battle  in  which  he  fell.

WIRT,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bladensburg,
Md.,  8  Nov.,  1772 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  18
Feb.,  1834.  His  father  was  a  Swiss,  his  mother  a
German.  Both  parents  having  died  before  he  was
eight  years  old,  Jasper  Wirt,  his  uncle,  became

his  guardian.  Be-
tween his  seventh
and  his  eleventh
year  the  boy  was
sent  to  several  clas-
sical schools,  and
finally  to  one  kept
by  the  Rev.  James
Hunt,  in  Montgom-
ery county,  where,
under  an  accom-
plished and  sym-
Eathetic  teacher,
e  received  during
four  years  the  chief
part  of  his  educa-
tion. For  two  years
he  boarded  with
Mr.  Hunt,  in  whose
library  he  spent
much  of  his  time,
reading  with  a  keen
and  indiscriminate  appetite.  In  his  fifteenth  year
the  school  was  disbanded,  and  his  patrimony
nearly  exhausted.  Among  his  fellow-pupils  was
Ninian  Edwards  (afterward  governor  of  Illinois),
whose  father,  Benjamin  Edwards  (afterward  mem-
ber of  congress  from  Maryland),  discovering,  as  he
thought,  in  young  Wirt  signs  of  more  than  ordi-
nary natural  ability,  invited  him  to  reside  in  his
family  as  tutor  to  Ninian  and  two  nephews,  and
offered  him  also  the  use  of  his  library  for  the  prose-
cution of  his  own  studies,  an  invitation  which  was
joyfully  accepted.  Under  Mr.  Edwards's  roof
Wirt  stayed  twenty  months,  spending  his  time  in
teaching,  in  classical  and  historical  studies,  in
writing,  and  in  preparation  for  the  bar,  which  he
had  chosen  as  his  future  profession.  With  the  ad-
vantages of  a  vigorous  constitution  and  a  good
person  and  carriage,  but  with  the  drawbacks  of  a
meagre  legal  equipment,  a  constitutional  shyness
and  timidity,  and  an  over-rapid,  brusque,  and  in-
distinct utterance,  he  began  his  legal  career  at
Culpeper  Court-House,  Va.  In  1795  he  married
Mildred,  daughter  of  Dr.  George  Gilmer,  and  re-
moved to  Pen  Park,  the  seat  of  that  gentleman,
near  Charlottesville.  This  change  introduced  him
to  the  acquaintance  of  many  persons  of  eminence,
including  Thomas  Jefferson  and  James  Monroe.
The  boundless  hospitality  of  the  country  gentle-
men and  the  convivial  habits  of  the  members  of
the  bar  at  that  time  had  for  a  season  a  dangerous
fascination  for  Wirt,  who  was  regarded  by  his
legal  brethren  rather  as  a  bon  vivant  and  gay,  fas-
cinating companion,  than  as  an  ambitious  lawyer.
Fortunately  he  saw  his  peril,  and  with  quick  re-
solve forsook  the  seductive  path  he  was  treading.


In  1799  his  wife  died,  and  he  removed  to  Rich-
mond, where  he  became  clerk  of  the  house  of  dele-
gates. Three  years  later,  at  the  early  age  of  thirty,
he  was  elected  chancellor  of  the  eastern  district  of
Virginia,  which  office  he  resigned  after  performing
its  duties  for  six  months.  In  the  winter  of  1803-'!
Wirt  removed  to  Norfolk,  but  in  1806,  wishing  for
a  wider  field  of  practice,  returned  to  Richmond,
where  he  speedily  took  rank  with  the  leaders  of
the  bar.  In  1807  he  was  retained  to  aid  the  U.  S.
attorney  in  the  prosecution  of  Aaron  Burr  for
treason.  His  principal  speech,  occupying  four
hours,  and  which  was  characterized  by  eloquent
appeal,  polished  wit,  and  logical  reasoning,  greatly
extended  his  fame.  The  passage  in  which  he  de-
picted in  glowing  colors  the  home  of  Harman
Blennerhassett,  and  "  the  wife  of  his  bosom,  whom
he  lately  permitted  not  the  winds  of  summer  '  to
visit  too  roughly,'  "  as  "  shivering  at  midnight  on
the  wintry  banks  of  the  Ohio,  and  mingling  her
tears  with  the  torrents  that  froze  as  they  fell,  was
for  many  years  a  favorite  piece  for  academic  decla-
mation ;  and  the  fact  that,  though  worn  to  shreds
by  continual  repetition,  it  still  has  power  to  charm
the  reader,  is  proof  of  its  real  though  somewhat
florid  beauty.  In  1808  Wirt  was  elected  to  the
Virginia  house  of  delegates,  the  only  time  he  con-
sented to  serve  the  state  as  a  legislator.  In  1816
he  was  appointed  a  district  attorney,  and  in  1817
he  became  attorney-general,  of  the  United  States.
He  soon  afterward  removed  to  Washington.  After
twelve  years,  during  which  he  was  often  pitted
with  signal  honor  against  the  most  eminent  coun-
sel in  the  land,  he  resigned  his  office  and  removed
to  Baltimore.  In  1832  Wirt  accepted  a  nomina-
tion by  the  anti-Masons  as  their  candidate  for  the
presidency  of  the  United  States,  and  in  the  elec-
tion that  followed  he  received  the  seven  electoral
votes  of  Vermont,  and  a  popular  vote  of  33,108.
He  died  at  Washington  of  erysipelas,  after  an  ill-
ness of  two  days,  caused  by  a  severe  cold.

The  most  striking  characteristic  of  Mr.  Wirt
was  his  devotion  to  his  profession.  From  the  be-
ginning to  the  end  of  his  legal  career  he  kept  be-
fore him  a  lofty  ideal,  which,  except  for  a  brief  in-
terval, he  strained  every  nerve  to  attain.  To  this
end  all  his  studies,  literary,  historical,  and  scien-
tific, as  well  as  legal,  were  made  to  converge.  In
his  early  legal  addresses  he  was  tempted  to  aim
less  at  argumentative  strength  than  at  the  quali-
ties that  captivate  the  multitude.  The  reputation
that  he  thus  acquired  for  excelling  in  the  ornate
rather  than  in  the  severe  qualities  of  oratory  ad-
hered to  him  long  after  it  had  ceased  to  be  well
founded.  The  consciousness  of  his  early  fault  ap-
pears to  have  haunted  him  during  a  large  part  of
his  career,  for  we  find  him  not  only  perpetually
denouncing  "  the  florid  and  Asiatic  style  of  ora-
tory" in  his  letters,  and  characterizing  wit  and
fancy  as  "  dangerous  allies,"  but  laboring  with  in-
defatigable perseverance  to  attain  a  better  reputa-
tion for  himself.  That  he  succeeded  is  well
known.  While  he  never  ceased  to  relieve  the
stress  and  weariness  of  argument  with  playful  sal-
lies of  humor,  it  was  in  logical  power — the  faculty
of  close,  cogent  reasoning  —  that  he  mainly  ex-
celled. His  power  of  analvsis  was  remarkable  and
his  discrimination  keen.  He  excelled  in  clearness
of  statement,  in  discernment  of  vital  points,  and  in
the  vigorous  presentation  of  principles.  Bestow-
ing great  labor  on  his  cases,  he  often  anticipated
and  answered  his  opponent's  arguments,  and  swept
the  whole  field  of  discussion,  so  as  to  leave  little
for  his  associates  to  glean.  In  meeting  the  unfore-
seen points  that  come  up  suddenly  for  discussion,


WIRT


WISE


579


he  was  remarkably  prompt  and  effective.  His
ablest  arguments  were  those  he  delivered  on  the
trial  of  Aaron  Burr,  in  the  case  of  McCulloch  vs.
the  State  of  Maryland,  in  the  Dartmouth  college
case  (see  Wheelock,  John,  and  Webster,  Dan-
iel), in  the  great  New  York  steamboat  case  of  Gib-
bons vs.  Ogden,  in  the  Cherokee  case,  and  especial-
ly in  the  defence  of  Judge  Peck,  impeached  before
the  U.  S.  senate.  Mr.  Wirt  was  conspicuous  for
his  personal  beauty,  both  in  youth  and  manhood.
His  manly,  striking  figure,  intellectual  face,  clear,
musical  voice,  and  graceful  gesture  won  the  favor
of  his  hearer  in  advance.  In  his  public  addresses
he  was  usually  calm,  self-possessed,  and  deliberate.
His  memory  was  very  retentive,  and  he  excelled  in
felicity  of  quotation,  sometimes  retorting  upon  an
adversary  with  telling  effect  a  passage  inaptly  cited
by  him  from  an  English  or  Latin  poet.  A  pocket
edition  of  Horace  was  often  thumbed  in  his  jour-
neys ;  but  Seneca  was  his  favorite  classic  author.
Wirt's  conversation,  enriched  by  multifarious  read-
ing, yet  easy,  playful,  and  sparkling  with  wit  and
humor,  was  full  of  interest  and  charm.  Similar
qualities  pervade  his  letters.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Presbyterian  church,  and  in  his  last  years  took
great  interest  in  missionary  societies,  and  was  presi-
dent of  the  Maryland  Bible  society.

Wirt's  earliest  work  was  the  noted  "  Letters  of
the  British  Spy,"  which  he  first  contributed  to  the
Richmond  "Argus"  in  1803,  and  which  won  im-
mediate popularity.  They  are  chiefly  studies  of
eloquence  and  eloquent  men,  are  written  in  a  vivid
and  luxuriant  style,  and  may  be  regarded,  in  spite
of  the  exceptional  excellence  of  "The  Blind
Preacher,"  as  rather  a  prophecy  of  literary  skill
than  its  fulfilment.  They  were  soon  afterward  is-
sued in  book-form  (Richmond,  1803 ;  10th  ed.,
with  a  biographical  sketch  of  the  author  by  Peter
H.  Cruse,  New  York.  1832).  In  1808  Wirt  wrote
for  the  Richmond  "  Enquirer  "  essays  entitled
"  The  Rainbow,"  and  in  1810,  with  Dabney  Carr,
George  Tucker,  and  others,  a  series  of  didac-
tic and  ethical  essays,  entitled  "  The  Old  Bache-
lor," which,  collected,  passed  through  several  edi-
tions (2  vols.,  1812).  These  papers  were  modelled
after  those  of  the  "  Spectator,"  and  treat  of  female
education,  Virginian  manners,  the  fine  arts,  and
especially  oratory — a  favorite  theme  of  the  author.
The  best  of  the  essays,  that  on  the  "  Eloquence  of
the  Pulpit,"  is  a  vigorous  and  passionate  protest
against  the  coldness  that  so  often  reigns  there.  In
October,  1826,  he  delivered  before  the  citizens  of
Washington  a  discourse  on  the  lives  and  charac-
ters of  the  ex-presidents,  Adams  and  Jefferson,
who  had  died  on  4  July  of  the  same  year  (Wash-
ington, 1826),  which  the  London  "Quarterly  Re-
view," in  a  paper  on  American  oratory,'  several
years  afterward,  pronounced  "  the  best  which  this
remarkable  coincidence  has  called  forth."  In  1830
Wirt  delivered  an  address  to  the  literary  societies
of  Rutgers  college,  which,  after  its  publication  by
the  students  (New  Brunswick.  1830),  was  repub-
lished in  England,  and  translated  into  French  and
German.  His  other  publications  are  "The  Two
Principal  Arguments  in  the  Trial  of  Aaron  Burr  "
(Richmond,  1808) ;  "  Sketches  of  the  Life  and  ( 'har-
acter  of  Patrick  Henry,"  which  has  been  severely
criticised  both  for  its  hero-worship  and  its  style,
the  subject  of  the  biography  having  been  regarded
by  many  as  a  creation  of  the  rhetorician  rather
than  an  actual  personage  (Philadelphia,  1817) ;
"  Address  on  the  Triumph  of  Liberty  in  France  "
(Baltimore,  1830) ;  and  "  Letters  by  John  Q.  Adams
and  William  Wirt  to  the  Anti-Masonic  Committee
for  York  County  "  (Boston,  1831). Wirt's  "  Life  "


has  been  written  by  John  Pendleton  Kennedy  (2
vols.,  Philadelphia,  1849). — His  second  wife.  Eliza-
beth Washington,  b.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  30  Jan.,
1784;  d.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  24  Jan.,  1857,  was  the
daughter  of  Col.  Robert  Gamble,  of  Richmond,
Va.  She  was  carefully  educated  in  her  native  city
and  in  1802  married  Mr.  Wirt.  She  published  an
illustrated  quarto  volume  entitled  "Flora's  Dic-
tionary," which  was  the  first  book  of  its  kind  in
this  country,  and  is  described  as  "  at  once  a  course
of  botany,  a  complete  flower  letter-writer,  and  a
dictionary  of  quotations  "  (Baltimore,  1829).

WISE,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
England,  10  Jan.,  1813.  He  was  educated  at  Ports-
mouth grammar-school,  came  to  the  United  States
in  1833,  and,  entering  the  ministry  of  the  Meth-
odist Episcopal  church,  was  pastor  of  various
churches  in  1837-'52,  and  then  editor  of  "  Zion's
Herald  "  in  Boston  till  1856.  From  that  time  till
1872  he  was  editor  of  the  Sunday-school  publica-
tions of  his  denomination,  and  from  1860  till  1872
he  was  also  editor  of  the  tract  publications.  Since
1872  he  has  been  engaged  chiefly  in  literary  work.
Wesleyan  university  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1859.  Dr.  Wise  published  and  edited  in  1838-44
the  first  Methodist  Sunday-school  paper  in  this
country.  Among  his  many  works,  which  are  chiefly
for  youth,  are  "Life  of  Lorenzo  Dow"  (Lowell,
Mass.,  1840);  "History  of  London"  (1841);  "Per-
sonal Effort"  (Boston,  1841);  "The  Cottage  on
the  Moor"  (New  York,  1845);  "The  McGregor
Family"  (1845);  "Lovest  Thou  Me?"  (Boston,
1846) ;  "  Guide  to  the  Saviour  "  (New  York,  1847) ;
"Bridal  Greetings "  (1850) ;  "Life  of  Ulric  Zwin-
gle"  (1850);  "Aunt  Effie"  (1852);  "My  Uncle
Toby's  Library  "  (12  vols.,  Boston,  1853) :  "  Popu-
lar Objections  to  Methodism  Considered  and  An-
swered "  (1856) ;  "  The  Squire  of  Walton  Hall :  a
Life  of  Waterton,  the  Naturalist "  (1874) ;  "  The
Story  of  a  Wonderful  Life :  Pen  Pictures  from  the
Life  of  John  Wesley"  (Cincinnati,  1874):  "Van-
quished Victors"  (Cincinnati,  1876);  "Lights  and
Shadows  of  Human  Life"  (New  York,  1878);
"  Heroic  Methodists  "  (1882) ;  "  Sketches  and  Anec-
dotes of  American  Methodists"  (1883) ;  "  Our  Mis-
sionary Heroes  and  Heroines  "  (1884) ;  "  Boy  Trav-
ellers in  Arabia"  (1885) ;  "  Men  of  Renown  "  (Cin-
cinnati, 1886) ;  and  "  Some  Remarkable  Women  "
(1887).  He  has  used  the  pen-names  of  "  Francis
Forrester,  Esq.,"  and  "  Lawrence  Lancewood."

WISE,  Henry  Alexander,  governor  of  Vir-
ginia, b.  in  Drummondtown,  Accomack  co.,  Va.,  3
Dec,  1806 ;  d.  in  Richmond.  Va.,  12  Sept.,  1876.
He  was  graduated  at  Washington  college,  Pa.,  in
1825,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Win-
chester, Va.,  in  1828,  and  settled  in  that  year  in
Nashville,  Tenn.,  but  in  1830  returned  to  Acco-
mack. In  1833  he  was  elected  to  congress  by  the
Jackson  party,  and  after  the  election  fought  a  duel
with  his  competitor  for  the  office.  He  was  twice
re-elected.  In  congress  he  went  over  to  the  oppo-
sition on  the  development  of  Jackson's  bank  policy,
and  took  strong  ground  in  favor  of  slavery.  In
1837  he  was  second  to  William  J.  Graves,  of  Ken-
tucky, in  his  duel  with  Jonathan  Cilley,  of  Maine,
in  which  the  latter  was  killed.  He  was  a  man  of
undoubted  ability,  and  had  great  influence  in  John
Tyler's  administration,  and,  says  John  W.  Forney,
"Standing  between  the  two  great  parties  in  the
house,  he  delighted  in  his  isolation  and  rioted  in
the  eccentricities  of  his  genius."  In  1842  the  sen-
ate rejected  the  nomination  of  Mr.  Wise  as  minis-
ter to  France,  but  he  was  subsequently  appointed
minister  to  Brazil,  and  resided  at  Rio  Janeiro
from  May,  1844,  till  October,  1847. In  1848  and


580


WISE


WISE


1852  he  supported  the  Democratic  candidates  for
president.  He  was  elected  governor  of  Virginia  in
1855,  after  a  very  vigorous  canvass,  directed  es-
pecially against the "  Know- Nothings," whose

progress  he  did
much  to  check  by
his  vigorous  ora-
tory. His  success,
which  overturned
the  calculations
of  many  politi-
cal prophets,  was
due  in  part  to  his
accusation  that
the  "  Know-Noth-
ings "  were  Abo-
litionists in  dis-
guise. Toward  the
close  of  his  term
occurred  the  seiz-
ure of  Harper's
Perry  by  John
Brown,  whose  exe-
cution on  2  Dec,
1859,  was  one  of
the  last  acts  of  his
administration.  (See  Brown,  John.)  In  February,
1861,  he  was  a  member  of  the  State  convention,  in
which,  from  the  committee  on  Federal  relations,  he
made  a  report  that  aimed  at  compromise  and  a
peaceable  adjustment  with  the  seceded  states.  Af-
ter the  secession  of  Virginia  he  was  appointed  briga-
dier-general in  the  Confederate  army.  His  force
was  driven  out  of  Kanawha  valley  by  the  National
troops  under  Gen.  Jacob  D.  Cox,  and  at  Gauley
Bridge  lost  a  large  quantity  of  arms  and  stores.  Sub-
sequently he  commanded  at  Roanoke  island,  N.  C,
where  his  forces  were  defeated  by  Gen.  Ambrose  E.
Burnside's  expedition,  his  son,  Obadiah  J.  Wise,  be-
ing among  the  killed.  After  the  war  he  resumed
the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  published  "Seven
Decades  of  the  Union :  Memoir  of  John  Tyler "
(Philadelphia,  1872). — Henry  Alexander's  son,  John
Sergeant,  politician,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil,  25
Dec,  1846,  was  educated  at  Virginia  military  in-
stitute, and,  while  a  cadet  there,  took  part  in  the
battle  of  Newmarket,  Va.,  where  he  was  wounded,
afterward  serving  on  staff  duty  till  the  end  of  the
war.  He  studied  law  at  the  University  of  Virginia,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1867,  and  has  engaged
in  practice  in  Richmond.  From  1882  till  1883  he
was  U.  S.  district  attorney.  He  was  chosen  to  con-
gress in  1882  as  a  Readjuster,  served  one  term,  and
in  1885  was  the  Republican  candidate  for  governor
of  Virginia,  but  was  defeated  by  Fitzhugh  Lee. —
Henry  Alexander's  nephew,  George  Douglas,  con-
gressman, b.  in  Accomack  county,  V a.,  4  June,  1831,
was  educated  at  Indiana  university,  studied  law  at
William  and  Mary,  and  practised  at  Richmond.
He  served  in  the  Confederate  army  as  a  captain,
was  commonwealth's  attorney  of  Richmond  in
1870-'80,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  chosen  as  a
Democrat  to  congress,  where  he  has  since  served.
— Gov.  Wise's  cousin,  Henry  Augustus,  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  12  May,  1819 ;  d.  in  Naples,
Italy,  2  April,  1869,  was  a  son  of  George  Stuart
Wise,  of  the  U.  S.  navy.  He  entered  the  navy,  8
Feb.,  1834,  attended  the  naval  school  at  Philadel-
phia in  1839-'40,  and  became  a  passed  midshipman,
16  July,  1840.  He  served  in  the  depot  of  charts,
and  on  special  duty  in  1840-'3,  and  cruised  in  the
"  Plymouth,"  of  the  Mediterranean  station,  in
1844-'5.  He  was  promoted  to  master,  31  Oct..
1846,  and  lieutenant,  25  Feb.,  1847.  During  the
Mexican  war  he  was  attached  to  the  razee  "Inde-


pendence," on  the  Pacific  station,  and  participated
in  the  operations  in  the  Gulf  of  California,  at
Mazatlan,  and  La  Paz.  In  1850-'2  he  served  in
the  coast  survey,  and  then  he  cruised  in  the  frigate
"  Cumberland,"  of  the  Mediterranean  station,  in
1852-'4.  He  was  on  ordnance  duty  at  Boston
and  Washington  during  the  following  years  until
1860.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was  attached
to  the  steam  frigate  "  Niagara  "  in  the  first  block-
ading squadron  off  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1861.  He
Was  promoted  to  commander,  16  July.  1862,  and
appointed  assistant  chief  of  the  bureau  of  ordnance
and  hydrography,  where  he  served  throughout  the
remainder  of  the  war  and  until  January,  1869,  and
rendered  valuable  services.  He  was  promoted  to
captain,  29  Dec,  1866,  and  was  abroad  on  leave
when  he  died.  He  married  a  daughter  of  Edward
Everett  in  1848.  Cant.  Wise  was  the  author  of
"  Los  Gringos,  or  an  Interior  View  of  Mexico  and
California,  with  Wanderings  in  Peru,  Chili,  and
Polynesia"  (New  York,  1849);  "Tales  for  the  Ma-
rines "  (Boston,  1855) ;  "  Scampavias ;  from  Gibel
Tarak  to  Stamboul,  bv  Harrv  Gringo  "  (New  York,
1857) ;  "  The  Story  of  the  Gray  African  Parrot,"
for  children  (1859);  and  "Captain  Brand  of  the
'  Centipede ' "  (London,  1860 ;  New  York,  1864).

WISE,  Isaac  Mayer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stein-
grub,  Bohemia,  3  April,  1819.  After  following  the
usual  rabbinical  training,  and  a  course  of  secular
instruction  at  Prague,  he  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Vienna  in  1843.  In  the  same  year  he
was  appointed  rabbi  of  Radnitz,  Bohemia,  where
he  remained  three  years.  He  then  went  to  New
York,  and  from  1846  till  1854  he  officiated  in  Al-
bany. In  1854  Dr.  Wise  was  called  to  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  where  he  has  remained.  In  1854  he  pub-
lished the  weekly,  "  The  Israelite,"  and  in  1855  a
German  supplement,  "  Die  Deborah."  He  has  also
issued  a  special  ritual  called  "Minhag  America,"
which  has  been  adopted  by  a  large  number  of  con-
gregations, and  he  has  been  an  industrious  writer
on  Jewish  and  polemical  topics.  He  has  lectured
throughout  the  country,  and  consecrated  a  large
number  of  synagogues.  He  is  identified  with  the
reform  movement  in  American  Judaism,  and  his
energy  led  to  the  union  of  American  congregations
and  the  Hebrew  union  college,  of  which  he  is  presi-
dent. Among  his  works  are  a  "History  of  the
Israelitish  Nation"  (Albany,  1854);  "Essence  of
Judaism"  (Cincinnati,  I860) ;  "Judaism:  its  Doc-
trines and  Duties"  (1862);  "The  Martyrdom  of
Jesus  of  Nazareth,"  to  prove  that  the  Jews  were
not  responsible  for  the  crucifixion  (1874);  "The
Cosmic  God  "  (1876) :  and  "  History  of  the  Hebrews'
Second  Commonwealth  "  (1880).

WISE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,
in  August,  1652;  d.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  8  April,
1725.  He  was  the  son  of  Joseph  Wise,  who,  in  his
younger  days,  had  been  a  serving-man.  John  at-
tended Roxbury  free  school,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1673,  and,  after  studying  theology,  was-
ordained  pastor  of  Chebacco,  a  new  parish  of  Ips-
wich, on  12  Aug.,  1683,  where  he  remained  till  his
death.  In  1688,  for  leading  the  citizens  of  Ipswich
in  their  remonstrance  against  arbitrary  taxation  by
Sir  Edmund  Andros,  he  was  imprisoned,  fined  £50
and  costs,  and  deprived  of  his  ministerial  office,
but  after  the  revolution  of  the  following  year  he
brought  action  against  Chief-Justice  Dudley  for
refusing  him  the  benefit  of  the  habeas  corpus  act,
and  is  said  to  have  recovered  damages.  The  town
had  paid  his  fine  and  costs  and  sent  him,  as  its
representative,  to  Boston,  where  he  took  an  active
part  in  reorganizing  the  government.  In  1690  he
was  a  chaplain  in  the  unfortunate  expedition  to


WISE


WISNER


581


Canada.  When  it  was  proposed,  under  the  leader-
ship of  the  Mathers,  to  establish  associations  of
ministers  in  Massachusetts  that  should  exercise
authority  that  had  belonged  to  the  individual
churches,  Wise  opposed  the  plan  as  being  the  first
step  toward  a  hierarchy,  and  published  against  it
a  pamphlet  entitled  "  The  Churches'  Quarrel  Es-
poused" (Boston,  1710;  2d  ed.,  with  the  "Cam-
bridge Platform,"  1715).  In  this  he  attacked  the
scheme  with  keen  satire,  utterly  defeating  it.  Dr.
Henry  M.  Dexter,  in  his  "Congregationalism  as
Seen  in  its  Literature,"  says  the  essay  is  unsur-
passed "  for  density,  for  clearness,  for  largeness  of
vision,  for  conclusiveness,  and  for  general  ability
and  beauty  of  style."  Later  Mr.  Wise  amplified
his  views  in  his  "  Vindication  of  the  Government
of  New  England  Churches,"  which  was  bound  to-
gether with  another  edition  of  the  former  pam-
phlet (1717).  This  is  a  remarkable  exposition  of
the  general  principles  of  civil  government,  and  be-
came, says  a  biographer,  "  the  text-book  of  liberty
for  our  Revolutionary  fathers,  containing  some  of
the  notable  expressions  that  are  used  in  the  Decla-
ration of  Independence."  The  two  essays  were
reprinted  in  a  volume  by  the  Congregational  board
of  publication,  with  an  historical  introductory  no-
tice by  the  Rev.  Joseph  S.  Clark,  D.  D.  (I860).
See,  also,  funeral  sermon,  by  John  White  (1725).

WISE,  John,  aeronaut,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  24
Feb.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Lake  Michigan,  28  or  29  Sept.,
1879.  His  first  ascension  from  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
on  2  May,  1835,  was  short  and  uneventful.  Dur-
ing his  next,  on  4  July,  1835,  from  Lebanon,  Pa.,
he  attempted  to  open  the  valve  on  the  top  of  the
balloon,  but  lost  control,  and  it  burst,  compelling
him  to  descend.  On  1  Oct.,  1835,  he  attempted
an  ascension  from  Lancaster,  Pa.,  but  was  thrown
from  the  car  and  became  unconscious  while  the
balloon  ascended  alone,  and  on  7  May,  1836,  he
ascended  again  from  Lancaster,  and  landed  in  Har-
ford county,  Md.,  about  seventy-five  miles  distant.
While  he  was  emptying  the  car  of  its  cargo  an  ex-
plosion of  the  gas  occurred,  burning  the  aeronaut
severely.  He  made  a  voyage  from  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  on  18  Sept.,  1837,  alighting  in  Delaware  river,
where  he  was  rescued.  On  this  trip  he  set  loose
two  parachutes  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrating
the  superiority  of  the  inverted  parachute.  In  Oc-
tober, 1837,  he  ascended  again  from  Philadelphia,
and  alighted  in  New  Jersey,  forty  miles  from  his
starting-point.  He  left  Easton,  Pa.,  11  Aug.,  1838,
and  when  he  had  reached  the  height  of  13,000  feet
his  balloon  burst,  and  in  less  than  ten  seconds  all
the  gas  had  escaped.  The  balloon  descended  rapid-
ly with  an  oscillating  motion,  and,  on  reaching  the
earth,  rebounded,  throwing  Mr.  Wise  ten  feet  from
the  car.  He  next  advertised  that  on  1  Oct.,  1838,
he  would  ascend  and  in  the  air  would  convert  his
balloon  into  a  parachute,  which  feat  he  success-
fully accomplished.  On  4  July,  1840,  he  entered
into  competition  with  William  Paullin  for  a  record
of  the  highest  and  longest  balloon  ascension,  but
was  defeated.  In  June,  1843,  he  announced  his
intention  of  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  summer
of  1844,  advancing  the  theory  that  there  was  a  con-
stant air-current  from  west  to  east  12,000  feet  above
the  ocean ;  but  he  failed  to  secure  an  appropriation
from  congress  for  the  purpose,  and  was  compelled
'  to  abandon  the  project.  In  August,  1846,  during
an  ascension  from  West  Chester,  Pa.,  he  entered  a
thunder-cloud,  and,  on  descending,  his  car  was
struck  by  lightning,  but  he  escaped.  During  an
ascent,  on  15  Aug.,  1851,  from  Zanesville.  Ohio,  he
made  experiments  on  the  action  of  falling  bodies,
and  found  that  they  all  spin  upon  their  axes. A


light,  empty  pint-bottle  fell  in  a  large  spiral,  giv-
ing out  a  musical  sound  in  its  descent,  and  turning
slowly  on  an  axis  as  it  came  down.  On  5  Sept.,
1851,  he  ascended  from  Columbus,  Ohio,  and  found
himself  entering  a  stratum,  10,000  feet  in  height,
that  was  highly  electrical  and  agitated  by  "  con-
vulsionary  air-wheels."  All  parts  of  the  balloon-
rigging  acquired  musical  properties,  the  various
cords  giving  forth  sounds  similar  to  those  of  a
stringed  instrument.  At  sunset  he  saw  the  clouds
tinted  with  the  colors  of  the  rainbow,  and,  although
more  than  a  mile  high,  heard  the  voices  of  persons
below  in  conversation.  This  voyage  was  benefi-
cial to  his  health,  which  had  been  much  impaired.
In  1851  he  petitioned  congress  for  an  appropria-
tion of  $20,000  for  the  purpose  of  constructing  a
large  air-ship  with  which  to  demonstrate  the  pos-
sibility of  destroying  any  fleet,  fort,  or  army  by
means  of  explosive  missiles  thrown  from  the  car,
and  also  the  possibility  of  crossing  the  ocean.
The  petition  was  referred  to  the  naval  committee
and  never  reported  on.  Thereafter  he  continued
to  make  occasional  ascensions  until  1859,  when
they  numbered  about  230.  In  that  year,  with
John  La  Mountain  and  others,  he  made  the  cele-
brated voyage  from  St.  Louis  to  Jefferson  county,
N.  Y.,  a  description  of  which  is  given  in  the  article
La  Mountain.  From  September,  1871,  till  July,
1872,  he  was  librarian  of  the  Franklin  institute.
He  then  revived  his  project  of  crossing  the  Atlantic,
and  made  efforts  to  raise  funds  for  a  balloon  and
equipment,  but  without  success  until  the  enterprise
was  taken  up  by  the  "  Daily  Graphic,"  of  New
York  city.  (See  Donaldson,  Washington  H.)
Soon  after  this  failure  he  removed  to  Louisiana,
Mo.,  intending  to  devote  the  remainder  of  his  life
to  farming ;  but  he  was  unable  to  resist  the  fasci-
nation of  ballooning,  and  announced  an  ascension
from  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  28  Sept.,  1879.  With  several
companions,  in  a  new  balloon  named  the  "  Path-
finder," he  set  out  at  the  appointed  time,  intending
to  stay  in  the  air  as  long  as  he  could.  The  bal-
loon moved  in  a  northeasterly  direction,  and  was
last  seen  at  Carlinville,  111.  From  that  time  no
tidings  were  ever  received  from  the  aeronauts,  but
several  weeks  later  the  body  of  one  of  the  party
was  washed  ashore  on  Lake  Michigan.  It  is  sup-
posed that  they  perished  during  one  of  the  sudden
tempests  of  that  region,  and,  like  Donaldson  and
others,  were  drowned  in  the  waters  of  the  great
lake.  Mr.  Wise  published  a  "System  of  Aero-
nautics "  (Philadelphia,  1850).

WISNER,  Benjamin  Blydenbnrg,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Goshen,  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  19  Sept.,
1794 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  9  Feb.,  1835.  His  father
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  in  Goshen.  Benjamin
was  graduated  at  Union  in  1813  and  at  Princeton
theological  seminary  in  1820,  and  in  the  interval
was  principal  of  the  academy  in  Johnstown,  N.  Y.,
also  studying  law.  In  1821-'32  he  was  pastor  of
the  Old  South  church,  Boston,  Mass.  He  then
resigned  on  account  of  failing  health,  and  became
secretary  of  the  American  board  of  commissioners
for  foreign  missions.  In  that  capacity  he  did  good
service  in  visiting  various  parts  of  the  country  and
in  forming  missionary  associations.  Union  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1828.  His  publications
include  single  sermons  and  memoirs ;  "  History  of
the  Old  South  Church  "  (Boston,  1830) ;  and  "  Moral
Condition  and  Prospects  of  the  Heathen  "  (1833).
See  "  Memorial  Volume  of  the  First  Fifty  Years  of
the  American  Board  of  Commissioners  of  Foreign
Missions,"  by  Rufus  Anderson,  D.  D.  (1862).

WISNER,  Henry,  patriot,  b.  in  Goshen,  Or-
ange co.,  N.  Y.,  about 1725;  d.  there  in 1790.


582


WISNER


WISTAR


He  was  the  grandson  of  a  Swiss  soldier  who  set-
tled in  Orange  county  in  1715.  Henry  was  ap-
pointed in  1768  one  of  the  assistant  justices  of  the
court  of  common  pleas,  and  represented  Orange
county  in  the  New  York  general  assembly  in
1759-'69.  He  strenuously  espoused  the  side  of
colonial  rights  against  the  pretensions  of  the  Brit-
ish parliament,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Conti-
nental congress  of  1774,  and  of  the  2d  Continental
congress,  which  adopted  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence. For  that  measure  Wisner  voted,  and
he  was  the  only  New  York  delegate  who  acquired
that  honor,  but  before  the  Declaration  was  en-
grossed on  parchment  and  ready  for  signing,  he
went  to  New  York  to  attend  the  Provincial  con-
gress, of  which  he  had  been  elected  a  member.  He
studied  the  art  of  making  gunpowder  and  erected
three  powder-mills  in  the  neighborhood  of  Goshen,
from  which  large  quantities  of  powder  were  sup-
plied to  the  Revolutionary  army.  He  was  other-
wise of  practical  service  to  the  patriot  cause  by
having  spears  and  gun-flints  made  and  by  repair-
ing the  roads  in  Orange  county,  thus  facilitat-
ing the  transportation  of  provisions  and  military
material  to  the  American  troops.  He  also,  at  his
own  expense,  erected  works  and  mounted  cannon
on  the  banks  of  Hudson  river,  which  greatly  im-
peded British  vessels  in  their  passage  of  the  High-
lands. He  was  one  of  the  committee  that  framed
the  first  constitution  of  New  York  in  1777,  state
senator  in  1777-'82,  and  a  member  of  the  New
York  convention  of  1788,  which  ratified  the  U.  S.
constitution.  On  that  occasion  he  voted  in  the
negative,  fearing,  in  common  with  other  stanch
patriots,  that  a  strong  Federal  government  would
overpower  state  and  individual  rights.  In  person
Wisner  was  tall,  with  pleasing  manners,  and  a
frame  that  was  vigorous  even  in  old  age.  He  pos-
sessed a  strong  intellect  and  an  energetic  charac-
ter. See  "A  Memorial  of  Henry  Wisner,"  by
Franklin  Burdge  (New  York,  1878).

WISNER,  Moses,  lawyer,  b.  in  Aurelius,  N.  Y.,
in  1818 ;  d.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  5  Jan.,  1863.  He
was  carefully  educated,  removed  to  Michigan  in
1839,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at
Pontiac  in  1842.  He  became  prosecuting  attorney
for  Lapeer  county  in  1843,  and  was  governor  of
Michigan  in  1849-'61.  In  1862  he  entered  the
National  army  as  colonel  of  the  22d  Michigan
regiment,  but  died  on  his  way  to  the  seat  of  war.

WISNER,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Warwick,
N.  Y.,  in  1782;  d.  in  Cedar  Rapids,  Iowa,  7  Jan.,
1871.  He  adopted  the  profession  of  law,  and  prac-
tised in  Orange  county,  N.  Y.,  for  several  years,
but  relinquished  that  profession  to  become  a  clergy-
man. He  studied  theology  at  Princeton  seminary,
was  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Ithaca
for  a  short  time,  and  in  1831  took  charge  of  the
Brick  church,  Rochester,  N.  Y„  where  he  remained
for  several  years.  He  removed  to  Cedar  Rapids,
Iowa,  in  1870.  Delaware  college  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1842.  His  publications  include
"  Incidents  in  the  Life  of  a  Pastor  "  (New  York,
1851),  and  "  Elements  of  Civil  Liberty,  or  the
Way  to  maintain  Free  Institutions  "  (1853). —
His  son,  William  Carpenter,  clergyman,  b.  in
Elmira,  N.  Y..  7  Dec,  1808;  d.  in  Lockport,  N.  Y.,
14  July,  1880,  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1830,
studied  theology  with  private  instructors,  and
was  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in  New  York
and  Missouri  from  1832  till  1836,  when  he  became
pastor  in  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  holding  charges  there
from  1837  till  1876.  Union  college  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1851.  Dr.  Wisner  was  known
throughout  the  Presbyterian  church  not  only  for


solid  learning,  but  for  his  inexhaustible  humor.
He  left  his  large  private  library  to  Auburn  theo-
logical seminary,  of  which  he  was  a  trustee  in
1863-76.  He  was  moderator  of  the  general  as-
sembly in  1855.  He  published  several  sermons
and  "  Prelacy  and  Parity  "  (New  York,  1844).

WISSER,  John  Philip,  soldier,  b.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  19  July,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Central  high-school  of  St.  Louis  in  1870,  and  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1874.  Receiving
an  assignment  to  the  1st  artillery,  he  served  on
garrison  duty  in  Florida  and  Massachusetts  until
May,  1876,  when  he  was  ordered  to  the  U.  S.  artil-
lery-school at  Fort  Monroe.  Since  1878  he  has
been  connected  almost  continuously  with  the  aca-
demic staff  of  instructors  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  chiefly  in  the  department  of  chemistry,
mineralogy,  and  geology.  On  13  Jan.,  1880,  he
was  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  and  during  1884  he
studied  at  the  Freiberg,  Saxony,  school  of  mines,
and  at  the  agricultural  experiment  station  at  Wies-
baden. He  was  requested  to  investigate  and  report
upon  the  system  of  instruction  at  the  military
schools  of  England,  France,  Germany,  and  Austria,
and  to  attend  and  report  upon  the  manoeuvres  of
the  17th  corps  of  the  French  army  in  1884.  Lieut.
Wisser  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  John  Gibbon
during  the  Chinese  troubles  in  Washington  territory
in  1886,  but  in  August  of  that  year  he  returned  to
the  U.  S.  military  academy.  He  is  a  member  of
the  Chemical  society  of  Berlin  and  of  the  Ameri-
can association  for  the  advancement  of  science.
His  publications  include"  Chemical  Manipulations"
(Fort  Monroe,  1883) ;  "Short  Historical  Sketch  of
Gunpowder  "  (New  York,  1883)  ;  "  Compressed
Gun-Cotton  for  Military  Use"  (1886) ;  "  Report  on
the  Manoeuvres  of  the  17th  Corps  of  the  Array
of  France "  (Vancouver  Barracks,  W.  T.,  1886) ;
"  Practical  Instruction  in  Minor  Tactics  and  Strat-
egy "  (New  York,  1888) ;  and  "  Report  on  the  Mili-
tary Schools  of  Europe :  I.,  Austria  "  (1889).

WISSLER,  Jacques,  engraver,  b.  in  Strasburg,
Germany,  in  1803 ;  d.  in  Camden,  N.  J.,  25  Nov.,
1887.  He  was  educated  in  Paris,  France,  came  to
this  country  in  1849,  and  was  employed  in  a  litho-
graphing firm.  Before  the  civil  war  his  employer
sent  him  to  Richmond,  Va.,  and  after  the  firing  on
Fort  Sumter  he  was  detained  by  the  Confederate
authorities  and  assigned  to  the  task  of  engraving
its  paper  currency  and  bonds.  Mr.  Wissler  ac-
quired a  fortune  in  this  employment,  but  his  loy-
alty to  the  U.  S.  government  caused  the  confisca-
tion of  his  estate  before  the  close  of  the  war.  He
then  removed  to  Macon,  Miss.,  and  finally  settled
in  Camden,  N.  J.,  where  he  acquired  the  reputa-
tion of  being  among  the  most  skilled  engravers  in
this  country.  He  was  also  successful  in  portrait-
painting  in  crayons  and  oils.

WISTAR,  Richard,  merchant,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  20  July,  1756 ;  d.  there,  6  June,  1821.  He
was  the  grandson  of  Caspar  Wistar,  who  came  to
this  country  from  Germany  in  1717  and  estab-
lished near  Salem,  N.  J.,  what  is  believed  to  have
been  the  first  glass-factory  in  the  colonies,  in  the
management  of  which  his  son  was  also  associated.
In  early  life  Richard  turned  his  attention  to  com-
merce, in  which  he  was  eminently  successful.  He
built  a  large  four-storied  store  in  1790,  where  he
conducted  an  iron  and  hardware  business,  and  with
the  profits  of  this  undertaking  purchased  lands  and
houses  in  the  vicinity  of  Philadelphia,  which  be-
came exceedingly  valuable.  During  the  Revolu-
tionary war  he  advocated  the  defence  of  his  prop-
erty by  arms,  which  resulted  in  his  being  disowned
by  the  Society  of  Friends. He  was  an  inspector


WISTAR


WITHERELL


583


/w&j&r


of  prisons,  and  was  one  of  the  early  friends  and
supporters  of  the  Philadelphia  library  company
and  the  Pennsylvania  hospital. — His  brother,  Cas-
par, physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13  Sept.,
1761 ;  d.  there,  22  Jan.,  1818,  was  educated  at  the
Friends'  school  in  his  native  city,  where  he  received
a  thorough  classical
training.  His  inter-
est in  medicine  began
while  he  was  aiding
in  the  care  of  the
wounded  after  the  bat-
tle of  Germantown,
and  he  made  his  first
studies  under  the  di-
rection of  Dr.  John
Redman.  He  attend-
ed lectures  at  the  med-
ical department  of  the
University  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  received
the  degree  of  bachelor
of  medicine  in  1782.
After  spending  a  year
in  England,  he  went
to  Edinburgh,  where,
in  1786,  he  received
his  doctorate.  While  in  Scotland  he  was,  for  two
successive  years,  president  of  the  Royal  medical  so-
ciety of  Edinburgh,  and  also  president  of  a  society
for  the  further  investigation  of  natural  history.  He
returned  to  this  country  in  January,  1787,  and  en-
tered on  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Philadel-
phia, where  he  was  at  once  appointed  one  of  the  phy-
sicians to  the  Philadelphia  dispensary.  He  was  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  and  the  institutes  of  medicine
in  the  College  of  Philadelphia  from  1789  till  1792,
when  the  faculty  of  that  institution  united  with
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania, of  which  he  was  adjunct  professor  of
anatomy,  midwifery,  and  surgery  until  1808.  In
that  year,  on  the  death  of  his  associate,  Dr.  Will-
iam Shippen,  Jr.,  he  was  given  the  chair  of  anato-
my, which  he  retained  until  his  death.  His  fame
attracted  students  to  his  lectures,  and  he  was  largely
the  means  of  establishing  the  reputation  of  the
school.  Meanwhile  he  was  chosen  physician  to  the
Pennsylvania  hospital,  where  he  remained  until
1810.  His  ability  as  an  anatomist  was  increased
by  his  description  of  the  posterior  portion  of  the
ethmoid  bone  with  the  triangular  bones  attached,
which  received  universal  recognition  as  an  original
treatment  of  the  subject.  It  was  his  habit  to  throw
open  his  house  once  every  Week  in  the  winter,  and
at  these  gatherings  students,  citizens,  scientists,
and  travellers  met  and  discussed  subjects  of  inter-
est. These  assemblies,  celebrated  in  the  annals  of
Philadelphia  under  the  title  of  Wistar  parties,  were
continued  long  after  his  death  by  other  residents
of  that  city.  The  College  of  physicians  elected  him
a  fellow  in  1787,  and  he  was  appointed  one  of  its
censors  in  1794,  which  place  he  retained  until  his
death.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society  in  1787,  was  chosen  its  vice-

S resident  in  1795,  and  on  the  resignation  of  Thomas
efferson,  in  1815,  succeeded  to  the  highest  office,
which  he  filled  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.
On  the  death  of  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  Dr.  Wistar
succeeded  to  the  presidency  of  the  Society  for  the
abolition  of  slavery.  The  well-known  climbing-
shrub,  wistaria,  which  grows  wild  in  the  western
and  southern  states,  was  named  in  his  honor.  Dr.
Wistar  contributed  papers  to  the  "  Transactions  of
the  College  of  Physicians  "  and  to  the  "  Transac-
tions of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,"  and


was  the  author  of  "  A  System  of  Anatomy,  for  the
Use  of  Students  of  Medicine  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1814,  originally  published  in  parts). — His  son,
Isaac  Jones,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14
Nov.,  1827,  was  educated  at  Haverford  college,  Pa.,
adopted  the  profession  of  law,  and  practised  in
Philadelphia.  He  entered  the  National  army  in
1861,  as  a  captain  in  a  regiment  of  Pennsylvania
volunteers,  and  served  in  Maryland  and  Virginia,
his  commission  as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
dated  29  Nov.,  1862,  being  granted  for  services  at
Antietam.  After  the  war  he  resumed  practice,  and
is  now  president  of  a  canal  company  and  several
coal  companies  in  Pennsylvania.

WISTER,  A  ii ii is  Lee,  translator,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  9  Oct.,  1830.  She  is  the  daughter  of
the  Rev.  William  H.  Furness,  and  married,  in  1854,
Dr.  Caspar  Wister  (a  descendant  of  Caspar  Wis-
tar, who  came  to  this  country  in  1717),  who  was
born  in  1817,  and  died  20  Dec,  1888.  Her  educa-
tion was  received  chiefly  at  home  under  the  care
of  her  father,  and  she  early  began  to  translate
stories  from  the  German.  Subsequently  she  trans-
lated and  adapted  various  novels,  including  those
of  Eugenie  Marlitt,  Wilhelmine  von  Hillern,  Fried-
rich  W.  Hacklarfder,  Fanny  Lewald.  and  others,
numbering  in  all  more  than  thirty  volumes  (Phila-
delphia, 1864  et  seq.),  among  which  are  "  The  Old
Mam'selle's  Secret,"  "Gold  Elsie,"  "The  Second
Wife,"  "  Violetta."  and  "  The  Owl's  Nest."  A  uni-
form set  of  her  German  translations  has  been  issued
in  thirty  volumes  (1888).  She  has  also  published,
with  Dr.  Frederic  H.  Hedge.  "  Metrical  Transla-
tions and  Poems"  (Boston,  1888).

WISWALL,  Ichabod,  clergyman,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1638;  d.  in  Duxbury,  Mass.,  23  July,  1700.
He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  his  youth,  studied
at  Harvard  for  three  years  without  being  gradu-
ated, was  ordained  to  the  ministry,  and  from  1676
until  his  death  was  pastor  of  the  church  in  Dux-
bury,  Mass.  He  taught  for  many  years,  and  was
an  agent  of  the  colony  in  1689  in  its  efforts  to
prevent  the  union  of  Plymouth  colony  to  New
York  or  Massachusetts,  visiting  England  for  this
purpose,  but  was  defeated  by  Increase  Mather,  the
representative  of  Massachusetts,  who  desired  the
union.  Wiswall  published  a  poem  on  the  comet
of  1680  (London,  1680).

WITHERELL,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Mans-
field, Mass.,  16  June,  1759 ;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  9
Jan.,  1838.  He  served  in  the  Revolutionary  army
as  a  member  of  the  11th  Massachusetts  regiment
from  the  beginning  of  the  war  till  1783,  when  he
was  mustered  out  of  service,  after  participating  in
the  principal  battles  in  New  York  and  New  Jersey,
and  being  severely  wounded  at  White  Plains.  He
then  studied  medicine  in  his  native  state,  was
licensed  to  practise  in  1788,  and  removed  to  Ver-
mont, where  he  adopted  the  profession  of  law.  He
served  in  the  legislature  in  1798-1803,  was  a  judge
of  Rutland  county  for  the  next  two  years,  state
councillor  in  1803-7,  and  a  member  of  congress
from  October,  1807,  till  May,  1808,  when  he  re-
signed to  become  U.  S.  judge  for  the  territory  of
Michigan.  He  resigned  that  post  in  1828,  and  was
appointed  secretary  of  the  territory  by  President
John  Quincy  Adams.  He  was  active  in  the  man-
agement of  the  municipal  and  educational  affairs
of  Detroit,  and  left  a  valuable  collection  of  papers
on  the  history  of  that  city  and  the  state  of  Michi-
gan.— His  son,  Benjamin  Franklin  Hawkins,
jurist,  b.  in  Fair  Haven,  Vt.,  4  Aug.,  1797:  d.  in
Detroit,  Mich.,  26  June,  1867,  was  educated  in  a
private  school  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  accompanied  his
father  to  Michigan,  and  studied  law. He  was  ad-


584


WITHERS


WITIIERSPOON


mitted  to  the  bar  of  Detroit  in  1819,  was  prose-
cuting attorney  and  probate  judge  of  Wayne
county,  and  in  1843  district  judge  of  the  criminal
court  of  Wayne,  Washtenaw,  and  Jackson  counties.
He  became  historiographer  of  Detroit  in  1855,  and
from  1857  until  his  death  was  circuit  judge  of
Wayne  county.  He  was  appointed  a  regent  of  the
State  university  in  1848,  served  several  terms  in
the  legislature,  was  a  member  of  the  State  consti-
tutional convention  in  1850,  and  president  of  the
Michigan  historical  society  for  many  years.

WITHERS,  Frederick  Clarke,  architect,  b.
in  Shepton  Mallet,  Somersetshire,  England,  4  Feb.,
1828.  He  was  educated  in  King  Edward's  school
in  Sherborne,  Dorsetshire,  and  then  devoted  him-
self to  the  study  of  architecture.  Mr.  Withers
early  came  to  this  country  and  established  for


himself  a  high  reputation  for  his  designs  of
churches.  Among  these  are  St.  Luke's,  Matteawan,
N.  Y. ;  the  1st  Presbyterian,  Newburg,  N.  Y. ;  St.
Thomas's,  Hanover,  N.  H. ;  the  Church  of  the  Ad-
vent, Louisville,  Ky. ;  St.  Luke's,  Altoona,  Pa. ;  and
Calvary,  Summit,  N.  J.  Of  other  buildings,  the
Hudson  river  state  hospital  for  the  insane  at  Pough-
keepsie,  N.  Y. ;  and  the  buildings  of  the  Columbia
institution  for  deaf  and  dumb  at  Washington,
D.  C,  are  from  his  plans.  The  Jefferson  market
court-house  and  prison  in  New  York,  designed  in
the  Italian  Gothic  style,  is  the  only  public  building
where  that  style  has  been  introduced,  and  ranks
as  one  of  the  best  pieces  of  architectural  designing
in  that  city.  He  also  designed  and  had  charge
of  the  erection  of  the  altar  and  reredos  in  Trinity
church,  New  York  city,  in  honor  of  William  B.
Astor.  This  memorial,  carved  in  Caen  stone,
occupies  nearly  the  entire  width  of  the  chancel,
and  is  about  twenty  feet  high.  The  altar,  of  white
marble,  is  eleven  feet  long,  and  is  divided  into
panels,  in  the  central  one  of  which  is  a  Maltese
cross  in  mosaic  set  with  cameos,  on  which  are  cut
the  symbols  of  the  evangelists.  In  beauty  of  de-
sign and  delicacy  of  carving  this  reredos  is  among
the  best  works  of  its  character  on  the  American
continent.  (See  illustration.)  During  1861-2  Mr.
Withers  served  as  an  officer  in  the  New  York  vol-
unteer engineers,  and  he  has  published  ''Church
Architecture"  (New  York.  1873).

WITHERS,  Jones  Mitchell,  soldier,  b.  in
Madison  county,  Wis.,  12  Jan.,  1814.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1835,
and  resigned  in  the  same  year,  but  during  the
Creek  disturbances  in  1836  commanded  the  Ala-
bama volunteers.  He  subsequently  studied  law  in
Tuscaloosa,  Ala.,  became  private  secretary  to  Gov.
Clement  C.  Clay,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1838. He  settled  in  Mobile  as  a  lawyer  and  com-


mission merchant  in  1841.  He  was  in  the  legisla-
ture in  1855,  mayor  of  Mobile  in  1856-'61,  and  at
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  entered  the  Confed-
erate army  as  colonel  of  the  3d  Alabama  infantry.
He  became  brigadier-general  in  July,  1861,  com-
manding the  defences  of  Mobile,  major-general
early  in  1862,  commanded  a  division  at  Shiloh.  and
participated  in  the  battle  of  Stone  River,  31  Dec.r
1862.  He  was  subsequently  in  charge  of  a  depart-
ment, with  headquarters  at  Montgomery,  Ala.
After  the  war  he  returned  to  Mobile,  and  edited
the  "  Tribune  "  in  that  city.

WITHERS,  Robert  Enoch,  senator,  b.  in
Campbell  county,  Va.,  18  Sept.,  1821.  He  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia  in  1840,  and  practised  his  pro-
fession in  his  native  county  for  fifteen  years,  after-
ward removing  to  Danville,  Va.  Early  in  1861  he-
became  colonel  of  the  18th  Virginia  regiment,  and
with  that  command  he  participated  in  all  the  bat-
tles of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  from  Bull
Run  to  Gaines's  Mills,  where  he  was  severely
wounded.  Being  incapacitated  for  further  field
duty,  he  was  then  assigned  to  the  charge  of  the
prisons  and  hospitals  in  Danville,  Va.,  which  post
he  held  till  the  close  of  the  civil  war.  He  edited
the  "  Lynchburg  News "  in  1866-'8,  and  subse-
quently the  "  Richmond  Enquirer,"  and  was  nomi-
nated for  governor  by  the  Democratic  party  in
1868,  but  withdrew  in  "favor  of  Gilbert  C.  Walker,
Conservative.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in
1873,  became  lieutenant-governor,  1  Jan.,  1874r
and  on  the  13th  of  the  same  month  was  chosen
U.  S.  senator  as  a  Democrat,  succeeding  John  F.
Lewis,  Republican,  and  serving  one  term.  Since
1885  he  has  been  U.  S.  consul  at  Hong  Kong.  China.

WITHERSPOON,  John,  signer  of  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence,  b.  in*  Gifford,  Haddington-
shire, Scotland,  5  Feb.,  1722;  d.  near  Princeton,
N.  J.,  15  Sept.,  1794.  Through  his  mother  he  was
descended  from  John  Knox.  His  father,  James
Witherspoon,  was  minister  of  the  parish  of  Yestery
which  included  the
village  of  Gifford.
The  son  was  gradu-
ated at  Edinburgh
university  in  1742,
and  in  1745  was
ordained  minister
of  the  parish  of
Beith.  "While look-
ing at  the  battle  of
Falkirk  he  was
made  a  prisoner,
and  confined  for
two  weeks,  to  the
permanent  injury
of  his  health.  He
gained  a  wide  rep-
utation, first  by  a
satirical  essay  on  ec-
clesiastical abuses,
and  afterward  by
a  disquisition  on  the  Calvinistic  doctrine  of  justifi-
cation by  faith,  and  was  installed  pastor  at  Paisley
on  16  Jan.,  1757,  and  in  the  course  of  a  year  was
chosen  moderator  of  the  synod  of  Glasgow  and
Ayr.  The  University  of  Aberdeen  conferred  on
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1764.  He  declined  the
presidency  of  Princeton  college  in  1766,  but  ac-
cepted a  second  invitation,  and  was  inaugurated
on  17  Aug.,  1768.  He  brought  with  him  300
valuable  volumes  as  a  gift  to  the  college,  while
his  friends  in  Scotland  and  England  gave  many
more. Finding  the  treasury  empty,  he  made  a


/**  /t/it£~o/*«-rff


WITHERSPOON


W1THERSPOON


585


tour  in  New  England,  obtaining  subscriptions  in
Boston  and  other  towns,  secured  aid  also  from
South  Carolina,  Virginia,  and  other  colonies,  and
issued  "  An  Address  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Jamaica
and  other  West  India  Islands  on  Behalf  of  the
College  of  New  Jersey."  His  special  department
of  instruction  was  that  of  divinity,  and  during
the  entire  period  of  his  presidency  he  officiated  as
pastor  of  the  church  in  Princeton.  He  was  the
first  teacher  in  this  country  of  the  system  of  meta-
physics that  was  contemporaneously  expounded  in
Scotland  by  Thomas  Reid.  He  also  enlarged  the
course  of  philosophy  so  as  to  include  political
science  and  international  law,  and  promoted  the
study  of  mathematics.  The  college  received  a
great  expansion  through  his  administrative  ability
and  the  introduction  of  progressive  educational
methods.  Besides  other  improvements  in  the  sys-
tem of  teaching,  he  introduced  the  lecture  method,
and  gave  lectures  himself  on  rhetoric,  moral  phi-
losophy, history,  and  theology.  In  1772  he  insti-
tuted a  class  in  Hebrew,  and  he  also  introduced  the
study  of  the  French  language.  He  was  a  leader
of  the  Presbyterians  of  the  country  in  embracing
the  side  of  the  patriots  in  the  difficulties  with  the
British  crown,  identifying  himself  with  the  colonial
contention  from  his  landing  in  America,  and  by  his
influence  and  example  doing  much  to  attach  the
Scotch  and  Scotch-Irish  population  to  the  patriot
cause.  When  the  preparations  for  a  general  con-
gress were  in  progress  he  met  the  New  Jersey  com-
mittee at  New  Brunswick  to  urge  resistance  to  the
tea  tax,  and  was  accounted  "  as  high  a  son  of  lib-
erty as  any  man  in  America."  On  17  May,  1776,
which  was  appointed  by  congress  as  a  day  of  fast-
ing, he  delivered  a  sermon  on  "  The  Dominion
of  Providence  over  the  Passions  of  Men,"  which
was  published  and  dedicated  to  John  Hancock,  and
reprinted  in  Glasgow  with  notes  denouncing  the
author  as  a  rebel  and  a  traitor.  The  people  of  New
Jersey  elected  him  to  the  convention  that  framed
the  state  constitution,  and  he  surprised  his  fellow-
members  with  his  knowledge  of  law.  On  22  June,
after  taking  part,  as  a  member  of  the  Provincial
congress,  in  the  overthrow  of  the  authority  of  the
royal  governor,  William  Franklin,  he  was  elected
to  the  Continental  congress.  He  was  impatient  of
delay  in  passing  the  Declaration  of  Independence,
declaring  that  "he  that  will  not  respond  to  its
accents,  and  strain  every  nerve  to  carry  into  effect
its  provisions,  is  unworthy  the  name  of  freeman,"
and  protesting  for  himself  that  "although  these
gray  hairs  must  soon  descend  into  the  sepulchre,  I
would  infinitely  rather  that  they  should  descend
thither  by  the  hand  of  the  public  executioner  than
desert  at  this  crisis  the  sacred  cause  of  my  country."
He  was  a  member  of  the  secret  committee  of  con-
gress whose  labors  were  of  supreme  importance  in
the  prosecution  of  the  war.  In  November,  1776,  he
was  appointed  on  a  committee  with  two  others  to
visit  Gen.  Washington  and  confer  with  him  on  the
military  crisis,  and  in  December,  when  congress
had  been  driven  from  Philadelphia  to  Baltimore,
he  made  one  of  a  committee,  the  other  members
being  Richard  Henry  Lee  and  John  Adams,  which
issued  a  stirring  appeal  to  the  people.  He  was
also  a  member  of  the  board  of  war,  and  in  1778
was  made  a  member  of  the  committee  on  the
finances.  In  the  following  year  he  distinguished
himself  as  a  member  of  the  committee  to  procure
supplies  for  the  famishing  army.  He  also  acted  in
that  year  on  the  committee  to  conduct  negotiations
with  the  people  of  Vermont,  who  were  determined
to  organize  a  new  state  on  the  New  Hampshire
grants.  In  1779  he  resigned  his  seat  in  congress  on


account  of  the  expense  that  was  incident  to  the
place,  and  with  the  desire  to  devote  his  attention
to  a  revival  in  the  college ;  but  he  was  persuaded  to
return  in  1780.  Many  of  the  state  papers  on  the
emission  of  a  paper  currency,  the  mode  of  supply-
ing the  army  by  commission,  and  other  important
subjects  were  from  his  pen,  and  some  of  the  chief
measures  of  congress  were  initiated  by  him.  Re-
tiring from  congress  in  1783,  he  visited  England
with  Joseph  Reed,  intending  to  appeal  to  the  peo-
ple of  Great  Britain  and  the  continent  for  con-
tributions to  the  treasury  of  Princeton  college;
but  he  found  the  British  so  embittered  toward  the
people  of  this  country  that  he  refrained  from  pre-
senting his  object  to  the  public.  He  did  not  re-
sume the  work  of  teaching  after  the  war,  but
occupied  himself  with  the  administrative  affairs
of  the  college  and  with  the  cultivation  of  a  farm
near  Princeton  till  the  close  of  his  life.  For  two
years  before  his  death  he  was  blind.  The  earliest
publication  of  Dr.  Witherspoon  was  his  "  Ecclesi-
astical Characteristics,  or  the  Arcana  of  Church
Policy ;  being  an  Humble  Attempt  to  open  up  the
Mystery  of  Moderation,"  first  issued  without  his
name  (Glasgow,  1753),  but  afterward  avowed  in
"  A  Serious  Apology  for  the  '  Characteristics.' "
His  "  Essay  on  the  Connection  between  the  Doc-
trine of  Justification  by  the  Imputed  Righteous-
ness of  Christ  and  Holiness  of  Life  "  (Edinburgh,
1856)  was  often  republished.  The  publication  by
the  Rev.  John  Home  of  the  tragedy  of  "  Douglas  "
drew  from  him  a  "  Serious  Inquiry  into  the  Na-
ture and  Effects  of  the  Stage"  (Glasgow,  1757).
A  sermon  entitled  "Seasonable  Advice  to  Young
Persons"  (Paisley,  1762),  denouncing  some  young
men  for  mocking  the  sacrament,  subjected  him
to  a  heavy  fine  for  libel.  The  first  collection  of
his  writings,  which  bore  the  title  of  "Essays  on
Important  Subjects,  with  Ecclesiastical  Character-
istics" (3  vols.,  London,  1764),  included  an  "Essay
on  Regeneration,"  which  was  also  published  sepa-
rately. "  Sermons  on  Practical  Subjects  "  (Glasgow,
1768)  and  "  Practical  Discourses  on  Leading  Truths
of  the  Gospel "  (1768)  contained  nine  and  fourteen
homilies,  respectively.  After  coming  to  this  country
he  published  single  sermons ;  lectures  on  philoso-
phy, eloquence,  divinity,  and  education;  an  "  Essay
on  Money,"  "Letters  on  Marriage,"  philological
papers  in  "The  Druid,"  and  political  essays,  one
of  which,  entitled  "  Considerations  on  the  Nature
and  Extent  of  the  Legislative  Authority  of  the
British  Parliament"  (Philadelphia,  1774),  was
attributed  to  Benjamin  Franklin.  After  his  death
appeared  a  volume  containing  "  Sermons  on  Vari-
ous Subjects,"  and  numerous  controversial  tracts,
one  of  which  was  the  "  History  of  a  Corporation  of
Servants,"  satirizing  the  Church  of  England,  which
was  written  before  he  left  Scotland.  A  collected
edition  of  his  "Works,"  with  his  funeral  sermon
by  Rev.  Dr.  John  Rodgers,  and  a  memoir  of  his
life  by  Rev.  Dr.  Samuel  S.  Smith,  was  edited  by
the  Rev.  Dr.  Ashbel  Green  (4  vols.,  New  York,
1800-'l;  9  vols.,  Edinburgh,  1804).  The  "Life"
had  already  appeared  by  itself  (New  York,  1795),
and  was  reprinted  in  an  edition  of  his  "  Select
Works"  (2  vols.,  London,  1804).  Dr.  Green  left  a
memoir  of  Dr.  Witherspoon  which  remains  in
manuscript  in  the  library  of  the  New  Jersey  his-
torical society  at  Newark.  A  colossal  statue  of
Witherspoon  was  unveiled  on  20  Oct.,  1876,  in
Fairmount  park,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

WITHERSPOON,  Thomas  Dwight,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Greensborough,  Hale  co.,  Ala.,  17  Jan.,
1836.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Mis-
sissippi in  1856,  studied  theology,  and  became  pas-


586


WITHINGTON


WOERT


tor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Oxford,  Miss.,
in  1859,  was  a  chaplain  in  the  army  of  the  Confed-
eracy for  the  whole  duration  of  the  civil  war,  then
was  settled  at  Memphis,  Tenn.,  till  1870,  when  he
was  chosen  chaplain  of  the  University  of  Virginia
for  the  usual  period  of  two  years.  After  his  in-
cumbency in  that  post  he  took  charge  of  a  church
at  Petersburg,  Va.,  which  he  left  in  1882  to  be-
come pastor  of  one  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  at  the
same  time  chairman  of  the  evangelistic  agency  of
the  synod.  He  has  been  invited  to  various  pro-
fessorships and  to  the  presidency  of  colleges,  but
would  not  leave  the  pastorate.  The  University  of
Mississippi  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1868,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1884.  Dr.  Witherspoon  is
the  author  of  "  Children  of  the  Covenant '  (Rich-
mond, 1867),  and  "  Letters  on  Romanism  "  (1877).
WITHINGTON,  Leonard,  clergyman,  b.  in
Dorchester  (now  a  part  of  Boston),  Mass.,  9  Aug.,
1789 ;  d.  in  Newbury,  Mass.,  22  April,  1885.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1814,  studied  theology
at  Andover  seminary,  was  ordained  as  a  Congrega-
tional minister  on  31  Oct.,  1816,  and  acted  as  pas-
tor of  the  1st  church  at  Newbury  till  1858,  when
he  retired  from  the  active  duties  of  the  ministry,
though  he  continued  to  be  connected  with  the
church  as  senior  pastor  till  his  death.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Bowdoin in  1850. He

fmblished,  besides  numerous  sermons,  reviews,  and
ectures,  "  The  Puritan,  a  Series  of  Essays,"  under
the  pen-name  of  "  Jonathan  Oldbug  "  (2  vols.,  Bos-
ton, 1836),  afterward  suppressing  the  edition  ;
"  Penitential  Tears,  or  a  Cry  from  the  Dust  by  the
Thirty-One"  (1845),  referring  to  the  protest  of  Bos-
ton school-masters  against  the  abolition  of  corporal
punishment ;  and  "  Solomon's  Song  Translated
and  Explained,"  which  was  the  fruit  of  nearly
twoscore  vears  of  study  (1861).

WITHROW,  William  Henry,  Canadian  au-
thor, b.  in  Toronto,  6  Aug.,  1839.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Toronto  academy,  Victoria  college,  and
Toronto  university,  and  was  graduated  in  1864.
He  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  church
in  1864,  and  was  subsequently  pastor  consecutively
at  Waterford,  Montreal,  Hamilton,  and  Niagara.
In  1874  he  was  elected  editor  of  the  "  Canadian
Methodist  Magazine "  at  Toronto,  which  he  has
since  held,  and  he  is  also  editor  of  the  Sunday-
school  periodicals  of  his  denomination.  He  was
f>rofessor  of  ethics  and  metaphysics  in  Wesleyan
adies'  college  at  Hamilton  in  1873-'4 ;  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  senate  of  Toronto  university  in  1866,
and  of  Wesleyan  theological  college  since  1886;
was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society  of  Canada
in  1884,  and  in  1882  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Victoria  university,  Cobourg.  He  has  trav-
elled extensively,  and  has  been  identified  with  the
cause  of  temperance  in  Canada.  He  has  published
"  The  Catacombs  of  Rome,  and  their  Testimony
relative  to  Primitive  Christianity"  (New  York,
1874) ;  "  School  History  of  Canada"  (Toronto,  1876) ;
"  History  of  Canada  "  (Boston,  1878) ;  "  Worthies
of  Early  Methodism"  (Toronto,  1879);  "Romance
of  Missions"  (1879) ;  "The  King's  Messenger,  or
Lawrence  Temple's  Probation  "  (1879) ;  "  Barbara
Heck"  (1880);  "Great  Preachers,  Ancient  and
Modern  "  (1880) ;  "  Neville  Trueman,  the  Pioneer
Preacher  "  (1880) ;  "  A  Canadian  in  Europe  "  (1881) ;
"Valeria,  the  Martyr  of  the  Catacombs"  (1881);
"Men  Worth  Knowing "  (1883) ;  "Life  in  a  Par-
sonage, or  Lights  and  Shadows  of  Itinerancy"
(1885) ;  and  "  The  Dominion  of  Canada,  Picturesque
and  Descriptive  "  (1888).

WITSEN,  Willem  Jacobus,  Dutch  physician,
b.  in  Oesgeet,  Holland,  in  1739 ;  d.  near  Rotter-


dam in  1808.  He  was  educated  at  the  University
of  Leyden,  and  went  about  1765  to  St.  Eustatius,
W.  I.,  where  he  practised  his  profession  and  formed
a  valuable  library.  After  holding  the  office  of
health  commissioner  of  the  colony,  he  was  trans-
ferred to  Surinam  in  the  same  capacity,  and
checked  there  an  epidemic  of  yellow  fever  in
1779-'80,  and  the  Asiatic  cholera  in  1783.  He
was  maintained  in  his  office  when  the  colony  was
captured  by  the  English  and  retaken  by  the
French,  and  after  the  conclusion  of  peace  he  estab-
lished a  botanical  garden  in  Surinam,  and  made
several  expeditions  into  the  interior  to  collect
medicinal  plants.  In  1797  he  was  appointed  sur-
geon-inspector in  the  home  navy  department,  and
retired  from  active  service  in  1801,  settling  on  an
estate  near  Rotterdam,  where  he  died.  Among
his  works  are  "  Tropiske  Medicinske  Voorden-
boek,  gefolgden  van  een  Verhandling  over  medi-
cinske planten  van  Guiana  "  (Rotterdam,  1799),  and
"  De  plantarum  Guiana?  asconomia"  (1802).

WITTE,  Nicolas  (vit-teh),  Flemish  missionary,
known  also  as  Fray  Juan  de  San  Pablo,  b.  in
Bruges  about  1505;  d.  in  Mexico,  21  Oct.,  1565.
It  is  said  that  he  was  a  relative  of  the  Emperor
Charles  V.,  who  gave  him  a  high  office  at  court,
but  in  1532  he  fled  to  the  convent  of  San  Agustin
and  became  a  monk,  despite  the  emperor's  en-
treaties. As  he  longed  to  labor  in  the  New  World,
and  had  refused  several  bishoprics,  he  obtained
leave  in  1543  to  go  to  New  Spain.  He  learned  the
Indian  dialects  in  Mexico,  took  charge  in  1548  of
the  missions  in  the  northern  provinces,  preaching
in  the  native  languages  with  remarkable  success.
He  was  given  by  the  Indians  the  name  of  "  El
Roco,"  which  means  friend,  or  protector.  Owing
to  his  great  favor  with  the  emperor,  he  abolished
in  his  missions  the  enforced  labor  to  which  the
Indians  had  before  been  subjected,  and,  making
known  at  court  their  true  condition,  succeeded  in
obtaining  several  imperial  decrees,  enacting  im-
provements and  measures  for  their  welfare,  not
only  in  Mexico  but  in  the  whole  of  South  America.
He  was  prior  successively  of  the  convents  of  Chilapa
and  Mexico.  Witte  left  to  the  convent  of  Burgos
a  rich  library  of  books  about  Aztec  and  Toltec
monuments.  Besides  manuscripts  that  are  pre-
served in  the  archives  of  Simancas,  and  several
letters  published  in  the  recent  Spanish  state  publi-
cation "  Cartas  de  Indias,"  he  wrote  "  Ensayo  sobre
la  lengua  Mexicana  "  (Seville,  1561).

WOEDTKE,  Frederick  William  (vet-keh),
Baron  de,  soldier,  b.  in  Prussia,  about  1740;  d.
near  Lake  George,  N.  Y.,  31  July,  1776.  He  was
for  many  years  an  officer  in  the  army  of  Frederick
the  Great,  attaining  the  rank  of  major.  Coming
to  Philadelphia  with  letters  of  recommendation
from  friends  of  America  in  Paris,  he  was  appointed
a  brigadier-general  on  16  March,  1776,  and  ordered
to  join  the  Northern  army.  He  took  part,  about
three  weeks  before  his  death,  in  a  council  of  war
at  Crown  Point,  which  decided,  against  the  advice
of  Col.  John  Stark  and  others,  to  evacuate  that
post  and  fall  back  on  Mount  Independence.

WOERT,  or  WERT,  Jan  Jacobus  Sebald,
Dutch  navigator,  b.  about  1550 ;  d.  in  Holland
about  1612.  He  was  in  the  service  of  the  East
Indian  company,  when  he  sailed  as  rear-admiral
of  the  fleet  of  Jacobus  Mahn,  which  was  sent  to
explore  the  Strait  of  Magellan,  and  left  Texel  in
June,  1598.  The  admiral  having  died  at  sea  in
September  fpllowing,  Simon  Van  Cordes  succeeded
in  command,  and  Woert  became  vice-admiral.  Af-
ter visiting  Buenos  Ayres  and  making  soundings
along  the  coast  of  Patagonia,  they  anchored  in


WOLCOTT


WOLCOTT


587


April,  1599,  at  the  Pinguin  islands,  and  a  few  weeks
later  discovered  Nassau  island,  where  the  admiral
established  his  headquarters,  while  Woert  made
journeys  into  the  interior  and  had  friendly  inter-
course with  the  natives.  They  entered  the  South
sea  on  10  Sept.,  and  the  next  day  Woert's  ship
was  carried  by  a  storm  back  into  the  straits.  Un-
able to  unite  the  fleet,  he  returned  to  Nassau  isl-
and, whence  he  led  surveying  expeditions  along
the  strait,  prepared  a  valuable  chart,  and  dis-
covered the  Sebald  islands  on  28  Feb.,  1600.  He
reached  Amsterdam  in  the  following  June,  and
in  1604  commanded  a  new  expedition  to  the  Strait
of  Magellan.  Some  authors  assert  that  he  died
during  the  journey,  but  others  contend  that  he
sailed  to  the  south  till  he  encountered  ice-fields.
The  clerk  of  the  expedition  wrote  a  narrative
of  Woert's  discovery,  which  was  translated  into
French  as  "  Relation  de  l'expedition  des  amiraux
Jacques  Mahn,  Simon  de  Cordes  et  Jean  Sebald
Woert,  faite  au  detroit  de  Magellan "  (Leyden,
1603).  There  is  a  Latin  version  by  Jan  Laet,
which  is  included  in  his  "Novus  orbis,  seu  de-
scriptionis  occidentalis  "  (Leyden,  1633).

WOLCOTT,  Roger,  colonial  governor,  b.  in
Windsor,  Conn.,  4  Jan.,  1679 ;  d.  in  East  Windsor
(then  a  part  of  Windsor),  Conn.,  17  May,  1767.
The  frontier  settlement  in  which  he  grew  up  af-
forded him  no  opportunities  of  early  education.  At
the  age  of  twelve  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  weaver,
and  on  reaching  his  majority  he  established  him-
self in  business,  and  acquired  a  competence.  He
was  a  representative  in  1709,  became  a  justice  of
the  peace  in  the  following  year,  and  in  1711  acted
as  commissary  of  the  Connecticut  forces  in  the  ex-
pedition against  Canada.  He  became  a  member  of
the  council  in  1714,  judge  of  the  county  court  in
1721,  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  in  1732,  and
deputy  governor  and  chief  judge  of  the  supreme
court  in  1741.  In  1745  he  commanded  the  Con-
necticut contingent  of  the  forces  that  were  sent  by
the  colonies  against  Louisburg,  with  the  rank  of
major-general,  and  in  the  siege  of  that  place  was
second  in  command  under  Sir  William  Pepperell.
He  was  elected  governor  in  1750,  and  held  the
office  till  1754,  when  he  retired  from  public  life,
and  devoted  his  after-years  to  literary  pursuits  and
religious  meditation.  He  published  "  Poetical  Med-
itations," a  small  volume  of  verse  (New  London,
1725),  containing,  with  six  shorter  pieces,  a  narra-
tive poem  called  "  A  Brief  Account  of  the  Agency
of  the  Hon.  John  Winthrop  in  the  Court  of  King
Charles  the  Second,"  which  has  been  reprinted  in
the  "  Collections  "  of  the  Massachusetts  historical
society.  Some  of  the  other  poems  are  given  in
Charles  W.  Everest's  "  Poets  of  Connecticut  "
(New  York,  1843) ;  and  a  letter  to  the  Rev.  Peter
Hobart  entitled  "The  New  England  Congrega-
tional Churches  are  and  always  have  been  Conso-
ciated  Churches  "  (1761). — His  son,  Erastus,  sol-
dier, b.  in  East  Windsor,  Conn.,  21  Sept.,  1722  ;  d.
there,  14  Sept..  1793.  was  repeatedly  elected  to  the
general  assembly,  and  was  chosen  speaker  of  the  low-
er house,  was  a  justice  of  the  peace  and  a  judge  of
probate,  and  became  chief  judge  of  the  county  court.
He  was  sent  to  Boston  in  1775  to  observe  the
movements  of  the  British  troops.  Early  in  1776  he
joined  Gen.  Washington's  army  before  Boston  with
a  regiment  of  Connecticut  militia,  and  in  the  sum-
mer of  that  year  he  garrisoned  the  forts  at  New
London  with  his  men.  He  was  appointed  a  briga-
dier-general of  militia  in  1777,  and  led  the  1st
brigade  of  Connecticut  troops  on  the  expedition  to
Peekskill,  N.  Y.,  and  then  to  Danbury,  Conn.  He
was  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress,


but  did  not  serve.  After  the  Revolution  he  was  a
judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Connecticut. —
— Another  son,  Oliver,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  b.  in  Windsor,  Conn.,  26  Nov.,
1726;  d.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  1  Dec,  1797,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1747,  and  in  the  same  year
was  commissioned  as  captain  by  the  governor  of
New  York,  and,  rais-
ing a  company  of  vol-
unteers, served  on  the
northern  frontier  till
his  regiment  was  dis-
banded after  the  sig-
nature of  the  treaty
of  Aix-la- Chapelle.
He  then  studied  med-
icine with  his  brother,
Dr.  Alexander  Wol-
cott,  but  in  1751,  be-
fore he  entered  into
practice,  he  was  cho-
sen sheriff  of  the  new-
ly organized  county
of  Litchfield.  He
was  a  member  of  the
council  continuously
from  1774  till  1786,
and  at  the  same  time
judge  of  the  county

court  of  common  pleas,  and  also  judge  of  probate
for  the  Litchfield  district  many  years.  He  was  ac-
tive in  the  militia  organization,  and  rose  through
all  the  grades  from  a  captaincy  to  the  rank  of
major-general.  Adhering  to  the  American  cause
from  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  troubles,
he  was  appointed  by  the  Continental  congress  in
July,  1775,  one  of  the  commissioners  of  Indian
affairs  for  the  northern  department,  who  were  in-
trusted with  the  task  of  inducing  the  Iroquois
Indians  to  remain  neutral.  The  Wyoming  con-
troversy between  Connecticut  and  Pennsylvania,
and,  still  more,  the  dispute  between  the  settlers
of  Vermont  and  the  authorities  of  the  state  of
New  York,  which  endangered  the  harmonious
action  of  the  colonies,  were  compromised  largely
through  his  exertions.  A  gilded  leaden  statue  of
George  III.,  that  had  been  erected  on  Bowling
Green  in  New  York  city  in  1770,  was  thrown  down
by  the  citizens  in  1776,  and  was  taken  to  Gen.
Wolcott's  place  in  Litchfield,  where  his  daughters
and  their  friends  converted  the  material  into  cart-
ridges for  the  militia.  He  was  elected  to  the  sec-
ond Continental  congress,  and  took  his  seat  in
January,  1776,  remaining  during  the  debates  on
the  Declaration  of  Independence  and  until  after  it
was  adopted.  He  then  returned  to  Connecticut,
and  was  appointed  by  the  governor  and  council  of
safety  to  the  command  of  the  fourteen  regiments
of  Connecticut  militia  that  were  sent  for  the  de-
fence of  New  York.  He  organized  this  force,  and
when  it  was  divided  into  brigades  returned  to  his
home,  and  in  November  resumed  his  seat  in  con-
gress, which,  a  month  later,  was  driven  from
Philadelphia,  and  continued  its  sessions  in  Balti-
more. During  the  summer  of  1777  he  was  em-
ployed in  organizing  bodies  of  militia,  in  active
operations,  and  in  corresponding  with  other  patri-
ots on  military  matters.  He  brought  re-enforce-
ments of  several  thousand  men  to  the  assistance
of  Gen.  Israel  Putnam  on  Hudson  river,  and  then
joined  the  northern  army  under  Gen.  Horatio
Gates  with  three  or  four  hundred  volunteers,  and
was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a  brigade  of
militia  which  took  part  in  the  defeat  of  Gen.  John
Burgoyne. In February, 1778, he  resumed his


588


WOLCOTT


WOLFE


?lace  in  congress,  which  was  then  sitting  at  York,
'a.  He  was  not  elected  to  the  next  congress.  In
the  summer  of  1779,  when  the  British  ravaged  the
coast  of  Connecticut,  he  took  the  field  at  the  head
of  a  division  of  militia.  In  1780  he  was  again
elected  a  representative  in  congress,  and  continued
a  member  till  1784,  although  he  did  not  regularly
attend  the  sessions.  In  1785  he  was  appointed  one
of  the  commissioners  of  Indian  affairs  for  the
northern  department  who  negotiated  a  treaty  of
peace  with  the  Six  Nations.  He  was  elected  lieu-
tenant-governor of  Connecticut  in  1786,  and  re-
elected till  1796,  when  he  was  chosen  governor,
which  office  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.
— Oliver's  son,  Oliver,  secretary  of  the  treasury,
b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  11  Jan.,  1760;  d.  in  New
York  city,  1  June,  1833,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1778,  having  in  the  previous  year  taken  part  as  a
militiaman  in  encounters  with  the  British  who  at-
tempted to  capture  the  Continental  stores  at  Dan-
bury.  He  studied  law  at  Litchfield,  at  the  same
time  accompanying  his  father  to  the  coast  in  1779
as  a  volunteer  aid,  and  discharging  later  the  duties
of  quartermaster  at  Litchfield.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  January,  1781,  removed  to  Hartford,
became  a  clerk  in  the  financial  department  of  the
state  government,  and  in  1782  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  committee  of  the  pay-table.  In
May,  1784,  he  was  commissioned,  with  Oliver  Ells-
worth, to  adjust  the  claims  of  Connecticut  against
the  U.  S.  government.  He  was  appointed  comp-
troller of  public  accounts  when  that  office  was  cre-
ated in  1788.  When
the  National  gov-
ernment was  or-
ganized under  the
new  constitution,
in  September,!  789,
he  received  the  ap-
pointment of  au-
ditor of  the  treas-
ury. He  became
comptroller  of  the
treasury  in  the
spring  of  1791,  re-
taining that  office
in  preference  to
the  presidency  of
the  United  States
bank,  which  he  was
s>s)  *  offered  on  its  or-

#w^^^-  f™rinthe


on  in
summer of that
year. On  2  Feb.,


1795,  he  succeeded  Alexander  Hamilton  as  secre
tary  of  the  treasury.  He  offered  his  resignation  on
the  accession  of  John  Adams  to  the  presidency,  but
was  continued  in  office  till  8  Nov.,  1800,  when  he
peremptorily  resigned.  He  had  been  subjected  to
gross  slanders,  his  political  opponents  accusing  the
Federalist  officials  of  burning  the  treasury  build-
ings in  order  to  conceal  peculations.  He  therefore
called  for  an  investigation,  and  the  hostile  com-
mittee of  the  house  of  representatives  kept  alive
the  malicious  insinuation  by  reporting  that  they
had  obtained  no  evidence  regarding  the  fire  in  the
treasury  department  that  enabled  them  to  form  a
"  conjecture  satisfactory."  President  Adams  forth-
with nominated  Mr.  Wolcott  judge  of  the  U.  S.
circuit  court  for  the  2d  district,  embracing  the
states  of  Connecticut,  Vermont,  and  New  York,
and  the  senate  shielded  his  reputation  by  unani-
mously confirming  the  nomination.  In  1802  he
lost  his  judgeship  by  the  repeal  of  the  judiciary
act  under  which  he  had  been  appointed. He  then


engaged  in  mercantile  business  in  New  York  city,
and  in  1803  was  elected  president  of  the  Merchants'
bank,  which,  however,  soon  afterward  was  de-
stroyed by  the  operation  of  the  law  known  as  the
"  restraining  act."  When  the  charter  of  the  first
United  States  bank  expired,  Wolcott  employed  his
capital  in  founding  the  Bank  of  North  America,
and  was  chosen  its  first  president,  holding  the
office  from  1812  till  1814,  when  he  retired,  in  con-
sequence of  political  differences  between  himself
and  the  directors.  He  was  the  Democratic  candi-
date for  governor  of  Connecticut  in  1815,  and  was
defeated,  but  in  1817  he  was  elected,  and  in  the
same  year  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that
framed  the  new  state  constitution,  and  was  chosen
to  preside  over  that  body.  He  was  annually  re-
elected to  the  governorship  for  ten  years.  Subse-
quently he  resumed  his  residence  in  New  York  city.

WOLF,  George,  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  b.
in  Allen  township,  Northampton  co.,  Pa.,  12  Aug.,
1777;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  March,  1840.  He
was  the  son  of  a  German  emigrant,  was  educated
at  a  classical  School,  taught  for  some  time,  and  then
studied  law.  Attaching  himself  to  the  Republican
party  at  the  beginning  of  the  administration  of
Thomas  Jefferson,  he  was  appointed  postmaster  at
Easton,  and  afterward  clerk  of  the  Northampton
county  orphans'  court,  remaining  in  that  post  till
1809.  In  1814  he  was  elected  to  the  state  house
of  representatives.  He  was  elected  to  congress
without  opposition,  taking  his  seat  on  9  Dec,  1823,
and  was  returned  at  the  two  succeeding  elections,
taking  the  protectionist  side  in  the  debates  on  the
tariff,  and  serving  till  3  March,  1829.  In  that
year  he  was  elected  governor.  After  inducing  the
legislature  to  prosecute  the  construction  of  canals
and  impose  new  taxes  for  the  liquidation  of  debts
that  had  already  been  incurred  on  account  of  in-
ternal improvements,  he  urged  the  establishment
of  a  general  system  of  common  schools,  and  by
strenuous  efforts  accomplished  this  reform  where
former  governors  had  failed.  He  was  once  re-
elected, serving  six  years  as  governor,  and  was
then  defeated  as  a  candidate  for  a  third  term,
owing  to  the  defection  of  a  part  of  the  Democrats
who  voted  for  Henry  A.  Muhlenberg.  In  the
following  year  President  Jackson  appointed  him
first  comptroller  of  the  treasury.  He  entered  on
the  functions  of  this  office  on  18  June,  1836.  Re-
tiring on  23  Feb.,  1838,  he  was  in  the  same  year
appointed  collector  of  the  port  of  Philadelphia,
and-  held  that  office  till  he  died.  He  was  recog-
nized as  the  "  father  of  the  public-school  system
by  the  erection  of  a  memorial  gateway  at  Easton,
which  was  unveiled  on  29  June,  1888.

WOLF,  Simon,  lawyer,  b.  in  Hinzweiler,  Ba-
varia, 28  Oct.,  1836.  He  emigrated  to  the  United
States  at  an  early  age,  and  for  several  years  fol-
lowed business  pursuits,  but  began  to  read  law,  and
was  graduated  at  the  Cleveland  law-school  in  1861.
In  1862  he  went  to  Washington,  and  in  1869  he
was  appointed  recorder  of  deeds  for  the  District  of
Columbia,  holding  that  office  until  May,  1878.  In
July,  1881,  he  received  the  post  of  consul-general
in  Egypt,  which  he  resigned  in  May,  1882.  He  has
been  active  in  Jewish  charitable  and  educational
movements,  and  is  a  frequent  lecturer  on  social,
literary,  and  political  topics.

WOLFE,  James,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Wester-
ham,  Kent,  England,  2  Jan.,  1727 ;  d.  near  Que-
bec, Canada,  13  Sept.,  1759.  He  was  a  son  of
Lieut.-Col.  Edward  Wolfe,  an  officer  distinguished
for  skill  and  bravery  in  Marlborough's  campaigns.
James  was  educated  at  Greenwich.  His  military
life  began  early,  and  with  such  unmistakable  evi-


WOLFE


WOLFE


589


dences  of  great  ability  that  at  the  age  of  sixteen  he
served  as  adjutant  of  his  regiment  in  the  campaign

of  Dettingen.  In
the  suppression  of
the  Scottish  re-
bellion of  1745  he
served  as  major
and  deputy  quar-
termaster -  gener-
al, while  his  father
was  a  major-gen-
eral, commanding
a  division.  He
was  engaged  in
the  Netherlands
in  1747-8, on  gar-
rison duty  in  Scot-
land and  Ireland
in  1748-'53,  and
in  England  in
1753-'7.  In  1758
^2  he had reached

z'  ^  ^^^/Px? the  grade  of  briga-

ya^^c^/ U^T/je^ dier-general, and
r  commanded one

of  Gen.  Jeffrey  Amherst's  divisions  at  the  siege  of
Louisburg,  where  he  was  distinguished  for  his  gal-
lantry. The  next  year  he  was  promoted  major-
general,  and  placed  by  William  Pitt  in  command
of  the  expedition  against  Quebec.  In  the  latter
part  of  June,  1759,  he  arrived  before  that  city  with
a  force  of  8,000  men,  supported  by  a  powerful
fleet,  and,  after  erecting  batteries  at  Point  Levi  and
the  isle  of  Orleans,  he  opened  fire  on  the  enemy's
defences,  which  had  been  greatly  strengthened  by
the  French  commander-in-chief.  (See  Montcalm.)
The  large  ships  of  war  being  unable  to  co-operate
by  reason  of  their  draught,  he  next  took  position
near  the  mouth  of  Montmorency  river  and  made  a
bold  attack  on  the  French  works,  which  was  re-
pelled with  loss.  Various  other  plans  were  now  pro-
posed by  Wolfe,  but  rejected  by  his  officers.  Sir
•Jeffrey  Amherst  failed  to  co-operate  as  had  been
promised,  and  the  approach  of  winter  necessitated
the  speedy  departure  of  the  fleet.  Wolfe  sent
many  desponding  messages  to  Pitt,  and  the  ap-
pointment of  the  young  general  to  the  command
was  severely  criticised  in  England.  As  a  final  plan,
Wolfe  transferred  his  troops  to  a  point  several
miles  above  the  city.  While  reconnoitring  the
precipitous  bluffs  called  the  Heights  of  Abraham,
on  the  north  shore  of  the  river,  he  detected  the
oove  that  is  now  called  by  his  name,  about  two
miles  from  Quebec,  whence  a  narrow  path  wound
up  the  cliff.  Determining  to  surprise  the  French
by  this  difficult  route,  he  spent  a  day  and  a  night  in
preparation,  and  at  one  o'clock  on  the  morning  of
13  Sept.  embarked  about  5,000  men  in  boats,
which  dropped  noiselessly  down  the  river  to  the
landing-place.  By  sunrise  the  entire  force  had
completed  the  ascent,  and  soon  after  ten  o'clock
they  confronted  the  French  force,  which  was  su-
perior in  numbers  but  composed  chiefly  of  undis-
ciplined provincials.  After  an  hour's  cannonade
Montcalm  attacked  impetuously,  but  his  men  were
driven  back  in  confusion,  and  Wolfe,  pressing  to
the  front,  ordered  the  Louisburg  grenadiers  to
charge  the  enemy.  While  cheering  on  his  men,
he  received  two  wounds,  the  second  of  which
ended  his  life,  but  not  until  he  was  assured  of  the
defeat  of  the  French.  Five  days  later  Quebec  sur-
rendered, and  the  English  became  masters  of  Can-
ada. Wolfe's  remains  were  carried  to  England,
where  a  monument  was  erected  to  him  in  West-
■minster  Abbey. The  Massachusetts  assembly  also


voted  a  marble  statue  of  him.  A  small  column
marks  the  spot  where  he  fell,  and  an  obelisk  sixty
feet  in  height  has  been  placed  in  the  government
gardens  at  Quebec  in  his  honor  and  that  of  his
enemy  Montcalm,  who  fell  in  the  same  battle.
See  Robert  Wright's  "  Life  of  James  Wolfe  "  (Lon-
don, 1864),  and  Francis  Parkman's  "  Montcalm
and  Wolfe  "  (Boston,  1885).

WOLFE,  John  David,  merchant,  b.  in  New
York  city,  24  July,  1792;  d.  there,  17  May,  1872.
He  was  the  son  of  David  Wolfe  (1758-1836),  who
served  during  the  Revolutionary  war  as  captain  in
a  militia  company  and  later  as  assistant  quarter-
master under  Col.  Timothy  Pickering  with  the
army  under  Gen.  Washington.  The  boy  was  edu-
cated for  a  commercial  life,  and  became  a  success-
ful hardware-merchant  and  the  head  of  the  firm  of
Wolfe  and  Bishop.  He  gave  largely  to  benevolent
objects,  especially  for  the  relief  of  orphans,  aged
persons,  and  prisoners,  and  for  the  promotion  of
religion  and  education  under  the  auspices  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church.  For  some  time  he
was  a  vestryman  of  Trinity,  and  at  the  time  of
his  death  was  senior  warden  of  Grace  church.  He
founded  a  high-school  for  girls,  known  as  "  Wolfe
hall,"  at  Denver,  Col.,  and  a  diocesan  school  for
girls  at  Topeka,  Kan.,  gave  the  building  for  the
theological  seminary  connected  with  Kenyon  col-
lege, and  a  fund  for  the  College  of  the  Sisters  of
Bethany,  at  Topeka,  Kan.,  built  homes  for  crippled
and  destitute  children  and  for  impoverished  Chris-
tian men,  in  Suffolk  county,  N.  Y.,  and,  with  Mrs.
Peter  Cooper,  established  the  Sheltering  Arms
charity  in  New  York  city.  Mr.  Wolfe  was  asso-
ciated in  the  organization  of  St.  Johnland,  was  its
first  president,  and  a  liberal  contributor  to  its
support.  He  was  also  president  of  the  Working-
womens'  protective  union,  vice-president  of  the  so-
ciety of  the  New  York  hospital,  also  an  active
officer  in  other  charitable  organizations,  and  presi-
dent of  the  American  museum  of  natural  history.
Mr.  Wolfe  prepared  a  "  Mission  Service,"  consist-
ing of  suitable  portions  of  the  "  Book  of  Common
Prayer,"  which  he  had  translated  into  German,
Spanish,  and  French,  and  in  all  circulated  more
than  130,000  copies.  See  "A  Memorial  of  John
David  Wolfe,"  by  Evert  A.  Duyckinck  (New  York,
1872).  His  wife  was  Dorothea  Ann,  a  daughter
of  Peter  Lorillard. — Their  daughter,  Catharine
Lorillard,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New  York  citv,
28  March,  1828;  d.  there,  4  April,  1887,  inherited
from  her  father's
and  grandfather's
estates  a  well-in-
vested fortune  of
about  $10,000,000,
and  expended  at
first  $100,000,  and,
as  her  income  in-
creased, as  much  as
$250,000,  each  year
for  benevolent  pur-
poses. She  aided
the  charities  that
her  father  estab-
lished, carried  out
his  design  in  giv-
ing a  site  for  the  *  .  *.
Home  for  incura-  ^O^^u^e  dz"/xn%Z-
bles  at  Ford  ham,  '
N.  Y.,  gave  about  $100,000  to  Union  college,  $30,-
000  to  St.  Luke's  hospital,  New  York  city,  and
$65,000  to  St.  Johnland  on  Long  Island ;  largely
aided  in  building  the  American  chapel  at  Rome,
and  contributed  a  large  sum  to  the  one  in  Paris ;


'ft


fm^"


590


WOLFF


WOLSELEY


established  an  Italian  mission,  costing  $50,000,  and
a  newsboys'  lodging-house,  and  a  diocesan  house
which,  including  its  endowment,  cost  $170,000.
This  was  her  last  act  of  public  charity.  She  also
founded  or  built  schools  and  churches  in  many
places  in  the  west  and  south,  added  to  the  funds
of  Alexandria  seminary,  the  American  school  at
Athens,  Griswold  college,  and  distributed  large
amounts  annually  among  the  indigent  clergy  and
the  deserving  poor  through  the  ministers  and
charitable  institutions  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  In  1884  she  sent  an  expedition  to  Asia
Minor  in  charge  of  Dr.  William  H.  Ward,  which
made  important  archaeological  discoveries.  Miss
Wolfe  took  special  interest  in  Grace  church,  of
which  she  was  a  member,  and  during  her  life  gave
to  it  the  chantry,  the  reredos,  a  large  memorial  win-
dow, and  Grace  house,  all  of  which  amounted  to
over  $250,000.  By  her  will  she  left  an  endowment
of  $350,000  to  that  church.  Her  fondness  for  art
was  shown  in  her  residence  at  13  Madison  avenue,
which  was  filled  with  paintings,  many  of  which  she
selected  during  her  visits  abroad,  and  of  these  Lud-
wig  Knaus's  "  Holy  Family "  and  Gabriel  Max's
"  The  Last  Greeting  "  are  the  best  known.  In  ad-
dition to  her  city  house  she  owned  a  villa  at  New-
port, R.  I.,  that  was  elegantly  furnished,  and  other
country  houses.  Miss  Wolfe  left  her  valuable  col-
lection of  modern  paintings  to  the  Metropolitan
museum  of  art,  together  with  $200,000  for  its
preservation  and  enlargement.

WOLFF,  Bernard  Crouse,  clergyman,  b.  in
Martinsburg,  Va.,  11  Dec,  1794;  d.  in  Lancaster,
Pa.,  1  Nov.,  1870.  He  received  a  classical  educa-
tion '  at  the  Chambersburg  high  -  school,  studied
theology  at  the  seminary  cf  the  German  Reformed
church  at  York,  Pa.,  after  having  carried  on  busi-
ness as  a  mechanic  in  Martinsburg  for  thirteen
years,  and  became  the  English  pastor  of  the  church
at  Easton,  Pa.,  in  1833.  In  1845  he  left  that  place
to  become  pastor  of  a  Reformed  church  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  and  in  1854  became  professor  of  didac-
tic and  practical  theology  in  the  seminary  at  Mer-
cersburg.  After  retiring  from  the  chair  in  1864  he
removed  to  Lancaster,  and  was  active  and  success-
ful in  obtaining  contributions  for  Franklin  and
Marshall  college.  Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1843.  He  was  for  several  years  president
of  the  German  Reformed  board  of  foreign  mis-
sions, a  member  of  the  liturgical  committee  from
1849  till  1868,  when  the  liturgy  was  completed,
and  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  church  publica-
tions, having  begun  his  literary  labors  while  a
theological  student  bv  editing  the  "  German  Re-
formed Magazine."  He  translated  for  his  classes
Johann  H.  A.  Ebrard's  "  Christliche  Dogmatik,"
and  was  engaged  in  preparing  the  work  for  publi-
cation when  he  died.

WOLLE,  Peter,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  on  the
island  of  St.  John,  W.  I.,  5  Jan.,  1792;  d.  in  Beth-
lehem, Pa.,  14  Nov.,  1871.  His  father,  a  Moravian
missionary  in  the  West  Indies,  came  to  this  coun-
try in  1800,  and  placed  his  son  in  school  at  Naza-
reth, Pa.  Peter  was  afterward  one  of  the  first
three  graduates  of  the  theological  seminary  of  the
American  Moravian  church,  and  after  his  ordina-
tion had  charge  of  the  churches  at  Lancaster,
Philadelphia,  and  Lititz.  While  laboring  at  Lititz
he  was  consecrated  to  the  episcopacy,  26  Sept.,
1845.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  executive
or  governing  board  of  the  northern  district  of  the
church  for  nearly  twenty  -  five  years,  and  at  his
death  was  senior  bishop  of  the  Moravian  church
in  Europe  and  America.  He  possessed  a  thorough
knowledge  of  music,  and  by  direction  of  the  synod


revised  and  rearranged  the  hymn-tunes  that  are
now  in  use  in  the  Moravian  churches. — His  nephew,
Francis,  botanist,  b.  in  Jacobsburg,  near  Xaz.i-
reth,  Pa.,  17  Dec.,  1817,  was  educated  in  the  Mo-
ravian parochial  school  in  Bethlehem,  and  then
became  a  clerk  in  his  father's  store.  Subse-
quently he  taught,  first  at  Nazareth  hall  and
then  in  the  higher  departments  of  the  Moravian
parochial  school  in  Bethlehem.  He  became  in
1857  vice-principal  of  the  Moravian  seminary  for
young  ladies,  and  in  1861  principal  of  that  insti-
tution, which  place  he  held  until  1881.  He  was
ordained  a  clergyman  in  the  Moravian  church
in  1861,  but  is  now  retired.  In  1852  he  patented
in  the  United  States,  and  later  in  France  and  Eng-
land, a  machine  that  he  devised  for  making  paper
bags.  It  was  the  first  of  its  kind,  and  covers  the
fundamental  principle  of  the  many  similar  ma-
chines that  are  now  used.  From  early  boyhood
he  made  natural  history  a  study,  particularly  en-
tomology, which  later  gave  place  to  botany.  At
first  he  studied  phaenogams,  then  cryptogams,
especially  musci,  hepaticae,  and  finally  the  fresh-
water alga?  of  the  United  States.  He  has  con-
tributed papers  on  his  specialties  to  the  "  Bulletin
of  the  Torrey  Botanical  Club,"  and  similar  pe-
riodicals. His  works,  which  are  recognized  as
authorities  both  in  this  country  and  abroad,  are
"  Desmids  of  the  United  States,  and  List  of  Pedi-
astrums,"  with  1,100  illustrations  bv  the  author
(Bethlehem,  Pa.,  1884),  and  "  The  "Fresh-Water
Algae  of  the  United  States,"  with  2,300  illustra-
tions by  the  author  (2  vols.,  1887).

WOLLENWEBER,  Louis  August,  author,  b.
in  Speyer,  on  the  Rhine,  Germany,  5  Dec,  1807:
d.  in  Reading,  Pa.,  25  July,  1888.  He  was  educated
at  Speyer  for  the  trade  of  a  printer,  was  employed
at  his  vocation  at  Homburg,  and  was  compelled
to  emigrate  to  this  country  in  consequence  of  his
being  one  of  the  agitators  of  the  "  Hambacher
Volksfest."  After  his  arrival  in  Philadelphia  he
was  first  engaged  on  the  "  Schnellpost,"  afterward
founded  a  new  German  paper,  "Der  Freimue-
thige,"  and  subsequently  acquired  possession  of
the  "  Demokrat."  the  chief  German  newspaper  in
Philadelphia.  In  1853  he  sold  the  "Demokrat,"
and  afterward  resided  in  the  Lebanon  valley  and
in  Reading.  He  was  a  frequent  correspondent  of
the  German  newspapers,  and  published  "  Sketches
of  Domestic  Life  in  Pennsylvania,"  a  collection  of
poems  and  sketches  in  the  mixed  German  and
English  of  the  Pennsylvania  Germans  (Philadel-
phia, 1869) ;  "  Treu  bis  in  den  Tod  "  (1875) ;  and
"  Zwei  treue  Kameraden  "  (1878).

WOLLEY,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lincoln,
England,  about  1652 ;  the  date  of  his  death  is  un-
known. He  was  graduated  at  Cambridge  in  1673,
sailed  for  New  York,  27  May,  1678,  in  company
with  Sir  Edmund  Andros,  and  was  chaplain  of
Fort  James  there  from  the  date  of  his  arrival  till
1680,  when  he  returned  to  England.  He  is  said  to
have  been  afterward  settled  at  A]  ford,  Lincoln-
shire. He  published  "  A  Two  Years'  Journal  in
New  York,  and  Part  of  its  Territories  in  America  "
(London,  1701),  of  which  a  new  edition,  with  copi-
ous historical  and  biographical  notes,  was  issued
by  Edmund  B.  O'Callaghan  (New  York,  1860).

"  WOLSELEY,  Garnet  Joseph,  Viscount,  Brit-
ish soldier,  b.  in  Golden  Bridge  house,  near  Dub-
lin, Ireland,  4  June,  1833.  He  is  the  son  of  an
army  officer,  and  is  descended  from  a  Staffordshire
family.  He  was  educated  privately,  entered  the
army  as  ensign  in  March,  1852,  became  a  captain
in  1855,  major  in  1858,  and  colonel  in  June,  1865.
He  served  in  the  Burmese  war  of  1852-*3,  in  the


WOOD


WOOD


591


war  in  the  Crimea,  was  severely  wounded  at  the
siege  of  Sebastopol,  and  received  the  -decoration
of  the  Legion  of  honor  and  the  Turkish  order  of
the  Medjidieh.  During  the  Sepoy  mutiny  in  1857
he  was  at  the  siege  and  capture  of  Lucknow.  and
at  the  defence  of  Alumbugh.  He  was  sent  to
Canada  when  difficulties  arose  with  the  United
States  in  consequence  of  the  affair  of  the  "  Trent,"
November,  1861,  and  afterward  visited  the  Con-
federate camps.  In  1867  he  was  appointed  deputy
quartermaster  -  general  of  Canada,  and  in  1869
commanded  the  expeditionary  force  that  was  sent
to  suppress  the  insurrectionary  government  of
Louis  Kiel  at  Fort  Garry,  and  was  knighted  for
his  services.  He  commanded  the  troops  during
the  Ashantee  war  of  1873-'4,  and  for  his  success
was  promoted  a  major-general,  and  received  the
thanks  of  parliament  and  £25,000.  In  April,  1874,
he  was  appointed  to  command  the  auxiliary  forces,
in  1875  was  sent  to  Natal  as  administrator  of  its
government,  and  in  1876  was  nominated  a  mem-
ber of  the  council  of  India.  In  1878  he  was  sent
to  organize  the  government  of  Cyprus;  in  June,
1879,  he  returned  to  Natal,  and,  as  governor  of
Natal  and  the  Transvaal,  took  charge  of  the  work
of  organizing  a  government  in  Zululand,  and  con-
ducted the  subsequent  campaign  against  Secoeni.
Returning  in  May,  1880,  he  was  appointed  quarter-
master-general, became  adjutant-general  of  the  army
in  April,  1882,  and  the  same  year  was  commander-
in-chief  of  the  force  that  was  sent  to  Egypt.  For
his  services  on  this  occasion  he  was  gazetted  Baron
Wolseley  of  Cairo,  and  of  Wolseley  in  the  county
of  Stafford  on  20  Nov.,  1882,  and  he  was  also  pro-
moted a  general  in  1882.  In  1884-'5  he  was  com-
mander-in-chief in  Egypt,  and  conducted  the  futile
operations  for  the  relief  of  Khartoum,  and  on  his
return  he  was  made  a  viscount.  He  is  now  adju-
tant-general of  the  British  army.  He  has  received
degrees  from  various  colleges,  and  has  published  a
"  Narrative  of  the  War  with  China  in  1860  "  (Lon-
don, 1862) ;  "  The  Soldier's  Pocket-Book  for  Field
Service  "  (1869) ;  "  The  System  of  Field  Manoeuvres
best  adapted  for  enabling  our  Troops  to  meet  a
Continental  Army "  (1872) ;  and  "  France  as  a
Military  Power  in  1870  and  1878  "  (1878).

WOOD,  Alphonso,  botanist,  b.  in  Chesterfield,
N.  H.,  17  Sept.,  1810;  d.  in  West  Farms,  N.  Y.,  4
Jan.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1834,  and  then  studied  for  a  year  in  Andover  theo-
logical seminary.  Subsequently  he  taught  in  Kim-
ball union  academy,  Meriden,  N.  H.,  until  1849,
after  which  he  followed  the  practice  of  civil  engi-
neering for  three  years.  In  1851  he  became  presi-
dent of  the  Ohio  female  seminary,  where  he  re-
mained until  1857  and  then  accepted  a  professor-
ship in  Terre  Haute  female  college.  Ind.  He  was
chosen  principal  of  Clinton  female  seminary  in
Brooklyn,  which  post  he  held  until  1865,  and  then
after  travelling  for  a  year  he  settled  in  1867  in
West  Farms,  N.  Y.  Prof.  Wood  made  a  specialty
of  botany  and  published  "  Class-Book  of  Botany,"
of  which  100,000  copies  have  been  sold  (Boston,
1845) ;  "  First  Lessons  in  Botany  "  (1848) ;  "  Leaves
and  Flowers,  or  Object  Lessons  in  Botany  "  (New
York,  1863) ;  "  The  American  Botanist  and  Flor-
ist "  (1870) ;  and  "  Plant  Record  "  (1877).  He  edit-
ed a  translation  from  the  German  of  "  Poetry  from
the  Vegetable  World  "  (Cincinnati,  1853).

WOOD,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  3  June,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at  Haver-
ford  college,  Pa.,  in  1870,  and  at  the  theological
seminary  at  Princeton  in  1873.  He  was  pastor  of
the  Central  Presbyterian  church,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in
1873-'8,  afterward  passed  a  year  in  study  in  Ger-


many, made  a  tour  around  the  world,  and,  return-
ing to  this  country  in  November,  1881,  became
Sastor  of  the  4th  Presbyterian  church,  Albany,
F.  Y.  In  March,  1886,  he  assumed  charge  of  the
1st  Presbyterian  church  in  Germantown,  the  sub-
urb of  Philadelphia,  Pa.  Mr.  Wood  was  delegate
of  the  Presbyterian  church  of  the  United  States  to
the  general  assembly  of  the  Church  of  Scotland  in
1879.  He  has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  peri-
odical literature,  and  has  published  "  A  Memorial
of  Dr.  John  C.  Lord  "  (Buffalo,  1878)  and  "  Saun-
terings  in  Europe"  (New  York,  1882).

WOOD,  Charlotte  Matilda,  actress,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1836.  She  came  of  an  old  theatrical  family
named  Vining.  She  married  John  Wood,  and  with
her  husband  played  her  first  important  engagement
at  Manchester,  appearing  as  Audrey  to  her  hus-
band's Touchstone.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  John  Wood
came  to  the  United  States  in  1854,  and  Mrs.  Wood
made  her  debut  in  Boston  as  Gertrude  in  "  A  Loan
of  a  Lover."  In  1859  they  visited  California,  where
she  undertook  the  management  of  the  San  Fran-
cisco American  theatre.  There  she  separated  from
her  husband,  who  died  in  Vancouver's  island,  28
May,  1863.  Returning  to  New  York,  Mrs.  Wood
appeared,  in  May,  1860,  at  the  Olympic  theatre,  to
which  she  gave  that  name,  it  having  previously
been  known  as  Laura  Keene's  theatre,  of  which  she
subsequently  became  the  manager,  and  remained
until  1866,  when  she  returned  to  England,  where
she  acted  at  the  Princess  theatre  in  London  un-
der the  management  of  her  cousin,  George  Vin-
ing. Appearing  there  in  "Barnaby  Rudge,"  she
was  not  well  received,  her  audience  mistaking  her
for  an  American,  and  actors  of  that  nationality
being  then  unfavorably  regarded  by  the  English

Eublic.  Since  that  time  Mrs.  Wood  has  played  in
iondon,  where  she  has  also  managed  several  thea-
tres with  success  and  created  many  new  characters.
Among  her  latest  successes  are  the  principal  char-
acters in  "The  Magistrate,"  "  The  School-Mistress,"
and  "Dandy  Dick."  On  24  Sept.,  1888,  she  ap-
peared at  the  new  Court  theatre  with  a  comedy
entitled  "Mamma,"  an  adaptation  of  "Les  sur-
prises de  divorce."  On  the  same  evening  her
daughter,  Florence,  made  a  successful  debut.

WOOD,  De  Volson,  engineer,  b.  in  Smyrna,
N.  Y..  1  June,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  in  1857  with  the
degree  of  C.  E.,  and  at  once  became  assistant  pro-
fessor of  civil  engineering  at  the  University  of
Michigan,  where  he  was  made  full  professor  two
years  later.  In  1872  he  was  chosen  professor  of
mathematics  and  mechanics  in  the  Stevens  insti-
tute of  technology,  Hoboken,  and  in  1885  he  was
transferred  to  the  chair  of  engineering,  which  he
still  retains.  Prof.  Wood  designed  an  ore-dock
at  Marquette,  Mich.,  in  1866,  and  has  invented  a
rock-drill,  a  steam-pump,  and  an  air-compressor.  In
1881  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  board  of  edu-
cation in  Boonton,  N.  J.  The  honorary  degree  of
A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Hamilton  in  1859,
and  that  of  M.  S.  by  the  University  of  Michigan  in
the  same  year.  Prof.  Wood  is  a  member  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers  and  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, and  corresponding  member  of  the  American
society  of  architects.  He  has  contributed  to
mathematical  and  engineering  journals  and  has
published  "  Treatise  on  the  Resistance  of  Materials  "
(New  York,  1871);  "A  Treatise  on  the  Theory  of
the  Construction  of  Bridges  and  Roofs"  (1872);
"  The  Elements  of  Analytical  Mechanics  "  (1876) :
"Principles  of  Elementary  Mechanics"  (1878);
"  The  Elements  of  Co-ordinate  Geometry  "  (1879) ;


592


WOOD


WOOD


"  The  Mechanics  of  Fluids  "  (1884) ;  "  Trigonome-
try, Analytical,  Plane,  and  Spherical "  (1885) ;  and
"  Thermodynamics  "  (1887).

WOOD,  Edmund  Burke,  Canadian  jurist,  b.
near  Fort  Erie,  Ont.,  13  Feb.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Winni-
peg, Manitoba,  7  Oct.-,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at
Oberlin  in  1848,  studied  law,  and  in  1853  was  ad-
mitted to  the  Canadian  bar  as  an  attorney.  In
1854  he  was  called  to  the  bar  of  Ontario,  and  en-
tered into  partnership  with  Peter  Ball  Long.  In
1863  he  was  elected  to  parliament  as  a  supporter  of
the  Macdonald-Dorion  government.  He  sat  in  the
house  until  1867,  when  the  union  of  the  colonies
took  place.  At  the  first  general  election  afterward
he  presented  himself  for  a  seat  in  the  Ontario  house
of  assembly.  In  those  days  dual  representation
was  allowed,  and  he  was  elected  to  a  seat  in  both
the  legislative  assembly  of  Ontario  and  the  house
of  commons  of  Canada.  In  July,  1867,  Mr.  Wood
entered  the  Ontario  coalition  ministry  of  John  Sand-
field  Macdonald  as  provincial  treasurer.  He  be-
came an  expert  financial  minister,  and  his  budget
speeches  rank  among  the  best  that  were  delivered
in  the  Ontario  legislature.  In  December,  1871,  he
resigned  his  office,  but  he  continued  to  sit  in  the  as-
sembly as  a  private  member.  In  1872  he  was  made
a  queen's  counsel,  and  in  the  following  year  was
elected  a  bencher  of  the  Law  society.  In  1873  Mr.
Wood  resigned  his  seat  in  the  Ontario  legislature,
And,  announcing  his  candidature  for  the  house  of
commons,  was  returned  by  acclamation.  He  held
his  seat  until  11  March,  1874,  when  the  Macken-
zie-Dorion  administration  appointed  him  chief  jus-
tice of  Manitoba.  As  a  member  of  the  house  of
commons  he  took  part  in  the  attack  on  Sir  John
A.  Macdonald  and  his  cabinet  in  the  Pacific  scan-
dal question.  While  treasurer  of  Ontario  he  in-
troduced the  scheme  for  the  settlement  of  the
municipal  loan  fund  of  Upper  Canada,  and  brought
to  a  conclusion  the  financial  arbitration  between
•Ontario  and  Quebec  provinces  consequent  on  con-
federation, drafting  the  award  with  his  own  hand.
In  1871  his  popularity  and  political  standing  suf-
fered somewhat  in  consequence  of  the  charge  that
he  had  betrayed  his  leader  during  the  time  that
the  fortunes  of  his  government  were  hanging  in
the  balance.  He  possessed  a  voice  of  singularly
•deep  notes,  and  Thomas  D'Arcy  McGee  gave  him
the  name  of  "  Big  Thunder."  As  chief  justice  he
instituted  many  important  reforms  in  the  legal

Erocedure  of  the  courts  of  Manitoba.  In  the  cele-
rated  case  of  The  Queen  vs.  Ambrose  Lepine  for  the
murder  of  Thomas  Scott  at  Fort  Garry,  during  the
Red  river  rebellion,  Judge  Wood's  decision  was  con-
firmed by  the  law  officers  of  the  crown  in  England.
In  1882  an  attempt  was  made  in  the  house  of  com-
mons at  Ottawa  to  impeach  him  on  the  grounds
•of  "  misconduct,  corruption,  injustice,  conspiracy,
partiality,  and  arbitrariness,"  and  a  petition  was
sent  to  parliament  in  which  these  charges  were
preferred.  The  judge  returned  an  answer  of  128
pages  octavo,  in  which  he  denied  the  accusations,
explained  the  transactions  to  which  the  petitioners
referred,  and  assailed  the  character  of  his  oppo-
nents. Parliament  appointed  a  special  commission
to  deal  with  the  question,  but,  as  the  chief  justice
died  late  in  the  autumn,  the  matter  was  dropped.
WOOD,  Eleazer  Derby,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1783 ;  d.  near  Fort  Erie,  Upper  Cana-
da, 17  Sept.,  1814.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  30  Oct.,  1806.  appointed  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  corps  of  engineers,  and  assisted  in
the  construction  of  Castle  Williams,  Governor's
island,  N.  Y..  and  Fort  Norfolk,  Va.  In  the  war
with  Great  Britain  he  conducted  the  defence  of


Fort  Meigs  during  its  siege,  was  engaged  in  the
sortie  of  5  May,  1813,  and  was  in  command  of  the
artillery  at  the  battle  of  the  Thames,  5  Oct.  fol-
lowing. He  was  appointed  acting  adjutant-gen-
eral to  Gen.  William  Henry  Harrison  in  October,

1813,  was  transferred  to  the  Northern  army  in

1814,  and  engaged  in  all  the  events  of  that  cam-
paign, including  the  capture  of  Fort  Erie  on  3
July  and  the  battles  of  Chippewa  and  Niagara,  and
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  bravery  at  the
last-named  action.  After  the  battle  of  Niagara
the  American  army  fell  back  to  Fort  Erie.  Col.
Wood,  in  command  of  the  21st  infantry,  partici-
pated in  the  repulse  of  the  assault  on  this  fort,  15
Aug.,  1814,  and  was  killed  in  a  sortie  a  few  days
afterward.  Wood  county,  Ohio,  which  contains
the  site  of  Fort  Meigs,  and  Fort  Wood  on  Bedlow's
island,  New  York  harbor,  were  named  in  his  honor.
Gen.  Jacob  Brown  erected  a  handsome  monu-
ment to  his  memory  at  West  Point.

WOOD,  Fernando,  mavor  of  New  York  city,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  June,  1812 ;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  14  Feb.,  1881.  He  was  of  Quaker
descent,  and  went  to  New  York  city  in  1820,  where
he  early  entered  business  and  became  a  shipping-
merchant.  From  the  time  that  he  attained  his
majority  he  was  active  in  public  matters,  and  at-
tracted notice  by  his  writing  and  speaking.  In
1839  he  was  chairman  of  the  chief  young  men's
political  organization  in  New  York  city,  and  a  year
later  he  was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,
serving  from  31  May,  1841,  till  3  March,  1843.  On
the  expiration  of  his  term  he  returned  to  his  busi-
ness, which  occupied  his  attention  until  his  retire-
ment in  1850.  He  was  then  nominated  by  the
Democratic  party  for  the  mayoralty  of  New  York
city,  but  was  defeated  by  a  combination  of  the
Whig  and  Know-Nothing  parties.  He  was  a  suc-
cessful candidate  in  1854,  at  a  time  when  the  city
government  was  in  a  state  of  demoralization,  and
he  at  once  devised  a  municipal  system  to  secure
good  government.  Various  reforms  were  intro-
duced and  were  received  with  such  satisfaction
that  he  was  re-elected  by  the  better  element  of
both  parties  in  1856.  During  the  winter  of  1856-'7
a  bill  was  passed  by  the  state  legislature  depriving
the  mayor  of  all  control  of  the  police,  and  abol-
ishing the  municipal  force.  Acting  by  advice  of
the  counsel  of  the  corporation  and  of  Charles
O'Conor,  he  refused  to  recognize  the  change,  and
endeavored  to  maintain  the  municipal  police,  for
which  the  authority  had  been  in  existence  for  200
years.  The  metropolitan  police  was  organized,
and  a  collision  between  the  two  forces  occurred,
resulting  in  a  serious  riot.  (See  Matsell,  George.)
Ultimately  the  municipal  police  went  out  of  exist-
ence, and  at  the  ensuing  election  Mr.  Wood  was
defeated.  He  was  again  elected  in  1859,  and  in
January,  1861,  when  the  question  of  secession  was
foremost,  recommended  that  New  York  secede  and
become  a  free  city.  Mr.  Wood  then  returned  to
congress  and  served  from  7  Dec,  1863,  till  3  March,
1865.  After  a  year  in  Europe  he  was  re-elected
to  congress  and  served  from  4  March,  1867,  till
3  March,  1877. — His  brother,  Benjamin,  journal-
ist, b.  in  Shelbyville,  Ky.,  13  Oct.,  1820,  received  a
common-school  education,  and  early  became  self-
supporting.  In  the  capacity  of  a  supercargo,  he
went  to  the  West  Indies  and  Central  America.
Subsequently  he  engaged  in  business  in  New  York
city,  and  in  1860  he  purchased  the  "  Daily  News "
and  became  its  editor.  He  supported  Stephen  A.
Douglas  in  his  canvass  for  the  presidency  in  1860,
becoming  chairman  of  the  committee  of  editors
that  met  in  the  Astor  house. Mr.  Wood  was  elect-


WOOD


WOOD


593


ed  to  congress  in  the  same  year  and  served,  with
re-election,  from  4  July,  1861,  till  3  March,  1865.
Throughout  his  career  in  Washington  he  persist-
ently opposed  the  continuation  of  the  civil  war,
and  his  conduct  in  that  respect  led  to  the  prefer-
ring of  charges  against  him  in  the  house,  with  the
result  that  the  matter  was  referred  to  a  committee
for  consideration ;  but  no  action  was  taken  in  the
matter.  His  paper  was  suppressed  for  eighteen
months  during  the  first  years  of  th«  war.  On  29
April,  1867,  he  began  its  publication  as  an  evening
journal,  at  the  price  of  one  cent  a  copy.  It  was
the  first  daily  to  be  issued  at  that  price  after  the
war,  and  it  attained  the  largest  circulation  of  any
journal  in  the  United  States,  and  the  third  largest
of  any  daily  paper  in  the  world.  In  March.  1876.
he  founded  the  "  New  Yorker  Tages-Nachrichten,"
a  German  evening  paper,  which  is  still  continued,
and  previously  he  established  the  "  New  York  Sun-
day News."  Mr.  Wood  is  the  author  of  "  Fort  La-
fayette, or  Love  and  Secession  "  (New  York,  1862).

WOOD,  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Chesterfield,  Bur-
lington co.,  N.  J.,  17  Jan.,  1789 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  17  March,  1860.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1808,  and.  after  studying  law  with  Richard
Stockton,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1812.  Set-
tling in  New  Brunswick,  he  soon  rivalled  his  pre-
ceptor, and  he  has  been  referred  to  as  the  ablest
lawyer  that  his  state  ever  produced.  His  power
of  analogical  reasoning  was  very  striking,  and  he
had  the  faculty  of  so  stating  a  question  as  to  make
the  mere  statement  an  argument  in  itself.  The
law  of  this  country  on  charitable  devises  was  in  a
great  degree  unsettled  in  his  time,  but  Mr.  Wood
was  able  to  elucidate  that  subject  in  such  a  manner
as  to  form  a  guide  for  the  decisions  and  learning
of  this  country.  In  1831  he  went  to  New  York
city,  where  he  took  a  high  rank  among  lawyers,
and  he  was  engaged  in  chief  cases  not  only  there
but  throughout  the  United  States.  In  his  later
years  his  efforts  were  much  directed  toward  the
maintenance  of  sound  government  principles,  and
to  the  preservation  of  the  constitution  in  its  integ-
rity. On  one  occasion,  when  William  C.  Preston,
of  South  Carolina,  was  about  to  argue  an  important
case  in  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  Daniel  Webster
asked  him  who  was  on  the  other  side.  Preston
replied  that  it  was  a  man  from  New  York,  whose
name  he  could  not  recall,  and  said,  "  a  sleepy-look-
ing fellow  named  Wood,  I  think."  "  If  it  is  George
Wood,"  said  Webster,  "  I  advise  you  to  look  out
how  you  wake  him  up."  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was
conferred  upon  him  by  Hamilton  college  in  1842
and  by  Union  in  1845.

WOOD,  George,  author,  b.  in  Newburvport,
Mass.,  in  1799 ;  d.  in  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,  24
Aug.,  1870.  He  studied  under  Samuel  L.  Knapp,
and  removed  with  his  mother  and  family  to  Alex-
andria, Va.,  in  1816.  He  was  a  clerk  in  the  war
department  in  1819-'22,  and  in  the  treasury  in
1822-'45,  after  which  he  removed  to  New  York,
but  returned  to  Washington,  resumed  his  clerical
labors  in  the  treasury  department,  and  became
chief  of  the  navigation  division.  Mr.  Wood  con-
tributed to  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine "  in
1846-7,  and  to  the  "  National  Era,"  of  Washington,
and  other  periodicals.  He  published  "Peter
Schlemihl  in  America"  (Philadelphia,  1848) ;  "The
Modern  Pilgrim:  showing  the  Improvements  in
Travel,  with  the  Newest  Methods  of  Reaching  the
Celestial  City  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1855) ;  "  Marrying
Too  Late :  a  Tale  "  (New  York,  1856) :  and  "  Future
Life,  or  Scenes  in  Another  World"  (1858).  On
the  publication  of  Elizabeth  Stuart  Phelps's  "  Gates
Ajar,"  Mr.  Wood's  last-named  book  was  reissued  j


with  the  title  "The  Gates  Wide  Open"  (Boston,
1869),  and  four  editions  were  sold  in  one  week.

WOOD,  George  Bacon,  author,  b.  in  Green-
wich, Cumberland  co.,  N.  J„  13  March,  1797 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  30  March,  1879.  His  parents
were  members  of  the  Society  of  Friends.  He  re-
ceived his  early  education  in  the  city  of  New  York,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1815,  and  in  medicine  in  1818,  and  in  1820  de-
livered a  course  of  lectures  on  chemistry  in  Phila-
delphia. He  was  professor  of  chemistry  in  the
Philadelphia  college  of  pharmacy  in  1822-'31,  of
materia  medica  in  1831-'5,  held  the  same  chair  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1835-'50,  and
that  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  that
institution  from  1850  till  1860,  when  he  resigned.
He  was  eminently  successful  as  a  lecturer,  and
while  in  the  chair  of  materia  medica  exhibited  to
the  students  many  specimens  of  rare  living  tropi-
cal and  other  exotics,  which  he  had  secured  at
great  expense,  and  of  which  he  had  occasion  to
treat  in  his  lectures.  In  1865  he  endowed  an
auxiliary  faculty  of  medicine  in  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  composed  of  five  chairs — zoology  and
comparative  anatomy,  botany,  mineralogy  and  ge-
ology, hygiene,  and  medical  jurisprudence  and  toxi-
cology— and  by  will  he  endowed  the  Peter  Hahn
ward  of  the  University  hospital.  He  was  physician
in  the  Pennsylvania  hospital  in  1835-'59,  became
president  of  the  American  philosophical  society  in
1859,  and  was  for  many  years  president  of  the  Col-
lege of  phvsicians  of  Philadelphia.  With  Franklin
Bache,  M.  D.,  he  published  "  The  Dispensatory  of  the
United  States  "  (Philadelphia,  1833).  Of  this  work
150,000  copies  were  sold  during  Dr.  Wood's  life-
time, the  royalty  to  the  authors  being  about  $155,-
000.  He  also  published  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Prac-
tice of  Medicine"  (2  vols.,  1847);  "  A  Treatise  on
Therapeutics  and  Pharmacology,  or  Materia  Medi-
ca "  (2  vols.,  1856) ;  "  Introductory  Lectures  and
Addresses  on  Medical  Subjects "  (1859) ;  and,  of
lesser  works,  "  History  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania "  (Philadelphia,  1827) :  "  Memoir  of  Samu-
el G.  Morton  "  (1853) ;  and  "  Memoirs  of  Franklin
Bache"  (1865). — His  nephew,  Horatio  C,  physi-
cian, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13  Jan.,  1841,  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1862,  and  established
himself  in  practice  in  Philadelphia,  making  special-
ties of  therapeutics  and  nervous  diseases.  In  1866
he  was  appointed  professor  of  botany  in  the  aux-
iliary medical  faculty  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania, but  in  1876  he  relinquished  this  depart-
ment to  accept  the  chair  of  therapeutics.  In  1875
he  had  been  made  clinical  professor  of  diseases  of
the  nervous  system.  The  last-mentioned  charges
he  still  retains.  In  1879  he  was  elected  to  the
National  academy  of  sciences.  He  was  visiting
physician  of  the  Philadelphia  hospital  in  1872-87,
and  to  St.  Agnes's  hospital  in  1886,  and  has  held
the  same  relation  to  the  University  hospital  since
1870.  He  has  published  "  Experimental  Researches
in  the  Physiological  Action  of  Nitrite  of  Amy],"
for  which  he  received  the  Warren  prize  from  the
Massachusetts  general  hospital  in  1871 ;  also  me-
moirs on  "The  Myriapoda.  of  North  America"
(1865) ;  "  On  the  Phalangidae  of  North  America  "
(1868) ;  "  The  Fresh-Water  Algse  of  North  America"
(1872) ;  and  "  Fever,  a  Study  in  Morbid  and  Normal
Physiology  "  (1880).  The  two  last-mentioned  were
issued  by  the  Smithsonian  institution.  Dr.  Wood
edited  "  New  Remedies  "  in  1870-3  ;  "  The  Phila-
delphia Medical  Times"  in  1873-'80;  and  since
1884  has  conducted  "  The  Therapeutic  Gazette."
He  was  also  an  editor  of  the  "  U.  S.  Dispensatory  "


594


WOOD


WOOD


(14th  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1883  et  seq.).  He  has  also
published  "  Researches  upon  American  Hemp,"  for
which  a  special  prize  was  awarded  by  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society ;  "  Thermic  Fever,  or  Sun-
stroke "  (Philadelphia,  1872),  for  which  he  received
the  Boylston  prize  from  Harvard  university  in
1872 ;  "  Treatise  on  Materia  Medica  and  Therapeu-
tics" (1875;  7th  ed.,  1888);  "  Brain- Work  and  Over-
Work"  (1879);  and  "Nervous  Diseases  and  their
Diagnosis"  (1886).

WOOD,  Isaac,  physician,  b.  in  Clinton,  Dutchess
co.,  N.  Y„  21  Aug.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Norwalk,  Conn.,
25  March,  1868.  In  1803  his  father  removed  to
New  York  city,  establishing  there  a  book-store  and

Eublishing-house.  Isaac  studied  medicine  with
»r.  Valentine  Seaman,  spent  the  years  1814— '16  in
the  New  York  hospital,  and  in  1816  received  his
diploma  from  the  medical  department  of  Queen's
(now  Rutgers)  college,  N.  J.  He  was  one  of  the
physicians  of  the  New  York  dispensary  till  1825,
and  resident  physician  of  Bellevue  hospital  from
1826  till  1833,  when  he  resigned.  In  1832-'3,  dur-
ing the  prevalence  of  cholera  in  New  York,  he  kept
his  post,  and  was  attacked  by  the  disease,  from
whose  effects  he  did  not  fully  recover  for  five  years.
Dr.  Wood  was  an  active  member  of  the  Society  for
the  reformation  of  juvenile  delinquents,  of  which
his  father  and  elder  brother  were  the  principal
founders.  He  was  for  twenty-five  vears  one  of  the
most  active  managers  of  the  New  York  institution
for  the  blind,  one  of  the  founders  and  subse-
quently president  of  the  Society  for  the  relief  of
the  widows  and  orphans  of  physicians,  and  a
founder  and  twice  president  of  the  New  York
academy  of  medicine.  For  many  years  he  was
president  of  the  Bellevue  hospital  medical  board,
and  he  was  connected  with  other  institutions  and
societies,  including  the  Sanitary  commission  dur-
ing the  civil  war.  He  had  a  high  reputation  as  an
ophthalmic  surgeon.

WOOD,  James,  governor  of  Virginia,  b.  in  1750 ;
d.  at  Olney,  near  Richmond,  Va.,  16  July,  1813.
His  father.  Col.  James  Wood,  was  the  founder  of
Winchester,  Va.,  and  clerk  of  Frederick  county.  In
1774  the  son  was  commissioned  by  Lord  Dunmore
a  captain  of  Virginia  troops,  and.  in  1775  he  was
elected  to  the  house  of  burgesses  from  Frederick
county.  In  July  of  that  vear  he  went  on  a  mis-
sion from  the  state  of  Virginia  to  the  western
Indians,  accompanied  by  a  single  companion,  to
invite  them  to  a  treaty  at  Fort  Pitt.  The  courage
that  he  displayed  on  this  mission  won  the  admira-
tion of  the  savages,  and  he  accomplished  his  ob-
ject. The  house  of  burgesses,  of  which  he  was  a
member  in  1776,  appointed  him  on  12  Nov.,  1776,  a
colonel  in  the  Virginia  line,  commanding  the  8th
regiment.  He  served  with  gallantry  during  the
early  part  of  the  Revolutionary  war.  When  Bur-
goyne  s  captured  army  was  quartered  at  Charlottes-
ville, Va.,  in  1778,  Col.  Wood  was  appointed  to  the
command  of  that  post.  In  1781  he  was  made  super-
intendent of  all  the  prisoners  of  war  in  Virginia,
and  in  1783  the  governor  of  the  state  commis-
sioned him  a  brigadier-general  of  state  troops.  He
was  also  for  several  years  a  member  of  the  Virginia
council,  and  by  seniority  in  that  body  the  lieu-
tenant-governor of  the  state.  In  1789  he  was  one
of  the  presidential  electors  for  Virginia  when  the
vote  of  that  state  was  cast  for  George  Washing-
ton. He  was  elected  governor  of  Virginia,  1  Dec,
1796,  serving  until  1  Dec,  1799,  when  he  was  suc-
ceeded by  James  Monroe.  Wood  county  (now  in
West  Virginia)  was  named  in  honor  of  his  public
services,  which  covered  a  period  of  more  than
twenty-five  years. Gov.  Wood  was  the  vice-presi-


dent in  1797,  and  in  1801  president,  of  the  Socie-
ty for  promoting  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  Vir-
ginia. He  became  a  member  of  the  Virginia  branch
of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati,  9  Oct.,  1784,  was
elected  vice-president  of  the  same,  4  Dec.,1789,  and
became  president,  17  Jan.,  1802,  serving  in  this
office  until  his  death  in  1813. — His  wife,  Jean
Moncure,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1754 ;  d.  in  1823,  mar-
ried Gov.  Wood  in  1775.  She  was  the  daughter  of
the  Rev.  John  Moncure,  a  clergyman  of  the  Church
of  England  in  Virginia,  and  a  native  of  the  parish
of  Kinoff,  Scotland.  She  was  possessed  of  much
poetic  ability,  Christian  zeal,  and  loveliness  of
character.  The  later  years  of  her  life  were  spent
in  deeds  of  Christian  benevolence.  She  was  active
in  organizing  the  Female  humane  association  of
Richmond,  which  was  incorporated  in  1811,  and
was  its  first  president.  Many  examples  of  her  po-
etic talent  occurred  in  the  publications  of  her  day,
and  the  most  elegant  verses  from  her  pen  were
published  in  a  volume  entitled  "  Flowers  and
Weeds  of  the  Old  Dominion  "  (1859).

WOOD,  James,  educator,  b.  in  Greenfield,  Ul-
ster co.,  N.  Y.,  12  July,  1799 ;  d.  in  Hightstown,
Mercer  co.,  N.  J.,  7  April,  1867.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1822,  and  studied  at  Princeton
theological  seminary.  He  preached  at  Wilkesbarre
and  Kingston,  Pa.,  in  1825-'6,  and,  after  being  or-
dained in  the  latter  year,  he  held  the  joint  pastor-
ate of  Amsterdam  and  Veddersburg,  N.  Y.,  from
1826  till  1834.  The  next  five  years  he  served  as
an  agent  of  the  board  of  education  of  the  Presby-
terian church,  and  he  was  professor  in  the  Theo-
logical seminary  of  the  northwest  from  1839  till
1851.  while  that  institution  was  located  at  Hanover
and  New  Albany,  Ind.  The  following  three  years
he  was  again  an  agent  of  the  board  of  education,
and  in  1854-'9  he  was  its  associate  secretary.  In
1859  he  became  president  of  Hanover  college,  Ind.,
and  held  the  office  until  1866,  when  he  resigned  to
become  principal  of  the  Van  Rensselaer  institute
at  Hightstown,  N.  J.,  a  school  for  the  education  of
the  children  of  missionaries.  Dr.  Wood  took  high
rank  among  the  clergymen  of  his  denomination.
His  sound  judgment,  amiable  temper,  extensive
learning,  and  great  energy  made  his  influence
widely  felt.  In  an  able  work,  entitled  "  Old  and
New  Theology"  (1855),  he  gave  the  fullest  ex-
hibition of  the  reasons  that  led  to  the  disruption
of  the  Presbyterian  church,  and  its  division  into
Old  and  New  School,  that  has  ever  been  published.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Marion  col-
lege, Mo.,  in  1841.  In  1864  he  was  moderator  of
the  general  assembly.  He  is  also  the  author  of
"A  Treatise  on  Baptism"  (1850);  "Call  to  the
Sacred  Office"  (Philadelphia,  1857);  "The  Best
Lesson  and  Best  Time  "  ;  "  The  Gospel  Fountain  "
(1859) ;  and  "  Grace  and  Glory  "  (1860).

WOOD,  James  Frederic,  archbishop,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  April,  1813 ;  d.  there,  20  June,
1883.  His  father,  an  Englishman  who  had  settled
in  this  country,  carried  on  the  business  of  an  im-
porter. The  child  was  sent  in  his  eighth  year  to
his  English  relatives  in  Gloucester,  where  for  five
years  he  attended  the  free-school  of  St.  Mary  de
Crypt.  In  his  fifteenth  year  he  left  Philadelphia
for  Cincinnati,  where  he  had  been  appointed  clerk
in  a  branch  of  the  U.  S.  bank,  and  in  1833  he  be-
came teller  in  the  Franklin  bank  of  that  city,  and
in  1836  its  cashier.  He  was  received  into  the
Roman  Catholic  church  in  April,  1836,  by  Arch-
bishop Purcell,  and  a  few  months  later  resigned
his  post  in  the  bank  and  went  to  Rome  to  study
for  the  priesthood.  In  the  College  of  the  prop-
aganda, where  he  remained nearly  seven  years,


WOOD


WOOD


595


f&Uootls


the  authorities  appointed  him  prefect  of  dis-
cipline. After  his  ordination  in  1844  he  returned
to  Cincinnati,  w/here  he  acted  as  assistant  rector
in  the  cathedral  for  ten  years,  arid  in  1854  he  was
appointed  to  the  pastorate  of  St.  Patrick's. In

1857  he  was  con-
secrated bishop  of
Gratianopolis  in
partibus,and  after-
ward he  was  trans-
ferred to  Philadel-
phia, his  native
city,  where  he  was
to  act  as  coadjutor
to  Bishop  Neu-
mann with  the
right  of  succes-
sion. The  Phila-
delphia diocese  at
that  time  had
hastily  undertak-
en more  than  it
seemed  likely  to
be  able  to  accom-
plish, and  financial  difficulties  were  producing
apathy.  Many  institutions  for  religion,  education,
and  benevolence,  a  magnificent  cathedral  among
the  number,  had  been  begun,  but  their  expense,  so
far  cheerfully  borne,  was  beginning  to  be  severely
felt  by  the  Roman  Catholic  population.  As  a  con-
sequence, many  of  the  buildings  had  been  stopped
altogether,  and  the  others  were  advancing  in  a
slow  and  half-hearted  way.  But  from  the  moment
of  Bishop  Wood's  arrival  things  began  to  improve.
Instead  of  waiting  for  the  completion  of  the  cathe-
dral to  form  its  parish,  he  called  a  very  strong  one
into  instant  existence  by  simply  erecting  a  large
but  inexpensive  cathedral  chapel,  thus  securing
immediate  and  permanent  financial  aid,  which  he
then  gradually  augmented  by  general  collections.
Bishop  Neumann  dying  in  I860,'  his  successor  could
devote  himself  with  still  greater  efficiency  to  the
wants  of  the  diocese.  The  cathedral  was  hardly
finished  in  1864  when  the  foundation  was  laid  at
Overbrook  of  the  Seminary  of  St.  Charles,  the  cost
of  which,  $500,000,  was  fully  justified  by  the  de-
mands for  pastors  that  were  made  by  new  churches.
Many  other  institutions — educational,  charitable,
or  religious — were  either  auspiciously  begun  or
brought  to  a  successful  issue  during  his  administra-
tion. He  was  taken  away  from  his  ordinary  duties
three  times  by  orders  to  present  himself  at  Rome —
in  1862  to  assist  at  the  canonization  of  the  Japanese
martyrs,  in  1867  to  celebrate  the  1800th  anniver-
sary of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  and  in  1869  to  take
active  part  at  the  Vatican  council.  In  1871,  the
flourishing  state  of  the  diocese  making  a  division
necessary,  several  episcopal  districts  were  formed,
over  which  he  was  created  archbishop  in  1875.  In
1880  he  assisted  at  the  Baltimore  provincial  coun-
cil, and  in  1882  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary  of
his  elevation  to  the  bishopric  was  celebrated  en-
thusiastically. His  health  was  now  feeble,  yet  he
allowed  himself  little  or  no  relaxation  from  his
numerous  duties.  Among  his  favorite  projects
had  been  that  of  providing  the  cathedral  with  a
grand  altar,  decorating  the  interior  in  befitting
style,  and  then  paying  off  the  debt.  Most  of  this
he  had  successfully  accomplished  when  death  put
a  sudden  end  to  his  labors.  He  was  noted  for  his
knowledge  of  sanitary  laws  as  applicable  to  the  con-
struction of  new  buildings,  and  no  Roman  Catholic
institution  was  erected  without  this  subject  re-
ceiving his  careful  consideration.  He  was  espe-
cially hostile  to  the  introduction  of  political  issues


from  other  countries  into  the  United  States,  and
the  stand  he  took  on  this  question  sometimes  cre-
ated discontent  among  his  flock.

WOOD,  James  Rushmore,  surgeon,  b.  in  Ma-
maroneck.  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Sept.,  1816 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  4  May,  1882.  He  was  the  son
of  a  Quaker  merchant.  After  studying  medicine  in
New  York  city,  and  at  the  Castleton,  Vt.,  medical
college,  he  was  graduated  at  the  latter  institution  in
1834,and  appointed  demonstrator  of  anatomy.  Soon
afterward  he  began  the  practice  of  medicine  in  his
native  city,  and  in  1847  he  became  a  member  of  the
medical  board  of  Bellevue  hospital,  New  York.
At  that  time  this  institution  was  a  receptacle  for
lunatics,  paupers,  criminals,  and  other  victims  of
a  depraved  life.  The  most  rudimentary  hygienic
laws  were  grossly  violated  in  its  management,  and
the  nursing  was  inefficient  and  untrustworthy.
With  the  assistance  of  Morris  Franklin,  president
of  the  board  of  aldermen,  Dr.  Wood  set  about  re-
forming this  state  of  things,  and  labored  so  suc-
cessfully that  he  soon  reduced  the  annual  death-
rate  by  600.  He  also  made  all  the  post-mortem
examinations,  amounting  to  many  hundreds  yearly,
established  Saturday  surgical  clinics,  and  founded
the  Wood  prize  for  the  best  anatomical  dissection.
In  1847  Dr.  Wood  began  to  collect  material,  with
the  intention  of  founding  a  museum,  and  this  col-
lection, together  with  the  accumulated  specimens
of  twenty  years'  practice,  he  presented  in  1856  to
the  commissioners  of  public  charities  and  correc-
tions. This,  with  later  additions,  constitutes  the
"  Wood  museum,"  which  Dr.  Willard  Parker  has
styled  "the  grandest  monument  ever  erected  to
any  surgeon  in  this  country."  In  1857  Dr.  Wood
was  mainly  instrumental  in  procuring  the  passage
by  the  legislature  of  the  dissecting  bill,  which  pro-
vided that  the  bodies  of  all  unclaimed  vagrants
should  be  given  for  dissection  to  the  institutions  in
which  medicine  and  surgery  are  taught.  It  took
four  years  to  secure  the  enactment  of  this  law,  and
so  great  was  the  public  prejudice  against  it  that  it
finally  passed  by  only  one  majority.  In  1861  Dr.
Wood,  in  association  with  many  physicians  and
surgeons  of  the  metropolis,  and  under  the  auspices
of  the  almshouse  commissioners,  founded  Bellevue
hospital  medical  college.  The  same  year  he  was
called  to  occupy  the  chair  of  operative  surgery  and
surgical  pathology  in  that  institution,  which  he
held  until  his  death,  being  made  professor  emeritus
in  1868.  Dr.  Wood  paid  especial  attention  to  the
bones  and  their  growth,  and  succeeded  in  establish-
ing beyond  dispute  the  fact  of  a  second  growth  of
bone  by  separating  the  periosteum  from  the  ne-
crosed bone  and  carefully  enucleating  it.  In  his
anatomical  and  pathological  museum  he  had  on
exhibition  an  entire  jaw  that  he  had  removed  for
phosphor-necrosis,  and  also  a  second  jaw  that  had
attached  itself  to  the  skull  of  a  patient  who  had
been  operated  upon  and  had  subsequently  died  of
another  disease.  In  fact,  he  had  specimens  to  show
the  reproduction  of  almost  every  bone  in  the  human
body.  Among  his  other  successful  operations  were
the  tying  of  both  carotids  in  the  same  patient  for
malignant  disease  of  the  antrum,  placing  the  liga-
ture on  the  subclavian  on  several  occasions,  and
tying  the  external  iliac  artery.  Dr.  Wood  was  also
surgeon  to  St.  Vincent's  hospital  and  to  the  New
York  ophthalmic  dispensary.  He  was  a  member
of  many  medical  and  other  learned  associations,
and  twice  president  of  the  New  York  pathological
society.  Besides  papers  on  "  Strangulated  Hernia  "
(1845),  "Spontaneous  Dislocation  of  the  Head  of
the  Femur  into  the  Ischiatic  Notch"  (1847),  and
«1  essay  on  "  Medical  Education "'  (1848),  he  pub-


596


WOOD


WOOD


lished  "Ligature  of  the  External  Iliac  Artery  fol-
lowed by  Secondary  Haemorrhage  "  and  "  Phosphor-
Necrosis  of  the  Lower  Jaw  "  (1856),  and  "  Early
History  of  Ligation  of  the  Primitive  Carotid."

WOOD,  John,  author,  b.  in  Scotland  about
1775  :  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  in  May,  1822.  He  was
residing  in  Switzerland  in  1798  at  the  time  of  the
French  invasion.  On  returning  home,  he  became
in  the  following  year  master  of  the  Edinburgh
academy  for  the  improvement  of  arts  in  Scotland.
About  1800  he  emigrated  to  the  United  States.  In
1806  he  edited  the  "  Western  World  "  in  Kentucky,
and  in  1817  he  had  charge  of  "  The  Atlantic
World,"  a  paper  published  at  Washington,  D.  C.
He  subsequently  resided  at  Richmond,  VTa.,  where
he  was  employed  in  making  county  maps.  He
published,  besides  other  works,  "  General  View  of
the  History  of  Switzerland"  (Edinburgh,  1799);
"  Letter  to  A.  Addison,  Esq.,  in  Answer  to  his
'  Rise  and  Progress  of  Revolution' "  (Philadelphia,
1801);  '"Pull  Exposition  of  the  Clintonian  Fac-
tion, and  the  Society  of  the  Columbian  Illumi-
nati "  (Newark,  1802) ;  "  History  of  the  Administra-
tion of  John  Adams  "  (New  York,  1802 ;  suppressed
by  Aaron  Burr ;  new  ed.,  with  notes  and  appendix
by  John  Henry  Sherburne,  Philadelphia,  1846) ;
''Narrative  of  the  Suppression,  by  Col.  Burr,  of
the  '  History  of  the  Administration  of  John
Adams,'  with  a  Biography  of  Jefferson  and  Hamil-
ton "  (1802) ;  "  Full  Statement  of  the  Trial  and
Acquittal  of  Aaron  Burr "  (Alexandria,  1807) ;
and  "  New  Theorv  of  the  Diurnal  Rotation  of  the
Earth  "  (Richmond,  1809).  Of  the  "  History  of
the  Administration  of  John  Adams  "  James  Par-
ton,  in  his  "Life  of  Aaron  Burr,"  says:  "Stu-
pidity, Ignorance,  and  Falsehood  combined  their
several  powers  in  the  production  of  this  indigested
mass  of  tedious  lies."  Mr.  Wood's  statements
were  also  traversed  in  "  Antidote  to  John  Wood's
Poison  "  (Philadelphia,  1802).

WOOD,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  Moravia,  Cavuga
co..  N.  Y.,  20  Dec,  1798 ;  d.  in  Quincy,  111.,  4  June,
1880.  He  emigrated  to  Illinois  in  1819,  and  in
1822  built  the  first  cabin  on  the  site  of  the  present
city  of  Quincy,  living  in  it  alone  during  one  win-
ter. In  1825  he  secured  the  laying  .out  of  Adams
county,  of  which  Quincy  is  the  county-seat.  For
the  succeeding  sixty  years  he  was  the  foremost
figure  in  all  matters  relating  to  the  city  that  he
founded  and  made  his  home.  He  served  as  town
trustee  from  1834  till  1840,  was  many  times  alder-
man, and  seven  times  mayor.  In  1850  he  was
eleoted  to  the  state  senate,  where  he  sat  till  1854.
In  1856  he  was  elected  lieutenant-governor,  and  he
succeeded  to  the  governorship  in  1859.  He  had
enlisted  in  the  Black  Hawk  war  in  1832,  and  at
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed
quartermaster-general  of  Illinois.  In  1861  he  was
sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  Peace  conference  at  Wash-
ington, and  in  1864  was  elected  colonel  of  the
137th  Illinois  volunteers.  Gov.  Wood  was  one  of
the  few  men  who,  from  the  outset,  comprehended
the  scope  of  the  coming  struggle.  On  being  ques-
tioned by  Gov.  Richard  J.  Oglesby  as  to  whether
a  call  for  75,000  men  for  three  months'  service
would  be  sufficient,  he  replied :  "  I  know  these
people,  their  attachment  to  slavery,  and  the  deep
feeling  that  actuates  them.  .  .  .  They  will  fight
long  and  desperately.  What  we  want,  and  want
now.  and  must  have,  for  it  will  take  it  all — I  know
it  will— is  500,000  men  and  $500,000,000."  After
taking  the  field,  Col.  Wood  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  a  brigade  at  Memphis,  where  he  was
stationed  at  the  time  of  Gen.  Nathan  B.  Forrest's
raid  on  that  city. As  quartermaster-general  he


made  frequent  visits  to  the  armies  both  in  Virginia
and  in  the  southwest,  giving  personal  atteution  to
the  wants  of  the  various  Illinois  regiments.  He
was  strongly  anti-slavery  in  sentiment,  and  more
than  any  one  man  in  northwestern  Illinois  is  said
to  have  contributed  to  the  casting  of  the  vote  in
that  region  against  the  slave-state  scheme  of  the
convention  of  1824.  His  townsmen  dedicated  a
monument  to  his  memory  on  4  July,  1883.

WOOD,  Joseph,  patriot,  b,  in  Pennsylvania :  d.
in  Sunbury,  Ga..  in  1789.  During  the  early  part
of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  saw  service  with  the
2d  Pennsylvania  regiment  and  rose  to  the  rank  of
colonel.  In  1776  he  was  on  duty  in  Canada.  To-
ward the  close  of  that  year  he  removed  to  Georgia
and  settled  in  St.  John's  parish  (afterward  Liberty
county),  where  he  became  a  planter  and  was  elected
a  member  of  the  council  of  safety.  In  1777-'9  Col.
Wood  represented  Georgia  in  the  Continental  con-
gress, for  which  he  was  placed  on  the  list  of  citi-
zens that  were  disqualified  by  act  of  the  Tory  gen-
eral assembly  of  the  state  on  6  July,  1780,  during
the  British  occupation.  In  this  document  he  is
stigmatized  as  a  "  member  of  the  rebel  congress."
Col.  Wood  was  a  man  of  unblemished  character
and  held  in  high  esteem  by  his  fellow-citizens.

WOOD,  Reuben,  lawyer,  b.  in  Rutland  county,
Vt.,  in  1792 ;  d.  in  Rockport,  Cuvahoga  co..  Ohio,
2  Oct.,  1864.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812  as
captain  of  Vermont  volunteers,  and,  after  studying
law  and  being  admitted  to  the  bar,  began  to  prac-
tise in  Cleveland,  Ohio.  From  1825  till  1828  he
was  a  member  of  the  state  senate.  In  1830  he  was
appointed  president-judge  of  the  3d  district,  and
in  1833  he  became  judge  of  the  state  supreme
court,  which  office  he  held  until  1845.  In  1849  he
was  elected  governor  by  the  Democrats,  and  he
was  re-elected  in  1850,  when  the  new  constitution
went  into  effect.  In  1852  the  Democratic  national
convention  discussed  the  nomination  of  Gov.  Wood
for  the  presidency,  but  finally  united  upon  Frank-
lin Pierce.  In  1853  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul
at  Valparaiso,  and  he  resided  there  eighteen  months,
when  he  resigned  and  retired  from  public  life.

WOOD,  Samuel  Casey,  Canadian  merchant,  b.
in  Bath,  Lennox  co.,  Ont.,  27  Dec,  1830.  His  fa-
ther, Thomas  Smith  Wood,  was  formerly  of  Sara-
toga Springs,  N.  Y.  The  son  was  educated  at
various  common  schools,  and  taught  three  yean,
when  he  embarked  in  trade,  taking  a  situation  in
a  country  store.  Later  he  opened  an  establishment
on  his  own  account  in  Mariposa,  Victoria  co.,  and
subsequently  became  clerk  of  the  township  coun-
cil. From  1860  till  1876  he  held  the  post  of  county
clerk  and  county  treasurer.  He  was  chairman  of
the  high-school  board  in  Lindsay,  Ont.,  and  was
the  representative  of  the  public-school  inspectors
in  the  council  of  public  instruction.  On  25  Feb.,
1871,  he  entered  the  legislative  assembly  of  Ontario,
in  the  Liberal  interest,  as  member  for  South  Vic-
toria, and  the  premier,  Oliver  Mowat,  invited  him
in  July,  1875,  to  enter  his  government  as  secretary,
registrar,  and  commissioner  of  agriculture,  in
March,  1877,  on  a  readjustment  of  the  portfolios,
he  assumed  the  departments  of  finance  and  agri-
culture. In  March,  1883,  he  retired  from  public
life  altogether.  He  was  chairman  of  the  Ontario
agricultural  commission  of  1881,  and  two  vears
later  accepted  the  office  of  manager  of  the  Free-
hold loan  and  savings  company.

WOOD,  Silas,  legislator,  b.  in  Suffolk  county,
N.  Y.,  in  1769;  d.  in  Huntington,  N.  Y.,  2  March,
1847.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1789.  and
during  the  succeeding  five  years  was  a  tutor  there.
He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and


WOOD


WOOD


597


<Jfc-j.  &rb-&^


began  practice  at  Huntington,  N.  Y.  He  was  after-
ward elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  6  Dec,  1819,  till  3  March,  1829.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Sketch  of  the  First  Settlement  of  the
Several  Towns  on  Long  Island,  with  their  Politi-
cal Condition  to  the  End  of  the  American  Revolu-
tion "  (Brooklyn,  1824 ;  with  a  biographical  memoir
and  additions  by  Alden  J.  Spooner,  1865).

WOOD,  Thomas  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Munford-
ville.  Ky.,  25  Sept.,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1845,  assigned  to  the
topographical  engineers,  and  then  transferred,  at
his  own  request,  to  the  2d  dragoons,  becoming  a  2d

lieutenant  there
on  2  Dec,  1846.
fie  took  part  in
the  war  with  Mex-
ico, being  present
at  the  battles  of
Palo  Alto,  Mon-
terey, and  Buena
Vista,  served  sub-
sequently in  Lou-
isiana and  Texas,
as  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  W'illiam  S.
Harney  in  1848-'9,
and  as  adjutant  of
the  2d  dragoons
till  1854.  He  was
promoted  in  suc-
cession to  1st  lieu-
tenant in  1851,  and  to  captain  in  the  1st  cavalry  in
1855,  serving  in  Kansas  during  the  border  troubles
and  on  the  Utah  expedition  under  Albert  Sidney
Johnston  till  1859.  He  became  major,  16  March,  and
lieutenant-colonel,  9  May,  1861,  and  in  October  of
the  same  year  was  commissioned  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  and  placed  in  command  of  a  division
in  the  Tennessee  and  Mississippi  campaigns,  taking
part  in  the  battle  of  Shiloh  and  the  siege  of  Cor-
inth. During  the  remainder  of  the  year  he  was
engaged  in  guarding  railroads  in  Alabama  and
Tennessee,  in  Oen.  Don  Carlos  Buell's  operations
in  Kentucky,  the  pursuit  of  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg's
forces,  and  in  the  battle  of  Stone  River,  31  Dec,  1862.
where  he  was  wounded.  He  commanded  a  divis-
ion in  the  21st  corps,  Army  of  the  Cumberland,
during  the  operations  in  Tennessee,  being  pres-
ent at  the  battles  of  Chickamauga  and  Mission
Ridge,  till  November.  1863.  and  was  engaged  in
operations  for  the  relief  of  Knoxville  and  the  in-
vasion of  Georgia,  including  the  principal  battles,
to  the  action  of  Lovejoy's  Station  in  September,
1864,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  Gen.  Wood
took  an  active  part  in  the  battles  of  Franklin  and
Nashville,  where  he  commanded  the  4th  corps,
and  in  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  to  Tennessee
river  in  December,  1864.  He  was  promoted  major-
general  of  volunteers  in  January,  1865,  and  com-
manded various  districts  and  departments  in  Ten-
nessee, Texas,  Arkansas,  and  Mississippi  until  he
was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service,  1  Sept.,
1866.  Gen.  Wood  received  the  brevet  of  1st  lieu-
tenant, U.  S.  army,  for  gallant  and  meritorious
conduct  in  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista,  that  of
brigadier -general  for  Chickamauga,  and  major-
general  for  Nashville.  He  was  promoted  colonel
of  the  2d  cavalry,  12  Nov.,  1861,  and  retired  from
service,  with  the  rank  of  major-general,  9  June,
1868,  and  that  of  brigadier-general,  3  March,  1871.
WOOD,  Thomas  Waterman,  artist,  b.  in  Mont-
pelier,  Vt.,  12  Nov.,  1823.  He  studied  portrait-
painting  with  Chester  Harding  in  Boston  during
1846-'T,  and  executed  likenesses  in  Quebec,  Wash-


ington, and  Baltimore  until  1858.  In  that  year
he  went  abroad  for  further  study,  remaining  about
two  years.  After  his  return  he  was  engaged  in
portrait-painting  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  and  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  until  1866.  He  then  removed  to  New
York,  where  he  has  since  resided.  He  soon  devoted
himself  almost  entirely  to  genre  painting,  in  which
he  has  chosen  familiar  subjects  in  American  life.
Mr.  Wood  became  vice-president  of  the  National
academy  in  1878,  and  from  1878  till  1887  was  presi-
dent of  the  Water-color  society.  He  was  one  of
the  founders,  in  1878,  of  the  New  York  etching
club,  and  is  a  regular  contributor  to  its  exhibitions,
most  of  his  etchings  being  after  his  own  paintings.
His  three  paintings,  "  The  Contraband,"  "  Recruit,"
and  "  Veteran,"  exhibited  at  the  Academy  of  design
in  1867,  gained  him  his  election  as  associate  the
following  year,  and  in  1871  he  became  an  acade-
mician. These  three  pictures  now  belong  to  the
Metropolitan  museum,  New  York.  Among  his
other  works  in  oil  are  "  Return  of  the  Flag  "  (1870) ;
"  The  Yankee  Peddler  "  (1873) :  "  The  Village  Post-
Office  "  (1874) ;  "  His  own  Doctor  "  and  "  His  own
Pipe  "  (1879) ;  and  "  Uncle  Ned  and  I "  (1882).  At
the  Water-color  society  he  has  exhibited  "  Nom-
inated "  and  "  Elected "  (1875) ;  "  Arguing  the
Question"  (1877);  "Dull  Times"  (1879);  "The
Doubtful  Coin  "  and  "  The  Cup  that  Cheers  "  (1881) ;
"  Seeking  Advice  "  (1882) ;  "  His  First  Business
Venture  "  (1884) ;  "  For  Thanksgiving-Day  "  (1885) ;
"  The  Lost  Stitch  "  (1886) ;  and  "  WThen  we  were
Boys  Together  "  (1888).

WOOD,  Walter  Abbott,  inventor,  b.  in  Mason,
N.  H.,  23  Oct.,  1815.  He  is  the  son  of  Aaron  Wood,
who  early  settled  in  New  York  state  and  was  among
the  first  to  manufacture  the  cast-iron  ploughs  in-
vented by  Jethro  Wood.  The  boy  had  a  natural
fondness  for  mechanics,  and  continued  in  his
father's  shops  till  he  was  twenty  years  old.  In
1835  he  settled  in  Hoosick  Falls,  N.  Y.,  where  he
entered  the  works  of  Parsons  and  Wilder,  and.  after
acquiring  a  small  capital,  began  business  on  his
own  account.  He  studied  the  mechanism  of  farm-
ing-implements and  soon  introduced  the  Manny
harvesting-machine  with  Wood's  improvements,  of
which  in  1852  he  made  and  sold  nearly  200.  Mr.
Wood  continued  to  improve  and  invent  better
forms  of  mowers  and  reapers,  and  in  1853  his  sales
amounted  to  500  machines.  These  were  so  well
received  that  he  determined  to  increase  his  works
and  manufacture  on  as  large  a  scale  as  possible.
In  1869  he  disposed  of  6,000  machines,  and  in  1884
of  48,300.  In  all,  nearly  600,000  machines  have
been  manufactured  and  sold  by  him  since  he  estab-
lished his  business.  About  thirty  patents  have
been  taken  out  by  Mr.  Wood,  and  his  works  are
probably  the  most  extensive  of  their  kind  in  the
world.  He  conducted  his  business  alone  until
1866,  when  it  was  organized  into  a  stock  company
called  the  Walter  A.  Wood  mowing  and  reaping
company,  of  which  Mr.  Wood  has  since  been  presi-
dent. Mr.  Wood  early  recognized  the  importance
of  furnishing  the  markets  abroad  with  his  machines,
and  his  foreign  sales  have  steadily  increased  until
it  is  estimated  that  ninety  per  cent,  of  the  machines
that  are  sold  abroad  are  made  by  him.  The  value
of  his  inventions  has  been  recognized  by  the
award  of  first  prizes  at  the  World's  fairs  in  Paris
in  1867,  in  Vienna  in  1873,  in  Philadelphia  in  1876,
and  in  Paris  in  1878,  as  well  as  by  medals  at  local
fairs.  He  has  received  the  order  of  Francis  Joseph
from  the  Austrian  government,  and  is  an  officer  of
the  Legion  of  honor  in  France.  In  1878  he  was
sent  as  a  Republican  to  congress,  and  he  served
from  18  March,  1879,  till  4  March,  1883.


598


WOOD


WOOD


WOOD,  William,  colonist,  b.  in  England  about
1580;  d.  in  Sandwich,  Mass.,  in  1(339.  He  emi-
grated to  this  country  in  1629,  and  returned  to
England  in  1633.  He  soon  afterward  sailed  again
for  Massachusetts,  and  settled  at  Lynn,  which
town  he  represented  in  the  general  court  in  1636.
He  removed  to  Sandwich  the  following  year,  be-
came town-clerk,  and  resided  there  until  his  death.
After  his  return  to  London  he  published  "  New
England's  Prospect,"  the  first  printed  account  of
Massachusetts,  and  styled  it  "  A  True,  Lively,  and
Experimentall  Description  of  that  part  of  Amer-
ica commonly  called  New  England ;  discovering
the  State  of  that  Countrie,  both  as  it  stands  to  our
New-Come  English  Planters  and  to  the  old  Native
Inhabitants ;  Laying  downe  that  which  may  both
enrich  the  Knowledge  of  the  Mind-travelling
Reader,  or  benefit  the  future  Voyager"  (1634).  The
perfect  copies  are  enriched  with  a  curious  map  of
the  country,  and  the  text  is  interspersed  with
rhymed  descriptions  of  natural  history  that  strongly
resemble  those  of  Spenser.  The  '  Prospect "  was
republished  with  an  "  Introductory  Essay,"  which
is  ascribed  to  James  Otis  (Boston,  1764),  and  again
by  the  Prince  society  (1865).

WOOD,  William,  publisher,  b.  on  Long  Island
in  April,  1797;  d.  in  New  York  city,  9  April,  1877.
In  1822  he  became  a  member  of  the  publishing-
firm  of  Samuel  Wood  and  Sons,  which  his  father,
Samuel  Wood,  an  English  Quaker,  had  established
in  New  York  city.  This  house  did  a  large  jobbing
trade  in  books  and  stationery,  and  early  became
noted  for  the  publication  of  juvenile  books.  Soon
after  the  admission  of  William  Wood  he  turned
his  attention  to  publishing  medical  books,  which
has  become  the  leading  business  of  the  house.  He
also  began  the  publication  of  the  "  Medical  Rec-
ord "  and  the  "  American  Journal  of  Obstetrics."
Mr.  Wood  was  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,
and  held  the  chief  executive  office  of  the  society
for  the  state  of  New  York  for  many  years.

WOOD,  William  B.,  actor,  b.  in  Montreal,
Canada,  26  May,  1779;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  23
Sept.,  1861.  He  was  brought  in  childhood  to  New
York  city,  where  he  began  life  as  a  clerk.  Feeling
that  he  had  a  vocation  for  the  stage,  he  set  out  for
Annapolis,  Md.,  with  a  capital  of  three  doubloons,
and  through  the  courtesy  of  Manager  Wignell,  an
old  family  friend,  he  made  his  first  appearance
there  on  26  June,  1798,  as  George  Barnwell.  He
was  partially  successful,  and  began  an  engagement
the  same  year  in  Philadelphia  in  "  Secrets  Worth
Knowing."  On  30  Jan.,  1804,  he  married  Juliana
Westray,  an  actress,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1809  he
purchased  of  William  Warren  one  half  of  his  inter-
est in  the  Philadelphia,  Baltimore,  and  Washing-
ton theatres.  Previous  to  entering  upon  the  duties
of  management  he  visited  New  York  city  and
played  De  Valmont.  In  the  autumn  of  1810  he
began  his  career  as  manager  in  Baltimore,  and
from  September,  1812,  till  the  close  of  the  season
of  1820,  he  divided  his  time  between  that  city  and
Philadelphia,  where  his  company  played  at  the
Chestnut  street  theatre.  On  2  April,  1820,  the
latter  edifice  was  destroyed  by  fire,  and,  as  the
insurance  had  expired  a  few  days  before,  the  loss
was  heavy.  Having  secured  a  lease  of  the  Walnut
street  theatre,  the  Warren-Wood  company  began
to  play  again  in  Philadelphia  the  following  Novem-
ber. On  the  27th  of  that  month  Master  Edwin
Forrest  made  his  first  appearance  there  on  any
stage  in  "  Douglas."  The  Chestnut  street  theatre
having  been  rebuilt,  it  was  opened  by  the  same
managers  on  2  Dec,  1822,  with  the  "School  for
Scandal,"  Warren  playing  Sir  Peter  Teazle,  and


Wood,  Charles  Surface.  In  1826  the  sixteen  years'
partnership  between  the  two  managers  was  ter-
minated by  the  withdrawal  of  Mr.  Wood.  On  1
Oct.,  1828,  the  latter  undertook  the  management  of
the  Arch  street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  then  just
built ;  but  the  enterprise  was  not  successful,  and
the  rest  of  his  theatrical  career  was  divided  between
management  and  acting  in  the  same  city.  He
retired  finally  from  the  stage.  18  Nov.,  1846,  on  the
occasion  of  a  benefit  at  the  Walnut  street  theatre.
For  an  account  of  his  career,  and  much  information
regarding  the  American  stage,  see  his  "Personal
Recollections  of  the  Stage  "  (Philadelphia,  1855). —
His  wife,  Juliana,  whose  maiden  name  was  West-
ray,  first  appeared  at  the  Haymarket  theatre.
Boston,  in  1797.  The  following  year  she  came  to
New  York,  where  she  made  her  debut  at  the  Park
as  Sarsnet  in  "  The  Deserted  Daughter."  She  soon
after  joined  the  company  in  which  Mr.  Wood  was
playing,  and  after  her  marriage  continued  to  act
in  the  theatres  that  he  managed.

WOOD,  William  Maxwell,  surgeon,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  27  May,  1809;  d.  in  Owing7s  Mills,
Baltimore  co.,  Md.,  1  March,  1880.  He  entered  the
navy  as  an  assistant  surgeon,  10  May,  1829,  became
a  passed  assistant  surgeon,  1  Jan.,  1835,  and  was
commissioned  surgeon,  20  Feb.,  1838.  He  served
on  the  steamer  "  Poinsett "  on  the  coast  of  Florida
during  the  Seminole  war  in  1838-'41,  was  appointed
fleet-surgeon  of  the  Pacific  squadron  in  1843,  and
brought  the  first  intelligence  of  the  opening  of  the
Mexican  war  from  Guadalajara  to  Mazatlan  to  Com.
Sloat.  This  information  induced  the  commodore
to  go  immediately  to  California,  when  he  captured
Monterey  and  began  the  operations  which  resulted
in  the  conquest  of  the  state.  He  was  fleet-surgeon
of  the  East  India  squadron  in  1856-'8  and  present
at  the  capture  of  the  Barrier  forts  in  Canton  river,
China.  He  was  fleet-surgeon  of  the  North  Atlantic
blockading  squadron  in  the  flag-ship  "  Minnesota  "
in  1861-'4,  and  was  present  at  the  capture  of  the  forts
at  Hatteras  inlet,  28  Aug.,  1861,  in  the  engagements
with  the  "  Merrimac,"  8-9  March,  1862,  at  the  cap-
ture of  Sewall's  point  and  Norfolk  in  May,  1862,  in
the  sounds  of  North  Carolina  in  1863,  and  on
blockade  and  other  operations  on  the  coast  in
1863-5.  On  1  July,  1869,  he  was  appointed  sur-
geon-general of  the  navy  and  chief  of  the  bureau
of  medicine  and  surgery,  in  which  he  served  until
24  Oct.,  1871,  though  he  was  retired  by  operation
of  law  on  27  May,  1871.  He  was  commissioned  a
medical  director,  3  March,  1871,  and  resided  at
Owing's  Mills,  Baltimore  co.,  Md.,  until  his  death.
Dr.  Wood  was  the  author  of  "  Wandering  Sketches
of  People  and  Things  in  South  America,  Polynesia,
California,  and  Other  Places  visited  during  a  Cruise
in  the  U.  S.  ships  '  Levant,'  '  Portsmouth,'  and
'Savannah'"  (Philadelphia,  1849);  "A  Shoulder
to  the  Wheel  of  Progress"  (New  York,  1849);
"  Hints  to  the  People  on  the  Profession  of  Medi-
cine "  (Buffalo,  1852) ;  and  "  Fankwei,  or  the  '  San
Jacinto '  in  the  Seas  of  India,  China,  and  Japan  "
(New  York,  1859).— His  son,  William  Maxwell,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  9  March,  1850,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1870,
was  promoted  to  master,  9  Aug.,  1874,  and  to  lieu-
tenant, 11  Dec,  1877.  He  has  patented  a  boat-
detaching  apparatus  (1871),  which  has  been  adopted
in  the  U.  S.  navy  and  merchant  service,  and  is
the  author  of  the  article  on  "  Life-Boats  and  Boat-
detaching  Apparatus  "  in  Hamersly's  "  Naval
Cyclopaedia"  (Philadelphia,  1881).

WOOD,  William  Willis  Wiley,  naval  engineer.
b.  in  Wake  countv,  N.  C.  30  May,  1818 ;  d.  near
Jutland,  St.  Mary's  co.,  Md.,  31  Aug.,  1882. He


WOODBERRY


WOODBRIDGE


599


acquired  a  knowledge  of  engineering  at  the  West
Point  foundry,  N.  Y.,  entered  the  navy  as  a  chief
engineer,  15  March,  1845,  and  superintended  the
construction  of  the  boilers  and  engines  of  the
steam  frigate  "Merrimac"  in  1854-'7  at  Cold
Spring,  N.  Y.  During  the  civil  war  he  rendered
valuable  services  on  special  duty  connected  with
the  steam-engineering  service  at  the  navy-yards  in
New  York,  Philadelphia,  and  Boston.  He  was
head  of  the  department  of  steam  engineering  at
the  naval  academy  in  1866-'7,  chief  engineer  of
the  New  York  navy-yard  in  1868-'9,  inspector  of
machinery  afloat  in  1870-'2,  chief  of  the  bureau
of  steam  engineering  from  1872  till  3  March,  1877,
and  on  special  duty  at  Washington  until  30  May,
1880,  when  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list.  He
was  one  of  the  pioneers  in  the  U.  S.  steam  navy,
and  held  the  relative  rank  of  commodore  when  he
was  retired  as  he  had  served  as  engineer-in-chief.
He  was  drowned  in  a  boat  capsized  by  a  squall.

WOODBERRY,  George  Edward,  author,  b.  in
Beverly,  Mass.,  12  May,  1855.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1877,  and  was  professor  of  English  in
the  University  of  Nebraska  in  1877-8  and  1880-'2.
He  was  connected  editorially  with  the  "  Nation,"
in  1878-'9,  and  is  the  author  of  a  "  History  of
Wood-Engraving  "  (New  York,  1883) ;  "  The  North
Shore  Watch,  a  Threnody "  (printed  privately.
1883):  and  "Life  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe,"  in  the
'•  American  Men  of  Letters  "  series  (Boston,  1885).

WOODBRIDGE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stan-
ton. Wiltshire,  England,  in  1614;  d.  in  Newbury,
Mass.,  1  July,  1691.  He  was  the  son  of  the  Rev.
John  Woodbridge,  rector  of  the  parish  of  Stanton,
Wiltshire,  whose  earliest  known  ancestor  was  John
Woodbridge,  born  about  1492,  and  was  sent  to  Ox-
ford, where  he  remained  "  until  the  oath  of  confor-
mity came  to  be  required  of  him,  which  neither  his
father  nor  his  conscience  approving,  he  removed
thence  into  a  course  of  more  private  studies."  In
1634  he  came  to  New  England  in  the  ship  "  Mary
and  John  "  with  his  uncle,  the  Rev.  Thomas  Parker,
and  settled  in  Newbury,  Mass.,  of  which  he  was  town-
clerk  in  1634-'8,  and  surveyor  of  arms  in  1637.  In
1639  he  married  Mercy,  the  daughter  of  Gov.  Thom-
as Dudley,  and  in  1643  taught  in  Boston.  With
others  he  negotiated  the  purchase  from  the  Indians
of  the  land  on  which  the  town  of  Andover  was
built ;  he  was  chosen  the  first  minister  of  the  place,
his  ordination,  on  24  Oct.,  1645,  being  one  of  the
earliest  in  New  England.  In  1647  he  returned  to
England,  became  chaplain  to  the  parliamentary
commissioners  who  made  a  treaty  with  the  king  at
the  Isle  of  Wight,  and  was  afterward  minister  at
Andover,  Hants,  and  at  Barford-St.  Martin's,  Wilt-
shire, until  he  was  ejected  after  the  Restoration.
In  1663  he  was  driven  from  a  school  that  he  had
established  in  Newbury,  England,  and  returned  to
New  England.  He  then  served  as  assistant  to  the
Rev.  Thomas  Parker  until  30  Nov.,  1670,  when  he
was  dismissed  in  consequence  of  dissensions  in  the
church.  Subsequently  he  held  other  local  offices,
and  was  an  assistant  of  Massachusetts  colony  in
1683-'4.  Cotton  Mather,  in  his  "  Magnalia,"  speaks
of  his  excellence  and  piety.  His  memory  is  pre-
served in  the  name  of  Woodbridge  island,  near  the
mouth  of  Merrimac  river.  He  is  the  progenitor
of  all  the  American  Woodbridges. — His  brother,
Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stanton,  Wiltshire,
England,  in  1622;  d.  in  Inglefield,  Berks,  Eng-
land, 1  Nov.,  1684,  was  graduated  at  Oxford  in
1638,  came  to  New  England  in  1639,  and.  enter-
ing Harvard,  was  the  first  graduate  of  that  uni-
versity. After  his  return  to  England  with  his
brother  in  1647  he  became  minister  at  Newbury,


Berks,  but  was  ejected  in  1662.  Being  a  favorite
of  the  king,  he  was  permitted  to  preach  privately.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Savoy  conference  and  for
a  time  was  chaplain  to  Charles  II.  He  received
episcopal  ordination  after  the  Restoration,  but
subsequently  became  a  non-conformist.  He  was
called  "  the  first  fruits  of  the  college  of  New  Eng-
land," and  left  the  reputation  of  being  a  "  univer-
sally accomplished  person,  of  a  clear  and  strong
reason,  and  of  an  exact  and  profound  judgment."
He  published  several  sermons,  including  "  Justifi-
cation by  Faith"  (London,  1652);  "The  Method
of  Grace  in  the  Justification  of  Sinners "  (1656) ;
and  "  Church  Members  set  in  Joynt "  (1656).
— John's  son,  Timothy,  clergyman,  b.  in  Barford-
St.  Martin's,  Wilts,  Phigland,'l3  Jan.,  1656;  d.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  30  April,  1732,  was  graduated  at.
Harvard  in  1675,  and  became  minister  of  the  1st
church  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  in  1683,  but  was  not
ordained  until  1685.  He  introduced  infant  bap-
tism into  Connecticut  in  1696,  and  was  one  of  the
ten  principal  ministers  of  Connecticut  colony  that
were  named  as  trustees  and  authorized  by  the
general  assembly  of  Connecticut  to  found  Yale
college  in  1699,  and  was  a  fellow  of  that  college  in
1700-'32.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  Say-
brook  convention  in  1708,  and  served  the  colony
in  many  important  political  affairs.  He  published
an  election  sermon  (1727)  and  occasional  poems. —
Another  son,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Med-
ford,  Mass.,  15  Jan.,  1710,  was  minister  of  Bristol
and  of  Kittery,  Me.,  in  1645.  He  wrote  the  ingen-
ious lines  for  the  tomb  of  Cotton  Mather.  His
brother  John  was  minister  of  Wethersfield,  Conn..
and  died  in  1791 ;  and  for  eight  generations  one  of
his  descendants  always  bore  the  name  of  John  and
followed  the  same  profession. — The  second  Benja-
min's grandson,  Benjamin,  merchant,  b.  in  1709;
d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  3  July,  1728,  was  the  son  of
Gov.  Dudley  Woodbridge,  of  Barbadoes.  He  re-
ceived a  good  education  in  Boston  and  became  a
partner  of  Jonathan  Sewall,  son  of  the  chief  jus-
tice. On  3  July,  1728,  he  fought  a  duel  with
swords  with  Henry  Phillips,  without  seconds  and
at  night,  on  Boston  common,  and  was  killed.
Phillips  escaped  to  France.  The  motive  for  the
duel  is  not  known.  It  caused  great  sensation,  and
severe  laws  against  duelling  were  enacted.  The
"  Overland  Monthly "  for  October,  1874,  gives  an
account  of  it. — John's  descendant  in  the  fifth
generation,  Timothy,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stock-
bridge,  Mass.,  23  Nov.,  1784;  d.  in  Spencertown,
Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  7  Dec,  1862,  was  the  son  of
Jahleel  (1738-'96),  who  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1761,  and  served  in  the  state  senate  and
as  judge  of  probate  in  Stockbridge.  Mass.,  from
1789  till  1795,  and  of  Lucy,  daughter  of  Jona-
than Edwards.  The  son  entered  Williams  col-
lege in  1799,  but  during  his  sophomore  year  lost
his  eyesight,  and  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life
in  total  blindness.  After  graduation  in  1803  he
studied  law,  but  abandoned  this  to  enter  Andover
theological  seminary  in  1810,  and  was  graduated
there  in  1811.  In  1816  he  became  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  Green  River,  Columbia  co..
N.  Y.,  remaining  there  until  1842,  when  he  was
called  to  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Spencertown,
and  held  this  charge  until  1851.  In  1852-3  he
served  as  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in
Alford,  Mass.,  and  he  then  returned  to  Spencer-
town, where  he  devoted  his  life  to  charity,  preach-
ing only  occasionally.  He  was  known  as  the  "  blind
minister " ;  but,  notwithstanding  his  infirmity,  he
was  very  active  and  cheerful,  a  hard  student,  and
an  interesting  preacher. In  his  method  of  con-


600


WOODBRIDGE


WOODBURY


ducting  religious  worship  there  was  nothing  to  in-
dicate- his  blindness ;  the  hymns  and  parts  of  the
scripture,  though  really  repeated,  were  apparently
read.  In  the  vigor  of  his  logic  and  the  clearness
of  his  descriptions  he  strongly  resembled  his  dis-
tinguished ancestor.  Williams  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1846.  See  "  The  Autobiography  of
a  Blind  Minister,  including  Sketches  of  the  Men
and  Events  of  his  Time  "  (Boston,  1856),  and  a  "  Dis-
course at  the  Funeral  of  the  Rev.  Timothy  Wood-
bridge,"  by  William  B.  Sprague,  D.  D.  (Albany,
1863). — John's  descendant  in  the  fifth  generation,
William,  governor  of  Michigan,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  20  Aug.,  1780 ;  d.  in  Detroit.  Mich..  20  Oct.,
1861,  removed  with  his  father,  Dudley  (1747-1823),
one  of  the  earliest  emigrants,  to  the  Northwest  ter-
ritory, to  Marietta,  Ohio,  in  1791,  but  was  sent  to
Connecticut  to  receive  his  education.  After  study-
ing at  the  Litchfield  law-school,  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Ohio  in  1806,  and  in  1807  was  elected
to  the  assembly.  From  1808  till  1814  he  was  prose-
cuting attorney  for  New  London  county,  Ohio,  and
he  was  also  a  member  of  the  state  senate.  In  1814
he  received  from  President  Madison  the  appoint-
ment of  secretary  of  the  territory  of  Michigan,  and
removed  to  Detroit.  For  a  long  time  he  was  legal
adviser  of  John  Jacob  Astor's  northwest  fur  com-
pany, and  was  counsel  in  important  Canadian  cases
against  the  Hudson  bay  company.  He  was  elected
the  first  delegate  to  congress  from  Michigan,  serv-
ing from  1819  till  1820,  when  he  resigned.  He
was  instrumental  in  procuring  government  aid
toward  constructing  a  road  through  the  "  Black
Swamp "  to  connect  Detroit  with  Ohio,  and  also
toward  'exploration  of  the  Northwest  territory.
From  1828  till  1832  he  was  judge  of  the  superior

court  of  Michigan
territory,  and  in
1835  he  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  State
constitutional  con-
vention. He  was
elected  to  the  state
senate  in  1837,  was
governor  of  Mich-
igan in  1840-1,
and.  being  chosen
to  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate, served  from
31  Mav,  1841,  till  3
March,  1847.  Dan-
iel Webster,  in  a
note  to  his  speech
/y  •  in  defence  of  the

^.^Z^&^Z^&Jv/^ Ashburton  treaty,

attributed  to  Mr.
Woodbridge  the  first  suggestion  that  was  ever
made  to  him  for  inserting  in  that  treaty  a  pro-
vision for  the  surrender  of  fugitives  under  cer-
tain circumstances,  upon  the  demand  of  foreign
governments.  For  many  years  before  his  death
he  lived  at  his  country-seat  near  Detroit,  and  de-
voted himself  to  his  books  and  to  horticulture.  He
married  Juliana,  daughter  of  John  Trumbull,  au-
thor of  "  McFingal."  See  his  "  Life."  by  Charles
Lanman  (Washington,  1867). — The  first  Timothy's
great-grandson,  William  Chamiing,  educator,  b.
in  Medford,  Mass.,  18  Dec,  1794 ;  d.  in "Boston,  Mass.,
9  Nov.,  1845,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1811,- and
studied  medicine  and  theology,  but  was  never  or-
dained. In  1812-14  he  was  principal  of  the  Bur-
lington academy,  N.  J.,  and  in  1817  he  became  an
instructor  in  the  institution  for  the  deaf  and  dumb
in  Hartford,  Conn.,  remaining  there  for  three  years,
and  being  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Congregational


association  of  that  city.  He  then  visited  Europe
three  times,  and  on  his  return  devoted  himself  to
elevating  the  condition  of  the  common  schools,
and  introduced  the  Pestalozzian  system  of  instruc-
tion as  modified  by  Philip  Emanuel  von  Fellen-
berg,  and  by  his  own  observations.  In  August,
1831,  he  purchased  the  "American  Journal  of  Edu-
cation," changed  its  name  to  "  The  Annals  of  Edu-
cation," and  published  it  until  1838,  serving  also
as  one  of  its  editors.  In  this  appeared  a  series  of
*'  Letters  from  Hof wyl,"  in  which  he  gave  an  ac-
count of  Fellenberg's  system  of  instruction.  He
published  "  Universal  Geography,  Ancient  and
Modern,"  with  Mrs.  Emma  Willard  (Hartford,
1824),  and  was  the  author  of  "Rudiments  of
Geography"  (Hartford,  1833);  "Modern  School
Geography  " ;  and  other  text-books  for  schools. —
John's  descendant  in  the  seventh  generation.  Sam-
uel Merrill,  clergyman,  b.  in  Greenfield,  Mass.,  5
April,  1819,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  the
city  of  New  York  in  1838  and  at  the  theological
seminary  at  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  1842,  and
became  pastor  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  churches  in
South  Brooklyn  in  1841,  in  Coxsackie,  N.  Y.,  in
1850,  and  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  1852.  From
1857  till  1864  he  was  professor  of  ecclesiastical  his-
tory and  church  government,  and  dean  of  the  theo-
logical seminary  of  the  Reformed  church  in  New
Brunswick,  and  also  professor  of  church  history
there  after  1856.  He  received  the  degrees  of  D.  D.
from  Rutgers  in  1857  and  Union  in  1858,  and
LL.  D.  from  Rutgers  in  1883.  Besides  addresses
and  sermons,  he  has  published  an  "Analysis  of
Theology"  (New  York,  1872). — John's  descendant
in  the  eighth  generation,  Frederick  Enoch,  law-
yer, b.  in  Vergennes,  Vt.,  29  Aug.,  1819 ;  d.  there,
26  April,  1888,  after  graduation  at  the  University
of  Vermont  in  1840,  studied  law  xmder  his  father,
Enoch  D.  Woodbridge,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1842,  and  practised  in  his  native  town.  He  was
long  a  member  of  the  legislature,  state  auditor  in
1850-'2,  prosecuting  attorney  in  1854-'8,  and
many  times  mayor  of  his  native  city.  In  1860-'2
he  served  in  the  state  senate,  of  which  he  was  presi-
dent pro  tempore  in  1861.  He  was  then  elected  to
congress  as  a  Republican,  served  from  7  Dec,  1863,
till  3  March,  1869,  and  was  a  member  of  the  com-
mittees on  the  judiciary  and  private  land-claims,
and  chairman  of  that  on  the  pay  of  officials  of  con-
gress. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  loyal-
ists' convention  of  1866.  Mr.  Woodbridge  engaged
in  railroad  enterprises,  and  for  several  years  was
vice-president  and  active  manager  of  the  Rutland
and  Washington  railroad. — John's  descendant,  in
the  7th  generation,  Abby  D wight,  b.  in  Jackson,
Me.,  27  Sept.,  1808 ;  d.  23  Feb.,  1866,  taught  for
many  years  in  Albany  and  Brooklyn,  and  was  the
author  of  numerous  poems.

WOODBURY,  Augustus,  author,  b.  in  Beverly,
Mass.,  in  1825.  He  was  graduated  at  Phillips  Exe-
ter academy  in  1846,  and  at  the  divinity-school  of
Harvard  in  1849,  and  became  pastor  of  Unitarian
churches  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  in  1849,  in  Lowell,
Mass.,  in  1853,  and  of  Westminster  Unitarian
church,  Providence,  R.  I.,  which  place  he  still
holds.  He  was  chairman  of  inspectors  of  the
Rhode  Island  state  prison  in  1866-'77,  and  in
1875-'9  was  a  member  of  the  commission  for  build-
ing the  state  prison.  He  was  chaplain  of  the  1st
Rhode  Island  regiment  from  April  till  August,
1861,  and  in  1874-'5  was  chaplain-in-chief  of  the
Grand  army  of  the  republic  Since  1883  he  has
been  president  of  the  Providence  athenaeum.  Har-
vard gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1866.  and
Brown  that  of  D.  D.  in  1888. He  is  the  author  of


WOODBURY


WOODFORD


601


••  Plain  Words  to  Young  Men "  (Concord,  1858) ;
"  The  Preservation  of  the  Republic,"  an  oration
(Providence,  18(50) :  "  Narrative  of  the  Campaign
of  the  First  Rhode  Island  Regiment  in  the  Spring
and  Summer  of  1861 "  (1862) :  "  General  Ambrose
E.  Burnside  and  the  Ninth  Army  Corps  "  (1867) ;
"  The  Second  Rhode  Island  Regiment "  (1875) ;
"  An  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Prisons  and  Jails  of
Rhode  Island "  (1877) ;  "  Memorial  of  Gen.  Am-
brose E.  Burnside  "  (1882) ;  and  sermons,  addresses,
and  articles  in  reviews.

WOODBURY,  Daniel  Phineas,  soldier,  b.  in
New  London,  N.  H.,  16  Dec,  1812 ;  d.  in  Key  West,
Fla.,  15  Aug.,  1864.  He  was  educated  at  private
schools  and  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1836  and  promoted  to  be  2d
lieutenant  in  the  3d  artillery.  In  November  of  the
same  year  he  was  transferred  to  the  engineers,
but  the  order  was  inoperative  until  July,  1837,
when  he  was  made  brevet  2d  lieutenant  of  engi-
neers, to  date  from  1  July,  1836.  He  was  engaged
in  the  construction  of  the  Cumberland  road  in  Ohio
till  1840,  being  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  7  July,  1838,
and  was  then  on  duty  till  1847,  repairing  fortifica-
tions at  points  on  the  Atlantic  coast,  and  as  an
assistant  to  the  chief  of  engineers  at  Washington.
Lieut.  Woodbury  was  superintending  engineer  in
the  construction  of  Fort  Kearny  and  Fort  Laramie
for  the  protection  of  the  Oregon  route  till  1850,
and  on  fortification  duty  on  the  North  Carolina
coast  until  1856,  becoming  captain  of  engineers.
3  March,  1853.  Thereafter,  until  the  civil  war,  he
was  constantly  engaged  in  the  duties  of  his  corps
on  the  southern  coast,  and  as  an  assistant  to  the
chief  of  engineers.  He  was  promoted  major  of  en-
gineers, 6  Aug.,  1861,  assisted  in  the  construction
of  the  defences  of  Washington,  and  was  with  Gen.
David  Hunter's  column  at  Bull  Run.  He  was
made  lieutenant-colonel  and  additional  aide-de-
camp in  September,  1861,  and  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  19  March,  1862,  and  was  assigned  to
command  the  engineer  brigade  in  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  where  he  rendered  great  service  in  the
siege  of  Yorktown  and  the  construction  of  roads,
bridges,  and  causeways  for  the  advance  upon  Rich-
mond and  the  subsequent  change  of  base  to  James
river.  In  the  Rappahannock  campaign  of  1862-'3
Gen.  Woodbury  distinguished  himself  at  Freder-
icksburg in  laying  down  pontoons  under  the  enemy's
fire,  and  in  their  prompt  removal  after  the  troops
had  recrossed  the  river.  In  March,  1863,  he  was
placed  in  command  of  the  District  of  Key  West,
where  he  died  of  yellow  fever.  He  was  brevetted
to  the  grade  of  major-general  in  the  United  States
army  "for  gallant  and  meritorious  services  dur-
ing the  rebellion,"  especially  on  the  peninsula  in
1862  and  at  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg.  Gen.
Woodbury  was  the  author  of  works  on  "  Sustaining
Walls"  (Washington.  1845),  and  the  "Theory  of
the  Arch  "  (New  York,  1858).

WOODBURY,  Isaac  Baker,  editor,  b.  in
Beverly,  Mass.,  in  1819;  d.  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  26
Oct.,  1858.  He  studied  music  in  Europe  for  a
year,  and,  returning  to  this  country,  taught  it  in
the  public  schools  of  Boston.  In  1845  he  removed
to  New  York,  where  he  edited  the  "Musical  Re-
view "  and  the  "  Musical  Pioneer."  He  compiled
several  collections  of  church  music  and  glee-books,
among  which  were  the  "Anthem  Dulcimer"  (New
YTork,  1850);  "Liber  Musicus"  (1851);  "Million's
Glee-Book  "  (1853)  ;  "  Cultivation  of  the  Voice
Without  a  Master";  "Self-Instructor  in  Musical
Composition  and  Thorough  Bass  "  ;  "  Singing-
School  and  Music-Teacher's  Companion  "  ;  and
the  "  Melodeon  and  Seraphine  Instruction-Book."


WOODBURY,  Levi,  jurist,  b.  in  Francestown,
N.  H.,  22  Dec,  1789;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  4
Sept.,  1851.  He  was  descended  from  John  Wood-
bury, of  Somersetshire,  England,  who  settled  first
at  Cape  Ann  in  1624,  and  at  Naumkeag  (now
Salem)  in  1626.  After  graduation  with  the  high-
est honors  at  Dartmouth  in  1809,  Levi  entered  the
Litchfield,  Conn.,
law-school.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar
in  1812,  and  prac-
tised in  his  native
town  until  1816,
when  he  was  chosen
clerk  of  the  state
senate.  In  1817  he
was  appointed  a
judge  of  the  su-
preme court  of  the
state,  and  in  1819
removed  to  Ports-
mouth, where  he
practised  law  after
serving  as  govern-
or  of  New  Hamp-  C„  •  4£_  JU?
shire  in  1823-4.  *»<-«***-  &>™JZ^y^
He  was  speaker  of  ^

the  state  house  of  representatives  in  1825,  and
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat,
serving  from  5  Dec,  1825,  till  3  March,  1831,
when  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  navy,
and  held  that  office  until  1834,  when  he  was
made  secretary  of  the  treasury,  serving  until  1841.
During  this  period  he  refused  the  post  of  chief
justice  of  the  New  Hampshire  superior  cburt.  Be-
ing elected  again  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  he  served
from  4  March,  1841,  till  20  Nov.,  1845,  and  voted
in  1844  for  the  annexation  of  Texas.  In  1845  he
declined  the  mission  to  England,  and  was  appointed
a  justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court  to  succeed
Judge  Joseph  Story.  His  nomination  was  con-
firmed by  the  senate  on  3  Jan.,  1846,  and  he  held
this  office  at  the  time  of  his  death.  For  his  part
in  the  celebrated  senate  debate  on  Samuel  A.
Foote's  resolutions  "  on  the  public  lands  "  in  1830
he  was  pronounced  by  Thomas  H.  Benton  "the
rock  of  the  New  England  Democracy,"  and  he  was
also  conspicuous  in  the  session  of  1841  in  defend-
ing the  independent  treasury  system,  which  was
first  established  under  his  administration  of  the
department,  and  in  defeating  the  banking  system
that  was  proposed  by  Henry  Clay.  He  published
discourses,  and  was  co-editor  with  William  M.  Rich-
ardson of  several  volumes  of  the  "  New  Hampshire
Reports  "  (Concord,  1816  et  sea.).  After  his  death
appeared  "  The  Writings  of  Hon.  Levi  Woodbury,
Political,  Judicial,  and  Literary,"  selected  and  ar-
ranged by  Nahum  Capen  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1852). —
His  son,  Charles  Levi,  lawver,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  22  May,  1820.  was  a  member  of  the  Suffolk,
Mass.,  bar,  and  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  Massa-
chusetts from  1858  until  1861.  He  edited  with
George  Minot  "  Reports  of  Cases  argued  and  de-
termined in  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  United  States
for  the  First  Circuit,"  containing  the  decisions  of
Judge  Levi  Woodbury  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1847-'52).

WOODFORD,  Stewart  Lyndon,  lawyer,  b.
in  New  York  city,  3  Sept.,  1835.  He  studied  at
Yale  and  at  Columbia,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1854,  and  in  1857  began  the  practice  of  law  in
his  native  city.  In  1860  he  was  chosen  messenger
of  the  electoral  college  of  his  state  to  convey  to
Washington  its  vote  in  favor  of  the  presidency  of
Abraham  Lincoln.  In  1861  he  was  appointed
U.  S.  assistant  district  attornev  for  the  southern


602


WOODFORD


WOODHULL


district  of  New  York,  holding  this  office  about
eighteen  months.  In  1862  he  entered  the  National
army  as  a  volunteer,  serving  until  1865,  during
which  time  he  became  in  succession  chief-of-staff
to  Gen.  Quincv  A.  Gillmore  in  the  Department  of
the  South,  and  military  commandant  of  Charleston
and  Savannah,  and  attained  by  brevet  the  rank  of
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  From  1866  till
1868  he  was  lieutenant-governor  of  New  York,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Republican,  but  he  was
defeated  as  candidate  for  the  governorship  in  1870.
In  1872  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  was  also
chosen  as  a  presidential  elector.  From  1877  until
1883  he  filled  the  office  of  U.  S.  attorney  for  the
southern  district  of  New  York.  Since  that  time
he  has  been  engaged  in  the  practice  of  law.  He  is
the  author  of  numerous  public  addresses,  includ-
ing a  eulogy  on  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas.

WOODFORD,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Caroline,
county,  Va.,  in  1735 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  13
Nov.,  1780.  He  served  with  credit  during  the
French  and  Indian  war,  and  in  the  autumn  of
1775,  on  the  assembling  of  the  Virginia  troops  at
Williamsburg,  was  chosen  colonel  of  the  2d  Vir-
ginia regiment.  At  Hampton  Roads,  the  first  bat-
tle of  the  Revolution  in  Virginia,  he  was  engaged
in  preventing  the  destruction  of  the  town  of
Hampton  by  Lord  Dunmore,  and  sank  five  of  his
vessels.  Col.  Woodford  had  command  of  the  Vir-
ginians that  defended  Great  Bridge  on  Elizabeth
river,  and  defeated  the  force  that  was  sent  by  Lord
Dunmore  to  take  it,  after  a  sharp  battle  in  which
the  British  suffered  a  loss  of  fifty-five,  while  not  a
single  Virginian  was  killed.  He  called  the  militia
of  Norfolk  and  Princess  Anne  counties  to  arms,
and  on  14  Dec,  1775,  occupied  Norfolk.  He  was
appointed  brigadier-general  on  21  Feb.,  1777,  and
given  command  of  the  1st  Virginia  brigade.  At
the  battle  of  the  Brandywine  he  was  wounded  in
the  hand,  but  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  battles
of  Germantown  and  Monmouth.  He  was  then
ordered  to  the  relief  of  Charleston,  S.  C,  and
marched  500  miles  with  the  Virginia  and  North
Carolina  troops  in  twenty-eight  days.  He  reached
Charleston  in  April,  and  was  taken  prisoner  on  12
May,  1780.  The  British  sent  him  to  New  York,
where  he  died.  Counties  in  Kentucky  and  Illi-
nois bear  his  name.

WOODHOUSE,  James,  chemist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  17  Nov.,  1770 ;  d.  there,  4  June,  1809.
He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylva-
nia in  1787,  and  at  its  medical  department  in  1792.
In  1791  he  served  as  a  surgeon  in  Gen.  Arthur  St.
Clair's  expedition  against  the  western  Indians.
When  Joseph  Priestley  declined  to  accept  the  chair
of  chemistry  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1795,  Dr.  Woodhouse  received  the  appointment,
which  he  held  until  his  death.  He  is  said  to  have
been  the  first  to  demonstrate  the  superiority  of  the
Lehigh  anthracite  coal  in  Northampton  county,
Pa.,  over  the  bituminous  coals  of  Virginia  for  in-
tensity and  regularity  of  heating  power.  He  was  a
member  of  the  American  philosophical  society,  and
contributed  to  its  transactions,  to  Dr.  Samuel
L.  Mitchell's  "  Medical  Repository,"  and  to  Dr.
John  R.  Coxe's  "  Medical  Museum."  Besides  edit-
ing Parkinson's  "  Chemical  Pocket-Book  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1802)  and  Chaptal's  "  Elements  of  Chem-
istry "  (4th  ed.,  2  vols.,  1807),  he  published  "  Dis-
sertation on  the  Chemical  and  Medical  Properties
of  the  Persimmon-Tree"  (1792);  "Observations  on
the  Combinations  of  Acids,  Bitters,  and  Astring-
ents" (1793);  "Answer  to  Dr.  J.  Priestley's  Con-
siderations on  the  Doctrine  of  Phlogiston  and  the
Decomposition  of  Water  "  (1794);  "Young  Chem-


ist's Pocket  -  Companion  "  (1797);  and  "Experi-
ments and  Observations  in  the  Vegetation  of
Plants  "  (1802).

WOODHULL,  Maxwell,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  York  citv,  2  April,  1813 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  19  Feb.,  1863.  He  was  the  only  son  of  Rich-
ard Miller  Woodhull,  the  founder  of  Williamsburg
(now  the  eastern  district  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.).  Max-
well Woodhull  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  4
June,  1832,  and  served  in  the  Mediterranean,  on
the  coast  of  Africa,  on  the  Brazil  station,  and  in
the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  During  the  Paraguay  expe-
dition he  was  executive  officer  of  the  flag-ship  "  Sa-
bine," and  he  afterward  commanded  the  brig
"  Bainbridge."  Being  attached  to  the  coast  sur-
vey, he  surveyed  New  York  harbor  and  the  ob-
structions of  Hell  Gate,  reported  plans  for  their
removal,  and  received  the  thanks  of  the  Chamber
of  commerce  of  New  York.  He  was  also  engaged
on  surveys  on  the  New  England  coast.  At  the
opening  of  the  civil  war  he  was  assigned  to  special
duty  under  the  navy  department,  and  promoted  to
the  rank  of  commander,  1  July,  1861.  He  organ-
ized the  supply  service  for  the  blockading  fleet,
commanded  the  "Connecticut,"  was  afterward
transferred  to  the  gun-boat  "  Cimerone,"  and  led  a
division  of  the  James  river  flotilla  during  Gen.
George  B.  McClellan's  peninsular  campaign.  Later
he  was  attached  to  Admiral  Charles  Wilkes's  flying
squadron,  and  ordered  with  the  "  Cimerone "  to
Florida  waters  to  open  St.  John's  and  St.  Mary's
rivers,  which  was  accomplished,  the  squadron  sev-
eral times  engaging  the  batteries  of  the  enemy.
Early  in  1863  he  was  ordered  to  the  north  with  his
vessel  for  repairs.  He  was  killed  accidentally  by
the  discharge  of  a  gun  from  which  a  salute  was
being  fired. — His  son,  Maxwell  Van  Zandt,  en-
tered the  volunteer  army  in  1862  with  the  rank  of
captain,  and  was  promoted  to  major  and  subse-
quently to  lieutenant-colonel  and  assistant  adju-
tant-general of  the  15th  army  corps.  He  was
brevetted  colonel  on  the  recommendation  of  Gen.
John  A.  Logan,  and  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
on  that  of  Gen.  Oliver  O.  Howard.

WOODHULL,  Richard,  colonist,  b.  in  Then-
ford,  Northampton,  England,  13  Sept.,  1620;  d.  in
Brookhaven,  N.  Y.,  17  Oct.,  1690.  He  came  to  this
country  probably  in  1648,  on  29  April  of  which
year  he  witnessed  a  deed  at  Easthampton,  Long  Isl-
and. He  settled  permanently  at  Brookhaven,  Suf-
folk co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1655,  of  which  place  he  became
proprietor  in  two  patents — that  of  Gov.  Richard
Nicolls  in  1666  and  that  of  Geo.  Thomas  .Dongan  in
1686.  In  1663  he  represented  Brookhaven  at  the
general  court  at  Hartford  in  an  effort  to  obtain  aid
against  the  usurpations  of  the  Dutch.  In  1666  he
was  appointed  one  of  the  justices  of  the  court  of
assizes,  and  in  1673  he  became  deputy  to  the  Dutch
commissioners  in  New  York,  and  by  them  was  com-
missioned a  magistrate  for  Brookhaven. — His  great-
grandson,  Nathaniel,  soldier,  b.  in  St.  George's
manor,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  30  Dec,  1722 ;  d.  in
New  Utrecht,  Long  Island,  10  Sept.,  1776.  He
served  as  major,  under  Gen.  Abercrombie,  in  the
attack  upon  Crown  Point  and  Ticonderoga  in  1758,
afterward  accompanied  Bradstreet  against  Fort
Frontenac,  and  was  a  colonel  under  Gen.  Jeffrey
Amherst  in  1760.  He  was  a  representative  from
Suffolk  county  in  the  colonial  assembly  from  1769
till  1775,  and  was  active  there  in  resisting  the  en-
croachments of  the  crown.  The  colonial  govern-
ment was  suspended  in  Mav.  1775,  from  which  time
till  April,  1777,  New  York  was  governed  by  the
Provincial  congress,  of  which  Gen.  Woodhull  was
president  in  1775,  and  again  in  1776. He  was  ap-


WOODHULL


WOODRUFF


603


pointed  brigadier-general  in  August,  1775,  and,  on
the  landing  of  the  British  on  Long  Island,  put
himself  at  the  head  of  the  militia.  A  few  days
after  the  disastrous  battle  of  Long  Island  he  was
surprised  by  a  body  of  British  light  horse  near
Jamaica.  He  surrendered  his  sword,  but  was  after-
ward so  severely  wounded  by  the  troopers  that  he
died  in  consequence.  A  narrative  of  Gen.  Wood-
hull's  capture  and  death  was  published  by  Henry
Onderdonk,  Jr.  (New  York,  1848),  and  his  journal
of  the  Montreal  expedition  of  1760  appeared  in
the  "  Historical  Magazine  "  for  September,  18(51. —
Richard's  great-great-grandson,  William,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Miller's  Place,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  3
Dec,  1741 ;  d.  in  Chester,  Morris  co.,  N.  J..  24  Oct.,
1824,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1 764,  entered
the  ministry,  and  in  1777  occupied  the  Black  River
(now  Chester)  pulpit,  Morris  co.,  N.  J.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Provincial  congress  of  New  Jersey
which  met  at  Burlington,  9  June,  1776,  deposed
Gov.  William  Franklin,  the  last  royal  governor,
and  framed  the  first  constitution  of  New  Jersey,
2  July,  1776,  and  of  the  convention  that  met  at
Trenton  on  11  Dec,  1787,  and  adopted  the  U.  S.
constitution. — William's  brother,  John,  clergy-
man-, b.  in  Miller's  Place,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,
26  Jan.,  1744;  d.  in  Freehold,  N.  J.,  22  Nov.,
1824,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1766,  pursued

theological  stud-
ies with  the  Rev.
John  Blair,  of
Faggs  Manor,  Pa .,
and  was  ordained
pastor  of  Lea-
cock  Presbyterian
church,  Lancaster
co.,  Pa.,  1  Aug.,
1770,  where  he  re-
mained ten  years.
In  1779  he  was
called  to  Free-
hold, N.  J.,  to
succeed  William
Tennent.  In  1780
he  was  elected  a
trustee  of  Prince-
ton, to  which  in-
stitution he  de-
voted his  most
faithful  attention.  In  1785  Mr.  Woodhull  was
one  of  a  committee  appointed  by  synod  to  form
a  complete  system  for  the  organization  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  the  United  States.  This
resulted  in  the  formation  of  the  general  assembly
and  the  present  form  of  government  and  discipline.
In  1798  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Yale.
In  1812  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  Princeton
theological  seminary.  While  pastor  at  Leacock  in
1777  he  induced  all  his  male  parishioners  to  shoul-
der their  muskets  for  Valley  Forge,  and  accom-
panied them  as  chaplain.  Afterward  at  Freehold,
in  1782,  he  wrote  to  Gen.  Washington  begging
him  to  retaliate  by  the  execution  of  one  of  the
English  officers,  then  in  his  hands, -for  the  murder,
without  trial,  of  Capt.  Joshua  Huddy,  of  Mon-
mouth, whose  funeral  sermon  Dr.  Woodhull  de-
livered from  the  court-house  steps  to  an  immense
audience  from  the  adjoining  counties.  This  request
was  granted,  and  Capt.  Asgell,  of  the  British  army,
was  designated  by  lot  to  expiate  the  offence.  Mean-
while, however,  the  English  general  organized  a
court-martial  to  examine  into  the  affair,  when  it
was  found  that  the  execution  of  Huddy  had  been

ferpetrated under instructions from William
'ranklin,  late  governor  of New  Jersey,  then  in


New  York,  and  president  of  the  Associated  Loyal-
ists. Asgell  was  accordingly  released.  Only  three
of  Dr.  Woodhull's  printed  sermons  have  been  pre-
served— '•  The  Establishment  of  the  Federal  Con-
stitution "  (1787);  "The  Death  of  General  Wash-
ington" (1799);  and  an  ordination  sermon  (1813).

WOODMAN,  Clarence  Eugene,  clergyman,  b.
in  Saco,  Me.,  1  Nov.,  1852.  He  entered  Amherst,
but  was  graduated  at  Trinity  in  1873.  After  a
year's  study  at  the  General  theological  seminary
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  New  York
city,  he  became  a  convert  to  the  Roman  Catholic
faith,  and  entered  the  Congregation  of  St.  Paul,
with  which  he  has  since  been  connected.  He  is
among  the  most  eloquent  public  orators  of  his
church  in  this  country.  On  high  festivals  he  is
frequently  invited  to  preach  in  the  cathedral,  and
has  rendered  great  service  throughout  the  church.
As  an  amateur,  Father  Woodman  has  shown  abil-
ity in  various  departments  of  physical  science,
especially  in  photography.  The  honorary  degree
of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Amherst  in  1877,
and  that  of  Ph.  D.  by  Manhattan  college  in  1883.

WOODMAN,  John  Smith,  educator,  b.  in  Dur-
ham, N.  H.,  6  Sept.,  1819 ;  d.  there,  5  May,  1871.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1842,  taught
for  four  years  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  read  law.
He  visited  the  principal  cities  of  Europe  in  1849,
travelling  a  great  part  of  the  time  on  foot,  and  on
his  return  to  New  Hampshire  practised  his  pro-
fession in  Dover,  and  subsequently  in  Rollinsford
till  1851,  when  he  became  professor  of  mathematics
in  Dartmouth.  He  held  that  chair  for  five  years,
and  upon  the  establishment  of  the  Chandler  scien-
tific school  there  in  1852,  also  taught  in  that  de-
partment. He  became  professor  of  civil  engineer-
ing and  vice-president,  and  the  practical  head  of
the  Chandler  scientific  school  in  1856,  its  prosperity
dating  from  his  entrance  on  these  offices,  all  of
which  he  held  until  his  death.  He  wrote  for  jour-
nals and  magazines,  and  lectured  on  scientific  sub-
jects. His  papers  on  the  construction  and  main-
tenance of  highways  showed  originality  and  prac-
tical knowledge,  and  his  views  were  often  adopted.

WOODRUFF,  George,  jurist,  b.  in  Bingham-
ton,  N.  Y.,  4  July,  1807 ;  d.  in  Marshall,  Mich.,  13
May,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Hobart  in  1829,
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Ithaca,  and  in  1837  removed
to  Marshall,  Mich.,  where  he  practised  law.  He
became  county  judge  in  1846,  served  two  terms,
was  circuit  commissioner  three  terms,  and  a  judge
of  the  circuit  court  in  1866-'75. — His  son,  William
S.,  was  killed  in  battle  before  Petersburg,  25  June,
1864. — Another  son,  George  Augustus,  soldier,  b.
in  Marshall,  Mich.,  27  May,  1840 ;  d.  in  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  4  July,  1863,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1857,  and  became  1st  lieutenant
of  artillery  in  June,  1861.  He  served  in  the  Vir-
ginia peninsular  campaign  from  March  till  July,
1862,  participating  in  the  siege  of  Yorktown  and
the  battles  of  Fair  Oaks,  Glendale,  and  Malvern
Hill,  commanded  a  battery  at  Antietam  in  the
Maryland  campaign,  was  engaged  at  Fredericks-
burg and  Chancellorsville,  and  during  the  Pennsyl-
vania campaign  commanded  a  battery,  and  was
mortally  wounded  at  Gettysburg.  In  this  battle
he  was  stationed  on  the  right  of  Gen.  Winfield  S.
Hancock's  line.  Of  his  death  Gen.  Hancock  wrote :
"  Among  all  the  brave  men  who  fell  at  Gettysburg
there  are  none  whose  loss  I  regret  more  than  his."

WOODRUFF,  Hiram,  horse-trainer,  b.  in
Flemington,N.  J..  22  Feb.,  1817;  d.  on  Long  Isl-
and, N.  Y.,  13  March,  1867.  He  began  his  career
as  a  professional  horse-trainer  in  Philadelphia
in  1831,  and  acquired  a  unique  reputation  for


604


WOODRUFF


WOODS


honesty  and  fair  dealing,  as  well  as  for  skill  in
driving  and  training  horses.  He  was  the  author
of  "  The  Trotting-Horse  of  America,  with  Remi-
niscences of  the  Trotting  Turf,"  edited  by  Charles
J.  Foster,  with  a  memoir  and  an  introduction  by
George  Wilkes  (New  York,  1869).

WOODRUFF,  Israel  Carle,  soldier,  b.  in
Trenton,  N.  J.,  in  1815;  d.  in  Tompkinsville,
N.  Y.,  10  Dec,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1836,  became  1st  lieu-
tenant of  topographical  engineers  in  1842,  and
was  superintending  topographical  engineer  of  the
survey  of  the  Creek  boundary  in  1850-'l.  He  then
engaged  in  reconnoissances  of  military  roads  to
the  bouth  Pass  of  the  Rocky  mountains  and  to
New  Mexico,  was  subsequently  engineer  and  in-
spector of  light-houses  on  the  great  lakes,  and  in
1853  became  captain  of  topographical  engineers
for  fourteen  years'  continuous  service.  He  was  as-
sistant to  the  chief  topographical  engineer  at
Washington,  D.  C,  in  1857-'63,  became  major  in
that  branch  of  the  service  in  August,  1861,  and
from  1863  until  his  death  was  assistant  to  the
chief  engineer  at  Washington.  In  that  capacity
he  was  engaged  in  the  defence  of  Washington
against  the  advance  of  Gen.  Jubal  A.  Early  in
July,  1864.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  en-
gineers in  August  of  the  same  year,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  board  of  examination  of  engineer  officers
in  1864-'5.  On  13  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted
colonel,  U.  S.  army,  "  for  faithful  and  meritorious
services  in  the  corps  of  engineers,"  and  brigadier-
general  in  the  same  "  for  meritorious  services  dur-
ing the  civil  war."

WOODRUFF,  Wilford,  president  of  the  Mor-
mon church,  b.  in  Northington  (now  Avon),  Conn.,
1  March,  1807.  He  was  educated  in  Farmington,
early  joined  the  Mormon  church,  and  was  or-
dained to  the  priesthood  in  1833.  Mr.  Woodruff
followed  the  church  in  its  journeyings  through  the
United  States  until  it  finally  reached  Salt  Lake
City.  He  was  ordained  one  of  the  twelve  apostles
on  29  April,  1839,  at  Far  West,  Mo.,  with  the  spe-
cial designation  of  "the  Banner  of  the  Gospel."
He  has  been  sent  on  missions  throughout  the
United  States  and  Europe,  and  in  all  has  travelled
about  150,000  miles.  Mr.  Woodruff  became  presi-
dent of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
Day  Saints  on  the  death  of  John  Taylor  in  1887,
retaining  still  that  office,  having  held  at  that  time
the  place  of  president  of  the  twelve  apostles.  He
has  been  a  member  of  the  Utah  legislative  assem-
bly for  twenty-two  years.  He  served  in  1843  on
the  editorial  staff  of  the  "  Times  and  Seasons  "  in
Xauvoo,  111.,  and  in  1843  on  the  "Millennial  Star"
in  Liverpool.  Mr.  Woodruff  is  a  believer  in  polyg-
amy, and  entered  into  that  practice  before  there
was  any  law  against  it  in  the  United  States.  See
"  Earlv  Davs  of  Mormonism,"  by  James  Harrison
Kennedv  (New  York,  1888).

WOODS,  Andrew  Salter,  jurist,  b.  in  Bath,
Me.,  2  June,  1803 ;  d.  there,  30  June,  1863.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1825.  and  began
the  practice  of  law  in  his  native  town.  He  at-
tained to  eminence  in  his  profession,  and  in  1840
was  chosen  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  New
Hampshire,  becoming  chief  justice  in  1855.  Dart-
mouth gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1852.

WOODS,  Leonard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Princeton.
Mass.,  19  June,  1774;  d.  in  Andover.  Mass.,  24
Aug.,  1854.  His  father.  Samuel,  possessed  "Puri-
tanic piety,"  and  his  habits  of  serious  thought  on
metaphysical  subjects  obtained  for  him  the  title  of
"  Philosopher  Woods."  The  son  was  brought  up
strictly,  and  while  very  young  was  conversant  with


the  works  of  John  Locke  and  Jonathan  Edwards.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1796,  taught,
studied  theology  at  Somers,  Conn.,  and  in  1798
was  ordained  pastor  at  Newbury,  Mass.  When
the  Andover  theological  seminary  was  founded  in
1808  he  became  professor  of  Christian  theology
there,  holding  that  chair  for  thirty-eight  years,
and  becoming  professor  emeritus  in  1846.  Dart-
mouth gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1810.  Dr.
Woods  was  active  in  the  establishment  of  the
American  tract  society,  the  Temperance  society,
and  the  board  of  commissioners  of  foreign  mis-
sions, of  whose  prudential  committee  he  was  a
member  for  twenty-five  years.  He  ably  defended
orthodox  Calvinism  against  Unitarian  theology, and
while  he  admitted  improvements  in  theologians
and  theological  science,  thought  theological  truths
were  fixed  and  unalterable.  His  literary  reputa-
tion dates  from  his  contribution  in  1805  of  a  series
of  papers  m  the  "  Panoplist,"  a  religious  periodi-
cal, in  which  he  defended  Calvinism  against  Jo-
seph Buckminster,  William  Channing,  and  other
Unitarian  divines.  Dr.  Henry  B.  Smith  says  of
him  :  "  He  is  emphatically  the '  judicious  '  divine  of
the  later  New  England  theology.  He  educated
more  than  1,000  preachers,  who  had  neither  crotch-
ets nor  airy  aims."  He  left  in  manuscript  a  "  His-
tory of  Andover  Seminary."  His  publications  in-
clude "  Letters  to  Unitarians  "  (Andover,  1820) ;
"Lectures  on  the  Inspiration  of  the  Scriptures"
(1829) ;  "  Memoirs  of  American  Missionaries "
(1833) ;  "  Examination  of  the  Doctrine  of  Perfec-
tion" (1841);  "Lectures  on  Church  Government"
(New  York,  1843) ;  "  Lectures  on  Swedenborgian-
ism  "  (1846) ;  and  his  collected  works,  containing
lectures,  essays,  sermons,  and  reviews  (5  vols.,  An-
dover, 1849-'50). — His  son,  Leonard)  scholar,  b.
in  Newbury,  Mass.,  24  Nov.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  24  Dec,  1878,  was  graduated  at  Union  col-
lege in  1827  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1830.  In  1831-'3  he  was  resident  graduate  scholar
at  Andover,  and  in  1833  he  was  licensed  to  preach.
His. private  pupil,  Richard  Henry  Dana,  says  of
him :  "  At  the  age  of  twentv-four  years  he  had
been  the  first  scholar  in  the  Phillips  academy,  the
first  in  every  branch  at  Union,  had  been  graduated
at  the  Theological  seminary  the  acknowledged  fore-
most man  of  his  period,  and  had  published  a  trans-
lation of  Knapp  s  '  Christian  Theology,'  enriched
with  a  long  and  fully  thought-out  preface,  with  '
original  notes  showing  profound  scholarship.  He
was  assisting  Professor  Stuart  in  his  commentary
on  the  '  Epistle  to  the  Romans,'  and  aiding  Profes-
sor Robinson  in  editing  the  '  Biblical  Repository,'
then  the  most  scholastic  periodical  in  America,
and  was  assistant  instructor  of  Hebrew  in  the
seminary."  He  edited  the  "  Literary  and  Theo-
logical Review  "  in  New  York  city  in  1834-'7,  and
although  that  periodical  was  the  organ  of  the
Presbyterian  and  Congregational  churches,  he  di-
rectly opposed  the  opinions  of  many  of  its  sup-
porters, objecting  to  the  proposals  of  temper-
ance and  anti-slavery  societies  and  popular  re-
vivalists, and  to  the  German  Reformation,  and
defending  the  few  and  simple  conditions  of  ad-
mission into  the  Anglican  communion,  as  com-
pared with  the  minute  requirements  of  doctrine
in  his  own  church.  He  was  professor  of  sacred
literature  in  Bangor  theological  seminary  in
1836-'9.  and  from  1839  till  1866  president  of  Bow-
doin.  He  never  accepted  a  pastoral  charge,  but
occasionally  delivered  sermons  and  addresses.  He
went  abroad  in  1*3:5,  and  contracted  friendships
with  eminent  theologians  in  Home  and  in  Oxford.
His  familiarity  with  the  classics  caused  him  to  be


WOODS


WOODS


605


congratulated  by  Gregory  XVI.  for  his  "  excellent
Latin  and  the  richness  of  his  discourse,"  and  the
Oxford  theology  having  won  his  approval,  he  was
the  theological  champion  and  personal  friend  of
Dr.  Edward  B.  Pusey.  "  He  was  even  more  re-
markable, perhaps,  for  his  conversations  than  for


his  public  addresses,"  says  his  biographer,  Prof.
Edwards  A.  Park.  Having  resigned  the  presi-
dency of  Bowdoin  in  1866  (see  the  accompanying
vignette),  he  accepted  from  the  legislature  of  Maine
a  commission  to  visit  Europe  to  obtain  materials
for  the  early  history  of  the  state.  He  engaged
the  assistance  of  Dr.  John  G.  Kohl  in  the  work,
which  subsequently  assumed  shape  in  his  "  Dis-
covery of  Maine "  (Portland,  Me.,  1868),  and  pro-
cured the  Hakluyt  manuscript  of  the  "  Westerne
Planting."  Dr.  Woods  was  preparing  this  docu-
ment for  the  press  when  his  health  declined,
and  the  papers  were  completed  and  published  by
Charles  Deane,  in  the  '•  Proceedings  of  the  Maine
Historical  Society"  (Portland.  1877).  Dr.  Woods
furnished  other  valuable  matter,  which  appeared  in
the  1st  and  2d  volumes  of  the  publications  of  that
society,  and  was  engaged  in  further  work  when  his
materials  were  destroyed  by  a  fire  that  consumed
his  entire  library.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1846,  and  Bowdoin  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1866.
Besides  the  works  already  referred  to,  including  his
translation  of  George  Christian  Knapp's  "  Chris-
tian Theology  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1831-'3),  Dr.
Woods  published  an  "  Address  on  the  Life  and
Character  of  Parker  Cleveland  (Portland,  Me.,
1859),  and  "  Address  on  the  Opening  of  the  New
Medical  Hall  of  the  Medical  School  of  Maine  "
■(1862).  See  a  "  Memorial  "  of  him.  by  Edwards  A.
Park  (Andover,  1880),  and  an  article  by  Richard
H.  Dana  in  the  "  Century  Magazine "  for  June,
1881. — The  first  Leonard's  nephew,  Alva,  educa-
tor, b.  in  Shoreham,  Vt.,  13  Aug.,  1794 ;  d.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  in  July,  1887,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1817,  and  at  Andover  seminary  in  1821.  Im-
mediately upon  his  graduation  at  the  seminary  he
was  elected  professor  of  mathematics  and  natural
philosophy  in  Columbian  college,  Washington,  D.  C.
In  1824  he  was  elected  to  the  same  chair  in  Brown
university,  where  he  remained  until  1828,  when  he
was  made  president  of  Transylvania  university,  Ky.
He  continued  in  this  place  until  1831,  when  he  be-
came president  of  the  University  of  Alabama,  at
Tuscaloosa.  Resigning  this  office  in  1837,  he  re-
moved soon  afterward  to  Providence,  R.  L,  where
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  days.  He  was  a
trustee  and  fellow  of  Brown,  and  a  trustee  of  New-
ton theological  institution.  He  founded  five  fel-
lowships in  the  former,  and  a  lectureship  on  elocu-
tion in  the  latter.  He  received  from  Brown,  in
1828,  the  degree  of  D.  D.  Dr.  Woods  published
several  inaugural  and  other  addresses.

WOODS,  Robert  Stuart,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Sandwich,  Ont.,  in  1819.  His  grandfather,  a  Scotch
merchant,  emigrated  to  Canada. Robert  was  edu-


cated at  Sandwich,  took  an  active  part  in  the  re-
bellion of  1837,  followed  Sir  Allan  N.  MacNab
through  the  campaign,  and  was  engaged  in  the  af-
fair of  the  "  Caroline."  He  subsequently  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1842,  became  a
queen's  counsel  in  1872,  and  continued  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession  till  he  was  appointed  junior
judge  of  Kent  county  in  1885.  He  was  largely  in-
strumental in  securing  the  construction  of  the
Great  Western  railway,  was  an  unsuccessful  can-
didate for  parliament  in  1854,  and  is  revising-officer
of  the  electoral  district  of  Kent.  He  is  an  active
advocate  of  the  temperance  reform.

WOODS,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Albemarle
county,  Va.,  in  1738;  d.  there  in  1819.  He  was
of  Scotch-Irish  descent,  and  his  father,  William,
came  from  Pennsylvania  with  the  emigrants  that
followed  John  Lewis  up  Shenandoah  valley,  and
became  the  owner  of  large  tracts  of  land  in  Albe-
marle county,  Va.  The  son  was  a  bold  and  in-
dependent thinker,  and  became  a  Baptist  when
that  denomination  was  struggling  for  existence
against  great  opposition.  In  1780  he  was  ordained
a  minister  of  that  faith,  and  founded  the  old  Albe-
marle Baptist  church,  near  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia. Thomas  Jefferson  frequently  attended  his
church,  and  wrote  that  "  it  was  a  model  for  a  re-
public." At  the  request  of  Jefferson  he  resigned
his  charge  in  1799  that  he  might  be  elected  to  the
legislature.  He  served  during  the  agitation  of
1800  over  the  Kentucky  resolutions  of  1798-'9,  and
his  name  heads  the  list  of  state-rights  Republican
voters  in  that  body.  During  his  term  a  bill  was
passed  to  increase  the  pay  of  the  members,  but  he
refused  to  accept  its  privileges. — His  son,  Micajah,
jurist,  b.  in  Albemarle  county,  Va.,  in  1776 ;  d.
there  in  1837,  was  for  twenty  years  a  member  of
the  justice's  court  for  Albemarle  county,  and  for
many  years  the  presiding  justice  of  that  county. —
His  son,  John  Rodes,  phvsician,  b.  in  Albemarle
county,  Va.,  15  Jan.,  1815;  d.  there,  9  July,  1885,
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  University  of
Virginia  in  1835,  but  ceased  to  practise  in  1837,
devoted  his  attention  to  scientific  agriculture,  and
brought  large  importations  of  English  stock  to  his
estate,  "  Holkham."  He  was  a  member  of  the  old
Whig  party,  a  personal  friend  of  Henry  Clay,  and
a  member  of  many  Whig  conventions.  For  eight
years  he  was  a  director  of  the  Virginia  Central
(now  Chesapeake  and  Ohio)  railway  company.  Dr.
Woods  was  a  supporter  of  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia, and  a  member  of  its  board  of  visitors  from
1867  till  1872.— John  Rodes's  son,  Micajah,  law-
yer, b.  at  Holkham,  Albemarle  co„  Va.,  17  May,
1844,  has  been  attorney  for  the  commonwealth  of
Albemarle  county  since  1870,  and  was  a  member
of  the  board  of  visitors  to  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia from  1872  till  1876.

WOODS,  William  Burnham,  soldier,  b.  in
Newark,  Licking  co.,  Ohio,  3  Aug.,  1824;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  14  May,  1887.  His  father,
Ezekiel  S.  Woods,  was  a  native  of  Kentucky,  of
Scotch-Irish  parentage.  The  son  was  educated  at
Western  Reserve  college  and  at  Yale,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1845.  He  afterward  studied  l;i\v  in
his  native  place,  and  practised  there,  was  elected
mayor  of  Newark  in  1856  and  1857,  and  in  the
latter  year  was  chosen  to  the  Ohio  legislature.  He
was  elected  speaker  of  the  house  in  1858,  and  re-
elected to  the  legislature  in  1859.  Soon  after  the
opening  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  National
army  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  76th  Ohio  volun-
teers, and  from  November.  1861,  till  the  close  of
the  war  he  was  continuously  at  the  front,  except
for  a  period  of  three  months. He  participated  in


606


WOODVILLE


WOODWARD


X


the  battles  of  Shiloh,  Chickasaw  Bayou,  Arkansas
Post  (where  he  was  slightly  wounded),  Resaca,
Dallas,  Atlanta,  Jonesboro',  Lovejoy  Station,  and
Bentonville.  He  was  also  present  at  the  sieges  of
Vicksburg  and  Jackson,  and  commanded  a  division

in  Gen.  William  T.
Sherman's  march  to
the  sea.  He  was  ap-
pointed brevet  brig-
adier-general of  vol-
unteers, 12  Jan.,
1865 ;  brevet  major-
general  of  volun-
teers, 13  March,
1865 ;  full  brigadier-
general,  31  May,
1865;  and  on  17
Feb.,  1866,  was  mus-
tered out  of  the  ser-
vice. Upon  leav-
ing the  army,  Gen.
Woods  engaged  in
cotton  -  planting  in
Alabama,  resuming
at  the  same  time  the  practice  of  law,  and  taking
an  active  part  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  state,
of  which  he  became  chancellor  in  1868.  In  1869
he  was  appointed  U.  S.  judge  for  the  5th  circuit,
and  on  15  Dec,  1880,  was  nominated  by  Presi-
dent Hayes  an  associate  justice  of  the  U.  S.  su-
preme court,  being  confirmed  on  22  Dec.  —  His
brother,  Charles  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Newark,
Ohio,  19  Feb.,  1827;  d.  there,  26  Feb.,  1885,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1852,
appointed  brevet  2d  lieutenant  of  infantry,  and
served  on  garrison  and  frontier  duty  till  1861.  In
the  attempt  to  relieve  Fort  Sumter  in  April  of  that
year,  he  commanded  the  troops  on  the  steamer
"  Star  of  the  West,"  and  he  was  appointed  colonel
of  the  76th  Ohio  volunteers,  13  Oct.,  1861.  He  was
at  Fort  Donelson  and  Shiloh,  and  commanded  a
brigade  during  the  siege  of  Corinth,  and  a  regi-
ment in  the  Vicksburg  campaign.  He  was  recom-
mended for  promotion  for  bravery  at  Arkansas
Post,  and  became  a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
4  Aug.,  1863,  leading  a  brigade  in  the  15th  corps  at
Lookout  Mountain  and  Mission  Ridge.  In  the  cam-
paign in  Georgia  and  the  Carolinas  he  commanded
a  division  in  the  same  corps.  He  was  appointed
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  4  Aug.,  1863,  brevet-
ted  major-general,  22  Nov.,  1864,  made  brevet  briga-
dier- and  major-general  in  the  U.  S.  army,  13
March,  1865,  and  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer
service,  1  Sept.,  1866.  He  was  transferred  to  the
27th  infantry,  27  Sept.,  1866,  and  during  the  latter

fart  of  the  same  year  was  on  the  plains  fighting
ndians  and  guarding  railways.  He  became  colonel
of  the  2d  infantry,  23  March,  1874,  and  was  retired
on  15  Dec.  of  the  same  year.  He  was  familiarly
known  in  the  army  as  "  Susan  Wood,"  a  name  that
had  been  applied  to  him  when  he  was  a  cadet  at
the  militarv  academy.

WOODVILLE,  Richard  Caton,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  about  1825 ;  d.  in  London,  Eng.,  13
Sept.,  1855.  He  studied  in  Dusseldorf,  whence  he
sent  to  the  American  art  union  "  The  Card-Play-
ers "  (1847),  and  "  The  Cavalier's  Return "  and
"Mexican  News"  (1848).  He  twice  revisited  Eu-
rope, and  while  in  London  was  cut  short  in  a  ca-
reer of  much  promise.  Among  his  effective  and
well  -  finished  genre  pictures  were  "Old  '76,"
"Young  '48,"  "The  Politicians,"  "The  Game  of
Chess."  "  Waiting  for  the  Stage,"  and  "  The  Sail-
or's Wedding."  Several  of  them  were  engraved  or
lithographed.


WOODWARD,  Ashbel,  physician,  b.  in  Well-
ington, Conn.,  26  June,  1804;  d.  in  Franklin,  Conn.,
20  Nov.,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the  medical
department  of  Bowdoin  in  1829,  settled  in  Frank-
lin, Conn.,  and  resided  there  until  his  death,  en-
gaging in  the  practice  of  his  profession  and  in
genealogical  and  historical  researches.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  volunteered  as
surgeon  in  the  26th  army  corps,  sharing  in  the
siege  and  capture  of  Port  Hudson.  Yale  gave
him  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  in  1854.  Dr.
Woodward  was  president  of  the  Connecticut  medi-
cal society  for  many  years,  and  a  member  of  the
New  England  historic-genealogical  society,  to
which  he  contributed  about  fifty  papers.  His  pub-
lications include  "  Vindication  of  Gen.  Israel  Put-
nam "  (Norwich,  Conn.,  1841) ;  "  Historical  Account
of  the  Connecticut  Medical  Society"  (Hartford,
1859) ;  "  Biographical  Sketches  of  the  Early  Phy-
sicians of  "Norwich"  (Norwich,  1859);  "Medical
Ethics"  (Hartford,  1860);  "Life,"  an  address
(1861) ;  "  Memoir  of  Col.  Thomas  Knowlton  "  (Bos-
ton, 1861) ;  "  Life  of  Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon  "  (Hart-
ford, 1862);  "Vindication  of  Army  Surgeons"
(New  Haven,  1863) ;  "  Specialism  in  Medicine "
(1866);  and  "The  Two  Hundredth  Anniversary  of
the  Settlement  of  Franklin,"  an  address  delivered
in  April,  1868  (1870).  See  a  memoir  of  him  by  his
son.  Henry  H.  Woodward  (Boston,  1886).

WOODWARD,  Augustus  B,  jurist,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia about  1775;  d.  in  Florida  in  1827.  He  was
a  laborious  student,  adopted  the  profession  of  law,
and  in  1805  emigrated  to  Michigan  to  become  a
judge  of  the  territory,  holding  office  till  1824.
During  that  service  he  published  the  "  code  of  laws  "
that  bears  his  name.  He  was  then  appointed  a
judge  of  the  territory  of  Florida,  where  he  died
after  a  service  of  three  years.  He  was  an  ardent
patriot,  and  during  the  second  war  with  Great
Britain  was  the  author  of  the  resolution  that  was
adopted  by  the  legislature  of  Michigan  prohibiting
the  wearing  of  any  clothing  made  from  English
goods.  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  founder  of  the
town  of  Ypsilanti,  Mich.,  but  the  statement  is  not
corroborated.  He  published  "  Considerations  on
the  Substance  of  the  Sun"  (Washington,  D.  C,
1801) ;  "  Considerations  on  the  Executive  Govern-
ment of  the  United  States  of  America"  (Flatbush,
1809);  and  "A  System  of  Universal  Science"
(Philadelphia,  1816).

WOODWARD,  Calvin  Milton,  educator,  b.  in
Fitchburg,  Mass.,  25  Aug.,  1837.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1860,  and  became  principal  of
Brown  high-school  in  Newburyport,  Mass.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  was  captain  in  the  48th  Mas-
sachusetts volunteers,  taking  part  in  the  siege  and
capture  of  Port  Hudson  under  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.
Banks.  In  1865  he  was  chosen  vice-principal  of  the
Smith  academy  of  Washington  university,  St.  Louis,
and  in  1868  he  was  appointed  assistant  professor
of  mathematics  in  that  university,  where  since  1870
he  has  held  the  chair  of  mathematics  and  applied
mechanics,  also  since  1870  he  has  been  dean  of  its
polytechnic  school.  He  planned  and  organized  in
1879  the  manual  training-school  as  a  subordinate
department  of  the  university  without  resigning  his
other  duties,  and  has  filled  the  directorship  of  this
school  from  the  first.  The  St.  Louis  manual  train-
ing-school is  the  pioneer  of  its  kind  in  America,
and  has  served  as  the  model  in  organizing  other
similar  schools,  in  consequence  of  which  Prof.
Woodward's  expositions  of  the  aims  and  value  of
manual  training  have  had  the  widest  influence  in
shaping  the  new  education  both  at  home  and
abroad. He  was  a  member  of  the  school  board  of


WOODWARD


WOODWARD


607


St.  Louis  in  1878-'80,  and  president  of  the  St.  Louis
engineer  club  in  1883-'4. Prof.  Woodward  was

S resident  of  the  industrial  department  of  the
ational  educational  association  in  1882-'4,  and
vice-president  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science  in  1888,  presiding  over  the
section  on  mechanical  science.  In  1885  he  was  in-
vited to  present  a  paper  on  "Manual  Training"
before  the  educational  conference  in  Manchester,
England,  and  afterward  he  visited  the  educational
institutions  of  Europe.  He  has  written  a  large
number  of  papers  on  mathematical  subjects  and
manual  training,  which  he  has  contributed  to  sci-
entific journals  and  other  periodicals.  His  books
are  "  History  of  the  St.  Louis  Bridge  "  (St.  Louis,
1882),  and  "The  Manual  Training  -  School :  its
Aims,  Methods,  and  Results  "  (Boston,  1887).

WOODWARD,  George  Washington,  jurist,
b.  in  Bethany,  Pa.,  26  March,  1809 ;  d.  in  Rome,
Italy,  10  May,  1875.  He  received  an  academic  edu-
cation, and  studied  and  practised  law  in  his  native
town.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania
constitutional  convention  in  1827,  president-judge
of  the  4th  judicial  district  in  1841-'51,  and  a  judge
of  the  superior  court  of  Pennsylvania  in  1852-'67.
He  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1866,
and  was  twice  re-elected.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
National  Democratic  convention  in  1868.  His
death  occurred  during  a  tour  abroad.

WOODWARD,  Joseph  Janvier,  surgeon,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  30  Oct.,  1833;  d.  near  that  city,
17  Aug.,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Philadel-
phia central  high-school  in  1850,  and  at  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1853.  He  practised  his  profession  in  Philadel-
phia, and  also  gave  private  instruction  in  the  use
of  the  microscope  and  in  pathological  histology,  and
with  Dr.  Charles  Bishop  he  conducted  a  "  quiz  "
class  in  connection  with  the  course  of  instruction
in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Subsequently
he  became  demonstrator  in  operative  surgery  in
that  place  and  clinical  surgical  assistant,  and  then
took  charge  of  the  surgical  clinic  of  the  univer-
sity. At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered
the  U.  S.  army  as  assistant  surgeon,  serving  with
the  2d  U.  S.  artillery  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,
and  then  became  chief  medical  officer  of  the  5th
division  in  the  Department  of  Northeast  Virginia,
being  present  at  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run.  Later
he  became  medical  officer  of  three  light  batteries
in  Gen.  Philip  Kearny's  division  in  the  Army  of
the  Potomac.  In  May,  1862,  he  was  assigned  to
duty  in  the  surgeon-general's  office  in  Washington,
and  charged  with  the  duty  of  collecting  materials
for  a  medical  and  surgical  history  of  the  war  and
for  a  military  medical  museum.  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  received  the  brevets  of  captain,  major,
and  lieutenant-colonel,  and  on  28  July,  1866,  he  was
commissioned  captain  and  assistant  surgeon.  Soon
after  his  assignment  to  Washington  his  attention
was  directed  to  experiments  in  photo-micrography,
and  he  improved  the  old  methods  and  devised
new  ones  for  this  class  of  work.  His  publications
in  this  direction  gave  a  powerful  stimulus  to  the
construction  of  microscopic  objectives,  and  the
great  improvements  that  have  been  made  in  these
instruments  of  research  are  due  chiefly  to  his  labors.
He  was  made  surgeon  with  the  rank  of  major  on
26  June,  1876.  Dr.  Woodward  was  associated  in
the  management  of  President  Garfield's  case  after
he  was  shot,  and  the  confinement,  anxiety,  and
labor  to  which  he  was  subjected  during  the  presi-
dent's long  illness  proved  too  great  for  him  and
hastened  the  sickness  that  terminated  his  life.  In
addition  to  his  connection  with  scientific  societies.


including  his  election  in  1873  to  *he  National
academy  of  sciences,  he  was  president  of  the  Amer-
ican medical  association  and  of  the  Philosophical
society  of  Washington.  He  published  about  100
single  papers,  and  in  book-form  "  Outlines  of  the
Chief  Camp  Diseases  of  the  U.  S.  Armies"  (Phila-
delphia, 1863)  and  "  The  Medical  and  Surgical  His-
tory of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  "  (2  vols.,  Wash-
ington, 1870-9). — His  sister,  Annie  Aubertine
Woodward-Moore,  translator,  b.  in  Montgomery
county,  Pa.,  27  Sept.,  1841,  was  educated  in  Phila-
delphia, studied  music  with  Carl  Gartner,  and  gave
successful  piano  recitals  and  concerts  in  Boston,
Philadelphia,  and  New  York.  She  also  early  de-
voted herself  to  literary  pursuits,  and  translated
extensively  from  the  French  and  German.  She
was  occupied  in  translating  from  the  Scandinavian
tongues  with  Rasmus  B.  Anderson  in  1876,  and
for  twelve  years  was  busy  preparing  English  ver-
sions of  Bjornstjerne  Bjornson's  novels  (Boston,
1881-'2),  and  of  Georg  Brande's  "  Authors  of  the
Nineteenth  Century  "  (New  York,  1886).  She  has
resided  in  Madison,  Wis.,  since  1877,  was  a  founder
of  the  Wisconsin  conservatory  of  music,  and  has
lectured  extensively,  especially  on  Norwegian  lit-
erature and  music.  She  married  Samuel  H.  Moore
in  1887.  Mrs.  Moore  has  published  most  of  her
writings  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Auber  Forestier."
They  include,  besides  the  translations  that  have
been  noticed,  English  versions  from  the  German  of
Robert  Byr's  "  Sphynx  "  (Philadelphia,  1871) ;  "  The
Struggle  for  Existence"  (1873);  Sophia  Verena's
"  Above  the  Tempest  and  the  Tide  "  (1873) ;  "  Sam-
uel Brohl  &  Co.,"  from  the  French  of  Victor  Cherbu-
liez  (New  York,  1877);  "Echoes  from  the  Mist
Land,  or  the  Nibelungen-Lied  Revealed  "  (Chicago,
1880) ;  "  The  Spell-Bound  Fiddler,"  from  the  Norse
of  Kristofer  Janson  (1881) ;  "  The  Norway  Music-
Album,"  Norway  folk-songs,  dances,  etc.,  edited
and  furnished  with  English  text  (Boston,  1881) ;
and  "  Voice-Culture,"  from  the  German  (1885).

WOODWARD,  Samuel,  physician,  b.  in  Water-
town,  Conn.,  in  1750 ;  d.  in  Torringford,  Conn.,  6
Jan.,  1835.  By  economy  and  industry  he  suc-
ceeded in  obtaining  sufficient  means  to  enter  Yale
when  he  was  twenty-six  years  old,  but  the  class  of
which  he  was  a  member  was  dispersed  by  the
Revolution,  and  he  was  not  graduated.  He  then
adopted  the  profession  of  medicine,  and  began
practice  in  Torringford,  Conn.,  where  he  remained
for  the  greater  part  of  his  life.  He  served  in  the
legislature  for  several  terms,  during  the  last  of
which  he  was  called  the  "  father  of  the  house,"  and
was  chosen  its  speaker.  He  was  the  first  in  that
body  to  advocate  openly  Democratic  principles
after  the  Revolution,  and  was  the  unsticcessful
candidate  of  that  party  for  congress.  He  estab-
lished a  successful  practice,  prepared  a  large  num-
ber of  students  for  the  medical  profession,  and  was
active  in  temperance  and  other  reforms. — His  son,,
Samuel  Bayard,  physician,  b.  in  Torringford,
Conn.,  10  June,  1787;  d.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  3
Jan.,  1850,  adopted  the  profession  of  medicine,  and
settled  in  Wethersfield,  Conn.,  where  he  became
physician  to  the  state  prison,  and  was  for  several
years  a  member  of  the  state  senate.  He  was  a
founder  of  the  Retreat  for  the  insane  at  Hartford,
Conn.,  and  in  1832-'46  was  superintendent  of  the
Massachusetts  state  lunatic  asylum  at  Worcester.
He  then  removed  to  Northampton.  Mass.,  where
he  practised  until  his  death.  Dr.  Woodward  was
a  projector  of  the  Massachusetts  school  for  idiotic
youth  and  of  an  asylum  for  inebriates.  He  pub-
lished essays  on  diseases  of  the  mind  and  nerves,
and  contributed  to  medical  journals.


608


WOODWORTH


WOODWORTH


WOODWORTH,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Schodack,
N.  Y.,  12  Nov.,  1768 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  1  June,

1858.  He  studied  law  with  John  Lansing  in  Al-
bany, was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1791,  and  began
practice  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  but  he  returned  to  Albany
in  1806,  and  resided  there  until  his  death.  He  was
surrogate  of  Rensselaer  county  in  1793-1804,  a
member  of  the  assembly  in  1803,  and  of  the  state
senate  in  1804-'7,  attorney-general  of  New  York  in
1804-'8,  and  a  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court  in
1819-'28.  He  published  "  Reminiscences  of  Trov
from  its  Settlement  in  1790  till  1807  "  (Albany,
1855),  and  with  William  P.  Van  Ness  revised  the
laws  of  New  York  (2  vols.,  1813).

WOODWORTH,  John  Maynard,  physician,
b.  in  Big  Flats,  Chemung  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  Aug.,
1837;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  14  March,  1879.
He  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Chicago,  be-
came curator  of  the  museum  of  the  Chicago  acade-
my of  sciences  in  1858,  and  established  the  Museum
of  natural  history  in  the  University  of  Chicago  in

1859.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Medical  college  of
Chicago  in  1862.  entered  the  National  army  as
post  surgeon  of  volunteers,  and  served  under  Gen.
William  T.  Sherman  till  1865,  becoming  full  sur-
geon in  1863,  and  subsequently  medical  inspector
of  the  Army- of  the  Tennessee.  In  March,  1865,
he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  of  volunteers
for  his  services  during  the  civil  war.  He  became
professor  of  anatomy  in  Chicago  medical  college
in  1866,  surgeon  of  the  Union  soldiers'  home,  and
sanitary  inspector  of  the  city  board  of  health  in
1868. In 1871-'9  he  was supervising surgeon-

feneral  of  the  Marine  hospital,  Washington,  D.  C.
n  that  service  he  introduced  systematic  methods
of  conducting  its  affairs,  required  candidates  for
medical  offices  to  pass  examinations,  and  substi-
tuted inexpensive  pavilions  for  costly  insanitary
hospitals  of  iron  and  stone.  He  was  president  of
the  Alumni  association  of  Chicago  medical  college
in  1870,  one  of  the  twelve  organizers  of  the  Ameri-
can public  health  association  in  1872,  a  member  of
many  state  and  National  professional  bodies,  and  a
vice-president  of  the  Society  of  the  Army  of  the
Tennessee.  In  1876  he  read  before  the  Interna-
tional medical  congress  a  paper  entitled  "  Quaran-
tine with  Reference  to  Cholera  and  Yellow  Fever,"
and  submitted  six  propositions  to  that  body  on  the
subject,  which  were  adopted.  He  wrote  numer-
ous essays  and  papers  that  were  published  in  the
"  Transactions  of  the  American  Medical  Associa-
tion," and  is  the  author  of  "  Primary  Surgery  of
Gen.  Sherman's  Campaigns  "  (Chicago,  1866) ;  "  The
Mystery  of  Life,"  an  address  (1871) ;  "  Regulations
of  the  United  States  Marine  Hospital  Service "
(Washington,  D.  C,  1873);  "Hospitals  and  Hospi-
tal Construction  "  (1873) ;  "  The  Immigration  Ser-
vice of  the  United  States  "  (1873) ;  "  Nomenclature
of  Diseases "  (1874) ;  and  "  Cholera  Epidemic  in
the  United  States  in  1873"  (1875).

WOODWORTH,  Samuel,  poet,  b.  in  Scituate,
Mass.,  13  Jan.,  1785 ;  d.  in  New  York  city.  9  Dec.
1842.  He  was  the  youngest  son  of  a  farmer  and
Revolutionary  soldier,  whose  poverty  prevented
him  from  educating  his  children,  but  Samuel's
verses  attracted  the  attention  of  Rev.  Nehemiah
Thomas,  who  taught  him  the  classics  for.  He
was  apprenticed  to  Benjamin  Russell,  editor  of
the  "Columbian  Centinel,"  when  he  was  seven-
teen years  of  age,  and  a  year  after  the  expiration
of  his  term  removed  to  New  Haven,  Conn.,  where
he  issued  a  weekly  paper  called  the  "  Belles-Let-
tres  Repository,"  of  which  he  was  "editor,  pub-
lisher, printer,  and  more  than  once  carrier,"  but
the  enterprise failed at  the  end  of its  second


ey&*?iA<e&MZtet*v*rJA~.


month.  He  removed  to  New  York  in  1809,  and  dur-
ing the  second  war  with  Great  Britain  conducted
a  weekly  paper  called  "  The  War,"  and  a  monthly
Swedenborgian  magazine  entitled  the  "Halcyon
Luminary  and
Theological  Re-
pository," both  of
which  were  un-
successful. His
next  literary  un-
dertaking was  a
contract  in  1816
to  write  a  histo-
ry of  the  second
war  with  Great
Britain  in  the  style
of  a  romance,  en-
titled the  "  Cham-
pions of  Free-
dom," which  was
published  (2  vols.,
New  York,  1816),
but  possesses  lit-
tle merit  either  as
history or as a

novel.  With  George  P.  Morris  he  began,  in  1823,
the  publication  of  the  "New  York  Mirror,"  but
lie  withdrew  from  the  partnership  within  a  year.
He  edited  the  "Parthenon"  in  1827.  afterward
contributed  frequently  to  the  press,  and  was  the
author  of  several  operettas  that  were  produced
with  success,  of  which  the  "  Forest  Rose  "  is  still  oc-
casionally performed.  During  his  later  life  he  was
paralyzed,  and  his  resources  were  meagre.  Of  his
numerous  lyrics  the  "  Old  Oaken  Bucket "  is  the
only  one  that  will  probably  live.  George  Perkins
Marsh  says  of  this  poem  in  his  "  Lectures  on  the
English  Language "  (New  York,  1861) :  "  Wood-
worth's  fine  song,  the  '  Old  Oaken  Bucket,'  which
has  embalmed  in  undying  Terse  so  many  of  the
most  touching  recollections  of  rural  childhood,  will
preserve  the  more  poetic  form  oaken, .  together
with  the  memory  of  the  almost  obsolete  implement
it  celebrates,  through  all  dialect  changes,  as  long
as  English  shall  be  a  spoken  tongue."  His  poetical
works  were  collected  and  edited  by  his  son,  with  a
memoir  of  him  by  George  P.  Morris  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1861). — His  son,  Selim  E.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  27  Nov.,  1815 :  d.  in  San  Francisco,
Cal.,  29  Jan.,  1871.  when  twelve  years  old  set  out
with  a  rifle  to  cross  the  continent  to  the  Pacific,
but  was  met  by  friends  and  sent  home  after  walking
300  miles.  In  1834  he  sailed  as  captain's  clerk  in
the  ship  "  Margaret  Oakley,"  in  which  he  was  ship-
wrecked off  Madagascar.  He  lived  on  the  island
with  the  natives,  but  eventually  reached  Mauritius,
whence  he  returned  home  after  an  absence  of  four
years.  He  was  appointed  a  midshipman  in  the
navy,  16  June,  1838,  became  a  passed  midshipman,
2<  I  Hay,  1844,  and,  obtaining  special  leave  of  absence
in  1846,  made  the  journey  to  the  Pacific  overland,
travelling  from  St.  Louis  to  Columbia  river  in  sixty
days.  He  then  went  down  the  coast  to  the  site  of
San  Francisco,  where  he  reported  for  duty  as  a
master  on  board  the  sloop  "  Warren."  and  subse-
quently served  in  command  of  the  transport  "  Ani-
ta" until  the  close  of  the  Mexican  war.  He  re-
signed from  the  navy.  11  Feb.,  1850,  and  was  elected
to  the  first  state  senate  of  California.  He  engaged
in  mercantile  pursuits,  but  at  the  opening  of  the
civil  war  he  volunteered  and  was  commissioned
acting  lieutenant,  10  Sept.,  1861.  He  served  under
Farragut  at  New  Orleans  and  in  Mississippi  river,
and  was  promoted  two  grades  to  commander,  16
July,  1862,  for  gallant  conduct. He  commanded


WOOL


WOOLMAN


609


the  steamer  "  Narragansett,"  which*  he  took  out  to
the  Pacific  coast  in  1865-'6,  and  upon  his  return
resigned  from  the  navy,  31  May,  1866. — Samuel's
nephew,  Francis  C,  author,  b.  in  Colchester,  Conn.,
in  1812 ;  d.  at  sea,  5  June,  1859,  was  a  printer  by
trade,  and  afterward  preached,  but  withdrew  from
the  ministry  on  account  of  failing  health.  He  then
devoted  himself  to  juvenile  literature,  in  which  he
was  remarkably  successful.  He  died  during  a  voy-
age between  Savannah  and  New  York.  His  nu-
merous publications  include  "  Our  own  Fields "
(New  York,  1850) ;  "  Youth's  Book  of  Gems  "  (1851)
"  Uncle  Frank's  Home  Stories "  (6  vols.,  1851)
"  Uncle  Frank's  Picture  Gallery  "  (2  vols.,  1852)
"Wonders  of  the  Insect  World"  (1853);  "The
World  as  it  is,  or  a  Miniature  Sketch  of  the  Earth
and  its  Inhabitants  "  (Philadelphia,  1854) ;  "  Theo-
dore Tinker's  Stories  for  Little  Folks"  (12  vols.,
New  York,  1854-'8);  "Young  American's  Life  of
Fremont "  (1856)  and  "  Uncle  Frank's  Pleasant
Pages  for  the  Fireside  "  (1857).  He  edited  "  Wood-
worth's  American  Miscellany "  (12  vols.,  1853  et
seq.),  and  "  Woodworth;s  Youth's  Cabinet,"  which
was  continued  after  his  death  (15  vols.,  1854  et  seq.).
WOOL,  John  Ellis,  soldier,  b.  in  Newburg,
N.  Y,  20  Feb.,  1784 ;  d.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  10  Nov.,
1869.  His  father  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution.
The  son  was  educated  at  the  common  schools  of
his  native  town,  and,  after  a  short  experience  in
mercantile  life  in  Troy,  began  the  study  of  the
law,  at  which  he  was  engaged  when  war  with  Eng-
land was  declared.  He  entered  the  military  service
as  an  officer  of  volunteers,  raised  a  company  in
Troy,  was  commissioned  captain  in  the  13th  U.  S.
infantry,  14  April,  1812,  and  greatly  distinguished
himself  at  Queenstown  Heights,  13  Oct.,  1812,
whei-e  he  was  severely  wounded.  He  was  promoted
major  of  the  29th  infantry,  13  April,  1813,  and  at
Plattsburg  on  11  Sept.,  1814,  he  received  the  brevet
of  lieutenant  -  colonel  for  gallantry.  Maj.  Wool
was  transferred  to  the  6th  infantry,  17  May,  1815,
and  in  the  subsequent  reorganization  was  made
inspector-general  of  the  army,  with  rank  of  colonel,
29  April,  1816.  The  routine  of  his  duty  was  varied
in  1832  by  a  professional  tour  abroad,  comprising
an  inspection  of  the  military  establishments  of
Europe  for  the  benefit  of  the  U.  S.  service.  In
1836  he  effected  the  transfer  of  the  Cherokee  In-
dians to  the  country  west  of  the  Mississippi,  and
on  25  June,  1841,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  in  the  U.
S.  army.  He  was
active  at  the  be-

f inning  of  the
texican  war  in
preparing  volun-
teer forces  for  the
field,  and  in  less
than  six  weeks
despatched  to  the
seat  of  war  12,000
men,  fully  armed
and  equipped.  He
was  Gen.  Zachary
Taylor's  second  in
command  at  Bue-
na  Vista,  selecting
the  ground  for  the
action,  making  the
preliminary  dispo-
sitions, and  commanding  on  the  field  till  the  ar-
rival of  his  superior.  For  gallant  and  meritori-
ous conduct  in  that  battle  he  was  brevetted  major-
general,  23  Feb.,  1847.  For  his  services  during
the  war  with  Mexico  congress  awarded  him  a  vote  of
vol.  vi. — 39


&T7i*^£Stl^r£n.


thanks  and  a  sword  of  honor,  and  a  sword  was  also
presented  to  Gen.  Wool  by  the  state  of  New  York.
He  commanded  the  eastern  military  division  in
1848-'53,  and  the  Department  of  the  Pacific  in
1854-'7,  putting  an  end  to  Indian  disturbances  in
Washington  and  Oregon  territories  in  1856  by  a
three-months'  campaign.  He  had  charge  of  the
Department  of  the  East  in  1860,  and  at  the  opening
of  the  civil  war  saved  Fortress  Monroe  by  timely
re-enforcements,  afterward  commanding  there  at
the  head  of  the  Department  of  Virginia.  He  was
promoted  major -gen-


army, 16
and had


eral,  U.  S.
May,  1862,
charge  successively  of
the  middle  military  de-
partment and  the  De-
partment of  the  East
till  July,  1863.  He
was  retired  from  ac-
tive service,  1  Aug.,
1863.  Gen.  Wool  was
a  rigid  disciplinarian,
and  had  no  superior  in
the  U..S.  service  as  an
organizer  of  troops.
The  monument  shown
in  the  illustration  was
raised  to  his  memory
in  Troy.  It  is  75  feet
high,  and  bears  the
following  inscription
from  the  pen  of  Will-
iam Cullen  Bryant  :
"This  stone  is  erect-
ed to  Maj  or- Gen  eral
John  Ellis  Wool,  the  gallant  soldier,  the  able
commander,  and  the  patriotic  citizen,  distin-
guished in  many  battles ;  and  to  Sarah  Moulton,
his  excellent  and  worthy  consort."

WOOLF,  Solomon,  educator,  b.  in  New  York
city,  6  Jan.,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Col-
lege of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1859,  and  in  the
same  year  was  appointed  tutor  in  descriptive  ge-
ometry there  and  in  the  Cooper  Union.  In  1878
he  was  appointed  to  the  professorship  of  geometry
and  drawing  in  that  college,  which  chair  he  has
since  held.  Besides  various  contributions  to  the
press,  he  has  published  "  A  Course  in  Descriptive
Geometry  "  (New  York,  1888).

WOOLMAN,  John,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in
Northampton,  Burlington  co.,  N.  J.,  in  August,
1720:  d.  in  York,  England,  7  Oct.,  1772.  He
worked  on  a  farm  with  his  father  till  he  was  twen-
ty-one years  of  age,  when  he  became  clerk  to  a
storekeeper  at  Mount  Holly,  where  he  opened  a
school  for  poor  children,  and  first  began  to  speak
at  the  meetings  of  the  sect.  Wishing  to  visit  the
various  societies  of  Friends  throughout  the  colo-
nies, and  to  preach  to  them,  he  first  learned  the
trade  of  a  tailor,  as  best  adapted  for  supporting
him  in  the  itinerant  life  that  he  had  resolved  to
lead.  In  1746  he  set  out  on  a  tour,  with  Isaac  An-
drews, to  visit  the  Friends  in  the  back  settlements
of  Virginia,  and  he  spent  a  great  part  of  his  life
in  such  journeys,  for  the  purpose  of  preaching.
He  spoke  and  wrote  much  against  slavery.  In
1763  he  visited  the  Indians  on  Susquehanna  river.
Early  in  1772  he  went  to  England,  and,  while  at-
tending the  quarterly  meeting  at  York,  he  was
smitten  with  small-pox,  and  died,  after  a  few  days'
illness.  Woolman's  writings  have  been  much  ad-
mired, and  were  highly  praised  by  Charles  Lamb.
Perhaps  the  most  interesting  of  his  works  is  the
posthumous  "  Journal  of  John  Woolman's  Life  and


610


WOOLSEY


WOOLSEY


Travels  in  the  Service  of  the.  Gospel "  (Philadelphia,
1775,  edited,  with  an  introduction,  by  John  G.  Whit-
tier,  1871).  Woolman  also  published  "  Some  Con-
siderations on  the  Keeping  of  Negroes  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1753 ;  2d  part,  1762) ;  "Considerations  on  Pure
Wisdom  and  Human  Policy,  on  Labor,  on  Schools,
and  on  the  Right  Use  of  the  Lord's  Outward  Gifts  "
(1768) ;  "  Considerations  on  the  True  Harmony  of
Mankind,  and  How  it  is  to  be  Maintained  "  (1770) ;
and  "An  Epistle  to  the  Quarterly  and  Monthly
Meetings  of  Friends"  (1772).  His*  "Serious  Con-
siderations, with  Some  of  his  Dying  Expressions,"
appeared  after  his  death  (London,  1773).  Various
manuscripts  that  he  left  were  included  in  an  edi-
tion of  his  works  (2  parts,  Philadelphia,  1774-'5).

WOOLSEY,  Melanchton  Taylor,  naval  officer,
b.  in  New  York  in  1782;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y,
18  May,  1838.  His  father  was  an  officer  in  the
war  of  independence  and  resided  at  Plattsburg,  on
Lake  Champlain,  where  he  was  collector  of  the
port.  The  son  studied  law,  but  entered  the  navy
as  a  midshipman,  9  April,  1800,  and  cruised  in
the  sloop  "  Adams  "  in  the  West  Indies  in  1800-'l.
He  went  to  Tripoli  just  before  the  close  of  the
Tripolitan  war,  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  14
Feb.,  1807,  and  went  to  Washington,  where  he  pre-
pared a  code  of  signals  for  the  navy.  He  was  sent
to  Lake  Ontario  to  superintend  the  building  of
three  naval  vessels,  and  at  Oswego,  in  1808,  laid  the
keel  of  the  "  Oneida,"  the  first  U.  S.  naval  vessel
that  was  ever  built  on  that  lake.  He  commanded
the  "  Oneida,"  and  was  in  charge  of  the  naval  sta-
tion at  Sackett's  Harbor  when  the  war  of  1812
began.  On  19  July,  1812,  a  British  squadron  of  five
vessels  came  in  sight,  when  Woolsey  attempted  to
escape  into  the  open  sea  in  the  "  Oneida  " ;  but  as
this  was  impossible,  he  returned  into  Sackett's  Har-
bor, where  he  landed  half  of  his  battery  on  shore
and  repelled  the  British  after  an  engagement  of
two  hours.  Com.  Isaac  Chauncey  arrived  soon
after  this  victory,  and  assumed  chief  command.
Other  vessels  were  built,  and  in  November,  1813,
Kingston  was  attacked,  Woolsey  commanding  the
"  Oneida "  and  continuing  to  serve  as  second  in
command.  He  was  promoted  to  master-comman-
dant. 24  July,  1813,  and  was  present  at  the  attack
on  York  and  the  assault  on  Fort  George.  In  the
schooner  "  Sylph  "  he  sailed  with  Com.  Chauncey's
squadron  on  28  Aug.,  1813,  and  chased  the  British
squadron  under  Sir  James  Yeo  for  six  days,  par-
ticipating in  numerous  engagements  during  Sep-
tember. On  5  Oct.,  1813,  he  captured  the  cutter
"  Drummond  "  and  the  sloops  "  Elizabeth,"  "  Mary
Ann,"  and  "  Lady  Gore "  off  False  Ducks.  In
May,  1814,  Woolsey  was  sent  to  Oswego  in  the
"  Sylph  "  to  transport  guns  and  cables  to  Sackett's
Harbor  at  a  period  when  the  British  had  again  ob-
tained control  of  the  lake.  The  British  squadron
appeared  off  Oswego  while  he  was  there,  and  he
circulated  a  report  that  the  destination  of  the  guns
and  stores  had  been  changed,  after  which,  availing
himself  of  a  dark  night,  he  went  out  with  a  flotilla
of  nineteen  heavy  boats  carrying  the  guns  and
stores.  The  British  discovered  his  retreat  and
followed  him  to  Sandy  Creek,  where  he  was  land-
ing the  guns  when  they  appeared.  Maj.  Daniel
Appling,  who  had  accompanied  him  with  a  force
of  riflemen,  prepared  an  ambuscade,  and  with
Woolsey  met  the  British  with  such  a  destructive
fire  that  in  the  end  they  were  all  captured.  Three
gun-boats,  two  barges,  one  gig,  six  guns,  and  186
men  were  taken  on  this"  occasion.  Woolsey  then
took  his  guns  and  stores  to  Sackett's  Harbor,  and
the  Americans  regained  command  of  the  lake.  He
had  charge  of  the  brig  "  Jones  "  from  the  following


year  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  remained  at  Sack-
ett's Harbor  after  peace  was  restored  until  1824  in
command  of  that  station.  He  was  promoted  to
captain,  27  April,  1816,  had  the  frigate  "  Constella-
tion "  in  the  West  Indies  from  1824  till  June,  1827,
was  in  chargeof  the  Pensacola  navy-vard  in  1827-'31,
and  commodore  commanding  the  Brazil  station  in
1832-'4.  In  1836-'7  he  had  charge  of  the  surveys
of  the  Chesapeake  bay,  after  which  his  health  de-
clined.— His  son,  Melanchton  Brooks,  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  New  York,  11  Aug.,  1817:  d.  in  Pensa-
cola, Fla.,  2  Oct.,  1874.  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman, 24  Sept.,  1832,  attended  the  naval  school
at  Philadelphia,  and  became  a  passed  midshipman,
16  July,  1840.  He  was  promoted  to  master,  22
March,  1847,  and  to  lieutenant,  16  July,  1847,  and
by  action  of  the  retiring  board  he  was  placed  on
the  reserved  list,  13  Sept.,  1855.  In  1861  he  was
assigned  to  active  duty  and  attached  to  the  re-
ceiving-ship at  New  York.  He  commanded  the
steamer  "  Ellen,"  on  the  South  Atlantic  blockade,
in  1861-'2,  in  which  he  engaged  Fort  Pemberton
at  Wapper  creek,  S.  C,  in  May,  1862.  repelled
Confederate  cavalry  at  Secessionville,  1  June,  1862,
and  participated  in  the  attack  on  James  island,  3
June,  1862.  He  was  commissioned  a  commander,
16  July,  1862,  on  the  reserved  list,  and  command-
ed the  sloop  "Vandalia"  in  1862-'3,  and  the
steamer  "  Princess  Royal,"  in  the  West  Gulf  squad-
ron, in  1863-'5.  He  participated  in  the  engage-
ment and  repulse  of  the  Confederates  at  Donald-
sonville,  La.,  on  28  June,  1863,  and  was  highly  com-
mended for  this  victory.  He  continued  to  serve
on  the  blockade  until  the  close  of  the  war,  and  was
placed  on  the  active  list  and  promoted  to  captain,
25  July,  1866,  and  to  commodore,  20  May,  1871.
On  6  March,  1873,  he  was  appointed  commandant
of  the  Pensacola  navy-yard.  In  1874  Woolsey  had
orders  to  go  to  the  north  on  duty,  but  he  declined
to  leave  his  post  when  a  yellow-fever  epidemic
appeared,  and  he  died  there.

WOOLSEY,  Theodore  Dwight,  educator,  b.  in
New  York  city,  31  Oct.,  1801.  He  is  the  son  of
William  W.  Woolsey,  a  merchant  of  New  York  city,
and  of  Elizabeth  Dwight.  sister  of  President  Tim-
othy Dwight,  of  Yale.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1820,  studied  law  for  a  year  in  Philadelphia,  and
theology  at  Princeton  in  1821-'3,  and  from  1823  till
1825  was  a  tutor  at  Y7ale.  In  1825  he  was  licensed
to  preach,  and  from  1827  till  1830  he  studied  the
Greek  language  and  literature  in  Germany,  France,
and  Italy.  Returning  to  this  country,  he  was  pro-
fessor of  Greek  at  Yale  from  1831  till  1846,  when
he  was  appointed  president,  which  post  he  held  till
his  resignation  in  1871.  He  was  a  member  of  the
American  company  of  revisers  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  its  chairman  in  1871-'81,  was  at  one
time  vice-president  of  the  Oriental  society,  and
for  several  vears  a  regent  of  the  Smithsonian  insti-
tution at  Washington,  D.  C.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1847,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  the  same  institution  in  1886.  He
gave  to  the  Yale  library  1,000  volumes  in  Greek
literature.  His  opinions  are  regarded  as  of  great
weight  on  questions  of  international  law.  He
edited  the  "  New  Englander "  for  several  years
after  its  first  appearance  in  1843,  and  wrote  for
the  "  North  American,"  "  Princeton  Review,"  and
the  "  Century."  He  published  editions  of  the
Greek  text,  with  English  notes  for  the  use  of  col-
lege students,  of  the  "Alcestis"  of  Euripides
(Cambridge,  1834);  the  "Antigone"  of  Sophocles
(1835);  the  "Prometheus"  of  ^schylus  (1837);
the  "  Electra  "  of  Sophocles  (1837) :  and  the  "  Gor-
gias  "  of  Plato  (1843) ;  "  Introduction  to  the  Study


WOOLSON


WOOSTER


611


of  International  Law,  designed  as  an  Aid  in  Teach-
ing and  in  Historical  Studies  "  (Boston,  1860 ;  5th
ed.,  enlarged,  New  York,  1879) ;  "  Essays  on  Di-
vorce and  Divorce  Legislation,  with  Special  Refer-
ence to  the  United  States"  (1869);  "Religion  of
the  Present  and  of  the  Future,  Sermons  preached
chiefly  at  Yale  College"  (1871);  "Political  Sci-
ence, "or  the  State,  Theoretically  and  Practically
considered "  (2  vols.,  1877) ;  "  Communism  and
Socialism  in  their  Historv  and  Theorv :  a  Sketch  "
<1880) ;  and  "  Helpful  Thoughts  for  Young  Men  "
(1882).  He  has  edited  new  editions  of  Francis
Lieber's  "  Civil  Liberty  and  Self-Government "
(Philadelphia,  1871),  and  a  "  Manual  of  Politic
Ethics  "  (2  vols.,  1871).  He  also  published  smaller
works,  and  essays  and  reviews  in  magazines.  The
discourses  and  addresses  at  his  ordination  to  the
ministry,  and  his  inauguration  as  president  of  Yale
were  published  together  (New  Haven,  1846). — His
son,  Theodore  Salisbury,  b.  in  New  Haven.  Conn.,
22  Oct.,  1852,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1872,  stud-
ied abroad  in  1874-'6,  was  gaduated  at  the  Yale
law-school  in  1876,  and  since  1879  has  been  pro-
fessor of  international  law  at  Yale  law-school. —
Theodore  Dwight's  niece,  Sarah  Chauncey,  author,
b.  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  about  1845,  has  published,
under  the  pen-name  of  "Susan  Coolidge,"  "The
New- Year's  Bargain  "  (Boston,  1871) :  "  What  Katv
Did  "  (1872)  j  "  Mischief's  Thanksgiving,  and  other
Stories  "  (1874), .  besides  other  books  for  children ;
"  For  Summer  Afternoons  "  (1876) ;  "  Verses  "
(1880);  "A  Guernsey  Lily"  (1881);  "A  Little
Country  Girl "  (1885) ;  and  "  A  Short  History  of
the  City  of  Philadelphia"  (1887).

WOOLSON,  Abba  Louisa  Goold,  author,  b.
in  Windham,  Me.,  30  April,  1838.  She  is  the
daughter  of  William  Goold,  author  of  "  Portland
in  the  Past "  (Portland,  1886),  and  of  several  his-
torical papers  in  the  "  Collections  "  of  the  Maine
historical  society,  of  which  for  many  years  he  was
corresponding  secretary.  She  passed  her  early
life  in  Portland,  Me.,  where  she  was  graduated  at
the  high-school  for  girls  in  1856,  and  the  same  year
married  Moses  Woolson,  its  principal.  Mrs.  Wool-
son  has  given  courses  of  lectures  in  Boston,  New
York,  Washington,  and  other  cities  on  "  English
Literature  in  Connection  with  English  History,"
"  The  Influence  of  Foreign  Nations  upon  English
Literature,"  "  Dramas  of  Shakespeare,  as  Illus-
trating English  History,"  and  "  The  Historic  Cities
of  Spain."  She  resides  with  her  husband  in  Bos-
ton, and  is  a  member  of  literary  and  philanthropic
societies  and  president  of  the  Castilian  club.  She
has  contributed  to  periodicals,  and  published
"  Woman  in  American  Society "  (Boston,  1873) ;
"Browsing  among  Books"  (1881);  and  "George
Eliot  and  her  Heroines "  (New  York,  1886) ;  and
edited  "Dress  Reform,"  a  series  of  lectures  by
female  physicians  of  Boston  on  "  Dress  as  it  affects
the  Health  of  Women  "  (Boston,  1874).

WOOLSON,  Constance  Fenimore,  author,  b.
in  Claremont,  N.  H.,  in  1848.  She  is  the  daughter
of  Charles  Jar  vis  Woolson  and  of  Hannah  Cooper
Pomeroy,  who  was  a  niece  of  James  Fenimore
Cooper.  She  removed  with  her  parents  to  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  in  early  life,  was  educated  at  the  young
ladies'  seminary  there,  and  afterward  sent  to  Ma-
dame Chegary's  French  school  in  New  York  city.
On  the  death  of  her  father  in  1869  she  began  to
write,  and  she  removed  with  her  mother  to  the
southern  states  in  1873,  where  she  resided,  princi-
pally in  Florida,  till  1879.  In  that  year,  on  the
death  of  her  mother,  she  went  to  England,  where
she  has  since  resided.  She  has  contributed  to  peri-
odicals, and  published  "  Anne  "  (New  York,  1882) ;


^^P^^^5


"For  the  Major"  (1883);  "East  Angels"  (1886);
"  Rodman  the  Keeper  "  (1886) ;  and  "  Castle  No-
where :  Lake-Country  Sketches  "  (1886).

WOOSTER,  David,  soldier,  b.  in  Stratford,
Conn.,  2  March,  1710;  d.  in  Danbury,  Conn.,  2
May,  1777.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1738,
and  when  war  be-
tween England
and  Spain  began
in  1739  he  en-
tered the  pro-
vincial army  as
lieutenant,  and
was  subsequent-
ly made  captain
of  a  vessel  that
was  built  and
equipped  by  the
colony  for  the
defence  of  its
coasts.  In  1745
he  served  as
captain  in  Col.
Aaron  Burr's
regiment,  which
participated  in
the  expedition
against  Louisburg,  and  commanded  the  "  Connecti-
cut," which  conveyed  the  troops  thither.  From
that  place  he  went,  in  command  of  a  cartel,  to
England.  He  was  made  a  captain  under  Sir
William  Pepperell,  and  received  half-pay  until
1774.  He  was  appointed  colonel  in  the  3d  Con-
necticut regiment  in  1755,  and  later  brigadier-gen-
eral, and  served  during  the  French  war,  1756-'63.
He  was  an  originator  of  the  expedition  that  cap-
tured Ticonderoga  in  April,  1775,  and  afterward
served  in  the  Connecticut  assembly.  On  the  or-
ganization of  the  Continental  army  he  was  appoint-
ed one  of  the  eight  brigadier  -  generals,  third  in
rank,  and  served  in  Canada,  where,  after  the  death
of  Gen.  Richard  Montgomery,  he  held  for  a  time  the
chief  command.  He  resigned  from  the  army,  but
on  his  return  to  Connecticut  he  was  made  the  first
major-general  of  the  militia  of  that  state.  During
the  winter  of  1776-'7  he  was  employed  in  raising
recruits  and  provisions  for  the  force  that  was
stationed  in  Danbury,  and  was  in  command  of
that  town  when  it  was  attacked  by  Gov.  William
Tryon's  troops  on  26  April,  1777.  Tryon,  fear-
ing that  he  might  be  cut  off  on  his  retreat,
marched  toward  Ridgeway,  a  parish  in  the  town
of  Ridgefield,  and  when  this  movement  was
known  to  the  American  commanders  they  sep-
arated their  forces  into  two  parts.  The  largest-
division,  of  400  men,  under  Gold  Selleck  Silliman
and  Benedict  Arnold,  was  stationed  in  front  of  the
enemy,  while  Wooster,  with  the  remaining  200,
was  sent  to  annoy  the  rear-guard.  Arnold,  on
arriving  at  Ridgefield,  constructed  a  barricade
across  the  highway  between  the  house  of  Benjamin
Stebbins  and  a  ledge  of  rock  to  the  west  of  the
road,  and  awaited  the  enemy's  approach.  The
British,  after  leaving  Danbury,  changed  their  course
of  retreat,  and  Wooster  hastened  forward  until  he
met  the  foe  a  few  miles  north  of  Ridgefield,  fell
upon  the  rear  of  the  British  column,  and,  after  a
sharp  skirmish,  took  forty  prisoners.  He  made  a
second  assault  about  a  mile  north  of  the  Stebbins
house.  Several  discharges  of  artillery  caused  the
American  column  to  break,  and  Wooster  endeav-
ored to  rally  his  men,  exclaiming,  "  Come  on,  my
boys !  Never  mind  such  random  shots ! "  But  a
musket-ball  pierced  his  body.  He  was  taken  to
Danbury,  where  he  died  a  few  days  afterward. On


612


WORCESTER


WORCESTER


17  June,  1777,  the  Continental  congress  passed  a
resolution  that  a  monument  be  erected  to  the
memory  of  Gen.  Wooster.  The  sum  of  $500  was
appropriated  for  this  purpose,  but  the  money  was
never  paid,  and  the  grave  of  the  hero  soon  be-
came unknown.  A  handsome  monument  of  Port-
land granite  was  erected  to  his  memory  in  Dan-
bury  in  1854. — His  grandson,  Charles  Whiting,
naval  officer,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1785;
d.  in  California  in  1848,  entered  the  merchant
service,  and  during  the  war  with  England  armed
the  privateer  "  Saratoga,"  with  which  he  captured
many  prizes,  acquiring  a  fortune.  When  the  Chili-
ans in  1817  were  trying  to  improvise  a  navy  for
capturing  a  Spanish  convoy  that  was  expected  in
Callao  by  way  of  Cape  Horn,  Wooster  arrived  in
Valparaiso  with  his  armed  brig  M  Columbus,"  which
the  government  bought  from  him,  and,  under  the
name  of  the  "Araucano,"  placed  under  the  com-
mand of  Wooster,  with  the  rank  of  captain.  After
a  fortunate  cruise  on  the  coast  of  Peru  and  Mex-
ico, his  vessel  was  sent,  with  the  "San  Martin,"
"  Chacabuco,"  and  "  Lautaro,"  to  capture  a  con-
voy of  nine  transports,  escorted  by  the  frigate
"  Maria  Isabel,"  which  was  expected  from  Spain
in  Taleahuano.  On  28  Oct.,  1818,  they  found  the
frigate  in  that  port,  and  captured  her  after  a  short
struggle,  Wooster  being  the  first  to  board  her.  In
recompense  he  was  given  command  of  the  prize,
and,  with  four  of  the  transports,  captured  shortly
afterward,  the  Chilian  fleet  entered  Valparaiso.
When  Lord  Cochrane  was  given  command-in-chief
of  the  Chilian  navy  in  1819,  Wooster,  refusing  to
serve  under  him,  resigned  and  took  command  of
a  merchant-vessel.  After  Cochrane's  departure,
Wooster  entered  the  service  again  in  1822,  taking
command  of  his  old  ship,  with  the  rank  of  post-
captain,  and  in  the  following  year  made  a  suc-
cessful cruise  on  the  coast  of  Peru.  He  also  took
{>art  in  the  campaigns  of  1824-'6  against  the  Chi-
oe  archipelago.  In  1829  he  was  promoted  rear-
admiral,  and,  for  a  long  time  before,  he  had  been
practically  commander-in-chief  of  the  small  Chili-
an navy.  He  went  in  1847  to  California,  where  he
engaged  in  mining  on  Yuba  river,  but  without
success. — Gen.  Wooster's  great-grandnephew,  Da-
vid, physician,  b.  in  Jasper,  Steuben  co.,  N.  Y.,  10
June.  1825,  served  as  acting  assistant  surgeon  in
the  U.  S.  army  during  the  Mexican  war,  being  sta-
tioned in  La  Puebla.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Cleveland  medical  college  in  1849,  and  in  that  year
began  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Adrian,
Mich.  In  1850  he  crossed  the  plains  to  California,
practised  medicine,  and  was  a  miner  on  Yuba  river
until  1856,  when  he  removed  to  San  Francisco.  In
1861-'3  he  served  as  surgeon  in  the  California  vol-
unteers in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico.  Prom  1867
till  1871  he  was  U.  S.  special  examiner  of  drugs  in
San  Francisco,  and  in  1871-'2  he  was  surgeon  in  the

U.  S.  marine  hospital  of  that  city,  where  he  still
practises  his  profession.  In  1858  he  founded  "  The
Pacific  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal "  in  San
Francisco,  which  he  edited  four  years.  Besides  nu-
merous contributions  to  this  journal  and  to  other
medical  periodicals,  he  has  published  a  brochure  on
"Diphtheria,"  the  first  publication  in  the  United
States  on  this  disease  (1859) ;  "  Diseases  of  the
Heart "  (186?) ;  a  pamphlet  on  "  Hip-Joint  Disease  "
(1876) ;  and  a  "  Genealogy  of  the  Woosters  in
America  "  (San  Francisco,  1885).

WORCESTER,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  13  Feb.,  1834. He  became  pastor  of  the

New  Church  society  of  Newtonville,  Mass..  in  1869,
instructor  of  theology  in  the  New  Church  theologi-
cal school,  Boston,  in  1878,  and  its  president  in


1881.  He  is  the  author  of  "A  Year's  Lessons
from  the  Psalms"  (Boston,  1869);  "Correspond-
ences of  the  Bible :  the  Animals "  (1875 ;  2d  ed.,
1884) ;  and  "  A  Journey  in  Palestine  "  (1884).

WORCESTER,  Joseph  Emerson,  philologist,
b.  in  Bedford,  N.  H.,  24  Aug.,  1784;  d.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  27  Oct.,  1865.  His  father,  Jesse  Wor-
cester (1761-1834),  wrote  much  for  the  press,  and
left  in  manuscript  "  Chronicles  of  Nissitissit."  The
son  worked  on  a
farm  in  his  youth,
but  cultivated  stu-
dious habits,  de-
termined to  ob-
tain a  liberal  edu-
cation, and  at  the
age  of  twenty-
five  entered  Yale,
where  two  years
later,  1811,  he  was
graduated.  He
was  a  teacher  in
Salem,  Mass.,  for
several  years,  and
passed  two  years
at  Andover,  but  in
1819  removed  to
Cambridge,  which
was  thenceforth
his  home.  His  life
was  long  and  quiet,  with  hardly  an  incident  except
the  publication  of  his  books.  His  first  work  was  "A
Geographical  Dictionary,  or  Universal  Gazetteer,
Ancient  and  Modern"  (2  vols.,  Andover,  Mass..
1817),  of  which  he  published  an  enlarged  edition
in  1823.  He  also  published  "  A  Gazetteer  of  the
United  States  "  (1818) ;  "  Elements  of  Geography,
Ancient  and  Modern  "  (1819),  which  passed  through
several  editions :  "  Sketches  of  the  Earth  and  its  In-
habitants "  (1823) ;  "  Elements  of  History,  Ancient
and  Modern,  accompanied  by  an  Historical  Atlas  "
(1826),  which  was  used  extensively  as  a  text-book :
"  Epitome  of  History  "  (1827) ;  and  "  Outlines  of
Scripture  Geography  "  (1828).  These  works  were
notable  for  their  accuracy,  skilful  condensation,
and  agreeable  style.  In  1825  Dr.  Worcester  read
before  the  American  academy  of  sciences  a  paper
on  "  Longevity  and  the  Expectation  of  Life  in  the
United  States.  Relating  more  Particularly  to  the
State  of  New  Hampshire,  with  Some  Comparative
Views  in  Relation  to  Foreign  Countries,"  which  was
published  in  the  "Transactions."  His  work  in
lexicography  began  with  an  edition  of  "  Johnson's
Dictionary,  as  improved  by  Todd  and  abridged  by
Chalmers,  with  Walker's  Pronouncing  Dictionary
Combined  "  (1828).  In  1829,  much  against  his  in-
clination, he  was  induced  to  prepare  an  abridgment
of  Noah  Webster's  "  American  Dictionary,"  and  in
1830  he  published  his  own  "Comprehensive  Pro-
nouncing and  Explanatory  English  Dictionary."
The  next  year  he  visited  Europe,  where  he  col-
lected philological  works  and  kept  a  journal,  which
is  still  in  manuscript.  From  1831  to  1843  he  edit-
ed the  "American  Almanac."  In  1846  he  pub-
lished a  "  Universal  and  Critical  Dictionary  of  the
English  Language,"  of  which  a  pirated  edition  ap-
peared in  London  with  a  garbled  preface  and  a
statement  on  the  title-page  that  it  was  "  compiled
from  the  materials  of  Noah  Webster,  LL.  D.,  by
Joseph  E.  Worcester,"  whereupon  Dr.  Worcester
published  a  pamphlet  exposing  the  fraud.  In
1847-'9  he  was  unable  to  use  his  eyes,  but  they
were  restored  after  he  had  undergone  two  operations
for  cataract.  Enlarged  editions  of  his  "  Compre-
hensive Dictionary  "  were  issued  in  1847,  1849,  and


WORCESTER


WORCESTER


613


1855.  All  this  work  was  preparatory  to  his  great
quarto  "  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language "
(Boston,  1860),  in  which  he  had  the  assistance  of
many  collaborators,  especially  for  the  explanations
of  technical  terms.  This  was  the  first  dictionary
that  used  illustrations.  The  difference  between
his  system  and  Webster's,  briefly  indicated,  was
this:  that  Worcester  endeavored  simply  to  repre-
sent the  English  language  as  it  was,  while  Web-
ster tried  to  improve  it  and  set  it  forth  as  he
thought  it  ought  to  be.  The  successive  editions  of
Webster's  work  have  receded  steadily  from  his
radical  plan,  so  that  now  there  is  but  little  essen-
tial difference  between  the  two  great  dictionaries.
Dr.  Worcester  was  retiring,  modest,  benevolent,
and  deeply  religious.  He  married,  in  1841,  Amy
Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Prof.  Joseph  McKean,  of
Harvard.  They  had  no  children.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  numerous  learned  societies,  and  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Brown  in  1847  and  from
Dartmouth  in  1856.  Ezra  Abbott  prepared  a
memoir  of  him,  which  was  read  before  the  Ameri-
can academy  of  sciences  the  vear  after  his  death.

WORCESTER,  Noah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hollis,
N.  H.,  25  Nov.,  1758;  d.  in  Brighton,  Mass.,  31
Oct.,  1837.  He  was  descended  from  Rev.  William
Worcester,  who  came  from  Salisbury,  England,
and  was  the  first  minister  of  the  church  in  Salis-
bury, Mass.,  which  was  organized  in  1638.  Noah's
father,  of  the  same  name,  was  one  of  the  framers
of  the  constitution  of  New  Hampshire.  The  son
was  a  fifer  in  the  Continental  army  in  1775,  entered
the  service  again  for  a  short  time  as  fife-major  in
1777,  and  was  at  the  battles  of  Bunker  Hill  and
Bennington.  In  September,  1778,  he  removed  to
Plymouth,  N.  H.,  where  he  taught,  and  in  Febru-
ary, 1782,  settled  at  Thornton,  filling  several  local
offices,  and  was  chosen  to  the  legislature.  Having
turned  his  attention  to  theology,  he  published  a
"  Letter  to  the  Rev.  John  Murray  Concerning  the
Origin  of  Evil"  (Newburyport,  1786),  was  licensed
to  preach  by  a  Congregational  association  in  1786,
and  in  1787  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  church  in
Thornton,  where  he  remained  till  1802,  receiving  a
salary  of  $200.  In  1802  he  was  employed  as  its
first  missionary  in  the  New  Hampshire  society
then  organized,  and  in  that  capacity  preached  and
travelled  extensively  through  the  northern  part  of
the  state.  He  removed  to  Salisbury,  N.  H.,  in
1810,  and  there  supplied  the  pulpit  of  his  brother
Thomas  till  1813,  when  he  settled  at  Brighton,
Mass.  He  edited  the  "  Christian  Disciple "  in
1813-'18,  and  "  The  Friend  of  Peace,"  a  quarterly
magazine,  in  1819-'29,  founded  the  Massachusetts
peace  society  in  1815,  and  was  its  secretary  till  1828.
Mr.  Worcester  received  honorary  degrees  in  arts
from  Dartmouth  in  1791,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from
Harvard  in  1818.  In  addition  to  his  editorial  work
he  contributed  to  the  "  Theological  Magazine,"  and

Bublished  "  Familiar  Dialogue  between  Cephas  and
Creas  "  (Worcester,  1792) ;  "  Solemn  Reasons  for
Declining  to  adopt  the  Baptist  Theory  and  Prac-
tice "  (Charlestown,  1809) ;  "  Bible  News,  or  Sacred
Truths  Relating  to  the  Living  God,  his  only  Son,
and  Holy  Spirit,"  which  was  censured  by  the  Hop-
kinsian  association,  of  which  the  author  was  a
member,  as  unsound  on  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity
(Concord,  1810) ;  "  Impartial  Review  of  the  Testi-
monies in  Favor  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Son  of  God  "
{1810) ;  "  Respectful  Address  to  the  Trinitarian
Clergy"  (Boston,  1812);  "Solemn  Review  of  the
Custom  of  War,  by  Philo  Pacificus,"  which  was
republished  in  Europe  in  several  languages  (1814) ;
■"  The  Atoning  Sacrifice :  a  Display  of  Love,  not  of
Wrath" (Cambridge, 1829); "The  Causes and


Evils  of  Contentions  among  Christians  "  (Boston,
1831) ;  "  Last  Thoughts  on  Important  Subjects  "
(Cambridge,  1833) ;  and  single  sermons  and  tracts.
See  "  Memoirs  of  Noah  Worcester,  D.  D.,"  by  Rev.
Henry  Ware,  Jr.,  D.  D.,  with  a  preface,  notes,  and
a  concluding  chapter  by  Samuel  Worcester  (Boston,
1844). — His  brother,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in
Hollis,  N.  H.,  22  Nov.,  1768;  d.  24  Dec,  1831,
having  studied  theology  under  the  direction  of
Rev.  Daniel Emerson,  of Hollis,  was ordained

Bastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Salisbury,
I".  H.,  9  Nov.,  1791.  He  adopted  the  Unitarian
views  of  his  brother  Noah,  and  this,  together  with
his  impaired  health,  led  to  his  dismissal,  24  April,
1823,  by  a  mutual  council.  He  remained  after-
ward without  a  pastoral  charge.  He  received  the
honorary  degree  of  M.  A.  from  Dartmouth  college
in  1806.  Mr.  Worcester  published  "A  Call  for
Scripture  Evidence  that  Christ  is  the  Self-Exist-
ent Eternal  God"  (Boston,  1811) ;  "  New  Chain  of
Plain  Argument  Deemed  Conclusive  against  Trini-
tarianism"  (1817);  "The  True  God  but  one  Per-
son "  (1819) ;  and  separate  sermons.  —  Another
brother,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hollis,  N.  H.,
1  Nov.,  1770 ;  d.  in  Brainard,  Tenn.,  7  June,  1821,
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1795,  licensed  to
preach  in  1796,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  in  Fitchburg,  Mass.,  from  1797  till
1802.  He  became  pastor  of  the  Tabernacle  church,
Salem,  in  1803,  which  charge  he  held  till  his  death.
He  declined  the  professorship  of  theology  in
Dartmouth  in  1804,  became  corresponding  secre-
tary of  the  American  board  of  commissioners  for
foreign  missions  in  1810,  and  in  1815  engaged  in
the  Unitarian  controversy,  his  immediate  oppo-
nent being  the  Rev.  William  E.  Channing.  At  the
time  of  his  death  he  was  travelling  for  the  benefit
of  his  health.  He  published  "  Discourses  on  the
Covenant  with  Abraham  "  (Salem,  1805) ;  "  Three
Letters  to  the  Rev.  William  E.  Channing  on  Uni-
tarianism"  (Boston,  1815);  "Watts's  Entire  and
Select  Hymns "  (1818) ;  single  sermons  and  pam-
phlets ;  and  reviews  and  essays  in  religious  periodi-
cals. After  his  death  a  collection  of  his  sermons
was  published  (1823).  See  "Life  and  Labors  of
Rev.  Samuel  Worcester,"  by  his  son,  Rev.  Samuel
M.  Worcester  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1852). — Samuel's
son,  Samuel  Melancthon,  b.  in  Fitchburg,  Mass.,
4  Sept.,  1801;  d.  in  Boston,  16  Aug.,  1866,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1822,  studied  for  a  year
at  Andover,  was  a  tutor  in  Amherst  in  1823-'5,
and  professor  of  rhetoric  and  oratory  there  from
1825  till  1834.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Tabernacle
church,  Salem,  from  1834  till  1860,  when  impaired
health  caused  him  to  resign.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Massachusetts  senate  and  house  of  representa-
tives. Mr.  Worcester  published  "  Essays  on  Sla-
very, by  Vigorinus  "  (1826) ;  "  The  Memorial  of  the
Old  and  New  Tabernacle,"  Salem,  Mass.  (Boston,
1855) ;  the  life  of  his  father  that  has  been  men-
tioned; single  sermons  and  discourses;  and  articles
in  religious  periodicals. — Noah's  son,  Thomas,
clergyman,  b.  in  Thornton,  N.  H.,  15  April,  1795;
d.  in  Waltham,  Mass.,  12  Aug.,  1878,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1818,  and  spent  two  years  and  a  half
at  the  divinity-school,  but  embraced  Swedenborgian
tenets,  and  was  the  first  clergyman  of  that  faith
in  Massachusetts,  serving  as  pastor  of  the  Boston '
society  of  the  New  Jerusalem  church  from  1821
till  1867.  He  was  president  of  the  Massachusetts
association  of  his  denomination,  and  also  of  its
general  convention  from  1839  till  1875.  Harvard
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1856,  and  he  was
one  of  its  overseers  in  1854-'60.  He  published
sermons,  addresses,  and  magazine  articles.


614


WORCESTER


WORKMAN


corSen^


WORCESTER,  Noah,  educator,  b.  in  Thorn-
ton, N.  H.,  in  1812  ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  4  April,
1847.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1832,  was
afterward  a  tutor  at  Dartmouth,  became  professor
of  general  pathology  in  Western  Reserve  college,
Ohio,  and  was  eminent  as  a  physician.  He  pub-
lished "Symptoms,  Diagnosis,  and  Treatment  of
Diseases  of  the  Skin  "  (Philadelphia,  1844).

WORDEN,  John  Lorimer,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Westchester  county,  N.  Y.,  12  March,  1818.  He
entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  12  Jan.,  1835,
attended  the  naval  school  at  Philadelphia  in  1840,
and  became  a  passed  midshipman  on  16  July  of

that  year.  He  was
promoted  to  lieu-
tenant, 30  Nov.,
1846,  and  served  on
various  vessels  and
at  the  naval  ob-
servatory till  the
civil  war.  In  April.
1861,  he  delivered
the  orders  from
the  secretary  of  the
navy  by  which  Fort
Pickens  was  saved
for  the  Union,  and
upon  his  attempt  to
return  to  the  north
overland  he  was
arrested  and  con-
fined as  a  prisoner
of  war  for  seven
months.  When  he
was  exchanged  he  was  ordered  to  superintend  the
completion  of  John  Ericsson's  "  Monitor,"  and  ap-
pointed to  take  command.  He  left  New  York
nastily  in  this  vessel,  and  after  experiencing  great
danger  arrived  at  Hampton  Roads.  On  8  March,
1862,  the  iron-clad  ram  "  Merrimac "  had  come
down  from  Norfolk  and  had  sunk  the  "  Congress  "
and  the  "  Cumberland."  Worden  anchored  along-
side of  the  "Minnesota,"  then  aground  on  the
shoal,  and  prepared  to  defend  the  fleet  when  the
"  Merrimac "  reappeared.  Early  the  next  morn-
ing, 9  March,  the  ram  prepared  to  attack  the
"  Minnesota,"  but  when  she  was  within  a  mile  of
the  ship  the  "  Monitor  "  steamed  out.  The  "  Mer-
rimac fired  broadsides  upon  the  "  Monitor,"  but
all  the  shots  that  struck  her  turret  glanced  off ;  the
"  Monitor "  fired  deliberately  about  every  seven
minutes,  every  shot  taking  effect.  Worden  en-
deavored to  get  as  close  as  possible,  while  the
"  Merrimac  "  tired  as  rapidly  as  the  guns  could  be
served.  The  duel  continued  for  more  than  two
hours,  when  the  "  Merrimac  "  attempted  to  ram  the
"  Monitor,"  but  Worden  avoided  the  blow  by  ma-
noeuvring, so  that  the  ram  glanced  off.  Worden
had  orders  not  to  use  heavy  charges,  as  the  eleven-
inch  guns  were  considered  too  weak  for  more  than
fifteen-pound  charges,  with  which  he  could  not
penetrate  the  "  Merrimac's "  heavy  armor.  At
11.30  a.  m.  a  shell  exploded  on  the  pilot-house  of
the  ••  Monitor  "  while  Worden  was  looking  thiwigh
the  slit,  and  the  powder  and  flame  was  driven  into
his  eyes,  rendering  him  blind  and  helpless.  (See
Greexe,  Samuel  Dana.)  Lieut.  Greene,  the  sec-
ond in  command,  continued  the  action ;  but  the
'•Merrimac"  soon  withdrew  to  Norfolk.  It  was
a  drawn  battle,  but  the  "Merrimac"  was  prevent-
ed from  accomplishing  her  purpose  of  destroy-
ing the  National  fleet  and  eventually  securing  the
independence  of  the  Confederates  by  capturing
Washington,  New  York,  and  other  cities,  as  had
been  expected. Honors  were  showered  upon  Wor-


den for  this  service.  Congress  gave  him  a  vote  of
thanks,  11  July,  1862,  and  again  on  3  Feb.,  1863,
and  recommended  him  to  be  advanced  one  grade
for  his  conduct  in  this  conflict.  He  was  commis-
sioned a  commander,  12  July,  1862,  and,  in  accord-
ance with  the  second  vote  of  thanks,  was  promoted
to  captain,  3  Feb.,  1863.  He  recovered  from  the
injuries  to  his  eyes,  and  commanded  the  monitor
"  Montauk,"  in  the  South  Atlantic  blockading
squadron,  from  January  till  June,  1863.  In  order
to  test  the  ability  of  the  monitors  to  withstand
heavy  gun-fire  from  forts,  Worden  was  sent  to  en-
gage Fort  McAllister,  at  Genesee  point,  on  Ogeechee
river,  and  reported  that  he  was  convinced  they
could  do  so.  In  this  expedition  he  destroyed  the
Confederate  privateer  "Nashville,"  which  had
taken  shelter  under  the  guns  of  Fort  McAllister.
He  participated  in  the  blockade  of  Charleston,  and
in  the  attack  on  the  forts  of  Charleston  by  Admiral
Dupont's  squadron  on  7  April,  1863.  After  receiv-
ing his  promotion  to  captain,  he  was  on  duty  at
New  York  connected  with  the  iron-clads  in  1863-6.
He  commanded  the  "  Pensacola,"  in  the  Pacific
squadron,  in  1866-'7,  and  was  on  special  duty  in  1868.
He  was  promoted  to  commodore,  27  May,  1868,
and  was  superintendent  of  the  naval  academy  in
1870-'4.  He  was  commissioned  a  rear-admiral,  20
Nov.,  1872,  was  commander-in-chief  of  the  Euro-
pean squadron  from  3  Feb.,  1875,  till  23  Dec,  1877,
and  then  served  as  member  of  the  examining  board
and  president  of  the  retiring  board  until  23  Dec,
1886.  As  he  had  received  two  votes  of  thanks
from  congress,  he  was  retained  by  operation  of  law
on  the  active  list  until  he  should  have  had  fifty-
five  years  of  service,  but  he  was  retired  with  the
highest  sea-pay  of  his  grade,  at  his  own  request,  by
special  act  of  congress,  23  Dec,  1886.

WORK,  Henry  Clay,  song-writer,  b.  in  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  1  Oct.,  1832  ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  8
June,  1884.  He  was  the  son  of  Alanson  Work,
who  was  sentenced  to  twelve  years'  imprisonment
in"  1841  in  Missouri  for  assisting  fugitive  slaves  to
escape.  While  young  the  son  removed  with  his
father  to  Illinois,  where  he  received  a  common-
school  education.  He  returned  to  Connecticut,
was  apprenticed  to  a  printer,  and  employed  his
leisure  in  studying  harmony.  His  first  success
was  achieved  during  the  civil  war,  when  he  sprang
into  favor  by  his  war-songs,  among  which  were-
"Kingdom  Coming,"  "Marching  through  Geor-
gia," and  "  Babylon  is  Fallen."  His  songs  num-
ber nearly  one  hundred,  and  include  "  Nicodemus
the  Slave,"  "  Lily  Dale,"  and  "  My  Grandfather's
Clock."  He  went  to  Europe  in  i865,  and  on  his
return  invested  the  fortune  that  his  songs  had
brought  him  in  a  fruit-raising  enterprise  in  Vine-
land,  N.  J.,  which  was  a  failure.  In  1875  he  be-
came connected  as  composer  with  Root  and  Cady,
the  music-publishers,  who  had  published  Work's
songs  until  the  plates  were  destroyed  by  the
Chicago  fire  of  1871.  Mr.  Work  was  also  an  in-
ventor, and  patented  a  knitting-machine,  a  walk-
ing doll,  and  a  rotary  engine.

WORKMAN,  Thomas,  Canadian  merchant,  b.
near  Lisburn,  County  Antrim.  Ireland,  17  June,
1813.  He  emigrated  to  Canada  in  1827,  served
during  the  rebellion  of  1837-'8,  was  present  at  the-
battle  of  St.  Eustache,  and  was  made  a  lieutenant
in  March.  1888.  He  entered  the  employ  of  a  hard-
ware firm  in  Montreal  in  1834,  with  which  he  has
retained  his  connection,  and  he  is  now  its  senior
partner.  He  has  been  for  more  than 'thirty  years
a  member  of  the  board  of  directors  of  Molson's
bank,  Montreal,  and  for  many  years  its  president,
and  is  a  life-governor  of  the  Fraser  institute  and


WORMAN


WORTH


615


Free  library,  to  the  establishment  of  which  he  con-
tributed liberally,  as  he  has  also  to  McGill  uni-
versity and  to  many  other  public  institutions  in
Montreal.  Mr.  Workman  was  unanimously  elected
to  the  Dominion  parliament  in  1867  for  Montreal
centre,  and  declined  renomination,  but  was  again
elected  in  1875  for  Montreal  west.

WORMAN,  James  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Prus-
sia, 28  Feb.,  1835.  He  was  educated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Berlin  and  at  the  Sorbonne,  Paris,  taking
his  degree  in  both  institutions  in  1864,  came  to  the
United  States  in  1865,  and  became  professor  of
modern  languages  in  Knox  college,  Galesbm'g,  111.
In  1867  he  was  appointed  librarian  and  instructor
in  Drew  theological  seminary,  Madison,  N.  J.,  and
on  the  death  of  Dr.  John  McClintock  he  became
one  of  the  editors  of  "  McClintock  and  Strong's
Cyclopaedia  of  Biblical  Literature."  He  was  a
teacher  in  Adelphi  academy,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  from

1877  till  1883,  and  then  a  professor  in  Vanderbilt
university  till  1886.  He  officiated  at  the  same
time  as  professor  in  Chautauqua  university  from

1878  till  1885,  and  since  that  date  has  been  director
of  the  Southern  Chautauqua  and  Round  Lake
branch.  In  1886  he  edited  the  "  Saratogian,"  and
since  1887  he  has  been  editor  of  "  Outing."  Dr.
Worman  published  a  school-book  on  universal  his-
tory before  coming  to  this  country  (Berlin,  1862),
and  has  since  published  many  books  for  language
instruction.  He  was  the  first  to  introduce  the
method  of  writing  books  of  instruction  entirely  in
the  language  to  be  learned,  interpreting  the  mean-
ing by  means  of  illustrations,  and  has  applied  it
to  German,  French,  Spanish,  and  Latin.

WORMELEY,  Mary  Elizabeth,  author,  b.  in
London,  England,  26  July,  1822.  Her  father,  Ad-
miral Ralph  Randolph  Wormeley,  of  the  British
navy,  a  native  of  Virginia  (1785-1852),  had  for
some  time  preceding  his  death  resided  in  Boston,
Mass.,  and  was  grandson,  on  the  mother's  side,  of
Attorney-General  John  Randolph.  Her  mother
was  a  niece  of  Com.  Edward  Preble,  U.  S.  navy.
The  daughter  resided  several  years  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  and,  after  gaining  a  reputation  as  a
writer,  married  Randolph  Latimer,  of  Baltimore.
She  has  contributed  to  magazines,  and  published
"Forest  Hill:  a  Tale  of  Social  Life  in  1830-'l "
(3  vols.,  London,  1846);  "Amabel,  a  Family  His-
tory" (New  York,  1853) ;  "Our  Cousin  Veronica"
(1856) ;  and  "  Familiar  Talks  on  Some  of  Shake-
speare's Comedies  "  (Boston,  1887) ;  also  translations
of  Louis  Ulbach's  "  Madame  Gosselin  "  (New  York,
1878);  "The  Steel  Hammer"  (1888);  and  "For
Fifteen  Years "  (1888).— Her  sister,  Katharine
Prescott,  author,  b.  in  Suffolk,  England,  14  July,
1832.  took  an  active  interest  in  the  relief  of  the
National  soldiers  during  the  civil  war,  and  pub-
lished "  The  U.  S.  Sanitary  Commission  "  (Boston,
1863).  A  volume  of  her  letters  from  the  head-
quarters of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission  with  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  during  the  peninsular  cam-
paign in  1862  has  been  published  by  the  Massa-
chusetts commandery  of  the  Loyal  legion  under
the  title  of  "  The  Other  Side  of  War  "  (1888).  She
is  best  known  as  the  American  translator  of  Honore
de  Balzac's  novels,  of  which  thirteen  volumes  have
been  issued  (Boston.  1886-'9).  among  which  the
"  Magic  Skin,"  "  Louis  Lambert,"  and  "  Seraphita,"
have  introductions  by  George  Frederic  Parsons. —
Another  sister,  Ariana  Randolph,  b.  in  Suffolk,
England,  14  Oct.,  1835,  married  Daniel  Sargent
Curtis,  of  Boston.  She  has  published  a  comedy  en-
titled "  The  Coming  Woman,  or  the  Spirit  of  '76  "
(Boston,  1870),  that  has  been  acted  in  public  and
private  both  in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe.


WORMLEY,  Theodore  George,  chemist,  b.  in
Wormleysburg,  Pa.,  1  April,  1826.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Dickinson  college,  but  left  without  gradu-
ation to  study  medicine,  and  in  1849  received  his
degree  at  the  Philadelphia  medical  college.  In
1852  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  chemistry  and
natural  sciences  at  Capital  university,  Columbus,
Ohio,  which  he  held  until  1865,  and  was  also
professor  of  chemistry  and  toxicology  in  Starling
medical  college  in  1854-'77.  On  the  resignation  of
Prof.  Robert  E.  Rogers  in  1877,  he  was  called  to
the  chair  of  chemistry  and  toxicology  in  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
which  place  he  still  holds.  During  1867-'75  he  was
state  gas  commissioner  of  Ohio,  and  in  1867-74  he
was  chemist  to  the  Ohio  geological  survey.  The
degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Dickin-
son college,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Marietta,  both
in  1870.  He  is  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  a  fellow  of  the  American  asso-
ciation for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  a
member  of  other  societies.  Prof.  Wormley  was  ap-
pointed a  member  of  the  Centennial  medical  com-
mission, having  in  charge  the  arrangements  for  the
International  medical  congress  of  1876,  and  was  a
delegate  therefrom  to  the  International  medical
congress  at  Philadelphia  in  September,  1876.  He
delivered  an  address  before  that  body  on  "  Medical
Chemistry  and  Toxicology."  In  1862-'4  he  edited
the  "  Ohio  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,"  and  he
published  in  the  "Chemical  News"  of  London  a
series  of  papers  on  the  "  Chemical  Reactions  of
Strychnine  "  (1859) ;  "  Atropine,"  "  Brucine,"  "  Mor-
phia," "  Narcotine  and  Meconic  Acid,"  "  Corrosive
Sublimate,"  "  Veratrine  "  (1860) ;  "  Nicotine  and
Daturine,"  "  Solanine,"  "  Codeine,  Meconine,  Nar-
ceine,  and  Aconitine  "  (1861) ;  "  Conine  "  (1862) ;
and  "  Oxalic  Acid  "  (1863).  Prof.  Wormley  is  the
author  of  "  Methods  of  Analysis  of  Coals,  Iron
Ores,  Furnace  Slags,  Fire  Clays,  Limestones,  and
of  Soils"  (1870),  has  contributed  reports  to  the
"  Geological  Survey  of  Ohio  "  (Columbus,  1871),  and
has  also  published  "  The  Micro-Chemistry  of  Poi-
sons "  (New  York,  1867).

WORTH,  Jonathan,  governor  of  North  Caro-
lina, b.  in  Guilford  county,  N.  ft,  18  Nov.,  1802 ;  d.
in  Raleigh,  N.  ft,  5  Sept.,  1869.  He  was  educated
at  the  common  schools  and  at  Greensborough  acad-
emy, studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1825.  He  soon  afterward  settled  at  Asheborough,
Randolph  co.,  and  engaged  in  practice.  He  was  a
member  of  the  North  Carolina  legislature  in
1829-'34,  and  during  the  height  of  the  nullification
excitement  introduced  in  1831  a  resolution  into  the
house  of  commons  of  the  state  denouncing  it  in  the
strongest  terms.  He  was  also  for  several  terms  a
member  of  the  state  senate,  and  opposed  secession
both  in  the  legislature  and  in  appeals  to  his  con-
stituents :  but  after  his  state  had  seceded  he  gave
his  adhesion  to  the  Confederate  government.  He
was  a  member  of  the  lower  house  of  the  legislature
from  1862  till  the  end  of  the  war,  and  was  public
treasurer  of  the  state  during  the  same  period.
When  a  provisional  government  was  organized  in
North  Carolina  by  President  Johnson,  Mr.  Worth
was  reappointed  state  treasurer,  which  post  he  re-
signed soon  afterward,  and  became  a  candidate  for
governor.  He  was  elected  and  served  from  1865
till  1868,  when  the  existing  state  government  was
superseded  by  the  one  that  was  organized  under
the  reconstruction  act  of  congress.

WORTH,  William  Jenkins,  soldier,  b.  in  Hud-
son, N.  Y..  1  March,  1794;  d.  in  San  Antonio,  Tex.,
17  May,  1849.  He  was  of  Quaker  ancestry,  and  of
a  family  that produced  -many  well-known  men,


616


WORTH


WORTHEN


among  others  Judge  John  Worth  Edmunds,  Gor-
ham  Worth,  and  Lawrence  Worth,  president  of
the  Park  bank.  Young  Worth  received  only  a
common-school  education,  and  in  early  life  entered

a  store  in  Hud-
son, whence  he
soon  removed  to
Albany,  where  he
continued  in  mer-
cantile pursuits
till  he  was  eigh-
teen years  of  age.
On  the  opening
of  war  with  Great
Britain  he  ap-
plied for  a  com-
mission in  the
armv.  and  on  19
March,  1813,  re-
ceived the  ap-
f)ointment  of  1st
ieutenant  in  the
23d  infantry.  He
served  as  aide
to  Gen.  Winfield
Scott,  and  for
gallantry  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  captain,  19
Aug.,  1814.  In  the  battle  of  Niagara  he  again
so  distinguished  himself  as  to  receive  the  thanks
of  his  general  and  the  rank  of  major.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  was  appointed  superintend-
ent of  the  IT.  S.  military  academy,  and  in  1824
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel.  In  1838  he  be-
came colonel  of  the  8th  infantry.  In  the  Florida
war  he  was  especially  active,  fighting  the  battle  of
Palaklaklaha,  19  April,  1842,  in  which  the  Semi-
noles  were  disastrously  defeated.  He  was  second
in  command  to  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  at  the  opening
of  the  war  with  Mexico,  leading  the  van  of  his
army,  and  being  the  first  to  plant,  with  his  own
hand,  the  flag  of  the  United  States  on  the  Rio
Grande.  Under  Taylor  he  conducted  the  negotia-
tions for  the  capitulation  of  Matamoras,  and  by
him  was  intrusted  with  the  assault  on  the  bishop's
palace  at  Monterey.  It  was  a  hazardous  under-
taking, the  cannon  having  to  be  dragged  up  precipi-
tous cliffs,  and  throughout  the  action  his  troops
were  exposed  to  the  heaviest  fire,  but  he  achieved
it  with  a  small  loss  of  life,  and  escaped  personal
injury,  though  constantly  on  horseback  passing
from  post  to  post  during
the  entire  action.  He  was
subsequently  ordered  to
the  Gulf  coast  to  join  Gen.
Scott,  and  was  under  him
engaged  in  all  the  battles
from  Vera  Cruz  to  Mexico,
having  a  principal  part  in
' ,  ,  the  capture  of  the  impor-
tant city  of  Puebla,  and  be-
ing the  first  to  enter  the
city  of  Mexico,  where,  with
his  own  hand,  he  cut  down
the  Mexican  flag  that  waved
from  the  National  palace.
After  the  war  he  was  placed
in  command  of  the  Depart-
ment of  Texas,  and  there
he  died  of  'cholera.  He
was  a  man  of  tall  and  com-
manding figure,  and  said
to  be  the  best  horseman
and  handsomest  man  in
the  army.  He  was  of  a  manly,  generous  nature,
and  possessed  talents  that  would  have  won  him


distinction  in  any  sphere  of  action.  He  was  bre-
vetted major-general  for  his  services  at  Monterey,
and  given  swords  by  congress,  the  states  of  New
York  and  Louisiana,  and  his  native  county,  Co-
lumbia. A  monument  was  erected  to  his  mem-
ory by  the  city  of  New  York  at  the  junction  of
Broadway  and  Fifth  avenue.  (See  vignette.) —
Thomas,"  caricaturist,  b.  in  New  York,  12  Feb.,
1834,  is  the  son  of  a  cousin  of  Gen.  William  J.
Worth.  He  was  with  his  father  in  banking  busi-
ness for  a  few  years  after  leaving  school,  but  soon
devoted  himself  entirely  to  art.  He  first  came
prominently  before  the  public  in  1862.  with  his  il-
lustrations to  "  Plutarch  Restored."  He  illustrated
also  some  of  the  books  of  "  Orpheus  C.  Kerr,"  the
edition  of  Dickens's  "  Old  Curiosity  Shop "  that
was  published  by  the  Harpers  in  1878,  and  numer-
ous other  works.  He  is  best  known  to  the  general
public  by  his  lithographed  caricatures,  many  of
them  on  sporting  subjects  or  scenes  in  negro  life ;
and  he  has  furnished  pictures  for  every  illustrated
paper  of  note  in  the  country.  At  present  he  is  on
the  staff  of  "  Texas  Sif  tings."

WORTHEN,  Amos  Henry,  geologist,  b.  in  Brad-
ford, Vt.,  31  Oct.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Warsaw,  111.,  6  May,
1888.  He  was  educated  at  Bradford  academy  and
emigrated  to  Kentucky  in  1834,  where  he  taught.
In  1836  he  settled  in  Warsaw,  111.,  which  contin-
ued to  be  his  principal  residence  until  his  death.
There  he  engaged  in  the  forwarding  and  commis-
sion business,  and  later  in  the  dry-goods  trade.
His  attention  was  early  directed  to  the  geological
features  of  his  western  home,  and  he  collected
specimens  of  the  sedimentary  rocks  of  that  region,
especially  the  geode  formations  that  there  existed
in  abundance.  In  1842,  owing  to  the  financial
depression  on  account  of  the  Mormon  disturbances
in  the  west,  he  withdrew  from  business  and  spent
two  years  in  Boston,  where  he  exchanged  his  min-
erals for  a  cabinet  of  sea-shells.  On  his  return  to
Warsaw  in  1844  he  resumed  his  collecting,  and,  by
comparing  the  fossil  specimens  with  his  shells,
he  became  an  expert  palaeontologist.  As  his
cabinet  increased  it  attracted  the  attention  of
scientists,  and  by  means  of  exchanges  it  grew  to
include  forms  from  other  parts  of  the  country.
In  1851  he  became  assistant  on  the  newly  estab-
lished geological  survey  of  Illinois,  and  in  1855  ac-
cepted a  similar  office  in  the  survey  of  Iowa  under
James  Hall,  who  intrusted  him  with  reporting  on
the  palaeontology  of  that  state.  This  place  he  held
until  1858,  when  he  was  appointed  state  geologist
of  Illinois  and  continued  in  the  work  of  the  sur-
vey until  1877,  when  the  office  was  abolished.
Meanwhile  he  associated  with  himself  representa-
tive men  in  special  fields  of  science,  assigning  the
descriptions  of  plants  to  Leo  Lesquereux,  the  ver-
tebrate palaeontology  to  John  S.  Newberry,  the  in-
vertebrate palaeontology  to  Fielding  B.  Meek,  and
geology  to  Garland  C.  Broadhead  and  Edward  T.
Cox,  and  it  resulted  in  the  publication  of  his  re-
ports on  the  "Geological  Survey  of  Illinois"  (8
vols.,  Springfield,  1866-'88).  In  1877  he  was  ap-
pointed curator  of  the  State  historical  library  and
natural  history  museum,  which  office  he  held  until
his  death.  In  this  capacity  he  gathered  an  exten-
sive variety  of  minerals  and  fossils  which  he  classi-
fied, and  also  furnished  numerous  collections  to
different  colleges  in  the  state.  Mr.  Worthen  was
elected  to  the  National  academy  of  science  in  1872,
and  in  1874  was  made  a  fellow  of  the  American  as-
sociation for  the  advancement  of  science,  besides
membership  in  other  American  and  foreign  scien-
tific bodies.  His  writings  were  confined  to  profes-
sional papers  and  the  reports  of  the  surveys.


WORTHEN


WOUWERMAN


617


WORTHEN,  William  Ezra,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Amesbury,  Mass.,  14  March,  1819.  He  is  the
son  of  Ezra  Worthen,  who  was  the  first  to  suggest
the  present  site  of  the  city  of  Lowell  as  a  desirable
locality  for  manufacturing,  and  who  was  the  first
superintendent  of  the  Merrimac  mills.  The  son
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1838,  and  at  once
began  the  practice  of  civil  engineering.  Beginning
under  George  R.  Baldwin.  C.  E.,  with  surveys  and
measurements  of  brook-flows  for  the  increase  of
the  Jamaica-pond  supply  for  the  city  of  Boston,  he
continued  hydraulic  investigations  and  works  un-
der James  B.  Francis,  C.  E.,  of  Lowell,  until  1848,
with  an  intermediate  employment  in  1840-'2  on  the
surveys  and  construction  of  the  Albany  and  West
Stockbridge  railroad.  Removing  to  New  York  in
1849,  he  did  architectural  work,  and  became  the
engineer  of  the  New  York  and  New  Haven  rail-
mad,  and  in  1854  its  vice-president.  As  a  hydraulic
engineer,  he  has  designed  and  constructed  masonry
dams  across  rivers,  for  the  establishment  of  water-
powers,  and  the  canals,  mills,  and  shops  connected
therewith.  For  the  water-supply  and  sewers  of
towns  he  has  given  designs  for  all  the  construc-
tions and  has  supervised  their  execution.  He  has
tested  the  large  pumping-engines  of  Brooklyn,
Lawrence,  Jersey  City,  Philadelphia,  St.  Louis,  and
Milwaukee,  and  has  also  given  designs  for  and  con-
structed pumping-engines.  In  the  city  of  New
York  he  was  the  sanitary  engineer  of  the  Metro-
politan board  of  health,  during  its  continuance  in
1866-'9,  engineer  of  the  Southern  boulevard,  mem-
ber of  the  examining  board  on  the  new  docks  and
bulkheads,  engineer  of  the  first  rapid-transit  com-
mission in  the  annexed  district,  member  of  a  later
commission,  and  member  of  examining  board  on
the  Riverside  park  and  Fifth  avenue  pavement.
In  Brooklyn  he  has  been  consulted,  and,  with  the
engineer  of  the  board  of  city  works,  has  reported
on  an  extensive  addition  to  the  system  of  sewers.
He  has  been  the  consulting  engineer  of  many  of
the  large  water-power  companies,  has  measured  the
quantity  of  water  used  by  different  lessees,  and  re-
ported on  the  condition  and  capacity  of  the  works.
Mr.  Worthen  is  a  member  of  several  scientific  soci-
eties, and  was  president  of  the  American  society  of
civil  engineers  in  1887.  In  addition  to  numerous
official  reports,  he  has  published  a  "  Cyclopaedia  of
Drawing"  (New  York,  1857);  ''First  Lessons  in
Mechanics"  (1862);  and  "Rudimentary  Drawing
for  Schools  "(1863).

WORTHINGTON,  Erastus,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bel-
chertown,  Mass.,  8  Oct.,  1779;  d.  in  Dedham,
Mass.,  27  June,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at  Will-
iams in  1804,  admitted  to  the  bar,  practised  at
Dedham  from  1809  till  1825,  and  was  a  member  of
the  general  court  in  1814-'15.  He  published  an
oration  on  "Recent  Measures  of  the  American
Government "  that  he  delivered  at  Dedham.  4  July,
1809  ;  "  An  Essay  on  the  Establishment  of  a  Chan-
cery Jurisdiction  in  Massachusetts"  (1810);  and
"  History  of  Dedham,  from  the  Beginning  of  its
Settlement  in  1635  to  Mav,  1827  "  (Boston,  1827).

WORTHINGTON,  George,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Lenox,  Mass.,  14  Oct.,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at
Hobart  in  1860,  and  at  the  General  theological
seminary,  New  York,  in  1863,  ordered  deacon  in
June,  1863,  and  ordained  priest  in  1864.  He  served
as  an  assistant  at  St.  Paul's  church,  Troy,  N.  Y.,
and  then  became  rector  of  Christ  church,  Ballston
Spa,  N.  Y.,  but  soon  removed  to  St.  John's  church,
Detroit,  Mich.,  where  he  remained  as  rector  for
seventeen  years.  He  was  for  several  years  presi-
dent of  the  diocesan  standing  committee,  and  ex-
amining chaplain  and  deputy  to  the  general  con-


vention. He  was  elected  twice  by  the  vote  of  the
clergy  to  the  episcopate  of  Michigan,  but  the  laity
refused  to  confirm  him.  In  1883  the  house  of
bishops  elected  him  missionary  bishop  of  Shanghai,
China,  but  he  declined.  Upon  the  death  of  Bishop
Clarkson  in  1884  he  was  chosen  bishop  of  Nebraska,
and  was  consecrated  to  that  office  in  St.  John's
church,  Detroit,  24  Feb.,  1885.  He  has  received
the  degrees  of  D.  D.  and  LL.  D.  from  Hobart  in.
1876  and  1885,  respectively.

WORTHINGTON,  Henry  Rossiter,  inventor,
b.  in  New  York  city,  17  Dec.  1817;  d.  in  Tarry-
town,  N.  Y.,  17  Dec,  1880.  He  early  engaged  in
business  with  his  father,  a  merchant  in  New  York
city,  and  about  1840  began  experimenting  with
steam  for  the  propulsion  of  canal-boats.  Among
the  difficulties  to  be  overcome  was  the  maintain-
ing of  a  supply  of  water  within  the  boiler  while
the  engine  was  not  in  motion,  as  when  the  boat
was  passing  through  locks.  The  method  in  use  at
this  time  was  a  hand-pump,  and  he  conceived  the
idea  of  compelling  the  idle  boiler  to  furnish  power
to  supply  its  own  water.  For  this  purpose  he  de-
vised a  small  steam  cylinder  with  an  attached  pump,
which,  without  the  use  of  shaft,  crank,  and  fly-
wheel, produced  a  movement  of  its  own  slide-valve.
In  1841  he  patented  the  independent  feed-pump,
which  developed  into  the  direct-acting  steam-pump
that  he  patented  in  1849.  In  1854  he  erected  in
Savannah  the  first  direct-acting  compound  con-
densing engine  that  was  ever  built  and  the  first
compound  engine  that  was  ever  used  in  water-
works. The  success  of  this  led  to  the  subsequent
adoption  of  similar  engines  throughout  the  coun-
try. The  invention  of  the  duplex  pump  followed,
and  consists  of  an  arrangement  of  two  pumps
working  side  by  side.  It  is  now  largely  used  for
supplying  water  in  cities  and  towns  and  in  mills
and  factories,  as  well  as  on  steamers,  where  it  is
used  to  feed  boilers,  extinguish  fires,  and  for  similar
purposes.  Mr.  Worthington  built  up  a  large  plant
for  the  manufacture  of  pumping  machinery,  and
he  ranks  as  a  pioneer  in  that  branch  of  hydraulic
engineering.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American
institute  of  mining  engineers  and  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  American  society  of  mechanical  engineers.

WORTHINGTON,  Thomas,  governor  of  Ohio,
b.  near  Charleston,  Va.  (now  W.  Va.),  16  July,
1773;  d.  in  New  York  city,  20  June,  1827.  He  re-
ceived a  good  education,  but  was  a  common  sailor
in  1790-'3.  In  1797  he  removed  to  Ross  county,
Ohio,  where  he  was  a  member  of  the  territorial
legislature  in  1799-1801,  and  a  delegate  to  the
State  constitutional  convention  in  1803.  He  was
elected  one  of  the  first  U.  S.  senators  from  Ohio,
as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3
March,  1807,  and  again  elected  instead  of  Return
Jonathan  Meigs,  Jr.,  who  had  resigned,  serving
from  8  Jan.,  1811,  till  1814.  when  he  resigned.  He
was  governor  of  Ohio  in  1814-'18,  a  canal  commis-
sioner from  1818  till  his  death,  and  one  of  the
original  vice-presidents  of  the  American  Bible  so-
ciety. He  contributed  greatly  to  the  development
of  his  adopted  state.

WOUWERMAN,  Simon  Tan,  Flemish  author,
b.  in  Bruges  in  1690 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  1743.  Little
is  known  of  his  early  life  except  that  he  was  in
the  employ  of  the  West  Indian  company  about
1724,  and  afterward  of  the  Mississippi  company.
In  1740  he  secured  an  employment  in  the  latter
company's  office  at  Paris,  where  he  died.  He  wrote
two  curious  works,  "  Histoire  philosophique  et  mo-
rale de  la  Louisiane  "  and  "  Systeme  d'administra-
tion  de  la  compagnie  des  hides,"  which  found
afterward  their  way  into  Holland,  where  they  were


618


WRAGG


WRANGELL


published  (3  vols.,  Amsterdam,  1752).  They  con-
tained grave  accusations  against  the  Louisiana  and
West  Indian  companies,  which  appear  to  have  se-
cured recruits  and  immigrants  by  false  promises,
and,  when  these  means  failed,  to  have  shipped  to
America  young  convicts  and  women  of  question-
able character.  Wouwerman's  works  caused  a
scandal  at  the  time  of  their  publication,  and  all
available  copies  were  bought  and  destroyed  by
order  of  the  officials  of  the  company.  Abbe  Pre-
vost,  in  his  noted  "Manon  Lescaut,"  mentions
that  it  was  the  custom  of  the  company  to  send
criminals  to  the  American  colonies.

WRAGG,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  South  Carolina
in  1714;  d.  at  sea  in  September,  1777.  He  was  of
Huguenot  descent,  and  was  educated  in  England,
where  he  studied  law.  After  returning  to  South
Carolina,  he  served  for  many  years  in  the  assem-
bly and  in  the  council.  In  1759  he  declined  the
appointment  of  chief  justice  of  the  colony,  that  he
might  give  evidence  to  those  whose  political  course
he  opposed  without  being  charged  with  acting  in
hope  of  official  distinction.  His  sense  of  duty  pre-
vented his  espousing  the  cause  of  independence,
and,  on  refusing  to  take  the  oath  prescribed  by  the
Provincial  congress,  he  was  banished.  He  sailed
for  England  in  the  summer  of  1777,  but  was  ship-
wrecked off  the  coast  of  Holland.  He  possessed  a
fortune,  and  was  much  esteemed.  A  monument
was  erected  to  his  memory  in  Westminster  Abbey.
He  published  "  Reasons  for  not  concurring  in  the
Non-Importation  Resolution  "  (1769).

WRANGEL,  Charles  Magnus  von,  clergyman,
b.  in  Sweden  about  1730;  d.  in  Sala,  Sweden,  in
1786.  He  was  a  descendant  of  an  illustrious  Swed-
ish general,  and  was  educated  at  Vestras  and  the
University  of  Upsala,  in  1757  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Gottingen  university,  and  was  then
immediately  nominated  as  court  preacher  to  the
king  of  Sweden.  In  1759  he  was  called  to  the
provostship  of  the  Swedish  churches  in  this  coun-
try, and  arrived  at  Philadelphia  in  the  same  year.
He  at  once  took  charge  of  the  Wicaco  parish  and
the  oversight  of  all  the  Swedish  Lutheran  congre-
gations in  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey.  He  was
one  of  the  most  zealous  and  successful  laborers  in
the  Swedish  churches.  According  to  the  instruc-
tion of  the  archbishop  of  Sweden,  he  cordially  and
actively  co-operated  with  the  German  ministers  in
the  defence  of  their  common  faith  and  the  exten-
sion of  the  Lutheran  church  in  America,  and  under
this  salutary  influence  both  parties  were  perfectly
united  and  frequently  met  in  conference  for  con-
sultation and  in  synod  for  the  transaction  of  busi-
ness pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  German  and
Swedish  churches.  He  was  an  indefatigable  worker
and  an  eloquent  preacher.  When  the  weather
permitted,  he  was  usually  obliged,  in  consequence
of  the  crowds,  to  preach  in  the  open  air.  Besides
attending  to  the  duties  of  his  own  parish,  he  built
two  new  churches  for  the  Swedes — one  at  King-
sessing,  under  the  name  of  St.  James  church,  the
other  at  Upper  Merion,  tinder  the  name  of  Christ
church — and  in  1765  obtained  a  charter  from  Rich-
ard Thomas  Penn  for  the  "  United  Swedish  Lu-
theran churches  of  Wicaco,  Kingsessing,  and  Upper
Merion."  He  also  visited  the  Germans  at  Lancas-
ter and  York.  He  often  preached  in  English,
since  he  found  that  the  young  could  understand
that  language  better  than  either  Swedish  or  Ger-
man. He  also  prepared  an  improved  English
translation  of  Luther's  small  catechism  for  the  use
of  his  young  people.  The  church  in  which  Dr.
Wrangel  labored  is  "  Gloria  Dei  Church,"  or  the
"Old  Swedes  Church,"  on  Swanson  and  Christian


streets,  Philadelphia.  The  building  in  which  he
preached  is  still  in  good  preservation,  and  is  one
of  the  oldest  buildings  in  Philadelphia.  The  first
house  of  worship  was  a  block-house,  erected  in
1669,  and  was  used
by  Swedish  Luther-
ans both  as  a  defence
against  the  Indians
and  as  a  place  of
worship.  On  2  July,
1700,  the  new  Gloria
Dei  church  was  dedi-
cated and  was  used
by  Lutherans  for
nearly  a  hundred
years,  but  in  the  lat-
ter part  of  the  eight-
eenth century  it
passed  into  the  hands
of  Episcopalians.  The
church  is  sixty  feet
long  and  thirty  feet
wide,  built  of  brick,
every  alternate  brick  being  glazed.  (See  illustra-
tion.) After  nine  years'  faithful  service,  Dr.  Wran-
gel returned  to  Sweden  in  1768,  and  received  from
the  government  the  pastorate  of  Sala,  where  he
died,  after  a  useful  and  eminently  successful  career.
WRANGELL,  Ferdinand  Petrovitch,  Baron
von,  Russian  navigator,  b.  in  Pleskau,  Esthonia,
29  Dec,  1796;  d.  in  Dorpat,  Livonia,  10  June,
1870.  He  was  educated  in  the  school  for  cadets  at
St.  Petersburg,  entered  the  naval  services  in  1812,
and  was  attached  to  the  scientific  expedition  to  Si-
beria and  Kamtchatka  in  1817.  He  was  appointed
in  1820  to  command  an  expedition  to  explore  the
Russian  polar  seas.  Sailing  from  St.  Petersburg,
he  arrived,  on  2  Nov.,  1820,  at  Nijnii-Kolymsk,  and
performed,  early  in  1821,  a  remarkable  journey  to
Cape  Schelagin  on  sledges  drawn  by  dogs.  He
sailed  afterward  up  Kolyma  river,  advancing  about
125  miles  into  the  interior,  through  the  territory
inhabited  by  the  warlike  Yakutes..  On  10  March,
1822,  he  resumed  his  journey  northward,  and  trav-
elled forty-six  days  on  the  ice,  reaching  72°  2'  north
latitude.  He  left  Nijnii-Kolymsk  on  1  Nov.,  1823,
and  arrived  at  St.  Petersburg,  15  Aug.,  1824.  In
1825  Wrangell,  who  had  been  promoted  command-
er, made  a  journey  around  the  world  on  the  sloop-
of-war  "  Kratkoi,"  and  on  his  return  to  Kronstadt
in  1827  was  appointed  governor  of  Russian  America
(now  Alaska).  He  repaired  to  his  post  early  in
1829,  by  way  of  Siberia  and  Kamtchatka,  and  on
his  arrival  devoted  all  his  energy  to  developing  the
resources  of  the  country.  After  thoroughly  reform-
ing the  administration,  he  introduced  the  culture
of  the  potato,  opened  and  regulated  the  working
of  several  mines,  and  urged  upon  the  home  gov-
ernment the  organization  of  a  fur  company.  He
foresaw  also  the  great  future  of  the  country,  en-
deavored to  induce  capitalists  to  invest  money  there,
and  sent  missionaries  to  the  remotest  districts.  He
likewise  began  a  survey  of  the  country,  opened
roads,  built  bridges  and  government  buildings,  and
promoted  the  civilization  and  improvement  of  the
natives.  He  also  made  valuable  geographical  and
ethnographical  observations,  which  he  embodied
in  a  memoir  to  the  navy  department.  Being  re-
called in  1834,  Wrangell  made  his  return  by  way
of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  the  United  States,
where  he  visited  several  cities.  He  was  promoted
rear-ad  mind  in  1837,  and  made  director  of  the  ship-
timber  department  in  the  navy  office,  which  post
he  held  for  twelve  years.  He  became  vice-admiral
in  1847,  but  resigned  in  1849,  and  temporarily  sev-


WREE


WRIGHT


619


ered  his  connection  with  the  navy  to  assume  the
presidency  of  the  newly  reorganized  Russian  Ameri-
can company.  He  was  always  opposed  to  the  cession
of  Alaska  to  the  United  States,  and  wrote  several
memoirs  upon  the  subject.  In  1854  he  re-entered
active  service  and  was  made  chief  director  of  the
hydrographical  department  of  the  navy,  chief  as-
sistant in  1855  to  the  high  admiral,  Grand  Duke
Constantine,  member  of  the  counsel  of  the  empire
in  1858,  and  in  1859  admiral  and  general  aide-de-
camp to  the  czar,  Alexander  II.  The  continent
that  Wrangell  sought  was  discovered  in  1855  by
the  English  navigator,  Capt.  Thomas  Long,  and  is
named  Wrangell  Land.  An  account  of  the  physical
observations  during  his  first  journey  was  published
in  German  (Berlin,  1827),  and  also  in  German  ex-
tracts from  Wrangell's  journals,  "  Reise  laengs  der
Nordkiiste  von  Sibirien  und  auf  dem  Eismeere
in  den  Jahren  1820-4  "  (2  vols.,  Berlin,  1839),
which  was  translated  into  English  as  "  Wrangell's
Expedition  to  the  Polar  Sea  "  (2  vols.,  London,
1840),  but  the  complete  report  of  the  expedition
appeared  two  years  later :  "  Otceschewie  do  Sje-
wernym  beregam  Sibiri,  po  Ledowitomm  More"
(2  vols.,  St.  Petersburg,  1841),  and  was  immediate-
ly translated  into  French  with  notes  by  Prince
Galitzin,  under  the  title  "Voyage  sur  les  cotes
septentrionales  de  la  Siberie  et  de  la  mer  glaciale  "
(2  vols.,  1841).  From  the  French  version  an  Eng-
lish one  was  made  under  the  title  "  A  Journey
on  the  Northern  Coast  of  Siberia  and  the  Icy  Sea  "
(2  vols.,  London,  1841).  He  also  published  "  Ots-
cherk  puti  is  Sitchi  w'  S.  Petersburg  "  (1836 ;  French
translation  under  the  title  "  Journal  de  voyage  de
Sitka  a  Saint  Petersbourg "  (Paris,  1836 ;  English
version  from  the  French,  entitled  "  Journal  of  a
Voyage  from  Sitka  to  St.  Petersburg,"  London,
1837) ;  and  "  Nachrichten  fiber  die  Russischen  Be-
sitzungen  an  der  Nordwestkuste  America's"  (2  vols.,
St.  Petersburg,  1839),  better  known  by  the  French
version,  "  Renseignements  statistiques  et  ethno-
graphiques  sur  les  possessions  Russes  de  la  cote
Nord-Ouest  de  PAmerique"  (Paris,  1839),  which  was
translated  into  English  under  the  title  "  Statistical
and  Ethnographical  Notices  on  the  Russian  Pos-
sessions in  North  America  "  (London,  1841).

WREE,  Oliver  van  der  (vray),  Dutch  soldier,
b.  in  Charleroi,  near  the  end  of  the  16th  century  ;
d.  in  Amsterdam  in  1649.  He  accompanied  in
1637  Prince  Maurice  of  Nassau  to  Brazil  as  secre-
tary, and  assisted  in  all  the  stages  of  the  conquest
of  the  northern  provinces  of  the  country.  In  1644
he  was  sent  by  Gen.  Sigismond,  the  new  com-
mander-in-chief, to  the  Portuguese  viceroy,  but
was  detained  as  hostage,  despite  his  character  of
ambassador.  He  was  exchanged  a  few  years  later,
and  on  his  return  to  Holland  published  a  very  in-
teresting work,  in  which  he  recounts  his  captivity
and  the  events  he  witnessed,  and  gives  curious
details  regarding  the  Indians  and  negroes,  and  the
administration  of  Brazil.  It  is  entitled  "  Epistola
in  carcere  unde  erupit  scripta,  17  August,  1647  "
(Amsterdam,  1649).

WRIGHT,  Adam  Henry,  Canadian  physician,
b.  in  Brampton,  Ont.,  6  April,  1846.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Universty  college,  Toronto,  in  1866,
and  received  the  degree  of  M.  B.  there  in  1873,
and  from  the  Royal  college  of  surgeons  in  England
in  1877.  He  was  demonstrator  of  normal  his-
tology in  the  Toronto  school  of  medicine  from
1879  till  1887,  surgeon-general  of  the  Toronto  hos-
pital in  1882-'3,  lecturer  in  the  Woman's  medical
college  in  1883-'6,  and  since  1887  has  been  pro-
fessor of  obstetrics  in  the  University  of  Toronto,
which  gave  him  the  degree  of  M.  D.  in  1888.


WRIGHT,  Alonzo,  Canadian  member  of  par-
liament, b.  in  Hull,  Lower  Canada,  26  Feb.,  1825.
He  is  a  grandson  of  Philemon  Wright,  of  Wo-
burn,  Mass.,  who  removed  to  Canada  in  1797,
founded  the  village  of  Hull,  and  was  the  first  repre-
sentative of  the  county  of  Ottawa  in  the  Lower
Canada  assembly.  The  grandson  was  educated  at
Potsdam  academy,  N.  Y.,  became  a  farmer,  and  is
lieutenant  -  colonel  of  the  Ottawa  county  reserve
militia.  He  was  a  representative  in  the  Canada
assembly  from  1862  till  1867,  when  he  was  elected
to  the  Dominion  parliament  by  acclamation,  re-
elected by  acclamation  in  1872,  and  again  returned
in  1874,  1878,  and  in  1887.

WRIGHT,  Ambrose  Ransom,  soldier,  b.  in
Louisville,  Jefferson  co.,  Ga.,  26  April,  1826 ;  d.
21  Dec,  1872.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  entered  politics  as  a  Democrat,  but
subsequently  joined  the  Know-Nothing  party.  He
supported  the  Bell  and  Everett  ticket  in  1860,  and
after  its  defeat  espoused  the  cause  of  secession.
He  was  sent  by  the  convention  of  Georgia  as  com-
missioner to  Maryland  to  induce  that  state  to  join
the  movement.  He  enlisted  as  a  private  soldier
in  the  Confederate  army  early  in  1861,  became
colonel  of  the  3d  Georgia  regiment  of  infantry.
8  May,  1861,  colonel  of  the  38th  Georgia  infantry,
15  Oct.,  1861,  brigadier-general,  3  June,  1862,  and
major-general,  26  Nov..  1864.  After  the  close  of
the  war  he  was  editor  of  the  "  Chronicle  and  Sen-
tinel "  newspaper.  He  was  elected  in  1872  a  repre-
sentative in  congress  as  a  Democrat,  but  died  be-
fore taking  his  seat.

WRIGHT,  Arthur  Williams,  physicist,  b.  in
Lebanon,  Conn.,  8  Sept.,  1836.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1859,  and  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
there  in  1861.  Subsequently  he  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1866,  but  did  not  prac-
tise. In  1863-'8  he  was  a  tutor  at  Yale,  and  in
1868-'9  he  studied  physical  science  in  Heidelberg
and  Berlin.  In  1869  he  became  professor  of  phys-
ics and  chemistry  in  Williams,  but  he  returned  to
Yale  in  1872  as  professor  of  molecular  physics
and  chemistry.  The  title  of  his  chair  was  changed
in  1887  to  that  of  experimental  physics.  Since
1885  he  has  had  charge  of  the  Sloane  physical  labo-
ratory at  Yale,  which  was  constructed  under  his
supervision.  Prof.  Wright  was  the  first  to  observe
and  describe  the  electric  shadow  in  1870-'l,  devised
a  new  apparatus  for  the  production  of  ozone,  and
investigated  its  action  upon  alcohol  and  ether  in
1872-'4 ;  also  in  1874  determined  the  polarization
of  the  zodiacal  light,  measuring  its  amount,  and
investigated  its  spectrum.  He  was  the  first  to  dis-
cover gases  in  stony  meteorites,  to  extract  them
and  determine  their  composition,  obtaining  their
spectra  in  vacuum  tubes,  and  pointing  out  their
relation  to  the  spectra  of  comets  as  affording  a
probable  explanation  of  the  latter.  In  1877  he
devised  a  method  of  applying  the  discharge  of
electricity  in  a  vacuum  to  deposit  the  metal  of  the
electrode  upon  glass  or  other  surfaces,  so  as  to  form
brilliant  transparent  metallic  films.  He  was  a
member  of  the  party  that  was  stationed  at  La
Junta,  Col.,  to  observe  the  total  solar  eclipse  of
1878,  when  he  determined  the  character  and  degree
of  polarization  of  the  light  of  the  corona  with  a
special  form  of  polarimeter.  The  same  instrument
was  employed  in  the  detection  and  measurement
of  the  polarization  of  the  light  of  several  comets
and  of  the  moon  in  1881-'3.  He  has  devised  a
novel  standard  barometer  and  a  simple  apparatus
for  distilling  mercury  in  vacuo,  which  has  been
adopted  by  the  U.  S.  signal  service.  In  1881-'6  he
was  consulting  specialist  to  the  U.  S.  signal  service


620


WRIGHT


WRIGHT


bureau.  Prof.  Wright  was  chosen  in  1879  a  fellow
of  the  Royal  astronomical  society,  and  in  1881  a
member  of  the  National  academy  of  science.  He
was  one  of  the  collaborators  in  the  revisions  of
Webster's  " Dictionary "  in  1862-'4  and  in  1885-8.
He  is  the  author  of  many  scientific  papers.

WRIGHT,  Asher,  missionary,  b.  in  Hanover,
N.  H.,  7  Sept.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Cattaraugus,  N.  Y.,  13
April,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1828  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1831,
and  from  that  year  until  his  death  was  a  mission-
ary to  the  Seneca  Indians  upon  the  Buffalo  creek
and  Cattaraugus  reservations.  He  acquired  the
Seneca  dialect,  into  which  he  translated  parts  of
the  New  Testament,  which  were  printed  by  the
mission  press.  He  also  prepared  several  element-
ary school-books  and  a  hymnal  in  that  language,
and  for  a  time  issued  a  small  periodical.  He  was
an  accomplished  scholar,  possessed  a  good  knowl-
edge of  medicine,  and  did  much  for  the  improve-
ment of  the  Senecas.  He  published  "  The  Inter-
esting Narrative  of  Mary  Jenison,  who  lived
nearly  Seventy-eight  Years  among  the  Indians"
(Buffalo,  1834). — His  wife,  Laura  Sheldon,  b.  in
Massachusetts  about  1808,  wrote  and  translated
several  hymns  in  the  Seneca  dialect.

WRIGHT,  Benjamin,  engineer,  b.  in  Wethers-
field,  Conn.,  10  Oct.,  1770 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24
Aug..  1842.  He  studied  mathematics  by  himself,
and  in  1786  went  to  Plymouth,  Conn.,  where  he
studied  surveying  with  his  uncle.  In  1788  he
settled  in  Fort  Stanwix  (now  Rome),  N.  Y.,  where
he  was  actively  employed  in  laying  out  the  property
of  the  new  settlers.  Having  acquired  in  this  man-
ner an  accurate  knowledge  of  civil  engineering,  he
was  called  on  to  make  a  map  and  profile  of  Wood
creek  for  the  Western  inland  lock  navigation  com-
pany. Subsequently  he  made  a  survey  of  Mohawk
river  from  Fort  Stanwix  to  Schenectady,  and  pro-
posed a  plan  for  its  improvement.  During  1811— '12
he  made  a  survey  for  the  canal  commissioners,
making  a  complete  report  of  his  work.  He  was
repeatedly  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  during
the  war  with  Great  Britain  was  appointed  county
judge.  In  1816  he  was  appointed  engineer  of  the
middle  section  of  the  Erie  canal,  and  to  him,  with
James  Geddes,  is  chiefly  due  the  credit  of  the  suc-
cessful completion  of  the  enterprise.  Mr.  Wright
was  chief  engineer  of  the  Delaware  canal,  the
Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal,  the  Harlem  railroad,
and  the  St.  Lawrence  ship  canal.  In  1834  he  was
street  commissioner  of  New  York  city,  and  in
1834-'6  he  conducted  a  survey  for  the  route  of  the
New  York  and  Erie  railroad.  Subsequently  he  was
engaged  in  Virginia.

WRIGHT,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Savannah,
Ga.,  2  April,  1784;  d.  in  Purdy,  Tenn.,  30  Jan.,
1860.  His  father,  John,  a  cousin  of  Sir  James
Wright,  noticed  below,  was  a  captain  in  the
Georgia  line  in  the  Revolutionary  war.  Benjamin
was  appointed  a  lieutenant  in  the  army  by  Presi-
dent Madison,  29  July,  1813,  and  assigned  to  the
39th  regiment  of  infantry,  which  was  commanded
by  Col.  John  Williams.  At  the  battle  of  the  Horse
Shoe,  27  March,  1814,  as  the  regiment  was  moving
on  the  Indian  breastworks,  Mai.  Lemuel  Mont-
gomery was  killed.  Lieut.  Wright  at  once  rushed
in  front  of  his  company,  and,  sword  in  hand,
mounted  the  works  and  called  to  his  men  to  follow.
They  passed  over  the  works,  and  the  result  of  the
battle,  which  ended  the  Creek  war,  was  the  death,
disabling,  or  capture  of  the  entire  Indian  force.
Wright  was  complimented  in  general  orders  and
promoted  captain  in  September,  1814.  He  re-
signed from  the  army  in  June,  1815,  and  settled


in  the  Choctaw  country  of  western  Tennessee,  where
he  built  on  the  present  site  of  Purdy  the  first  log-
cabin.  He  was  popular  with  the  Choctaw  and
Chickasaw  Indians,  and  was  instrumental  in  mak-
ing the  treaty  by  which  they  ceded  their  lands  in
northern  Mississippi  and  western  Tennessee.  He
volunteered  at  the  age  of  sixty-five  in  the  Mexican
war,  where  he  contracted  disease  that  led  to  his
death. — His  son,  John  Vines,  lawyer,  b.  in  Purdy,
McNairy  co.,  Tenn.,  28  June,  1828,  received  a
classical  education,  studied  law,  practised  in  his
native  town,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  serving  in  1855-'61.  He  was  then
chosen  colonel  of  the  13th  Tennessee  infantry  in
the  Confederate  army,  and  participated  in  the  bat-
tle of  Belmont.  Col.  Wright  was  elected  to  the
first  Confederate  congress,  and  re-elected.  He  has
been  judge  of  the  circuit  court,  special  chancellor
and  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,  and  in  1880
was  the  nominee  of  the  Democratic  party  for  gov-
ernor of  Tennessee,  advocating  the  payment  of  the
state  debt,  but  was  defeated  on  account  of  disaf-
fected Democrats  who  were  opposed  to  the  payment.
He  was  in  1887  chairman  of  the  northwestern  In-
dian commission,  which  concluded  treaties  with  13
tribes,  and  he  is  now  (1889)  a  member  of  the  Sioux
commission. — Another  son,  Marcus  Joseph,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Purdy,  McNairy  co.,  Tenn.,  5  June,  1831.
received  a  classical  education,  in  1857  was  appointed
assistant  purser  of  the  navy-yard  at  Memphis,  after-
ward studied  law,  and  practised  in  that  city.  He
entered  the  Confederate  army  as  lieutenant-colo-
nel of  the  154th  Tennessee  militia  regiment,  4
April,  1861,  and,  with  four  companies  of  his  regi-
ment and  a  battery  of  artillery',  occupied  and  forti-
fied Randolph,  Tipton  co.,  on  Mississippi  river.
He  was  military  governor  of  Columbus,  Ky.,  from
February  till  March,  1862,  and  lieutenant-colonel
and  assistant  adjutant-general  on  Gen.  Benjamin
F.  Cheatham's  staff  during  the  Kentucky  cam-
paign from  June  till  September,  1862.  He  was
appointed  brigadier-general,  13  Dec,  1862,  and  in
1863-'4  was  in  charge  of  the  district  of  Atlanta,
Ga.,  until  its  evacuation.  He  subsequently  com-
manded the  districts  of  Macon,  northern  Missis-
sippi, and  western  Tennessee.  He  led  his  regiment
in  the  battles  of  Belmont  and  Shiloh,  and  as  briga-
dier-general he  was  at  Chickamauga.  In  1867
he  was  elected  sheriff  of  Shelby  county,  Tenn.,  and
on  1  July,  1878,  he  was  appointed  agent  of  the
war  department  to  collect  Confederate  records
for  publication  in  the  "  Official  Records  of  the
War  of  the  Rebellion,"  which  place  he  now  holds.
He  has  published  "Reminiscences  of  the  Early
Settlement  and  Early  Settlers  of  McNairy  County,
Tenn."  (Washington,  1882),  and  a  "  Life  of  Gov-
ernor William  Blount "  (1884).

WRIGHT,  Benjamin  Hall,  engineer,  b.  in
Rome,  N.  Y.,  19  Oct.,  1801 ;  d.  there,  13  May,  1881.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1822,  and  served  as  2d  lieutenant  in  the  2d  in-
fantry on  garrison  duty  in  Sackett's  Harbor  until
his  resignation  on  1  June,  1823.  The  profession
of  civil  engineering  then  engaged  his  attention,
and  he  prompted  the  first  establishment  of  rail-
roads on  the  island  of  Cuba.  In  1834  he  conducted
the  preliminary  survey  and  subsequent  construc-
tion of  the  line  from  Havana  to  Guines,  the  first
railroad  in  Cuba.  He  was  in  1836  engineer  of  the
Cardenas  and  Bemba  railroad,  and  in  1837-'42  en-
gineer of  the  Nuevitas  and  Puerto  Principe  rail-
road. For  a  time  he  was  associate  principal  en-
gineer of  Cuba,  in  the  service  of  the  Spanish  gov-
ernment. He  then  returned  to  this  country,  and
was  one  of  the  first  to  conceive  the  idea  of  intro-


WRIGHT


WRIGHT


621


ducing  steam  as  a  motive  power  for  canal-boats,
building  several  experimental  engines,  which  were
operated  successfully.

WRIGHT,  Carroll  Davidson,  statistician,  b.
in  Dunbarton,  N.  H.,  25  July,  1840.  He  was  edu-
cated in  New  Hampshire  and  Vermont,  and  began
the  study  of  law.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  enlisted  in  the  14th  New  Hampshire  regi-
ment, of  which  he  became  colonel  in  December,
1864.  After  serving  as  acting  assistant  adjutant-
general  under  Gen.  Philip  H.  Sheridan,  he  resigned
in  March,  1865,  and  was  admitted  to  the  New
Hampshire  bar  in  October.  His  health  led  to  his
removal  to  Massachusetts,  where  he  was  in  the
state  senate  in  1871-'2,  during  which  time  he  se-
cured the  passage  of  a  bill  to  provide  for  the  es-
tablishment of  workingmen's  trains  to  Boston  from
the  suburban  districts.  He  was  chief  of  the  state
bureau  of  statistics  of  labor  in  1873-'88,  and  in
1880  was  appointed  supervisor  of  the  U.  S.  census
in  Massachusetts,  being  also  special  agent  of  the
census  on  the  factory  system.  In  1885  he  was
commissioned  by  the  governor  to  investigate  the
public  records  of  the  towns,  parishes,  counties,  and
courts  of  that  state,  and  in  January,  1885,  he  was
made  first  commissioner  of  the  bureau  of  labor  in
the  interior  department  in  Washington,  which
office  had  been  created  in  June,  1884.  Col.  Wright
was  a  Republican  presidential  elector  in  1876.  In
1875  and  again  in  1885  he  had  charge  of  the  decen-
nial census  of  Massachusetts.  He  was  lecturer
during  1879  on  phases  of  the  labor  question,  ethi-
cally considered,  at  the  Lowell  institute  in  Boston,
Mass.,  and  during  1881  university  lecturer  on  the
factory  system  at  Harvard.  He  is  a  member  of
various  scientific  societies  and  has  been  recording
secretary  of  the  American  statistical  association
and  president  of  the  American  social  science  asso-
ciation. The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  given  him  by
Tufts  college  in  1883.  Col.  Wright  has  published
"  Annual  Reports  of  the  Massachusetts  Bureau  of
Statistics  of  Labor  "  (15  vols.,  Boston,  1873-88) ;
"  Census  of  Massachusetts  "  (3  vols.,  1876-7) ;  "  The
Statistics  of  Boston  "  (1882) ;  "  The  Factory  Sys-
tem of  the  United  States"  (Washington  1882);
"  The  Census  of  Massachusetts  "  (4  vols.,  Boston,
1887-'8) ;  "  Reports  of  U.  S.  Commissioner  of  La-
bor," including  "  Industrial  Depressions  "  (Wash-
ington, 1886)  ;  "  Convict  Labor  "  (1886)  ;  and
"  Strikes  and  Lockouts  "  (1887) ;  also  numerous
pamphlets,  including  "  The  Relation  of  Political
Economy  to  the  Labor  Question  "  (Boston,  1882) ;
"  The  Factory  System  as  an  Element  in  Civiliza-
tion "  (1882)  ;  "  Scientific  Basis  of  Tariff  Legisla-
tion" (1884);  "  The  Present  Actual  Condition  of
the  Workingman  "  (1887) ;  "  The  Study  of  Statis-
tics in  Colleges  "  (1887) ;  "  Problems  of  the  Census  "
(1887);  "Hand  Labor  in  Prisons"  (1887);  "His-
torical Sketch  of  the  Knights  of  Labor  "  (1887) ;
and  "The  Growth  and  Purposes  of  Bureaus  of
Statistics  of  Labor  "  (1888).

WRIGHT,  Charles  Barstow,  financier,  b.  in
Bradford  county,  Pa.,  8  Jan.,  1822.  He  embarked
in  business  at  fifteen,  and  at  nineteen  was  taken
as  a  partner  by  his  employer.  In  1843  he  received
from  the  Towanda  bank  a  trust  of  landed  interests
in  the  then  small  town  of  Chicago,  and  in  two
years  he  not  only  fulfilled  this  mission  successfully,
but  realized  handsome  profits  in  Chicago  real  estate
for  himself.  In  1863  he  engaged  actively  in  de-
veloping the  petroleum  interests  of  Pennsylvania.
In  1870,  as  director  and  afterward  as  president,  he
undertook  the  work  of  pushing  the  Northern  Pa-
cific railroad  to  completion.  After  the  road  had
been  built  to  Missouri  river,  and  eastward  from


the  Pacific  about  100  miles,  Jay  Cooke  and  Co.,
the  fiscal  agents,  failed,  during  the  panic  of  1873
that  took  place,  and  the  completed  parts  were  not
paying  expenses.  Mr.  Wright  afterward  assisted
in  the  reorganization  by  which  the  road  was  com-
pleted to  Puget  sound."  In  1873  he  took  an  active
part  in  founding  the  city  of  Tacoma,  which  now
has  a  population  of  15,000.  He  endowed  the  An-
nie Wright  seminary  for  girls,  and  Washington
college  for  boys,  at  Tacoma,  and  has  been  noted
for  his  generosity  to  young  men.

WRIGHT,  Chauhcey,  mathematician,  b.  in
Northampton,  Mass.,  20  Sept.,  1830;  d.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  12  Sept.,  1875.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1852,  and  at  once  became  a  compu-
ter for  the  recently  established  "  American  Ephem-
eris  and  Nautical  Almanac  "  in  Cambridge.  His
occasional  contributions  to  the  "  Mathematical
Monthly  "  and  similar  journals  soon  gained  for
him  reputation  as  a  mathematician  and  physicist.
Gradually  his  attention  became  fixed  upon  the
questions  in  metaphysics  and  philosophy  that  are
presented  in  their  latest  form  in  the  works  of  John
Stuart  Mill,  Charles  Darwin,  Alexander  Bain,
Herbert  Spencer,  and  others,  and  he  prepared  a  se-
ries of  philosophical  essays  for  the  "  North  Ameri-
can Review,"  which  continued  until  within  a  few
months  before  his  death.  These  are  regarded  by
Charles  Eliot  Norton  as  "  the  most  important  con-
tribution made  in  America  to  the  discussion  and  in-
vestigation of  the  questions  which  now  chiefly  en-
gage the  attention  of  the  students  of  philosophy."
In  1870  he  delivered  a  course  of  university  lectures
at  Harvard  on  the  principles  of  psychology,  and  in
1874-'5  he  was  instructor  there  in  mathematical
physics.  He  was  appointed  recording  secretary  of
the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in
1863,  and  held  that  office  for  seven  years.  His  writ-
ings were  collected  by  Charles  Eliot  Norton  and
published,  with  a  biographical  sketch,  as  "  Philo-
sophical Discussions  "  (New  York,  1877).

WRIGHT,  Elizur,  reformer,  b.  in  South  Ca-
naan, Conn.,  12  Feb.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Medford,  Mass.,
21  Nov.,  1885.  His  father,  Elizur  (1762-1845),  was
graduated  at  Yale
in  1781,  and  be-
came known  for
his  mathematical
learning  and  devo-
tion to  the  Pres-
byterian faith.  In
1810  the  family  re-
moved to  Tall-
madge,  Ohio,  and
the  son  worked  on
the  farm  and  at-
tended an  academy
that  was  conduct-
ed by  his  father.
His  home  was  of-
ten the  refuge  for
fugitive  slaves,  and
he  early  acquired
anti-slavery  opin-
ions. He  was  grad-
uated at  Yale  in  1826,  and  taught  in  Groton,  Mass.
In  1829-'33  he  was  professor  of  mathematics  and
natural  philosophy  in  Western  Reserve  college,
Hudson,  Ohio.  Mr.  Wright  attended  the  conven-
tion in  Philadelphia  in  December,  1833,  that  formed
the  American  anti-slavery  society,  of  which  he  was
chosen  secretary,  and,  removing  to  New  York,  he
took  part  in  editing  the  "  Emancipator."  He  con-
ducted the  paper  called  "  Human  Rights "  in
1834-'5,  and  the  "Quarterly  Anti-Slavery  Maga-


i^tAz-*-*-^-  /fO^/k^T'


622


WRIGHT


WRIGHT


zine "  in  1835-'8,  and  through  his  continued  op-
position to  slavery  incurred  the  enmity  of  its
advocates.  His  house  was  once  besieged  by  a
mob,  and  an  attempt  was  made  to  kidnap  him
and  convey  him  to  North  Carolina.  He  removed
to  Boston  in  1839,  and  became  editor  of  the  "  Mas-
sachusetts Abolitionist."  For  several  years  he
was  connected  with  the  press,  and  in  1846  he
established  the  "  Chronotype,"  a  daily  newspaper
which  he  conducted  until  it  was  merged  in  the
"Commonwealth"  (1850).  of  which  he  was  for  a
time  the  editor.  Mr.  Wright  was  twice  indicted  and
tried  for  libel,  in  consequence  of  his  severe  strict-
ures on  the  liquor  interests  while  publishing  the
"  Chronotype,"  and  again  in  1851  for  aiding  the
rescue  in  Boston  of  Shadrach,  a  runaway  slave.  Be-
tween 1853  and  1858,  besides  editing  the  "  Railroad
Times,"  he  gave  his  attention  to  invention  and  me-
chanics, constructing  a  spike-making  machine,  a
water-faucet,  and  an  improvement  in  pipe-coup-
ling. He  patented  the  last  two,  and  manufactured
them  for  a  short  time.  In  1853  he  published  "  Life
Insurance  Valuation  Tables "  (2d  ed.,  revised  and
enlarged,  1871),  and  in  1858  he  secured  an  act  of
the  Massachusetts  legislature  to  organize  an  in-
surance commission,  on  a  basis  that  required  the
annual  valuation  of  the  policy  liabilities  of  all  life-
insurance  companies  in  tne  state.  He  was  appoint-
ed insurance  commissioner  of  Massachusetts  under
this  act,  which  office  he  held  until  1866.  He  ob-
tained the  passage  of  the  Massachusetts  non-for-
feiture act  of  1861,  and  also  its  substitute  in  1880,
which  was  embodied  with  some  change  in  the  in-
surance codification  bill  of  1887.  He  devised  a  new
formula  for  finding  the  values  of  policies  of  various
terms,  now  known  as  the  "  accumulation  formula,"
and,  in  order  to  facilitate  his  work,  invented  and
afterward  patented  (1869)  the  arithmeter,  a  mechan-
ical contrivance  for  multiplication  and  division,
based  on  the  logarithmic  principle.  Afterward  he
became  consulting  actuary  for  life-insurance  com-
panies. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  of
1840,  which  formed  the  Liberty  party  and  nomi-
nated James  G.  Birney  for  the  presidency,  and
edited  "  The  Free  American  "  in  1841. He  was  a

Jromoter  of  the  convention  at  Philadelphia  on  4
uly,  1876,  which  organized  the  National  liberal
league  to  support  state  secularization,  and  was  the
second  president  of  the  league,  being  twice  re-elect-
ed. He  was  a  member  of  the  Forestry  association,
was  instrumental  in  obtaining  the  Massachusetts
forestry  act  of  1882,  and  labored  for  a  permanent
forest  preserve.  He  wrote  an  introduction  to  Whit-
tier's  "  Ballads,  and  other  Poems  "  (London,  1844) :
and  published  a  translation  in  verse  of  La  Fon-
taine's "Fables"  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1841 ;  2d  ed.,  New
York,  1859);  "Savings  Bank  Life  Insurance,  with
Illustrative  Tables"  (1872);  "The  Politics  and
Mysteries  of  Life  Insurance  "  (1873) ;  and  "  Myron
Holley,  and  what  he  did  for  Liberty  and  True  Re-
ligion," a  contribution  to  anti-slavery  records  (1882).
WRIGHT,  Fanny,  reformer,  b.  in  Dundee,
Scotland,  6  Sept.,  1795;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  14
Dec,  1852.  Her  father  was  an  intimate  friend  of
Adam  Smith,  Dr.  William  Cullen,  and  other  scien-
tific and  literary  men.  She  became  an  orphan  at
an  early  age,  was  brought  up  as  a  ward  in  chancery
by  a  maternal  aunt,  and  early  adopted  the  philoso-
phy of  the  French  materialists.  She  travelled  in
this  country  in  1818-'20,  and  was  introduced  by
Joseph  Rodman  Drake  in  the  first  of  the  "  Croaker  '
papers.  On  her  return  to  England  she  published
her  "Views  of  Society  and  Manners  in  America"
(London,  1821 ;  Paris,  1822).  On  the  invitation  of
Lafayette  she  went  to  Paris,  and  in  1825  she  re-


turned to  this  country.  She  purchased  2,400  acres
in  Tennessee,  at  Neshoba  (now  Memphis),  and  es-
tablished there  a  colony  of  emancipated  slaves,
whose  social  condition  she  sought  to  elevate.  Ne-
shoba, which  was  held  in  trust  for  her  by  Gen.  La-
fayette, was  restored  by  him  when  he  discovered
that  her  plans  could  not  be  carried  out  without
conflicting  with  the  laws  of  the  state. The  ne-

froes  in  the  colony  were  afterward  sent  to  Hayti.
n  1833-'6  she  appeared  as  a  public  lecturer  in  the
eastern  states,  where  her  attacks  upon  slavery  and
other  social  institutions  attracted  large  audiences
and  led  to  the  establishment  of  "  Fanny  Wright
societies,"  but  her  freedom  of  speech  caused  great
opposition  and  the  hostility  of  the  press  and  the
church.  Fitz-Greene  Halleck  said  her  chief  theme
was"  just  knowledge,"  which  she  pronounced  "ioost
nolidge."  She  then  became  associated  with  Rob-
ert Dale  Owen  in  New  Harmony,  Ind.,  edited  there
"  The  Gazette,"  and  lectured  in  behalf  of  his  colo-
ny, but  with  little  success.  In  1838  she  visited
France,  and  married  there  M.  D'Arusmont,  whose
system  of  philosophy  resembled  her  own,  but  she
was  soon  separated  from  him,  resumed  her  own
name,  and  resided  with  her  daughter  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  until  her  death.  Her  last  years  were
spent  in  retirement.  She  was  benevolent,  unself-
ish, eccentric,  and  fearless.  She  published  in
London  in  1817  "  Altdorf,"  a  tragedy,  founded  on
the  tradition  of  William  Tell  and  unsuccessfully
played  at  the  Park  theatre  ;  "  A  few  Days  in  Ath-
ens, being  a  Translation  of  a  Greek  Manuscript
discovered  in  Herculaneum  "  (London,  1822) :  and
a  "  Course  of  Popular  Lectures  on  Free  Inquiry,
Religion,  Morals,  Opinions,  etc.,  delivered  in  the
United  States  "  (New  York,  1829 ;  6th  ed.,  1836).
See  "  Biography,  Notes,  and  Political  Letters  of
Fanny  Wright  D'Arusmont,"  published  by  John
Windt  (London,  1844),  and  "Memoir  of  Fanny
Wright,  the  Pioneer  Woman  in  the  Cause  of;  Wom-
en's Rights,"  by  Amos  Gilbert  (Cincinnati.  1855).

WRIGHT,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Vermont  in
1803 ;  d.  at  sea,  30  July,  1865.  He  was  educated
at  common  schools  and  at  the  U.  S.  military  acade-
my, where  he  was  graduated  and  promoted  2d
lieutenant  in  the  3d  U.  S.  infantry,  1  July,  1822.
He  served  at  Fort  Howard,  Wis.,  and  Jefferson
barracks,  Mo.,  until  1828,  was  promoted  1st  lieu-
tenant, 23  Sept.,  1827,  and  remained  in  garrison  at
Fort  Leavenworth  till  1831,  when  he  became  adju-
tant of  his  regiment.  On  30  Oct.,  1836,  he  was
promoted  captain,  and  in  1838  he  was  transferred
to  the  8th  infantry  upon  the  organization  of  that
regiment,  serving  during  the  Canada  border  trou-
bles and  at  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  till  1840.  He
took  part  in  the  Florida  war  against  the  Seminoles,
remaining  in  that  country  with  the  8th  infantry
until  1844,  and  receiving  the  brevet  of  major  "  for
meritorious  conduct  in  zeal,  energy,  and  persever-
ance." Maj.  Wright  took  an  active  part  in  the
war  with  Mexico,  in  the  principal  engagements
from  Vera  Cruz  to  Molino  del  Rey,  where  ne  com-
manded the  storming  party  and  was  wounded.
For  his  services  in  Mexico  he  was  brevetted  to  the
grade  of  colonel.  In  1848  he  became  major,  in
1855  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th  infantry,  and  on
3  March,  1855,  colonel  of  the  9th  infantry,  having
served  during  that  period  in  California  and  Wash-
ington territory.  He  was  in  command  of  the
northern  district  of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific
till  1857,  and  during  this  time  conducted  opera-
tions against  the  Indians,  especially  at  the  Cascades
in  1856  and  in  Oregon.  In  1858  he  commanded
an  expedition  against  the  Spokanes,  with  whom  he
had  several  combats. At  the  opening  of  the  civil


WRIGHT


WRIGHT


623


war  he  commanded  the  Department  of  Oregon,
from  which  he  was  transferred  to  command  the
Department  of  the  Pacific  with  the  rank  of  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  28  Sept.,  1861.  He
served  there  until  1864,  and  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general, U.  S.  army,  19  Dec,  1864,  "  for  long,
faithful,  and  meritorious  services."  Gen.  Wright
was  drowned,  30  July,  1865,  on  the  wreck  of  the
*'  Brother  Jonathan  "  while  on  his  way  to  assume
command  of  the  Department  of  the  Columbia.

WRIGHT,  George  Frederick,  geologist,  b.  in
Whitehall,  N.  Y.,  22  Jan.,  1838.  He  was  graduated
at  Oberlin  in  1859,  and  at  the  theological  seminary
there  in  1862,  and  during  1860  he  was  for  five
months  a  private  in  the  7th  Ohio  volunteers.  In
1862  he  entered  on  the  pastorate  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  in  Bakersfield,  Vt.,  where  he  was  or-
dained in  September,  1863,  and  in  1872  was  called
to  a  similar  charge  in  Andovei',  Mass.  He  accept-
ed the  professorship  of  New  Testament  language
and  literature  in  1881,  which  chair  he  still  holds.
Prof.  Wright  has  devoted  considerable  attention
to  geology.  In  1881  he  was  assistant  geologist  on
the  Pennsylvania  survey,  and  since  1884  he  has
been  connected  with  the  division  of  glacial  geology
on  the  U.  S.  survey.  He  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies,  and  in  1884  became  an  associate  editor
of  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra."  His  works  include
"  The  Logic  of  Christian  Evidence "  (Andover,
1880) ;  il  Studies  in  Science  and  Religion  "  (1882) ;
"  The  Relation  of  Death  to  Probation  "  (Boston,
1882);  "The  Glacial  Boundary  in  Ohio,  Indiana,
and  Kentucky  "  (Cleveland,  1884) ;  and  "  The  Di-
vine Authority  of  the  Bible  "  (Boston,  1884).

WRIGHT,  Heudrick  Bradley,  lawyer,  b.  in
Plymouth,  Luzerne  co.,  Pa.,  24  April,  1808;  d.  in
Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  2  Sept.,  1881.  He  was  educated
at  Dickinson  college,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1831,  and  began  practice  in  Wilkesbarre.
He  was  appointed  district  attorney  for  Luzerne
county  in  1834,  and  was  elected  to  the  legislature
in  1841- '3,  serving  in  the  latter  year  as  speaker.
He  was  a  member  of  all  the  national  Democratic
conventions  between  1840  and  1860,  and  was  the

S residing  officer  in  the  one  that  nominated  James
I.  Polk  for  president.  Being  elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat,  he  served  from  5  Dec,  1853,  till
3  March,  1855.  He  was  elected  again  to  fill  the  va-
cancy caused  by  the  death  of  George  W.  Scranton,
serving  from  4  July,  1861,  till  3  March,  1863.  and
again  from  1877  till  1881.  He  published  "  A  Prac-
tical Treatise  on  Labor"  (New  York,  1871),  and
"  Historical  Sketches  of  Plymouth,  Luzerne  Co.,
Pa."  (Philadelphia,  1873). — His  nephew,  Harrison,
lawyer,  b.  in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  15  July,  1850;  d.
there,  20  Feb.,  1885,  was  educated  in  his  native  city
and  at  Heidelberg,  Germany,  where  he  studied  four
years,  receiving  in  1871  the  degrees  of  A.  M.  arid
Ph.  D.  He  returned  home,  studied  law  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1874.  He  was  chosen  secretary
of  the  Wyoming  historical  and  geological  society  of
Wilkesbarre  in  1874,  and  devoted  himself  to  lit-
erary and  scientific  pursuits.  Mr.  Wright  was  a
member  of  the  Archaeological  society  of  Rome,  and
other  societies.  He  published  various  monographs
on  archaeological  and  scientific  subjects.  His  last
publications — "  The  Manuscripts  of  the  Earl  of
Ashburnham,  a  Translation  of  the  Report  to  the
Minister  of  Public  Instruction  and  Fine  Arts,  by
Leopold  Delisle,  of  the  National  Library  "  (1884),
and  "  Observations  on  the  Very  Ancient  Manuscript
of  the  Libri  Collection,  by  Leopold  Delisle  "  (1884),
which  he  published  and  circulated  widely  in  Amer-
ica— were  doubtless  the  means  of  preventing  the
sale  of  these  treasures  in  this  country  and  of  re-


storing them  to  the  National  library  at  Paris.  He
also  edited  the  first  volume  of  the  "  Proceedings  "
of  the  Wyoming  historical  and  geological  society.

WRIGHT,  Henry  Clarke,  reformer,  b.  in  Sha-
ron, Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,  29  Aug.,  1797;  d.  in
Pawtucket,  R.  I.,  16  Aug.,  1870.  For  many  years
he  was  a  noted  lecturer  on  anti-slavery  topics,  and
was  an  advocate  of  peace,  socialism,  and  spiritual-
ism, on  all  of  which  subjects  his  convictions  were
vehement,  and  were  delivered  with  eloquence.  At
one  time  he  was  conspicuous  among  the  band  of
anti-slavery  orators  that  assembled  annually  in
New  York  at  the  anniversary  of  the  American
anti-slavery  society,  and  by  its  earnestness  enlist-
ed the  sympathy  of  the  people.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  "  Man-Killing  by  Individuals  and  Nations
Wrong  "  (Boston,  1841) ;  "A  Kiss  for  a  Blow  "  (Lon-
don, 1843 ;  new  ed.,  1866) ;  "  Defensive  War  proved
to  be  a  Denial  of  Christianity  "  (1846) ;  "  Human
Life  Illustrated  "  (Boston,  1849) ;  "  Marriage  and
Parentage  "  (1854) ;  and  "  The  Living  Present  and
the  Dead  Past "  (1865).

WRIGHT,  Horatio  Governeur,  soldier,  b.  in
Clinton,  Conn.,  6  March,  1820.  He  was  graduated
second  in  his  class  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1841,  served  in  the  engineer  corps,  and  in  1842-'4
as  assistant  professor,  first  of  French  and  then
of  engineering,
at  West  Point,
and  was  pro-
moted 1st  lieu-
tenant in  1848.
After  super-
intending the
buildingofforts
and  improve-
ments in  Flor-
ida he  became
captain  in  1855,
and  till  the
civil  war  was
assistant  to  the
chief  engineer
at  Washington,
also  serving
on  several  spe-
cial ordnance
boards.  He  de-
clined a  major's
commission  in  the  13th  infantry  on  14  May,  1861,
but,  after  constructing  several  of  the  defences  of
Washington,  taking  part  in  the  battle  of  Bull
Run  as  chief  engineer  of  Heintzelman's  divis-
ion, and  organizing  the  Port  Royal  expedition  in
the  same  capacity,  he  accepted  that  rank  in  the
engineer  corps  in  August,  and  on  14  Sept.  be-
came brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  took
part  in  the  capture  of  Hilton  Head,  S.  C,  in  No-
vember, led  the  land  forces  in  the  Florida  expe-
dition, February-June,  1862,  and  on  18  July,  1862,
became  major-general  of  volunteers.  He  com-
manded the  Department  of  the  Ohio  till  26  March,
1863,  the  District  of  Louisville,  Ky.,  till  April,  and
then  led  a  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in
the  Pennsylvania  and  Rapidan  campaigns,  receiv-
ing the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  the  cap-
ture of  Rappahannock  Station,  where  he  tempora-
rily commanded  the  6th  corps.  After  the  death  of
Gen.  John  Sedgwick,  9  May,  1864,  he  succeeded  to
the  command  of  that  corps,  and  on  12  May  was
brevetted  colonel  for  gallantry  at  Spottsylvania.
While  at  Petersburg  he  was  ordered  to  the  defence
of  Washington  during  Gen.  Jubal  A.  Early's  inva-
sion of  Maryland,  in  the  midsummer  of  1864.  Great
anxiety  was  felt  lest  succor  from  the  troops  in  front


afe,


Stf&./h^*-


624


WRIGHT


WRIGHT


of  Petersburg  should  not  arrive  in  time  to  save  the
capital,  but  as  Early's  advance  arrived  in  the  sub-
urbs of  Washington  on  the  north,  Wright's  troops
were  landing  at  the  wharves  on  the  south.  With
some  regiments  of  the  19th  corps  just  arrived  from
the  Gulf  and  a  few  other  hastdy  gathered  troops,
Gen.  Wright  was  ready  to  meet  any  assault.  Early
was  soon  forced  to  withdraw  in  the  face  of  a  strong
reconnoissance  which  Gen.  Wright  pushed  out.
"I  have  sent  from  here,"  wrote  Gen.  Grant  to
President  Lincoln  from  the  Petersburg  lines,  "a
whole  corps,  commanded  by  an  excellent  officer."
And  to  a  prominent  official  of  the  war  department
he  said :  "  Boldness  is  all  that  is  needed  to  drive
the  enemy  out  of  Maryland,  and  Wright  is  the
man  to  assume  that."  Gen.  Wright  rallied  the
troops  under  his  command,  re-formed  the  line,  and
did  much  to  retrieve  the  fortunes  of  the  early  sur-
prise at  Cedar  Creek,  19  Oct.,  1864.  His  6th  corps
first  broke  the  strong  lines  at  Petersburg  on  Sun-
day morning,  2  April,  1865.  In  his  official  report
of  that  battle  Gen.  Grant  said  :  "  Gen.  Wright
penetrated  the  line  with  his  whole  corps,  sweeping
everything  before  him,  and  to  his  left  toward
Hatcher's  Run,  capturing  many  guns  and  several
thousand  prisoners."  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general,  u.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865,  for  gallantry
in  the  battle  of  Cold  Harbor,  and  major-general
for  the  capture  of  Petersburg,  Va.  On  14  June,
1865  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  Connecticut
legislature.  He  was  made  lieutenant-colonel,  23
Nov.,  1865,  and  then  served  on  various  engineer-
ing boards,  becoming  colonel,  4  March,  1879,  and
chief-of-engineers  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-gen-
eral, 30  June,  1879.  On  22  March,  1884,  he  was
retired  from  active  service.  Gen.  Wright  is  co-
author of  a  "  Report  on  the  Fabrication  of  Iron  for
Defences  "  (Washington,  1871).

WRIGHT,  Sir  James,  bart,  governor  of  Geor-
gia, b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  about  1714 ;  d.  in  Lon-
don, England,  20  Nov.,  1785.  His  father,  Robert,
removed  from  Durham,  England,  to  Charleston,
and  was  chief  justice  of  South  Carolina  for  many
years.  The  son  was  probably  educated  in  England,
studied  law,  and  practised  in  Charleston.  He  was
appointed  agent  of  the  province  in  Great  Britain,
and  beeame  chief  justice  and  lieutenant-governor
of  South  Carolina  on  13  May,  1760.  He  was  ap-
pointed royal  governor  of  Georgia  in  1764,  and
was  the  last  to  administer  its  affairs  in  the  name
of  the  king.  He  arrived  in  Savannah  in  October,
1764,  and  his  management  of  affairs  was  successful
until  the  passage  of  the  stamp-act.  He  labored  to
convince  the  people  that  they  should  submit  to  the
king's  authority,  but  the  governor's  proclamations
only  served  to  exasperate  them.  On  5  Dec,  1766,
his  majesty's  ship  "Speedwell"  arrived  in  the  Sa-
vannah river  with  the  stamped  paper,  which  was
placed  under  the  care  of  the  commissary ;  but,  on
receiving  news  that  the  "Liberty  boys"  had  de-
termined to  break  open  the  fort  and  destroy  the
papers,  the  governor  ordered  a  guard  to  prevent
their  seizure,  and  afterward  had  them  removed
to  Fort  George,  on  Cockspur  island.  In  1768  the
governor  charged  the  assembly  with  revolution-
ary conduct  and  dismissed  it.  On  17  June,  1775,
several  men-of-war  arrived  in  Tybee,  and,  to  pre-
vent the  governor  from  holding  communication
with  them,  Joseph  Habersham  entered  his  dwell-
ing and  took  him  prisoner ;  but  the  governor  made
his  escape,  and  went  to  Bonaventure,  whence  he
was  conveyed  to  the  armed  ship  "Scarborough,"
where  he  addressed  a  letter  to  nis  council.  The
assembly  adjourned  without  giving  Gov.  Wright  an
answer,  and  he  then  planned  an  attack  upon  the


town,  which  proved  unsuccessful,  and  he  afterward
sailed  for  England.  In  1779  he  was  despatched
to  resume  the  government  of  Georgia.  Savannah
was  at  this  time  in  possession  of  the  British,  and
the  Americans  were  endeavoring  to  recover  it.
The  friends  of  Gen.  Wright  say  that,  owing  to
his  determination  and  spirit,  the  defence  of  his
capital  "was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  events  of
the  war  in  the  south,"  and  would  not  have  been
made  but  for  his  deciding  vote  in  the  council
of  war.  At  the  close  of  hostilities  he  retired  to
England,  and  his  extensive  property  was  confis-
cated. He  was  created  a  baronet  on  8  Dec.  1772.
Wrightsborough,  Columbia  co.,  Ga.,  was  named  in
his  honor. — His  brother,  Jermyn,  was  in  command
of  a  fort  on  St.  Mary's  river,  which  became  a
rendezvous  for  the  Tories  of  that  part  of  the  coun-
try, and  was  unsuccessfully  assailed  by  the  patriots.
A  severe  writer  calls  it  a  "  nest  of  villains."  An-
other account  is  that  Wright's  force  consisted  of
negroes.  In  1778  he  was  attainted,  and  lost  his
estate.  His  name  appears  in  the  confiscation  act
of  South  Carolina  in  1782. — James's  son,  James,
succeeded  his  father  in  1785.  The  Georgia  Royal-
ists were  raised  for  him  in  1779,  but  his  name  is
found  in  connection  with '  that  corps  only  at  the
siege  of  Savannah,  when  his  post  was  in  a  redoubt
built  of  green  wood  strengthened  by  fillings  of
sand,  and  mounted  with  heavy  cannon.  He  died
in  1816  without  issue,  and  his  title  reverted  to  his
grand-nephew,  Sir  James  Alexander.  —  Another
son,  Alexander,  b.  in  1751,  married  Elizabeth,
the  only  daughter  and  heiress  of  John  Izard,  of
South  Carolina.  At  the  close  of  the  Revolution
he  settled  in  Jamaica,  W.  I.  He  was  of  "  known
and  just  influence."

WRIGHT,  Joel  Tombleson,  Canadian  clergy-
man, b.  in  Upwell,  Isle  of  Ely.  England,  16  March,
1834.  He  removed  to  Canada  in  1855,  and  was
ordained  as  a  priest  of  the  Church  of  England  in
Canada  in  1862  by  Bishop  Benjamin  Cronyn.  He
was  incumbent  of  Wardsville  and  adjacent  places
in  Middlesex  county  for  eight  years,  and  has  since
been  rector  of  St.  James's  church,  St.  Mary's,  Ont.
He  was  plaintiff  in  the  celebrated  chancery  suit,
Wright  vs.  the  Synod  of  Huron,  instituted  in  1881
on  behalf  of  himself  and  other  clergy  of  the  dio-
cese. The  case  finally  reached  the  supreme  court
of  Canada,  which  decided  against  Mr.  Wright,  who
thereupon,  in  1884,  appealed  to  the  privy  council
of  Great  Britain,  where  it  is  now  pending.  He  is
known  as  a  lecturer  on  Freemasonry,  and  has  pub-
lished a  work  on  "  Constitutional  Government  and
Synod  Legislation  "  (1879).

'WRIGHT,  John  C,  jurist,  b.  in  Wethersfield,
Conn.,  in  1783;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  13  Feb.,
1861.  He  received  an  academic  education,  learned
the  trade  of  a  printer,  and  went  to  Troy,  N.  Y.,
where  he  edited  "  The  Gazette  "  for  several  years.
After  studying  law  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and
began  practice  in  Steubenville,  Ohio.  For  many
vears  he  was  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,  and
he  was  elected  to  congress  as  an  Adams  Democrat,
serving  from  1  Dec,  1823,  till  3  March,  1829,  and
being  afterward  defeated  for  re-election  as  a  Henry
Clay  Democrat.  He  and  Tristram  Burgess,  of
Rhode  Island,  were  the  only  two  members  of  the
house  that  ventured  to  reply  to  John  Randolph  of
Roanoke  in  the  stvle  of  sarcasm  that  characterized
Randolph's  speeches.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
peace  congress  in  Washington  in  February,  1861,
but  died  before  its  adjournment.  For  several  years
he  was  the  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  Cincinnati
"  Gazette."  His  speeches  in  congress  on  the  "  reso-
lution calling  on  the  secretary  of  state  for  infor-


WRIGHT


WRIGHT


625


mation  relative  to  the  selection  of  newspapers  for
the  publication  of  the  laws "  were  issued  (Wash-
ington, 1827).  He  also  published  "  Supreme  Court
Reports  of  Ohio "  (Columbus,  1831-4).  This  book
possessed  much  legal  authority  at  the  time  of  its
publication,  and  is  still  held  in  repute.  Many  of
the  cases  are  reported  in  a  vein  of  peculiar  face-
tiousness,  for  which  Judge  Wright  was  noted. —
His  son,  Crafts  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,
13  July,  1808 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  23  July,  1883,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1828,  but  resigned  on  8  Nov.,  1828,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Ohio,  and  practised  with
his  father.  In  1840  he  became  assistant  editor  of
the  Cincinnati  "  Gazette,"  and  from  1847  till  1854
he  was  president  of  the  "  Gazette  "  company,  after
which  he  again  practised  law.  He  aided  in  organ-
izing the  first  telegraph  company  in  the  west  and
became  one  of  its  directors.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  entered  the  National  army  as
colonel  of  the  8th  Missouri  infantry,  but  afterward
he  raised  and  disciplined  the  13th  Missouri.  He
served  in  the  Tennessee  campaign  of  1862,  and
for  his  services  received  the  thanks  of  the  gov-
ernor of  Missouri.  In  March,  1862,  he  was  in  com-
mand of  Clarksville.  He  was  afterward  ordered
to  Pittsburg  Landing,  where  he  was  senior  colonel,
and  given  command  of  a  brigade.  He  was  also
engaged  in  the  Mississippi  campaign  and  in  the
siege  of  Corinth,  where  he  remained  ill  for  many
weeks  until  he  resigned  his  commission  on  16  Sept.,
1862.  For  his  services  at  Shiloh,  President  Lin-
coln nominated  him  for  the  post  of  brigadier-
general,  but  he  resigned  before  he  could  be  con-
firmed by  the  senate.  Subsequently  he  engaged  in
farming  in  Glendale,  Ohio,  but  afterward  lived  in
Chicago,  where  in  1876  he  was  made  steward  of  the
marine  hospital. — His  wife,  Margaret,  was  active
during  the  war  in  visiting  hospitals  and  battle-
fields, and  was  identified  with  many  benevolent
works.  She  was  at  one  time  the  oniy  woman  on
the  boat  that  carried  disabled  soldiers  to  the  north,
and  acted  as  nurse  to  them  under  the  direction  of
the  senior  surgeon.

WRIGHT,  John  Stephen,  manufacturer,  b.  at
Sheffield,  Mass.,  16  July,  1815  ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,
26  Sept.,  1874.  On  29  Oct.,  1832,  he  arrived  in
Chicago  with  his  father,  and  they  at  once  estab-
lished a  store.  In  1837  he  built  at  his  own  expense,
for  $507.93,  the  first  public-school  building  in  Chi-
cago. In  1840  he  established  the  "  Prairie  Parmer,"
which  is  still  in  existence.  In  1845  he  wrote  for
the  New  York  "Commercial  Advertiser"  numer-
ous articles  setting  forth  the  advantages  and  pro-
spective greatness  of  Chicago  and  the  northwest.
.In  1852  he  began  the  manufacture  of  Atkins's
self-raking  reaper  and  mower.  He  was  one  of  the
active  promoters  of  the  Illinois  Central  railroad,
and  sent  thousands  of  circulars  at  his  own  expense
from  Chicago  to  the  Gulf,  calling  attention  of  the
people  to  the  prospective  benefits  of  such  a  road
through  the  state.  He  published  a  valuable  statisti-
cal work  entitled  "  Chicago :  Past,  Present,  and  Fu-
ture "  (Chicago,  1870).

WRIGHT,  Joseph,  portrait-painter,  b.  in  Bor-
dentown,  N.  J.,  in  1756;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in
1793.  He  was  the  son  of  Patience  Wright,  who
excelled  in  modelling  miniature  heads  in  wax.  In
1772  he  went  to  England  with  his  parents,  and
there  received  his  art  education.  Subsequently  he
studied  in  Paris  under  the  care  of  Benjamin  Frank-
lin, and  on  his  return  to  this  country  he  narrowly
escaped  with  his  life  from  a  shipwreck.  In  the
autumn  of  1783  he  painted  a  three-quarters-length
portrait  of  George  Washington,  afterward  he  paint-
vol.  vi. — 40


ed  another  for  the  Count  de  Solms,  and  still  later
he  made  a  miniature  profile  from  life.  He  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Washington  first  draughts-
man and  die-sinker  in  the  U.  S.  mint,  and  the  first
coins  and  medals  issued  by  the  National  govern-
ment were  his  handiwork.

WRIGHT,  Joseph  Albert,  governor  of  In-
diana, b.  in  Washington,  Pa.,  17  April,  1810 ;  d.  in
Berlin,  Germany,  11  May,  1867.  He  removed  to
Bloomington,  Ind.,  with  his  parents,  and  entered
the  State  university,  where,  to  procure  his  educa-
tion, he  acted  as  janitor.  He  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1829,  began  practice  in  Rock-
ville,  Ind.,  and  was  a  member  of  both  houses  of
the  legislature.  Being  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  he  served  from  4  Dec,  1843,  till  3  March,
1845,  and  from  1849  till  1857  he  was  governor  of
Indiana.  In  the  last-named  year  he  was  appointed
minister  to  Prussia,  holding  this  position  until
1861.  From  3  March,  1862,  till  22  Jan.,  1863,  he
served  in  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the  unexpired  term
of  Jesse  D.  Bright,  who  had  been  expelled.  He
was  appointed  LT.  S.  commissioner  to  the  Hamburg
exhibition  in  1863,  and  was  then  a  second  time
minister  to  Prussia,  serving  from  1865  until  his
death. — His  brother,  George  Grover,  jurist,  b.
in  Bloomington,  Ind.,  24  March,  1820,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Indiana  in  1839,  studied
law  with  his  brother  in  Rockville,  and  removed  to
Iowa  in  1840,  where  he  began  practice.  He  was
prosecuting  attorney  in  1847-'8,  was  elected  to  the
Iowa  senate  in  1849,  serving  two  terms,  and  was
chosen  chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Iowa
in  1854,  serving  till  1870.  From  1868  till  1870  he
was  a  professor  in  the  law  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Iowa,  and  he  was  then  elected  U.  S.
senator  as  a  Republican,  holding  his  seat  from  4
March,  1871,  till  3  March,  1877,  and  serving  on  the
committees  on  finance,  the  judiciary,  claims,  and
the  civil  service.  He  then  resumed  his  practice,
and  for  the  past  five  years  has  lectured  before  the
law-school  of  the  State  university.  He  is  presi-
dent of  the  Polk  county  savings-bank.  In  1860-'5
he  was  president  of  the  Iowa  agricultural  society.

WRIGHT,  Joseph  Jefferson  Burr,  soldier,"  b.
in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  27  April,  1800 ;  d.  in  Carlisle,
Pa.,  14  May,  1878.  He  was  educated  at  Wash-
ington college,  Pa.,  and  received  his  medical  de-
gree at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1836.  He  en-
tered the  U.  S.  army  as  a  volunteer,  became  as-
sistant surgeon  on  25  Oct.,  1833,  and  major  and
surgeon  on  26  March,  1844,  and  served  in  the  war
with  Mexico,  participating  in  the  principal  battles,
and  being  in  charge  of  the  general  hospitals  at
Matamoras  and  Vera  Cruz.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  transferred  the  sick  and  wounded  to  New
Orleans,  and,  after  being  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  served  in  Texas  and  on  the  frontier  until
1861.  He  was  then  intrusted  with  organizing  gen-
eral hospitals  in  the  west  and  arranging  medical
affairs  on  an  efficient  basis  for  field  service.  As  medi-
cal director  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  George  B.  McClel-
lan  he  was  present  at  Rich  Mountain  and  Carrick's
Ford,  W.  Va.,  and  on  the  transfer  of  that  officer
to  the  east  he  declined  the  post  of  medical  director
of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  was  appointed
medical  director  of  the  Department  of  the  Missouri
on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  with  head-
quarters in  St.  Louis,  Mo.  Owing  to  his  advancing
years,  he  did  not  participate  actively  in  the  war
after  1862.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier  -  general,
U.  S.  army,  on  13  March,  1865,  and  retired  from
service  on  31  Dec,  1876.  Dr.  Wright  was  among
the  first  to  use  and  recommend  the  sulphate  of
quinine,  administered  in large  doses  during  the


626


WRIGHT


WRIGHT


remission  in  the  treatment  of  malarial  remittent
fevers.  This  method  of  treatment  is  now  admitted
to  be  of  great  value.  He  contributed  to  medical
literature,  and  published  articles  in  the  "  Southern
Medical  Reports."

WRIGHT,  Luther,  educator,  b.  in  Easthamp-
ton,  Mass.,  24  Nov.,  1796;  d.  there,  5  Sept.,  1870.
After  graduation  at  Yale  in  1822,  he  was  principal
of  an  academy  in  Maryland  for  two  years,  and
then  returned  to  Yale,  where  he  served  as  a  tutor,
and  studied  theology.  Subsequently  he  taught  in
Middletown  and  Ellington,  Conn.,  and  was  princi-
pal of  the  academy  in  Leicester,  Mass.,  in  1833-'9.
He  was  the  first  principal  of  Williston  seminary,
which  he  organized  (see  Williston,  Samuel),  serv-
ing from  1841  till  1849,  when  he  resigned,  but  for
several  years  gave  instruction  to  private  pupils.
Mr.  Wright  published  an  address  at  the  dedication
of  the  academy  building  in  Leicester  (1833),  and  a
historical  sketch  of  Easthampton  (1851).

WRIGHT,  Milton,  bishop  of  the  United
Brethren  in  Christ,  b.  in  Rush  county,  Ind.,  17
Nov.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Hartsville  col-
lege in  1853,  and  in  1855-6  was  pastor  of  the
Church  of  the  United  Brethren  in  Indianapolis.
He  was  ordained  in  the  latter  year,  and,  after  hold-
ing a  charge  at  Andersonville,  Ind.,  in  1856-'7,  he
went  as  missionary  to  Oregon,  where  he  was  pas-
tor at  Sublimity,  and  president  of  Sublimity  col-
lege, a  denominational  institution,  in  1857-9.
From  1859  till  1869  he  served  in  the  itinerancy  in
the  White  river  conference,  during  which  he  was
presiding  elder  and  pastor  in  Hartsville,  Ind.,  and
also  professor  of  theology  in  Hartsville  college  in
1868-'9.  In  1877  he  became  bishop,  and  until
1881  held  that  position  in  the  western  Mississippi
district.  In  1881-'5  he  was  presiding  elder  in  the
White  river  conference,  and  in  the  latter  year  he
was  re-elected  bishop  for  a  term  of  four  years  and
sent  to  the  Pacific  coast  district.  Westfield  col-
lege, 111.,  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1878.
He  was  editor  of  the  "  Religious  Telescope,"  the
organ  of  his  church,  in  1868-'9,  and  editor  and

fublisher  of  "  The  Richmond  Star,"  Richmond,
nd..  in  1883-'5,  and  has  published  several  tracts.
WRIGHT,  Rebecca  McPherson,  spy,  b.  near
Winchester,  Va.,  31  Jan.,  1838.  She  was  a  Quak-
er, and  her  father,  Amos  Wright,  died  in  a  Con-
federate prison  early  in  the  civil  war.  Her  fam-
ily was  one  of  the  few  of  Union  sentiment  that
remained  in  Winchester,  Va.,  during  that  period.
On  16  Sept.,  1864,  she  received  a  note  from  Gen.
Philip  H.  Sheridan,  which  was  conveved  to  her
wrapped  in  a  small  wad  of  tin-foil,  and  carried  in
the  mouth  of  a  negro  messenger.  It  read  thus:
"  Can  you  inform  me  of  the  position  of  Early's
forces,  the  number  of  divisions  in  his  army,  and
the  strength  of  all  or  any  of  them,  and  his  proba-
ble or  reported  intentions  ?  Have  any  more  troops
arrived  from  Richmond,  or  are  any  more  coming,
or  reported  to  be  coming  f "  Having  been  told  of
the  position  of  the  Confederate  army  by  a  wound-
ed Confederate  officer,  who  visited  her  two  even-
ings previously,  she  sent  a  reply  to  Gen.  Sheridan,
describing  the  number  of  troops  and  their  situa-
tion, and  upon  her  information  he  directed  the  at-
tack on  Winchester.  After  the  battle  she  was
thanked  in  person  by  Gen.  Sheridan,  who  always
spoke  of  her  as  his  "little  Quaker  girl,"  and  in
1867  sent  her  a  gold  watch  as  a  memento.  In  1871
she  married  William  C.  Bonsai,  and  she  has  held
a  clerkship  in  the  United  States  treasury  depart-
ment at  Washington  since  1868.

WRIGHT,  Robert,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.
in  Kent  county,  Md.,  about  1765 ;  d.  in  Queens-


town,  Md.,  7  Sept.,  1826.  After  receiving  a  public-
school  education  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  practised  in  Queenstown.  Being
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat,  he
served  from  7  Dec,  1801,  till  1806,  when  he  re-
signed. From  1806  till  1809  he  was  governor  of
the  state.  After  being  in  congress  from  3  Dec,
1810,  till  3  March,  1817,  and  again  from  3  Dec,
1821,  till  3  March,  1823,  he  was  appointed  district
judge  of  Kent  countv.

WRIGHT,  Robert  Emmet,  lawyer,  b.  in  Al-
lentown.  Pa.,  in  1810.  He  was  educated  at  Allen-
town  academy,  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  and  has  practised  in  his  native  town.  He
is  the  author  of  many  essays  on  constitutional  re-
form, and  has  published  practical  digest*  of  the
laws  of  Pennsylvania  on  "  Aldermen  and  Justices
of  the  Peace"  (Philadelphia,  1839);  "The  Office
and  Duties  of  Constable"  (1840);  the  "Reported
Cases  determined  in  the  Several  Courts  of  Pennsyl-
vania from  Mav  Term.  1836,  till  December,  1841 "
(1842);  and  "  Pennsvlvania  State  Reports"  (14
vols.,  1861-6).  He  has  edited  William  Graydon's
"Forms  of  Conveyancing"  (1845);  Samuel  Rob-
erts's "Digest  of  Select  British  Statutes"  (1847) ;
and  F.  Carroll  Brewster's  "  Reports  at  Law  and  in
Equitv"(1847).

WRIGHT,  Robert  William,  author,  b.  in
Ludlow,  Vt.,  22  Feb.,  1816;  d.  in  Cleveland.  Ohio.
9  Jan.,  1885.  His  grandfather,  Stephen,  was  the
fourth  in  descent  from  Capt.  Edward  Wright,  of
Concord,  Mass.,  who  came  to  this  country  from
Bromwick,  England,  in  1645.  After  graduation  at
Harvard  in  1842,  he  taught  in  the  public  grammar-
schools  in  Boston,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1845.  He  then  went  to  Wisconsin
and  practised  his  profession  in  Waukesha  until
1856,  and  in  1852  declined  the  Whig  nomination
for  congress  fnyn  that  district.  In  1856-'9  he  re-
sided in  Waterbury,  Conn.,  where  he  practised  law,
edited  the  Waterbury  "Journal."  and  served  one
year  as  judge  of  probate.  He  edited  the  Hartford
"Daily  Post"  in  1858,  the  New  Haven  "Daily
News "  from  1859,  and  afterward  the  Richmond,
Va.,  "  State  Journal."  Afterward  he  removed  to
Cheshire,  Conn.,  which  was  his  home  until  his
death.  He  invented  two  successful  newspaper  ad-
dressers, for  which  he  obtained  patents,  and  de-
voted his  leisure  to  astronomv  and  literature.  He
read  papers  before  the  New  Haven  colony  histori-
cal society,  contributed  to  magazines,  and  printed
numerous  satirical  poems.  He  published  "The
Church  Knaviad,  or  Horace  in  West  Haven,  by
Horatius  Flaccus,"  a  satirical  mock-heroic  poem
(New  Haven,  1864) ;  "  The  Vision  of  Judgment,  or
the  South  Church,  Ecclesiastical  Councils  viewed
from  Celestial  and  Satanic  Standpoints  by  Que-
vedo  Redivivus  "  (1867) ;  "  The  Pious  Chi-Neh,  or
a  Veritable  History  of  the  Great  Election  Fraud,
done  into  Verse  by  U  Bet,"  a  humorous  pasquinade
on  the  election  of  1871  in  Connecticut  (1872) ;  and
"  Life :  its  True  Genesis."  a  refutation  of  the  Dar-
winian theory  (New  York,  1880).  Mr.  Wright  was
also  the  author  of  "Practical  Legal  Forms"  (Mil-
waukee, 1852).

WRIGHT,  Rnfus,  artist,  b.  in  Cleveland.  Ohio,
in  1832.  He  was  a  pupil  at  the  National  academy,
and  studied  also  for  a  time  under  George  A.  Baker.
His  professional  life  has  been  spent  in  New  York,
Washington,  and  Brooklyn.  In  1866  he  was  made
a  member  of  the  Brooklyn  academy  of  design.
His  portraits  include  those  of  Roger  B.  Taney,
Edwin  M.  Stanton,  and  William  H.  Seward.
About  1875  he  turned  his  attention  also  to  the
painting  of  composition  pictures,  and has  pro-


WRIGHT


WRIGHT


627


duced,  among  other  works,  "The  Morning  Bou-
quet "  and  "  The  Inventor  and  the  Banker  "  (1876) ;
"Thank  you,  Sir!"  (1877);  "Concerned  for  his
Sole  "  (1878) ;  and  "  Feeding  the  Birds  "  (1880).

WRIGHT,  Silas,  statesman,  b.  in  Amherst,
Mass.,  24  May,  1795;  d.  in  Canton,  St.  Lawrence
co.,  X.  Y.,  27  Aug.,  1847.  His  early  life  was  spent
on  his  father's  farm  in  Weybridge,  Vt.,  and  after

graduation  at  Mid-
dlebury  college  in
1815  he  studied  law,
was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  began

fractice  in  Canton,
n  1820  he  was  ap-
pointed surrogate
of  St.  Lawrence
county,  and  in
1823-7  he  was  a
member  of  the  state
senate,  where  he
opposed  the  politi-
cal advancement  of
De  Witt  Clinton,
regarding  it  as  dan-
gerous to  the  Dem-
ocratic party,  of
which  he  was  a  firm
adherent  through-
out his  life.  In  1827  he  made  a  report  to  the  senate
developing  the  financial  policy  with  which  he  was
identified  throughout  his  life,  and  which  he  subse-
quently enforced  as  a  political  measure,  while  he
was  governor  of  New  York.  In  1827  he  was  made
brigadier-general  of  the  state  militia.  He  served
in  congress  from  3  Dec,  1827,  till  3  March,  1829,
and  there  voted  for  the  protective  tariff  of  1828,
and  for  the  appointment  of  a  committee  to  inquire
into  the  expediency  of  abolishing  slavery  and  the
slave-trade  in  the  District  of  Columbia.  In  1829
he  was  appointed  comptroller  of  New  York,  which
office  he  held  until  1833,  when  he  was  chosen  to
the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of  William  L.  Marcy.  In
that  body  he  served  on  the  committee  on  finance,
supported  the  force  bill  and  Henry  Clay's  compro-
mise bill  of  1833,  introduced  the  first  sub-treasury
hill,  which  became  a  law,  defended  President
Jackson's  removal  of  the  deposits  from  the  U.  S.
bank,  and  delivered  a  speech  opposing  Daniel
Webster's  motion  to  recharter  that  institution.  He
also  voted  against  receiving  a  petition  for  the  abo-
lition of  slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  and
in  favor  of  excluding  from  the  mails  all  "  printed
matter  calculated  to  excite  the  prejudices  of  the
southern  states  in  regard  to  the  question  of  sla-
very." Mr.  Wright  opposed  the  distribution  among
the  states  of  the  surplus  Federal  revenues,  sup-

gorted  the  independent  treasury  scheme  of  Van
luren,  maintained  in  reference  to  the  abolition  of
slavery  the  right  of  petition  and  the  sovereignty
of  congress  over  the  territories  in  1838,  and  voted
for  the  tariff  of  1842  and  for  the  annexation  of
Texas.  His  term  extended  from  11  Jan.,  1833,  till
1  Dec,  1844,  when  he  resigned  to  become  governor
of  New  York,  which  post  he  held  until  1847,  dur-
ing which  period  he  opposed  the  calling  of  a  con-
vention to  revise  the  state  constitution,  vetoed  a  bill
to  appropriate  money  for  canal  improvements,  and
took  decided  ground  against  the  anti-rent  rioters,
declaring  Delaware  county  in  a  state  of  insurrec-
tion and  calling  out  a  military  force.  He  was  de-
feated as  candidate  for  re-election  in  1846.  When
in  April,  1847,  the  application  of  the  Wilmot  pro-
viso to  the  territories  that  had  been  obtained  from
Mexico  was  under  discussion,  Mr.  Wright  emphat-


ically declared  that  the  arms  and  the  money  of
the  Union  ought  never  to  be  used  for  the  acquisi-
tion of  territory  for  the  purpose  of  planting  sla-
very. In  May,  1847,  he  wrote  a  letter  expressing
himself  in  favor  of  using  the  money  of  the  Federal
government  to  improve  the  harbors  of  the  north-
ern lakes.  He  refused  several  offers  of  cabinet
offices  and  foreign  missions.  After  his  term  as
governor  he  retired  to  his  farm  in  Canton,  which
he  cultivated  with  his  own  hands.  His  mind  was
logical  and  powerful,  and  he  was  considered  a
clear  and  practical  statesman.  Horatio  Seymour
said:  "Mr.  Wright  was  a  great  man,  an  honest
man;  if  he  committed  errors,  they  were  induced
by  his  devotion  to  his  party.  He  was  not  selfish ;
to  him  his  party  was  everything — himself  nothing."
There  is  a  good  portrait  of  him  by  James  White-
house  in  the  New  York  citv-hall.  See  "  Eulogy  on
Silas  Wright,"  by  Henry  D.  Gilpin  (Philadelphia,
1847) ;  his  "  Life  and  Times,"  by  Jabez  D.  Ham-
mond (Syracuse,  1848);  and  his  "Life,"  by  John
S.  Jenkins  (Utica,  1852).

WRIGHT,  Thomas  Lee,  physician,  b.  in  Wind-
ham, Portage  co.,  Ohio,  7  Aug.,  1825.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Miami  university  and  at  Ohio  medical
college,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1846.  Until
1854  he  practised  in  Kansas  City,  chiefly  among
the  Wyandotte  Indians,  and  he  afterward  removed
to  Bellefontaine,  Ohio.  He  lectured  on  the  theory
and  practice  of  medicine  in  Ohio  Wesleyan  uni-
versity in  1855-'6,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Ohio
medical  society  and  president  of  the  Logan  county
medical  society.  Dr.  Wright  has  made  the  scien-
tific aspects  of  inebriety  a  special  study.  This  has
led  to  inquiries  respecting  the  effects  of  alcohol,  not
only  immediately,  but  remotely,  upon  the  nervous
functions  and  capacities ;  and  finally  upon  minds
and  morals  in  their  several  departments.  In  1887
he  attended  the  International  congress  of  inebriety
held  in  London,  and  was  one  of  its  vice-presidents.
He  also  edited  the  "  Ohio  Censor,"  a  political  jour-
nal published  in  Bellefontaine.  Dr.  Wright  has
contributed  to  the  transactions  of  the  Ohio  medi-
cal society  and  medical  journals,  and  has  written
"  Notes  on  the  Theory  of  Human  Existence  "  (1848)
and  "  Disquisition  on  the  Ancient  History  of  Medi-
cine" (1860).  He  has  published  "  Inebriism,  a  Patho-
logical and  Psychological  Study  "(Columbus,  1885).

WRIGHT,  "William,  senator,  b.  in  Clarkstown,
Rockland  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1794 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
1  Nov.,  1866.  He
was  a  volunteer
for  the  defence  of
Stonington,Conn.,
in  the  war  of  1812.
The  death  of  his
father.  Dr.  Will-
iam Wright,  com-
pelled him  toaban-
don  the  hope  of
a  collegiate  edu-
cation, and  he
learned  the  trade
of  a  saddler,  and
followed  this  busi-
ness in  Bridge-
port, Conn.,  for
seven  years.  After
acquiring  a  for-
tune, he  removed
to  Newark,  N.  J.,
in  1821,  and  was
mayor  of  that
town  in  1840-'3.  Being  elected  to  congress  as  a
Henry  Clay  Whig,  he  served  from  4  Dec,  1843,  till


628


WRIGHT


WURTZ


3  March,  1847,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  a  defeated
candidate  for  governor  of  New  Jersey.  He  was
twice  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat,
and  served  from  4  March,  1853,  till  4  March,  1859,
and  from  7  Dec,  1863,  till  his  death.  He  was
chairman  of  the  committee  on  manufactures  and
of  that  on  the  contingent  expenses  of  the  senate,
and  served  also  on  the  committees  on  public  lands
and  Revolutionary  claims.

WRIGHT,  William,  journalist,  b.  in  Ireland
in  1824;  d.  in  Paterson,  N.  J.,  13  March,  1866.
He  came  to  this  country  about  1841  and  settled
near  Paterson,  N.  J.,  where  he  engaged  in  teach-
ing. In  1854  he  founded  in  that  town  "The
Press,"  a  Republican  journal.  He  took  an  active
part  in  the  canvass  for  the  presidency  in  1856,
advocating  the  election  of  John  C.  Fremont,  and
chiefly  through  his  exertions  Paterson  for  the  first
time  in  its  history  gave  a  majority  against  the
Democratic  party.  In  1858  he  was  interested  in  a
paper  called  the  "  Republican,"  afterward  merged
into  the  "Daily  Guardian."  In  1860  Mr.  Wright
removed  to  New  York,  where  he  was  connected
with  the  "Evening  Post"  and  the  "Commercial
Advertiser"  and  contributed  to  other  journals ;  but
in  1864  he  returned  to  Paterson  and  engaged  in
journalism  there.  Shortly  before  his  death  he  es-
tablished the  "Monthly  Review."  He  published
"  The  Oil  Regions  of  Pennsylvania,  showing  where
Petroleum  is  Found,  how  it  is  obtained,  and  at
what  Cost,  with  Hints  for  Whom  it  may  Concern  "
(New  York,  1865).

WRIGHT,  William  Bull,  poet,  b.  in  Orange
county,  N.  Y.,  29  Sept.,  1840 :  d.  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,
29  March,  1880.  After  graduation  at  Princeton
in  1859  he  taught  in  Buffalo  until  1862,  when  he
entered  the  5th  New  York  artillery  as  a  private.
While  his  regiment  was  stationed  at  Fort  McHenry,
Md.,  he  was  prostrated  bv  typhoid  fever,  but  after
his  recovery  he  rejoined  nis  regiment,  and  partici-
pated in  Sheridan's  campaign  in  the  Shenandoah
valley.  He  served  until  the  end  of  the  war,  part
of  the  time  as  judge-advocate,  and  was  mustered
out  as  lieutenant  with  the  brevet  of  major.  He
was  graduated  at  the  New  York  college  of  phy-
sicians and  surgeons,  practised  medicine  in  Orange
county  until  1871,  and  was  professor  of  ancient
languages  in  the  normal  school  at  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,
from  that  year  until  1878,  when  he  resigned,  owing
to  impaired  health.  He  was  the  author  of  "  High-
land Rambles,  a  Poem  "  (Boston,  1868),  and  "  The
Brook,  and  other  Poems"  (New  York,  1873).

WRIGHT,  William  Henry,  engineer,  b.  in
Wilmington,  N.  C,  in  1814;  d.  there,  29  Dec,
1845.  He  was  a  grandson  of  Judge  Joshua  Granger
Wright  (1768-1811),  who  served  in  the  legislature
from  1792  till  1800,  and  was  speaker  in  the  latter
year.  After  graduation  at  William  and  Mary  col-
lege William  studied  law,  which  he  abandoned  to
enter  the  U.  S.  military  academy.  He  was  gradu-
ated there  in  1834,  promoted  2d  lieutenant  in  the
1st  artillery,  was  transferred  to  the  engineer  corps
on  1  July,  1838,  and  became  1st  lieutenant  on  7
Dec.  of  that  year.  He  served  as  assistant  engineer
in  the  construction  of  Fort  Warren,  Boston  har-
bor, and  as  superintending  engineer  on  the  sea
wall  for  the  protection  of  Lovell's  island  in  that
harbor  in  1844-'5.  Lieut.  Wright  was  the  author
of  a  "  Brief  Practical  Treatise  on  Mortars,  with  an
Account  of  the  Processes  at  the  Public  Works  in
Boston  Harbor"  (Boston,  1845).

WRIGHT,  William  Janes,  mathematician,  b.
in  Weybridge,  Vt.,  3  Aug.,  1831.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  college  in  1857,  and  studied  at  Union
and  Princeton  theological  seminaries. He  was  or-


dained to  the  ministry  of  the  Presbyterian  church
in  1863,  was  a  chaplain  in  the  National  army  in
1863-'5.  and.  besides  holding  various  pastorates  and
spending  two  years  in  European  study,  has  been
professor  of  mathematics  at  Wilson  college,  Pa.,
in  1876-'7.  and  of  metaphysics  at  Westminster
college,  Mo.,  since  1887.  He  received  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  from  Union  in  1876,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Westminster  college  in  1882.  Dr.  Wright  has
published  "  Tracts  on  Higher  Mathematics,"  includ-
ing treatises  on  determinants,  trilinear  co-ordinates,
and  invariants  (London,  1875-'9). — His  wife,  Julia
McNair,  author,  b.  in  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  1  May,  1840,
was  the  daughter  of  John  McNair,  a  well-known
civil  engineer,  whose  father  emigrated  from  Scot-
land in  1798.  She  was  educated  at  private  schools
and  academies,  married  Dr.  Wright  in  1859,  and
has  devoted  her  life  mainly  to  literary  work.  Her
books  are  mostly  religious  stories,  anti-Catholic
Many  of  them  have  been  republished  in  Europe  and
several  have  been  translated  into  Arabic  Her
works  include  "  Priest  and  Nun  "  (1869) ;  "  Jug-or-
Not"  (New  York,  1870);  "Saints  and  Sinners"
(Philadelphia,  1873) ;  "  The  Early  Church  in  Brit-
ain "  (1874) ;  "  Bricks  from  Babel,"  a  manual  of
ethnography  (1876) ;  "  The  Complete  Home  "  (1879) ;
"A  Wife  Hard  Won."  a  novel  (1882);  and  "The
Nature  Readers "  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1887-8).

WURTELE,  Jonathan  Saxton  Campbell,
Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Quebec,  27  Jan.,  1828.  He
is  the  son  of  Jonathan  Wurtele,  seignior  of  River
David,  and  was  the  last  Canadian  seignior  to  ren-
der homage,  3  Feb.,  1854.  He  was  educated  at
Quebec  high-school  and  privately  studied  law,  and
was  called  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1850.
He  became  professor  of  commercial  law  in  McGill
university  in  1869,  received  the  degree  of  B.  C.  L.
from  that  institution  in  1870,  and  of  D.  C.  L.  in
1882,  and  is  now  an  emeritus  professor.  He  became
queen's  counsel  in  1873.  In  1875  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature  of  Quebec,  re-elected  in  1878  and
in  1881,  and  again  in  1882  on  his  being  appointed
provincial  treasurer.  He  was  speaker  of  the  Quebec
assembly  in  1884-'6,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  superior  court  of  the  province.
He  was  made  an  officer  of  public  instruction  in
1880  and  an  officer  of  the  Legion  of  honor  in
France  in  1882.  Mr.  Wurtele  negotiated  a  loan  in
France  for  the  province  of  Quebec  in  1880,  and  or-
ganized at  the  same  time  the  Credit  foncier  Franco
Canadien,  of  which  he  is  a  director.  He  has  been
counsel  of  the  German  society  of  Montreal,  and
has  held  the  offices  of  chief  clerk  of  the  seignioral
commission,  mayor  of  St,  David,  and  president  of
the  school  commissioners  of  that  place.  He  is  a
Liberal-Conservative  in  politics,  and  is  the  author
of  a  "  Manual  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  of
Quebec  "  (Quebec,  1885).

WURTZ,  Henry,  chemist,  b.  in  Easton,  Pa.,  5
June,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1848,  and  then  studied  chemistry  at  the  Lawrence
scientific  school  of  Harvard.  In  1851  he  became
instructor  at  the  Yale  (now  Sheffield)  scientific
school,  and  in  1853-'5  he  was  chemist  to  the  geo-
logical survey  of  New  Jersey.  He  was  chosen  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  at  the  Medical  college  in  Kings-
ton, Canada,  in  1857,  and  a  year  later  accepted  a
similar  chair  at  the  National  medical  college  in
Washington,  D.  G,  while  at  the  same  time  he  was
examiner  in  the  chemical  division  of  the  U.  S.
patent-office  until  1861.  Prof.  Wurtz  then  re-
moved to  New  York.  His  original  work  has  in-
cluded the  discovery  of  the  mineral  hisingerite  in
America  (1850) ;  the  invention  of  methods  for  the
production  of alum from greensand  marl  and


WYANT


WYCKOFP


629


potassium  chloride  and  potassium  sulphate  from
similar  sources  (1850) ;  methods  of  preparing  pure
alkalies  and  alkaline  earths  (1852);  applications
of  sodium  amalgams  (1865) ;  new  modes  of  manu-
facture of  fuel  gas  by  the  alternating  action  of
air  and  steam  on  cheap  coal  (1869);  the  produc-
tion of  magnesia  by  precipitation  from  sea-water
by  means  of  calcium  hydroxide  (-1877) ;  the  discov-
ery of  the  minerals  animikite  and  huntilite  (1878) ;
a  new  method  of  concentrating  and  caking  granu-
lar materials  of  all  kinds  by  mixing  with  small
percentages  of  metallic  iron  and  a  solution  of  fer-
rous sulphate  (1882) ;  and  a  new  method  of  distil-
ling coal  to  obtain  liquid  products.  He  was  en-
gaged until  1888  in  perfecting  processes  by  means
of  which  greater  yields  of  the  heavy  paraffin  oils,
paraffin  wax,  carbolic  acid,  and  other  products  can
be  obtained  from  coals  of  all  kinds  more  quickly,
also  in  developing  the  generation  of  electricity  by
methods  the  chemical  products  of  which  will  be  of
sufficient  value  to  pay  all  costs.  Prof.  Wurtz  en-
tered the  employ  of  Thomas  A.  Edison  as  chemist
in  October,  1888.  In  1876  he  served  as  a  judge  on
the  international  jury  of  awards  at  the  World's  fair
in  Philadelphia,  making  a  special  report  on  "  The
Chemistry  of  Japan  Porcelain  and  Porcelain  Min-
erals," and  in  1877  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  con-
ferred on  him  by  Stevens  institute  of  technology.
From  1868  till  1874  he  was  editor  of  the  "  Ameri-
can Gas-Light  Journal,"  and  he  was  assistant  edi-
tor in  the  chemical  department  of  "Johnson's  Uni-
versal Cyclopaedia."  He  has  made  numerous  re-
ports to  various  corporations,  and  is  the  author  of
about  sixty  scientific  memoirs.

WYANT,  Alexander  H.,  artist,  b.  in  Port
Washington,  Ohio,  11  Jan.,  1836.  He  studied  under
Hans  Gude  in  Carlsruhe,  and  also  in  London.
After  his  return  to  this  country  he  was  elected  an
associate  of  the  National  academy  in  1868,  and  an
academician  the  following  year.  Among  his  works
in  oil  are  "A  Storm"  (1861);  "Staten  Island,
from  the  Jersey  Meadows"  (1867);  "Scene  on  the
Upper  Susquehanna "  (1869) ;  "  Shore  of  Lake
Champlain  '  and  "  Pool  on  the  Ausable  "  (1871) ;
"View  on  Lake  George"  (1875);  "Wilds  of  the
Adirondacks  "  (1876) ;  "  An  Old  Clearing  "  (1877) ;
"Any whither"  (1883);  and  "Evening"  (1885).
His  water-colors  include  "Scene  on  the  Upper
Little  Miami"  (1867);  "New  Jersey  Meadows"
(1870);  "Sunset  on  the  Prairie"  (1876);  "Late
Autumn,  Ausable  River"  (1877);  and  "Reminis-
cence of  the  Connecticut "  (1878).

WYATT,  Sir  Francis,  governor  of  Virginia,  b.
in  England  about  1575  ;  d.  in  Bexley,  Kent,  Eng-
land, in  1644.  He  was  appointed  governor  of  Vir-
ginia in  1621  to  succeed  Sir  George  Yeardley,  and
with  a  fleet  of  nine  sail  arrived  there  in  October  of
that  year.  He  was  accompanied  by  his  brother,
Rev.  Haut  Wyatt,  as  clergyman  of  the  party,  Will-
iam Claiborne  as  surveyor,  John  Pott  as  physician,
and  George  Sandys,  the  translator  of  the  "  Meta-
morphoses of  Ovid,"  as  treasurer.  Sir  Francis
brought  with  him  a  new  constitution  for  the  colo-
ny, by  which  all  former  immunities  and  franchises
were  confirmed,  trial  by  jury  was  secured,  and  the
assembly  was  privileged  to  meet  annually  upon  the
call  of  the  governor,  who  was  vested  with  the  right
of  veto.  No  act  of  that  body  was  to  be  valid  un-
less it  should  be  ratified  by  the  Virginia  company ;
but,  on  the  other  hand,  no  order  of  the  company
was  to  be  obligatory  without  the  concurrence  of
the  assembly.  This  famous  ordinance  furnished
the  model  of  every  subsequent  form  of  govern-
ment in  the  Anglo-American  colonies.  During
his  first  year  of  governorship  21  vessels  arrived


in  Virginia,  bringing  more  than  1,300  settlers;
but  in  March,  1622,  the  Indians  rose  and  massa-
cred 347  persons,  including  10  members  of  the
council,  and  the  remainder  of  his  service  was  dis-
turbed by  continual  strife  with  the  savages ;  but
he  persisted  in  giving  larger  liberties  to  the  peo-
ple, and  in  March,  1623,  appointed  monthly  courts.
He  was  wise  and  pacific  in  his  management,  and
the  colony  grew  and  prospered.  Meanwhile  the
Virginia  company  incurred  the  ill-will  of  King
James  by  its  opposition  to  his  appointment  of  its
officers.  He  sent  commissioners  to  Virginia  to
gather  material  to  work  its  ruin,  and  on  16  June,
1624,  its  charter  was  annulled;  but  Sir  Francis
was  continued  as  governor  by  royal  commission,
and  retained  in  1625  by  Charles  I.  The  death  of
his  father,  Sir  John  Wyatt,  recalled  him  in  1626;
but  he  returned  in  1639,  and,  displacing  Sir  John
Harvev,  who  had  offended  the  king,  held  the  gov-
ernorship till  1842,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Sir
William  Berkeley.

WYATT,  William  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  Manchester,  Nova  Scotia,  9  July,  1789 ;  d.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  24  June,  1864.  He  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1809,  entered  the  ministry  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  was  ordered  deacon
in  1810,  and  ordained  priest  in  1813.  He  settled
in  Baltimore  as  associate  rector  of  St.  Paul's  par-
ish in  1814,  succeeded  to  the  full  pastorate  in  1827,
and  occupied  that  charge  until  his  death.  He  was
president  of  the  standing  committee  of  the  diocese
of  Maryland  for  many  years,  and  president  of  the
house  of  deputies  of  the  general  convention  from
1828  till  1853,  when  he  declined  re-election.  He
published  several  occasional  discourses  and  "  Chris-
tian Offices,  for  the  Use  of  Families  and  Individu-
als" (New  York,  1825),  and  "The  Parting  Spirit's
Address  to  His  Mother"  (1863).

WYCKOFF,  Isaac  Newton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Hillsborough,  Somerset  co.,  N.  J.,  29  Aug.,  1792 ;
d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  28  March,  1869.  He  taught
to  obtain  means  to  enter  college,  was  graduated  at
Rutgers  in  1813,  and  at  New  Brunswick  theological
seminary  in  1817,  and  while  a  student  at  the  lat-
ter institution  was  principal  of  a  young  ladies'
school  in  New  Brunswick.  He  was  pastor  of  the
1st  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  Leeds,  N.  Y.,  in
1817-'34,  of  that  in  Catskill  in  1834-'6,  and  of  the
2d  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  Albany  in  1836-66.
During  the  last-named  pastorate  1,000  persons
were  received  into  his  church.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Union  college  in  1838,  and
from  Rutgers  in  1839.  Dr.  Wyckoff  was  an  able
and  at  times  an  eloquent  preacher.  He  was  active
in  benevolent  and  educational  enterprises,  and  a
volunteer  commissioner  of  immigration  to  the
numerous  Hollanders  that  came  to  the  vicinity  of
Albany  between  1845  and  1865.  He  contributed
to  the  religious  press  and  to  Dr.  William  B.
Sprague's  "  Annals  of  the  American  Pulpit,"  and
published  seventeen  sermons  (Albanv,  1827-'66).

WYCKOFF,  William  Henry,  educator,  b.  in
New  York  citv,  10  Sept.,  1807;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  2  Nov.,  1877.  His  father,  the  Rev.  Corne-
lius C.  Wyckoff,  was  a  well-known  clergyman  in  the
Baptist  church.  William  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1828,  and  was  the  principal  of  the  classi-
cal department  in  schools  in  New  York  city,  where
he  fitted  a  larger  number  of  pupils  for  Columbia
and  the  University  of  New  York  than  any  other
private  instructor.  He  founded  the  "  Baptist  Ad-
vocate "  (now  the  "  Examiner  ")  in  1839,  edited  it
till  1846,  aided  in  organizing  the  American  and
foreign  Bible  society  in  1835,  and  the  American
Bible  union  in  1850,  was  corresponding  secretary


630


WYETH


WYLIE


of  the  former  in  1846-'50,  and  held  the  same  office
in  the  latter  in  1850-'77.  He  was  called  to  the
ministry  by  the  Laight  street  Baptist  church,  New
York  city,  in  1846,  and  subsequently  frequently
filled  vacant  pulpits,  although  he  accepted  no  set-
tled charge.  Madison  university  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  in  1858.  Dr.  Wyckoff  had  a  scholarly
acquaintance  with  most  of  the  European  languages,
made  himself  proficient  in  Hebrew  during  his  later
life,  and,  says  Prof.  Charles  Anthon,  "  had  no  su-
perior in  this  country  in  his  knowledge  of  Latin
and  Greek."  He  was  a  manager  of  the  American
Sunday-school  union,  and  for  many  years  president
of  the  Young  men's  city  Bible  society  and  the  Bap-
tist domestic  mission  society.  He  was  the  author
of  several  educational  and  religious  works,  includ-
ing "The  American  Bible  Society  and  the  Bap-
tists "  (New  York,  1841) ;  "  Documentary  History
of  the  American  Bible  Union  "  (4  vols.,  1857-'67) ;
and  he  edited  an  abridged  edition  of  Charles
Rollins's  "  Ancient  History "  (1848). — His  son,
William  Cornelius,  editor,  b.  in  New  York  city,
28  May,  1832 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  2  May,  1888,
was  educated  in  his  native  city,  became  a  book-
keeper in  a  banking  establishment,  and  was  con-
nected with  various  commercial  enterprises  till
1861,  when  he  became  chief  clerk  of  the  National
bank-note  company.  He  subsequently  engaged  in
the  real  estate  business,  was  scientific  editor  of  the
New  York  " Tribune "  in  1869-78,  and  from  the
latter  date  until  his  death  was  secretary  of  the
American  silk  association.  He  was  an  associate
editor  of  the  "  Science  News "  in  1879-'80,  U.  S.
government  expert  for  the  statistics  of  the  Ameri-
can silk  industry  in  1880-'3,  and  in  1886-8  editor
of  "  The  American  Magazine."  While  he  was  a
member  of  the  staff  of  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "
he  reported  the  annual  meetings  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  his
work  obtaining  wide  recognition  as  the  best  scien-
tific reports  that  were  ever  made  for  a  daily  paper.
He  wrote  many  valuable  papers  on  the  subject  of
silk  industries,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Silk  Goods  in
America  "  (New  York,  1879),  and  "  American  Silk-
Manufacture  "  (1887).

WYETH,  John  Allan,  surgeon,  b.  in  Mission-
ary Station,  Marshall  co.,  Ala.,  26  May,  1845.  He
was  educated  at  Lagrange  military  academy,  Ala.,
and  served  as  a  private  in  the  4th  Alabama  cavalry
during  the  civil  war.  After  his  graduation  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Louisville
in  1869  he  settled  in  Guntersville,  Ala.,  but  in  1872
he  removed  to  New  York  city,  and  was  graduated
at  Bellevue  hospital  medical  college  in  1873.  Dr.
Wyeth  practised  as  a  physician  and  surgeon  until
1882,  and  since  that  time  has  devoted  himself  to
surgery.  He  was  assistant  demonstrator  of  anato-
my at  Bellevue  hospital  medical  college  in  1873-'6,
and  in  1874-'7  prosector  to  the  chair  of  anatomy,
also  during  the  same  years  instructor  in  anatomy,
physiology,  and  materia  medica.  He  was  the
founder  of  the  New  York  polyclinic  and  hospital,
in  which  he  became  professor  of  surgery  and  secre-
tary of  the  faculty.  This  was  the  first  post-gradu-
ate medical  school  in  this  country,  having  been
organized  in  1880-1  and  opened  in  1882,  and  had
in  its  attendance,  until  the  winter  term  of  1888-'9,
more  than  1,400  practitioners  of  medicine.  Dr.
Wyeth  was  president  of  the  New  York  pathologi-
cal society  in  1885-'6.  The  Bellevue  alumni  asso-
ciation prize  was  awarded  to  him  in  1876  for  an
essav  on  "  The  Surgery  and  Surgical  Anatomy  of
the  Tibio-Tarsal  Articulation,"  and  he  received  the
first  prize  of  the  American  medical  association  in
1878  for  an  essay  on  "  The  Surgical  Anatomy  and


Surgery  of  the  Carotid  Arteries "  and  the  second
prize  in  the  same  year  for  an  essay  on  "  The  Sur-
gical Anatomy  and  Surgery  of  the  Innominate  and
the  Subclavian  Arteries."  He  has  published  "  Es-
says on  Surgical  Anatomy  and  Surgery "  (New
York,  1879),  and  a  "  Text-Book  on  Surgery  "  (1887).

WYLIE,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  Washington,
Pa.,  12  April,  1789 ;  d.  in  Bloomington,  Ind.,  11
Nov.,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  col-
lege, Canonsburg,  Pa.,  in  1810,  was  tutor  in  the
college  for  a  year,  studied  theology,  and  was  li-
censed to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  Ohio,  21
Oct.,  1812,  being  installed  as  pastor  at  Miller's
Run,  23  June,  1813.  He  was  president  of  Jeffer-
son college,  in  1812-'16,  and  of  \Vashington  college
in  1817-'28,  was  elected  president  of  Indiana  college
in  1818,  and  removing  to  Bloomington,  Ind.,  in
1829,  held  this  post  during  life.  He  changed
his  ecclesiastial  relations  in  1841,  was  ordained
deacon  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  New
Albany  in  December,  1841,  by  Bishop  Kemper,  and
priest  in  Vincennes,  Ind.,  in  May,  1842,  by  the
same  bishop.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Union  college  in  1825.  Dr.  Wylie  published  sev-
eral sermons  on  special  occasions  (1816— '51) ;  "  Eng-
lish Grammar  "  (1822) ;  "  Eulogy  on  General  La-
fayette "  (1834) ;  "  Sectarianism  is  Heresy,  with  its
Nature,  Evils,  and  Remedy  "  (3  parts,  1840) ;  and  bac-
calaureate and  other  addresses.  He  contributed
freely  to  reviews  and  magazines,  and  left  at  his
death  ready  for  publication  works  on  "  Rhetoric  "
and  "  Advice  to  the  Young."

WYLIE,  Robert,  artist,  b.  in  the  Isle  of  Man
in  1839  ;  d.  in  Brittany,  France,  4  Feb.,  1877.  He
was  brought  to  the  United  States  in  childhood,  and
first  studied  art  at  the  Pennsylvania  academy.  In
1863  he  went  to  France,  and  in  1872  he  received  a
second-class  medal  at  the  Paris  salon.  His  profes-
sional career  was  in  France,  and  his  pictures  deal
mostly  with  the  life  of  the  Breton  peasants.  His
"Death  of  a  Vendean  Chief"  (1876-'7)  is  in  the
Metropolitan  museum,  New  York.

WYLIE,  Samnel  Brown,  clergyman,  b.  in  Moy-
larg,  County  Antrim,  Ireland,  21  May,  1773 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  Oct.,  1852.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Glasgow  in  1797.  and
taught  for  a  short  time  in  Ballymena,  Ireland,  but
was  compelled  to  leave  the  country  in  consequence
of  his  efforts  in  favor  of  Irish  independence.  He
arrived  in  the  United  States  in  October,  1797,
taught  in  Cheltenham,  Pa.,  and  in  1798  became  a
tutor  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  subse-
quently establishing  a  private  academy  in  Phila-
delphia, which  he  successfully  conducted  for  many
years.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in  this  country  he
studied  theology  under  the  care  of  the  Reformed
Presbyterian  church,  and  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1799.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention
of  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  church  in  Ireland
and  Scotland  in  1802,  and  on  his  return  was  called
to  the  pastorate  of  the  1st  Reformed  Presbyte-
rian church  of  Philadelphia,  which  he  held  until
his  death,  a  period  of  fifty-one  years.  When  the
theological  seminary  of  his  church  was  organized
in  1809,  he  became  a  professor  there,  and  held  office
till  1851.  In  1828-^45  he  occupied  the  chair  of
languages  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  of
which  he  was  vice-provost  in  1838-'45.  Dickin-
son gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1816.  Dr.
Wylie  was  an  eminent  classical  and  Oriental  schol-
ar, a  contributor  to  the  American  philosophical  so-
ciety, an  assistant  editor  of  the  "  Presbyterian  "  in
182i-'2,  and  the  author  of  "  The  Faithful  Ministry
of  Magistracy  and  Ministry  upon  a  Scriptural  Ba-
sis "  (Philadelphia,  1804),  and  "  Life  of  Alexander


WYLLY


WYMAN


631


McLeod  "  (1855).  He  also  compiled  a  Greek  gram-
mar (1838).  See  memoirs  of  him  bv  Rev.  John
D.  McLeod  (New  York,  1852),  and  "Rev.  Gilbert
McMaster  (Philadelphia,  1852).— His  son,  Theophi-
Ins  Ada  in.  educator,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  8  Oct.,
is  10,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1830,  and  became  an  assistant  in  the  aca-
demic department  of  that  institution.  In  1837  he
accepted  the  chair  of  natural  philosophy  and  chem-
istry in  Indiana  university,  and  in  1852  he  became
professor  of  mathematics  in  Miami  university,  but
three  years  later  he  returned  to  his  former  post.
He  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of  ancient  lan-
guages in  1864,  and  during  1859  was  acting  presi-
dent of  the  university.  In  1886  he  withdrew  from
active  work  and  was  made  professor  emeritus.
Prof.  Wylie  was  ordained  as  a  clergyman  in  the
Reformed  Presbyterian  church  in  1838,  and  was
pastor  of  that  church  in  Bloomington,  Ind.,  in
1838-'52  and  1855-'69.  He  has  in  preparation  a
"  History  of  the  University  of  Indiana,"  with
sketches  of  the  faculty  and  graduates. — Another
son,  Theodore  William  John,  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  3  Oct.,  1818,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1836,  studied  the-
ology, was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Reformed
Presbyterian  church,  and  in  1838  became  associate
pastor  with  his  father  of  the  1st  church  in  Phila-
delphia. When  the  latter  died  in  1852,  the  son  suc-
ceeded him  as  pastor.  He  was  corresponding  sec-
retary of  the  board  of  missions  of  his  church  in
1843-'9,  professor  in  the  Reformed  Presbyterian
theological  seminary  in  1847-'51,  1854-'7,  and
1859-'69,  and  edited  the  "  Missionary  Advocate  "
in  1838-'41  and  the  "  Banner  of  the  Covenant  "  in
1845-55.  The  University  of  New  York  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1859.  Dr.  Wylie  is  the  au-
thor of  an  •'  English,  Latin,  and  Greek  Vocabulary  "
(Philadelphia,  1839);  "  The  God  of  our  Fathers"
(1854) ;  and  "  Washington  as  a  Christian  "  (1862).

WYLLY,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  a  southern  state
in  1757;  d.  in  Devonshire,  England,  in  1828.  He
adhered  to  the  crown  in  the  Revolution,  and,  re-
moving to  New  Brunswick,  became  the  first  king's
counsel  and  registrar  of  the  court  of  vice-admi-
ralty in  that  province.  In  1787  he  went  with  his
family  to  the  Bahama  islands,  where,  in  1788,  he
was  appointed  solicitor-general  and  surrogate  of  the
court  of  vice-admiralty.  In  1804  he  was  appoint-
ed advocate-general  of  the  vice-admiralty  court,
in  1812  he  became  chief  justice,  and  in  1822  chief
justice  of  the  island  of  St.  Vincent.

WYLLYS,  George,  governor  of  Connecticut,  b.
in  Fennv  Compton.  Warwick,  England,  about
1570 ;  d.  'in  Hartford,  Conn.,  9  March,  1645.  He
was  liberally  educated,  and  after  a  course  at  one
of  the  English  universities  settled  on  his  large  es-
tate in  Knapton,  Warwick.  He  ardently  espoused
the  cause  of  the  Puritans,  and  in  1636  sent  his
steward.  William  Gibbons,  with  twenty  men,  "  to
purchase  and  prepare  for  him  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
an  estate  suitable  to  his  rank,"  on  which  Gibbons
was  directed  to  build  a  house,  and  prepare  for  the
reception  of  his  master's  family.  Wyilys  arrived
in  1638,  and  at  once  became  an  important  mem-
ber of  the  colony.  He  was  a  f  ramer  of  the  con-
stitution in  1639,  and  at  the  first  election  that  was
held  under  it  was  chosen  one  of  the  six  magistrates
of  Connecticut,  holding  office  until  his  death.
He  was  chosen  deputy  governor  in  1641,  and  gov-
ernor in  1642.  Gov.  Wyilys  was  famed  for  his
social  and  domestic  virtues,  his  simplicity  of  man-
ners, and  his  love  for  civil  and  religious  liberty. —
His  son,  Samuel,  magistrate,  b.  in  Warwick,  Eng-
land, in  1632  ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  30  May,  1709,


came  to  this  country  with  his  father  in  1638,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1653,  and  in  1654  was
elected  one  of  the  magistrates  of  Connecticut.  In
this  office  and  the  corresponding  one  of  assistant
under  the  char-  . „.

ter  of  Charles
II.  he  was  re-
tained by  an-
nual election
for  more  than
thirty  years.
On  his  estate,
and  in  front  of
his  house,  the
charter  of  Con-
necticut, ac-
cording to  the
common  ac-
count, was  concealed  in  a  large  hollow  tree,  to  secure
it  from  Sir  Edmund  Andros(see  Andros,  Edmund,
and  Treat,  Robert),  and  it  remained  there  un-
til his  deposition  from  the  governorship  on  the
accession  of  William  and  Mary.  This  tree,  which
was  called  the  Charter  Oak,  was  said  to  be  1.000
years  old.  There  is  a  legend  that  when  Gov.  Wyl-
lys's  steward,  Gibbons,  was  about  to  cut  it  down,
a  deputation  of  Indians  remonstrated,  and  it  was
allowed  to  remain.  It  stood  for  169  years  after  the
charter  was  concealed  in  it,  but  was  prostrated  by  a
violent  gale  of  wind  in  August,  1856. — George's
grandson,  George,  secretary  of  the  colony  of  Con-
necticut, b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  6  Oct.,  1710;  d.
there,  24  April,  1796,  was  the  son  of  Hezekiah
Wyilys,  who  was  secretary  of  the  colony  in  1712-'30.
George  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1729,  and,  in  con-
sequence of  the  failure  of  his  father's  health,  was
chosen  secretary  pro  tempore  in  1730,  becoming  his
successor  in  1734.  He  held  that  office  for  sixty
subsequent  years,  during  which  he  attended  every
session  of  the  legislature.  He  was  town-clerk  of
Hartford  from  1730  until  his  death,  became  a  cap-
tain of  militia  in  1738,  and  held  a  commission  of
lieutenant-colonel  in  the  French  war  in  1757.  Not-
withstanding the  fact  that  he  was  in  active  sym-
pathy with  the  loyalist  element  during  the  Revo-
lution, his  tenure  of  office  was  not  interrupted.  He
married  Mary,  daughter  of  Rev.  Timothy  Wood-
bridge. — Their  son,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  15  Jan.,  1739;  d.  there,  9  June,  1823,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1758.  He  was  appointed
lieutenant-colonel  of  Col.  Joseph  Spencers  regi-
ment in  1775,  commanded  a  regiment  at  the  siege
of  Boston,  and  in  January,  1776,  became  a  colortel
in  the  Connecticut  line,  serving  throughout  the
Revolution.  He  then  returned  to  Hartford,  held
several  civil  offices,  and  in  1796  succeeded  his  father
as  secretary  of  Connecticut,  which  post  he  held  un-
til failing  health  caused  his  resignation  in  1809,
when  the  office  had  been  occupied  by  his  grand-
father, his  father,  and  himself,  in  uninterrupted
succession  for  ninety-eight  years.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Connecticut  academy  of  arts  and  sci-
ences, and  for  many  years  brigadier-general  and
major-general  of  militia.

WYMAN,  Morrill,  physician,  b.  in  Chelms-
ford, Mass.,  25  July,  1812.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1833,  and  at  the  medical  department
in  1837.  Meanwhile  he  served  as  assistant  engi-
neer on  the  Boston  and  Worcester  railroad  during
1833,  and  during  1836  was  house  physician  to  the
Massachusetts  general  hospital.  On  the  comple-
tion of  his  medical  studies  he  settled  in  Cambridge,
where  he  has  since  followed  his  profession.  In  1853
he  became  adjunct  professor  of  the  theory  and  prac-
tice of  medicine  in  Harvard,  but  he  relinquished


632


WYMAN


WYMAN


this  chair  after  three  years'  occupation.  He  in-
vented in  1850  an  instrument  for  removing  fluids
from  the  cavities  of  the  body,  especially  the  chest,
consisting  essentially  of  a  trocar  and  cannula  of  a
very  small  diameter  fitted  to  an  exhausting-syringe.
By  its  use  an  operation,  which  was  previously  con-
sidered dangerous,  and  was  often  fatal,  has  been
rendered  effectual,  safe,  and  almost  painless.  Dr.
Wyman  is  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  medical
society  and  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences.  In  1875  he  was  elected  an  overseer  of
Harvard,  and  he  has  since  been  re-elected.  The
degree  of  LL.  D.  was  given  him  by  Harvard  in
1885.  He  has  published  a  "  Memoir  of  Daniel
Treadwell"  (Cambridge,  1888).  and  in  book-form
"  A  Practical  Treatise  on  Ventilation  "  (Cambridge,
1846);  "Progress  in  School  Discipline"  (1868);
and  "Autumnal  Catarrh"  (New  York,  1872).— His
brother,  Jeffries,  comparative  anatomist,  b.  in
Chelmsford,  Mass.,  11  Aug.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Bethlehem,
N.  H.,  4  Sept.,  1874,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1833,  and  at  the  medical  school  in  1837. In  1836

he  was  appointed
house  physician  in
the  Massachusetts
general  hospital.
He  settled  in  Bos-
ton, became  dem-
onstrator of  anat-
omy under  Dr.
John  C.  Warren,
was  appointed  cu-
rator of  the  new-
ly founded  Lowell
institute  in  1839,
and  in  1840-1  de-
livered a  course  of
twelve  lectures  on
comparative  anat-
omy and  physiol-
ogy- With  the
'Wr^^°^/V^  money  that  he  de-
*  rived from this

source  he  went  to  Europe  and  studied  human  an-
atomy at  the  School  of  medicine,  and  comparative
anatomy  at  the  Jardin  des  plantes  in  Paris,  after
which  he  spent  some  time  at  the  Royal  college  of
surgeons  in  London.  He  returned  to  Boston  in
1843,  and  in  the  autumn  accepted  the  professor-
ship of  anatomy  and  physiology  in  Hampden  Sid-
ney college,  Va.,  where  he  continued  for  five  years,
except  during  the  summers  which  he  spent  in  Bos-
ton. In  1847  he  was  appointed  to  the  chair  of
anatomy  in  Harvard,  succeeding  Dr.  John  C.  War-
ren, remained  at  the  head  of  the  department  until
his  death,  and  during  all  the  time  he  was  noted  as
a  clear  and  conscientious  teacher  and  lecturer.  He
at  once  began  the  formation  of  a  Museum  of  com-
parative anatomy,  which  was  one  of  the  earliest  in
this  country,  and  is  intended  to  show  some  of  the
important  modifications  of  the  organs  of  animals
in  connection  with  the  physiological  processes  of
which  they  are  the  seat,  as  well  as  the  conditions
of  embryological  development  and  the  successive

Ehases  through  which  the  embryo  passes.  After
is  death  it  became  the  property  of  the  Boston
society  of  natural  history.  In  1849  he  delivered  a
second  course  of  lectures  before  the  Lowell  insti-
tute on  "  Comparative  Physiology,"  which  gained
for  him  a  high  rank  among  American  anato-
mists and  physiologists.  In  1856  he  visited  Suri-
nam, Guiana,  and  penetrated  in  canoes  far  into
the  interior,  making  important  researches  upon
the  ground,  and  enriching  his  museum  with  ani-
mals of  great  anatomical  interest. He  made  a


voyage  to  La  Plata  river  in  1858-'9,  ascended  the
Uruguay  and  the  Parana  in  a  small  iron  steamer,
and  then  crossed  the  pampas  to  Mendoza,  and  the
Cordilleras  to  Santiago  and  Valparaiso,  whence  he
returned  by  way  of  the  Peruvian  coast  and  the
Isthmus  of  Panama.  His  investigations  were  first
in  the  domain  of  comparative  anatomy  and  physi-
ology and  then  in  palaeontology,  but  with  his  great
knowledge  of  the  branches  he  was  able  in  later
years  to  concentrate  his  maturer  powers  on  in-
vestigations in  ethnology,  and  more  especially  in
archaeology.  Of  his  early  studies,  that  "On  the
External  Characters,  Habits,  and  Osteology  of  the
Gorilla  "  (1847)  was  the  first  scientific  description
of  that  animal,  whose  specific  name  of  gorilla  was
bestowed  on  it  by  Dr.  Wyman.  His  paper  "On
the  Nervous  System  of  the  Bull-Frog,  published
by  the  Smithsonian  institution  (1853),  is  said  to  be
the  "clearest  introduction  to  the  most  complex  of
animal  structures  "  that  was  issued  up  to  that  time.
He  was  also  the  author  of  a  series  of  papers  on  the
anatomy  of  the  blind  fish  of  the  Mammoth  cave.
To  this  subject,  and  to  the  comparative  anatomy
of  the  higher  apes,  he  returned  from  time  to  time
as  material  was  afforded.  He  exposed  the  fraudu-
lent nature  of  the  skeleton  called  the  Hydrachus
Sillimani,  alleged  to  be  that  of  an  extinct  sea-ser-
pent. His  "  Observations  on  the  Development  of
the  Skate "  (1864)  showed  most  conclusively  that
it  ranks  higher  than  the  shark,  since  the  latter  re-
tains through  life  a  general  form  resembling  one
of  the  stages  through  which  the  former  passes  dur-
ing its  development.  One  of  his  most  interesting
researches  was  "  Observations  and  Experiments  on
Living  Organisms  in  Heated  Water"  (1867),  which
showed  that  no  life  appeared  in  water  that  is  boiled
more  than  five  hours.  Although  reluctant  to  ex-
press an  opinion  on  the  subjects  of  spontaneous
generation  and  the  theory  of  descent,  still  his  ex-
periments convinced  him  that  the  former  does  not
exist,  and  his  teaching  was  favorable  to  the  latter.
He  was  a  member  of  the  faculty  of  the  Museum  of
comparative  zoology  from  the  first,  and  he  taught
comparative  anatomy  in  the  Lawrence  scientific
school  of  Harvard.  On  the  foundation  of  the  Pea-
body  museum  of  American  ethnology  and  archae-
ology at  Cambridge  in  1866,  he  was  named  as  one
of  the  seven  trustees,  and  was  chosen  its  curator
by  his  associates.  Under  these  circumstances  his
work  naturally  tended  toward  archaeology,  and,
spending  his  winters  in  Florida,  he  was  led  to  in-
vestigate the  ancient  shell-heaps  there.  In  these  he
found  evidences  of  prehistoric  peoples,  one  of  which
was  cannibal  in  its  habits.  He  also  discovered  and
studied  similar  refuse-piles  along  the  coast  of  New
England.  He  published  several  papers  on  this
subject  in  the  "  American  Naturalist "  and  in  the
"  Reports  of  the  Trustees  of  the  Peabody  Museum  "
(7  vols.,  Cambridge,  1867-74),  but  his  results  are
most  fully  given  in  a  posthumous  memoir  on  the
"  Fresh-water  Shell-mounds  of  the  St.  John's  Riv-
er, Florida"  (Salem,  1875).  Prof.  Wyman  was  a
member  of  the  Linnaean  society  of  London,  and  of
the  Anthropological  institute  of  Great  Britain  and
Ireland,  and,  besides  membership  in  various  other
societies  in  this  country,  was  a  fellow  and  council-
lor of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences.
In  1856  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  but  he
was  unable  to  be  present  at  the  subsequent  meet-
ing. His  relations  with  the  Boston  society  of
natural  history  were  very  close.  From  1839  to
1841  he  was  its  recording  secretary,  and  then  suc-
cessively curator  of  ichthyology  and  herpetology
and  comparative  anatomy,  and  from  1856  to  1870


WYMAN


WYNNS


633


he  was  its  president.  He  was  one  of  the  corporate
members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences,  named
by  act  of  congress  in  1863,  and,  although  he  soon
resigned,  his  name  was  retained  on  the  list  of  hon-
orary members.  His  bibliography  includes  175
titles,  a  full  list  of  which,  compiled  by  Alpheus  S.
Packard,  accompanies  the  sketch  of  Dr.  Wyman
by  him,  which  is  published  in  the  "  Biographical
Memoirs  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences"
(vol.  ii.,  Washington,  1886).  Asa  Gray,  Oliver  Wen-
dell Holmes,  S.  Weir  Mitchell,  Frederick  W.  Put-
nam, and  Burt  G.  Wilder  published  sketches  of  his
life,  and  James  Russell  Lowell  a  memorial  sonnet.
WYMAN,  Thomas  White,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Roxbury,  Mass.,  24  March,  1793 ;  d.  in  Florence,
Italy,  24  Feb.,  1854.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman, 17  Dec,  1810,  was  commissioned  lieuten-
ant, 27  April,  1816,  was  promoted  to  commander,
9  Feb.,  1837,  commanded  the  receiving-ship  at
Boston  in  1837,  and  the  sloop  "John  Adams"  on
the  East  India  station,  1838-'40.  He  was  promoted
to  captain,  2  March,  1842,  commanded  the  flag-
ship "  Columbus,"  1845-'8,  on  the  Pacific  station
during  the  Mexican  war,  in  which  he  participated
in  most  of  the  operations  on  the  Pacific  coast  of
California  and  Mexico.  He  was  commandant  of
Portsmouth  navy-yard  in  1849-'51,  and  was  ap-

fointed  to  the  "Vermont"  to  cruise  in  the  East
ndies,  but  he  went  abroad  on  a  leave  of  absence,
and  died  there. — His  son,  Robert  Harris,  naval
officer,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  12  July,  1822 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  2  Dec,  1882,  entered  the  navy
as  a  midshipman,  11  March,  1837,  attended  the
naval  school  at  Philadelphia  in  1842-'3,  and  became
a  passed  midshipman,  29  June,  1843.  He  was  acting
master  in  the  frigate  "Brandy wine"  in  1843-'6,
and  during  the  Mexican  war  served  in  the  Gulf
squadron,  with  which  he  participated  in  the  siege
and  capture  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  the  expeditions
that  captured  Tuspan  and  Tampico,  with  many
prizes,  in  1847.  He  served  at  the  naval  observa-
tory at  Washington  in  1848-'50,  was  promoted  to
ljeutenant,  16  Jidy,  1850,  and  was  again  attached
to  the  observatory  in  1853-'4.  When  the  civil  war
began  he  commanded  the  steamer  "  Yankee"'  from
July  till  October,  1861,  the  steamer  "Pawnee"  in
the  South  Atlantic  squadron  at  the  capture  of  Port
Royal  in  1861,  and  then  the  Potomac  flotilla,  by
which  he  kept  the  river  open  and  silenced  the
Confederate  batteries  on  the  banks.  He  was  pro-
moted to  commander,  16  July,  1862,  had  the  steam-
er "  Wachusett "  on  the  Potomac  in  1862-'3,  and
the  "  Santiago  de  Cuba  "  on  the  blockade  in  1863-'4.
He  was  commissioned  captain,  25  July,  1866,  and
in  October,  1869,  appointed  chief  hydrographer  of
the  navy  at  Washington,  where  he  remained  eight
years  and  acquired  an  enviable  reputation  for  the
excellence  of  his  hydrographic  work.  He  was  pro-
moted to  commodore,  19  July,  1872,  and  to  rear-
admiral,  26  April,  1878,  was  commander-in-chief  of
the  North  Atlantic  fleet  in  1879-82,  and  in  May,
1882,  appointed  a  member  of  the  light-house  board,
of  which  he  became  chairman,  5  June,  1882.  He
was  stricken  with  apoplexy  at  his  desk  in  the
treasury  department,  and  died  the  same  night.

WYNKOOP,  Henry,  member  of  the  Continen-
tal congress,  b.  in  Northampton  countv,  Pa.,  2
March,  1737;  d.  in  Bucks  county,  Pa.," 24  Oct.,
1812.  His  ancestor,  Gerardus,  settled  in  Moreland,
Philadelphia  co.,  Pa.,  in  1717.  Henry  received  a
classical  eduation  and  early  espoused  the  patriot
cause.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Northampton  coun-
ty committee  of  observation  in  1774,  a  deputy  to  the
provincial  conference  of  15  July  of  that  year,  and
of  the  provincial  conference  that  met  in  Carpen-


ter's Hall,  Philadelphia,  on  18  June,  1775.  About
the  same  time  he  became  a  major  of  one  of  the
associated  battalions.  He  served  on  the  general
committee  of  safety  from  July,  1776,  till  July,  1777,
was  chosen  by  the  General  assembly  one  of  the
commissioners  to  settle  the  accounts  of  county
lieutenants,  4  Dec,  1778,  and  on  3  March,  1779,
when  Edward  Biddle  resigned  his  seat  in  con-
gress, was  chosen  in  his  place,  being  re-elected,  24
Nov.,  1780,  and  22  Nov.,  1781.  He  was  commis-
sioned a  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  and
the  orphans'  court  on  18  Nov.,  1780,  and  held  office
till  27  June,  1789,  when  he  was  elected  to  the  first
congress  of  the  United  States,  serving  till  1791.
He  was  then  appointed  an  associate  judge  of  Bucks
county,  which  post  he  held  until  his  death.

WYNN,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  eastern  Vir-
ginia about  1750;  d.  in  Tennessee  in  1813.  He
entered  the  Continental  service  early  in  the  Revo-
lutionary war,  and  in  1775  was  a  lieutenant  of
South  Carolina  rangers,  participating  in  the  battle
on  Sullivan's  island.  He  was  then  placed  in  com-
mand of  Fort  Mcintosh,  Ga.,  promoted  colonel,
and  transferred  to  the  charge  of  the  militia  in
Fairfield  district,  S.  C.  He  fought  at  Hanging
Rock,  where  he  was  wounded,  and  was  actively
engaged  during  the  remainder  of  the  war.  At  its
close  he  became  brigadier-general  of  militia,  and
then  major-general.  He  afterward  settled  in  South
Carolina,  was  a  representative  in  the  3d  congress,
and  served  by  re-election  from  1809  till  1813.

WYNNE,  James,  physician,  b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,
in  1814;  d.  in  Guatemala,  Central  America,  11
Feb.,  1871.  He  was  a  lineal  descendant  of  Sir
John  Wynn,  of  Gwydyr,  Wales.  He  was  educated
at  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York,  stud-
ied medicine,  and  was  licensed  to  practise,  settling
in  Baltimore,  Md.  Later  he  removed  to  New  York
city,  where  he  devoted  much  attention  to  the  sub-
ject of  life  insurance  and  medical  jurisprudence,
contributing  to  the  "  Transactions  of  the  American
Medical  Society,"  to  the  "  North  American  Review,"
"  Knickerbocker,"  and  other  standard  magazines,
and  about  1867  he  emigrated  to  Guatemala,  where
he  engaged  in  coffee-culture.  He  published  valu-
able reports,  including  "  Public  Hygiene  "  (New
York,  1847) ;  "  Asiatic  Cholera  in  the  United  States
in  1847,"  prepared  at  the  request  of  the  British
government,  from  which  he  received  a  medal  (Lon-
don, 1852);  and  one  on  the  "Vital  Statistics  of
the  United  States,"  made  to  the  Mutual  life  in-
surance company  of  New  York  and  London  (New
York,  1857).  His  other  works  are  "Memoir  of
Maj.  Samuel  Ringgold"  (Baltimore,  1847);  "Lives
of  Eminent  Literary  and  Scientific  Men  of  Ameri-
ca "  (New  York,  1850) ;  "  Importance  of  the  Study
of  Legal  Medicine  "  (New  York,  1857) ;  and  "  The
Private  Libraries  of  New  York  "  (1863).

WYNNS,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Hertford
county,  N.  C.,  in  1764;  d.  there,  3  June,  1825.  He
was  the  youngest  of  four  brothers,  all  of  whom,
except  himself,  were  Revolutionary  soldiers.  In
1780  he  was  captured  at  sea  in  a  vessel  called  the
"  Fair  American,"  and,  with  several  other  colonists,
was  carried  to  London.  He  returned  after  the
peace,  settled  in  his  native  county  as  a  planter,  and
in  1788  was  a  member  of  the  North  Carolina  con-
vention that  acted  on  the  constitution  of  the  United
States.  Mr.  Wynns  became  state  senator  in  1790,
and  held  that  office  continuously  till  1817,  with
the  exception  of  his  service  in  congress.  He  was
chosen  to  that  body  in  1802,  and  held  his  seat  by
re-election  in  1803-'7.  He  was  a  member  of  the
executive  council  and  a  brigadier-general  of  mi-
litia. Winston,  N.  C,  is  named  in  his  honor.


634


WYTHE


WYTHE


WYTHE,  George,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Elizabeth  City  county,  Va.,  in
1726;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  8  June,  1806.  His
father  was  a  wealthy  planter,  and  his  mother,  who
possessed  unusual  intelligence  and  learning,  gave
him  his  early  educa-
tion. Under  her  tui-
tion he  became  an  ac-
complished Latin  and
Greek  scholar,  an  ex-
cellent mathematician,
acquired  a  liberal
knowledge  of  the  sci-
ences, and  was  further
instructed  at  William
and  Mary ;  but  the
death  of  both  parents
before  he  attained  his
majority  and  the  con-
sequent uncontrolled
possession  of  a  large
fortune  led  him  into
extravagance  and  dis-
sipation. He  reformed
when  he  was  about
thirty  years  old,  stud-
ied law  under  John  Lewis,  an  eminent  practi-
tioner, and  quickly  rose  to  the  front  rank  at  the
Virginia  bar.  Early  in  life  he  was  chosen  to  the
house  of  burgesses,  where  he  was  recognized  as
one  of  the  leaders,  and  he  continued  to  serve
until  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution.  On  14
Nov.,  1764,  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  its  com-
mittee to  prepare  and  report  a  petition  to  the  king,
a  memorial  to  the  house  of  lords,  and  a  remon-
strance to  the  house  of  commons  on  the  proposed
stamp-act.  He  drew  up  the  last-named  paper,  but
it  so  far  exceeded  the  demands  of  his  colleagues
in  boldness  and  truth  that  it  was  viewed  as  bor-
dering on  treason,  and  accepted  only  after  much
modification.  From  that  time  he  continued  to
exert  all  his  influence  in  favor  of  the  independence
of  the  colonies,  and  in  August,  1775,  he  was  ap-
pointed a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  from
Virginia,  signing  the  Declaration  of  Independence

on  4  July  of  the
next  year.  On  5
Nov.,  1776,  he  was
appointed  by  the
legislature,  with
Thomas  Jefferson,
Edmund  Pendle-
ton, George  Ma-
son, and  Thomas
Ludwell  Lee,  on  a
committee  to  re-
vise the  state  laws
of  British  and  colo-
nial enactment,  and  to  prepare  bills  for  re-enacting
them  with  such  alterations  as  were  required  under
the  new  government.  Mason  and  Lee  did  not  serve,
but  so  industrious  were  the  other  three  members
of  the  committee  that  on  18  June,  1779,  they  had
prepared  126  bills,  which  they  reported  to  the  as-
sembly. He  became  speaker  of  the  house  of  dele-
gates in  1777,  the  same  year  was  chosen  one  of  the
three  judges  of  the  chancery  court  of  Virginia,
and,  on  the  reorganization  of  the  court  of  equity,
was  constituted  sole  chancellor,  which  post  he  held
for  more  than  twenty  years.  Before  the  close  of
the  Revolution,  debts  had  been  incurred  between
American  and  British  merchants,  and  the  recovery


of  these  was  the  subject  of  the  6th  article  of  John
Jay's  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  but  popular  feel-
ing was  strong  against  legal  decrees  in  favor  of
British  claimants.  Chancellor  Wythe  was  the  first
judge  in  the  United  States  that  decided  the  claims
to  be  recoverable.  He  lost  almost  all  his  property
during  the  Revolution,  but  he  supplemented  his
small  income  as  chancellor,  which  was  £800  a
year,  by  accepting  the  professorship  of  law  in
William  and  Mary,  which  he  held  in  1779-'89.  In
the  latter  year  his  arduous  duties  compelled  his
resignation,  and  he  removed  to  Richmond,  Va.  In
December,  1786,  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the
convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  and  he  regularly  attended  its  ses-
sions, but,  being  absent  on  the  last  day,  failed  to
sign  the  constitution.  He  was  subsequently  twice
a  presidential  elector.  In  the  latter  part  of  his
life  he  emancipated  his  slaves,  furnishing  them
with  means  of  support  until  they  learned  to  take
care  of  themselves.  In  the  eighty-first  year  of  his
age,  while  he  was  still  in  the  full  vigor  of  his  in-
tellect and  the  exercise  of  the  duties  of  the  chan-
cellorship, he  was  poisoned.  His  nephew,  George
Wythe  Sweeny,  was  tried  for  the  crime,  but  was
acquitted.  William  and  Mary  gave  Judge  Wythe
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1790.  He  was  twice  mar-
ried, but  his  only  child  died  in  infancy.  Among
his  pupils  were  two  presidents  of  the  United  States,
a  chief  justice,  and  others  who  attained  high  rank
in  the  legal  profession.  Thomas  Jefferson,  his  law
pupil  and  devoted  adherent,  said  of  him  in  notes
that  he  made  in  1820  for  a  biography  of  Wythe,
which  he  never  completed :  "  No  man  ever  left  be-
hind him  a  character  more  venerated  than  George
Wythe.  His  virtue  was  of  the  purest  kind,  his  in-
tegrity inflexible,  his  justice  exact.  He  might  truly
be  called  the  Cato  of  his  country,  without  the  avarice
of  the  Roman,  for  a  more  disinterested  person  never
lived.  He  was  of  middle  size,  his  face  manly,  come-
ly, and  engaging.  Such  was  George  Wythe,  the
honor  of  his  own  and  the  model  of  future  times."
The  engraving  shows  his  house  in  Williamsburg,
Va.  He  published  "Decisions  in  Virginia  by  the
High  Court  of  Chancery,  with  Remarks  upon  De-
crees by  the  Court  of  Appeals"  (Richmond,  1795;
2d  ed..  with  a  memoir  by  Benjamin  B.  Minor  (1852).
WYTHE,  Joseph  Henry,  physician,  b.  in
Manchester,  England,  19  March,  1822.  He  re-
moved to  this  country  in  1835,  was  licensed  to
preach  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1842,
but  decided  to  study  medicine.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Pennsylvania  medical  college  in  1853.  and
began  to  practise  in  Port  Carbon,  Pa.,  where  he
was  for  three  years  surgeon  to  the  Beaver  Meadow
collieries.  In  1862-'3  he  served  as  surgeon  of  U.  S.
volunteers,  organizing  Camp  Parole  hospital,  Alex-
andria, Va.  After  the  war  he  removed  to  the
west,  and  in  1865-9  was  president  of  Willamette
university,  Oregon,  organizing  the  medical  depart-
ment of  that  institution,  and,  having  again  united
with  the  conference,  preached  in  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church.  He  subsequently  settled  in  San
Francisco,  Cal.,  and  became  professor  of  microscopy
and  histology  in  the  Medical  college  of  the  Pacific.
He  has  published  many  professional  papers,  and  is
the  author  of/' The  Microscopist "  (Philadelphia,
1850);  "Curiosities  of  the  Microscope"  (1852);
"  Physician's  Pocket  Dose-  and  Prescription-Book  "
(1852);  "Agreement  of  Science  and  Revelation"
(1883) ;  "  Easy  Lessons  in  Vegetable  Biology  "  (New
York,  1883) ;  and  "  The  Science  of  Life  "  (1884).


XIMENES


XUAREZ


635


X


XIMENES,  Francisco  (hee-may'-nes),  Spanish
clergyman,  b.  in  Ecija,  Andalusia,  about  1600 ;  d.  in
Guatemala  about  1680.  He  became  vicar  of  the
parish  of  Santo  Toinas  Chuila,  or  Chichicastenan-
go,  where  he  discovered  a  valuable  manuscript  in
the  Quiche  dialect  about  the  early  history  of
Guatemala,  which  is  best  known  under  the  name
of  Popol-Vuh.  He  translated  it  into  Spanish,  and
it  has  since  been  used  by  many  historians.  Xime-
nes  was  afterward  provincial  of  the  Dominican
order  for  the  province  of  San  Vicente  de  Chiapa
and  Guatemala,  which  post  he  retained  till  his
death.  He  was  very  proficient  in  Quiche,  Zutu-
hil,  and  Cakchiquel,  and  wrote  sermons  and  several
religious  works  in  these  languages,  his  manuscripts
being  preserved  in  the  library  of  the  Dominican  con-
vent in  the  city  of  Guatemala,  and  a  manuscript
copy,  made  and  signed  by  Father  Antonio  Garcia,
of  Ximenes's  "Vocabulario  de  la  Lengua  Cakchi-
quel" was  recently  sold  in  Paris  for  200  francs.
His  works  include  also  the  manuscripts  "  Historia
de  la  provincia  de  San  Vicente  de  Chiapa"  (4  vols.)
and  "  De  las  cosas  rnaravillosas  de  esta  America."
His  translation  of  the  Popol-Vuh,  under  the  title
of  "  Empiezan  las  Historias  del  Origen  de  los  In-
dios  de  esta  Provincia  de  Guatemala,  traducidas  de
la  lengua  Quiche  "  was  also  kept  in  the  convent,
and  a  copy  was  published  under  the  title  of  "  His-
toria del  Origen  de  los  Indios  en  la  provincia  de
Guatemala"  (Vienna,  1857).  It  was  until  recently
considered  the  only  original  document  on  the  early
history  of  Guatemala,  and  was  mentioned  as  such
by  Ferdinand  Denis,  Henry  Ternaux-Compans,  and
Brasseur  de  Bourbourg,  but  the  latter  discovered
in  1860  a  Quiche  copy  of  the  Popol-Vuh,  and  pub-
lished the  text  with  a  French  translation  (Paris,
1861).

XIMENEZ,  Francisco  (hee-may'-nayth),  Span-
ish missionary,  b.  in  Estremadura  in  the  latter  half
of  the  15th  century ;  d.  in  Mexico,  31  July,  1537.
He  studied  in  the  University  of  Salamanca,  where
he  was  graduated  in  theology,  and  entered  the
Franciscan  order  in  the  convent  of  San  Gabriel  in
Estremadura.  He  was  one  of  the  twelve  mission-
aries that  accompanied  Fray  Martin  de  Valencia
in  1523  to  Mexico,  and  became  thoroughly  ac-
quainted with  the  Mexican  language,  in  which  he
was  the  first  to  write  a  grammar  and  a  catechism.
He  was  a  successful  missionary  among  the  natives
and  founder  of  the  convent  of  Quaunahac  (now
Cuernavaca),  of  which  he  became  superior.  He
wrote  a  life  of  Fray  Martin  de  Valencia  and  "Arte
y  Vocabulario  en  lengua  Mexicana,"  which  is  still
in  manuscript.

XIUHTEMOC  I.  (see-oo'-ta-mock),  first  king  of
Culhuacan,  lived  in  the  12th  century.  After  the
destruction  of  the  empire  of  Tollan  some  of  the
scattered  tribes  settled  at  Culhuacan,  and  about
1104  elected  their  leader,  Xiuhtemoc,  king.  He
was  succeeded  in  1129  by  his  son,  Nauhyotl. —
Xinhtemoc  II.  was  eighth  king  of  Culhuacan
and  second  of  Mexico.  He  succeeded  his  father,
Acamapictli  I.,  who  had  dethroned  the  former  king,
Cocox,  two  years  before,  in  1303,  and  in  1318,  after
the  death  of  Huitzilihuitl  I.,  he  was  elected  by  the
Mexicans  king,  but  gradually  drew  them  to  Culhu-
acan. while  those  that  did  not  wish  to  follow  him
settled  in  Tlaltelolco  and  formed  there  a  separate
monarchy.  He  was  succeeded  in  1352  by  his  grand-
son, Acamapictli  II.


XIUTLALTZIN  (see-oot-lahl-tzeen'),  queen  of
Tollan,  daughter  of  the  6th  king,  Mitl,  whom  she
succeeded  in  1038.  She  was  the  only  woman  that
reigned  over  the  Toltecs,  Acolhuas,  or  Aztecs,  but
it  seems  that  her  husband,  whose  name  is  not  even
recorded,  was  either  not  entitled  by  his  family  to
sovereign  dignity,  or  that  he  died  before  Mitl's
decease.  After  a  short  reign,  which  is  eulogized
as  beneficial  to  the  country,  she  was  succeeded  by
her  son.  Tepancaltzin  (q.  v.),  in  1042.

XOCHITL  (soh-cheetl'),  queen  of  Tollan,  lived
in  the  11th  century.  She  was  the  daughter  of
Papantzin,  one  of  the  principal  nobles  of  King
Tepancaltzin's  court.  Reports  differ  as  to  whether
the  latter  or  his  beautiful  daughter,  whose  name
signifies  "  the  flower,"  was  the  inventor  of  pulque,
the  Mexican  fermented  drink  made  from  the  juice
of  the  aloe-plant.  All  authors  agree  that  in  1049
her  father  sent  her  with  a  jar  of  the  newly  invented
liquor  to  the  palace,  and  the  king  was  so  pleased
with  the  drink  that  he  ordered  her  to  bring  it
daily.  Charmed  by  her  beauty,  he  took  her  to  his
palace  at  Pal  pan,  where  she  gave  birth  to  a  son,
Topiltzin.  When  her  father  learned  her  situation,
he  upbraided  the  king,  but  was  quieted  by  the  prom-
ise that  Xochitl  should  be  acknowledged  queen  after
the  death  of  Tepancaltzin's  legitimate  consort,  and
that  Topiltzin  should  be  successor  to  the  throne.
This  was  done,  but  after  the  resignation  of  Tepan-
caltzin, in  1094,  in  his  son's  favor,  the  other  Tol-
tec  princes  rebelled,  and  in  one  of  the  battles  both
Xochitl  and  her  husband  were  killed,  and  the  Toltec
monarchy  was  destroyed,  as  Topiltzin,  with  many
of  his  followers,  emigrated  to  the  south,  where,  ac-
cording to  some  historians,  he  settled  in  Yucatan ;
according  to  others,  in  Chiapas  or  Guatemala.

XOLOTL  (soh-lotl'),  "the  vigilant,"  also  sur-
named  "  the  great,"  founder  of  the  Mexican  dy-
nasty of  Tenayucan,  or  Texcoco,  lived  in  the  12th
century.  He  was  chief  of  the  Chichimec  tribes  that
invaded  Anahuac  after  the  destruction  of  the  Toltec
monarchy,  and,  settling  on  the  lake  of  Texcoco,
he  proclaimed  himself  king,  about  1160.  He  rec-
ognized that  the  subjugated  Toltecs,  as  well  as
the  tribes  of  Aculhuas  and  Tecpanecs  that  arrived
afterward  in  the  valley  were  far  superior  to  his
own  wild  and  warlike  nation,  and  he  therefore
treated  them  kindly,  so  that  they  soon  trans-
formed the  Chichimecs  into  a  civilized  race.  To
equalize  the  different  tribes  and  dialects,  he  or-
dered the  Nahuatl,  or  instructed,  dialect,  a  form
of  the  Toltec,  to  be  adopted  as  the  official  lan-
guage, which  in  time  superseded  all  others,  and
is  the  equivalent  of  what  is  now  generally  called
Aztec.  King  Xolotl  constructed  in  Texcoco  a  tem-
ple to  the  sun,  a  palace,  and  gardens,  and  made  that
city  the  centre  of  the  civilization  of  Anahuac.  He
married  his  daughters  to  the  two  principal  chiefs
of  the  Aculhuas,  who  became  founders  of  the  em-
pire of  Atzcapotzalco,  and  was  succeeded  about
1220  by,  his  son,  Nopaltzin.

XUAREZ,  Pedro,  Indian  cacique,  b.  in  Mexico
about  the  beginning  of  the  17th  century.  He  was
liberally  educated,  and  was  sexton  of  the  church
of  San  Pablo.  He  is  chiefly  known  as  the  author
of  a  manuscript  work  in  the  Aztec  language,  un-
der the  Spanish  title  of  "Memorial  en  Lengua
Mexicana  sobre  cosas  memorables."  It  gives  very
valuable  notes  of  historical  events,  and  is  frequent-
ly cited  by  Carlos  de  Siguenza  in  his  works.


636


YALE


YALE


YALE,  Cyrns,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lee,  Mass.,  17
May,  1786;  d.  in  New  "Hartford.  Conn.,  21  May,
1854.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  181*1,
was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Hartford  north  as-
sociation, and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  church
in  New  Hartford,  Conn.,  12  Oct.,  1814.  He  re-
mained there  till  24  Dec,  1834,  when  he  resigned
and  was  pastor  at  Ware,  Mass.,  till  1837,  after
which  he  returned  to  his  old  congregation  in  New
Hartford,  and  ministered  there  till  his  death.  He
published  "  Life  of  Rev.  Jeremiah  Halleck  "  (Hart-
ford, 1828) ;  "  Miniature  of  the  Life  of  the  Rev.  Al-
van  Hvde,  D.  D."  (1852) :  "  Biographical  Sketches
of  the  Ministers  of  Litchfield  County  after  the  Year
1800  "  (1852) ;  and  single  sermons  and  addresses.

YALE,  Kl ill ii.  philanthropist,  b.  in  or  near  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  5  April,  1649 ;  d.  in  England,  8  July,
1721.  His  father,  David,  came  to  New  Haven
from  England in 1638, but returned in 1651,

and  was  fol-
lowed in  1652
by  his  fam-
ily, including
Elihu,  who
never  revisit-
ed this  coun-
try. The  son
went  to  the
East  Indies
about  1678,
and  in  1687-
'92  was  gov-
ernor of  Fort
St.  George,
Madras.  Gov.
Yale  acquired  great  wealth  in  India.  On  22  May,
1711,  Jeremiah  Dummer  wrote  from  London  to
Rev.  John  Pierpont,  then  a  trustee  of  the  Colle-
giate school  of  Connecticut :  "  Here  is  Mr.  Yale,
formerly  governor  of  Fort  George  in  the  Indies,
who  has  got  a  prodigious  estate,  and,  having  no
son,  now  sends  for  a  relation  of  his  from  Con-
necticut to  make  him  his  heir.  He  told  me  lately
that  he  intended  to  bestow  a  charity  upon  some  col-
lege in  Oxford  under  certain  restrictions  which  he
mentioned.  But  I  think  he  should  much  rather  do
it  to  your  college,  seeing  he  is  a  New  England  and,
I  think,  a  Connecticut  man.  If,  therefore,  when
his  kinsman  comes  over,  you  will  write  him  a  prop-
er letter  on  that  subject,  I  will  take  care  to  press
it  home."  The  result  was  that  between  1714  and
1721  Gov.  Yale  gave  to  the  Collegiate  school  books
and  money  whose  total  value  was  estimated  at  £800.
The  timeliness  of  these  gifts,  rather  than  their  in-
trinsic value,  made  them  a  great  aid  to  the  strug-
fling  college,  and  in  1718,  after  its  removal  from
aybrook  to  New  Haven,  its  trustees  named  the
new  collegiate  building  in  the  latter  place  Yale
college.  This  name,  applied  at  first  only  to  the
edifice,  was  given  formally  to  the  institution  in
the  charter  of  1745.  President  Thomas  Clap  says
that  Yale  "  was  a  gentleman  who  greatly  abound-
ed in  good  humor  and  generosity,  as  well  as  in
wealth."  He  is  buried  in  Wrexham,  Wales,  the  an-
cient seat  of  his  family.  On  his  tomb  is  engraved
an  epitaph  which  contains  the  well-known  couplet :
"  Born  in  America,  in  Europe  bred,
In  Afric  travelled,  and  in  Asia  wed."
A  full-length  portrait  of  Gov.  Yale  hangs  in  Alumni
hall,  Yale  college.  The  accompanying  illustration
represents  the  completed  corner  of  the  quadrangle


of  buildings  that  is  to  inclose  the  college  grounds.
The  original  "Yale  college"  is  not  now  standing,
the  oldest  building  on  the  grounds  having  been
erected  in  1752.

YALE,  Elisha,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lee,  Mass.,  15
June,  1780 ;  d.  in  Kingsborough,  N.  Y.,  9  Jan.,
1853.  He  was  brought  up  on  a  farm,  taught  school
in  Richmond,  Mass.,  in  1798-'9,  and  in  Lenox  in
1800,  studied  theology,  and  in  1803  was  licensed  to
preach  by  the  North  association  of  Hartford  coun-
ty. He  became  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church
at  Kingsborough,  N.  Y.,  in  1804,  and  retained  this
charge  till  his  resignation,  23  June,  1852.  He
published  "Select  Verse  System,  for  the  Use  of
Individuals,  Families,  and  Schools "  (Rochester,
1853),  and  single  sermons  and  articles  in  periodi-
cals, and  left  in  manuscript  a  "  Review  of  a  Pas-
torate of  Forty-eight  Years  "  and  "  Helps  to  culti-
vate the  Conscience."

YALE,  Leroy  Milton,  physician,  b.  in  Holmes'
Hole  (now  Vineyard  Haven),  "Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1841.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1862,  and  at
Bellevue  hospital  medical  college  in  1866,  settled
in  New  York  city,  and  has  since  followed  his  pro-
fession there.  In  1870  he  was  lecturer  on  obstet-
rics in  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Vermont,  and  since  1871  he  has  been  instructor
and  lecturer  on  various  branches — chiefly  ortho-
pedic surgery  and  diseases  of  children — in  the
Bellevue  hospital  medical  college.  He  was  sur-
geon to  the  Charity  hospital  from  1871  till  1877,
when  he  was  transferred  to  Bellevue  hospital  and
continued  there  until  1882.  During  1880-'5  he
was  similarly  connected  with  the  Presbyterian  hos-
pital. Dr.  Yale  is  a  member  of  the  New  York
county  medical  society,  the  New  York  academy  of
medicine,  and  other  professional  bodies.  His  con-
tributions to  medical  science  consist,  of  various
articles  to  medical  journals,  but  his  principal  lit-
erary work  has  been  editorial  contributions.  He
had  "charge  of  "The  Medical  Gazette"  in  1867-8,
and  has  edited  the  medical  part  of  "  Babyhood "
since  its  beginning  in  1884.

YALE,  Linus,  inventor,  b.  in  Salisbury,  N.  Y.,
4  April,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24  Dec,  1868.
His  ancestors  were  of  the  same  family  as  Elihu
Yale,  and  his  father,  Linus,  was  a  successful  in-
ventor. The  son  devoted  himself  for  a  time  to  por-
trait-painting, but,  having  considerable  mechanical
skill  and  ingenuity,  began  in  1850  to  study  mechani-
cal problems.  He  devised  in  that  year  a  plan  by
which  the  key  to  locks  for  the  protection  of  bank-
ers' safes  and  vaults  should  be  so  constructed  that,
when  its  essential  portion  was  doing  its  work
within  the  lock,  it  should  be  at  some  distance  re-
moved from  the  key-hole  through  which  it  had
entered,  and  at  the  same  time  isolated  from  the
exterior  of  the  door  by  a  hardened  steel  plate,
which  automatically  covered  the  key-hole  behind
it.  This  device  he  patented  in  1851,  and  thereafter
until  his  death  he  was  a  recognized  authority  on
all  matters  pertaining  to  locks  and  safes.  His  first
patent  was  followed  by  others  for  bankers'  safes,
and  for  bankers'  flat-key  and  common  locks.  He
patented  in  1858  a  device  for  adjusting  at  a  right
angle  the  joiners'  square,  in  1865  one  for  reversing
the  motion  of  screw-taps,  and  in  1868  two  for  im-
provements in  mechanics'  vises,  and  he  also  ob-
tained patents  abroad  for  certain  of  his  inventions.
In  the  course  of  his  experience  he  became  convinced
of  the  necessity  of  abandoning  the  use  of  a  key-hole,


YANCEY


YANEZ


637


as  it  afforded  an  easy  introduction  for  gunpowder
or  other  explosive.  This  led  to  the  adoption  of
the  permanent  dial  and  shaft  as  used  in  the  so-
called  "  combination  locks,"  and  subsequently  to
the  perfection  of  the  mechanism  that  is  known  as
the  clock  lock.  His  most  radical  invention  was
the  double  lock,  which  consisted  in  practically  plac-
ing two  within  one  case,  to  be  operated  by  the
same  or  different  combinations  so  that  the  unlock-
ing of  either  allowed  the  bolt  to  be  withdrawn.
His  improvements  in  locks  and  boxes  for  post-office
use  are  of  recognized  utility  and  world-wide  adop-
tion. He  was  an  exhibitor  at  the  world's  fairs  of
this  and  other  countries,  and  was  the  recipient  of
gold,  silver,  and  bronze  medals  as  first  awards  at
these  exhibitions.

YANCEY,  Bartlett,  member  of  congress,  b.  in
Caswell  county,  N.  C,  about  1780;  d.  there,  30
Aug.,  1828.  He  was  educated  at  the  University
of  North  Carolina,  was  a  tutor  in  that  institu-
tion, studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  be-
coming eminent  in  his  profession.  He  was  a  rep-
resentative in  congress  from  North  Carolina  in
1813— '17,  was  elected  a  state  senator  in  1817,  was
annually  re-elected  till  his  death,  and  generally

5 >resided  as  speaker. With  John  L.  Taylor  and
lenry  Potter  he  published  "  Laws  of  the  State  of
North  Carolina  "  (2  vols.,  Raleigh,  1821).

YANCEY,  William  Lowndes,  statesman,  b.  in
Ogeechee  Shoals,  Ga.,  10  Aug.,  1814 ;  d.  near  Mont-
gomery, Ala.,  28  July,  1863.  He  was  the  son  of
Benjamin  C.  Yancey,  a  lawyer  of  Abbeville,  S.  C,
was  educated  at  Williams  college,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Abbeville.  In  1836  he
removed  to  Alabama,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  edited  the  "  Cahawba  Democrat "  and  the  "  We-
tumpka  Argus."  He  served  in  both  branches  of
the  legislature,  and  was  elected  to  congress  in  1844
to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  re-elected  in  1845,  but  re-
signed in  1847  to  devote  his  entire  attention  to  law.
In  1845  he  was  challenged  to  a  duel  by  Gen.
Thomas  L.  Clingman,  but  neither  was  injured  in
the  encounter  that  ensued.  He  was  a  member  of
the  National  Democratic  convention  that  met  at
Baltimore  in  May,  1848,  a  zealous  opponent  of  the
compromise  measures  of  1850,  a  presidential  elec-
tor in  1856,  and  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  extreme
party  in  the  south.  In  a  letter  written  in  June,
1858,  and  published  in  1860,  he  advised  the  organi-
zation of  committees  of  safety  in  all  the  cotton

states  to  "  fire  the
southern  heart,"
and  ultimately  to
precipitate  those
states  into  revolu-
tion ;  and  in  1859
he  urged  the  call-
ing of  a  conven-
tion by  the  state
of  Alabama,  in
the  event  of  the
election  of  the  Re-
publican candi-
date for  president
in  1860.  He  was
a  member  of  the
Democratic  con-
vention atCharles-
ton,  23  April,
1860,  and  withdrew  with  other  southern  extremists.
During  the  presidential  canvass  he  made  a  tour
through  the  north  and  west,  speaking  at  Faneuil
hall,  Boston,  Cooper  institute.  New  York,  and  else-
where, urging  the  rejection  of  the  Republican  can-
didate on  the  ground  that  the  platform  adopted  by


<?y-s^f ^^^cjuz^.


that  party  would  make  the  south  hopeless  of  jus-
tice on  the  slavery  question.  In  the  Alabama  con-
vention, which  met  at  Montgomery,  7  Jan.,  1861,
he  reported  the  ordnance  of  secession,  which  was
passed  on  14  Jan.  On  27  Feb.  he  was  appointed  a
commissioner  to  the  governments  of  Europe  to
obtain  a  recognition  of  the  Confederate  states,  and
left  New  York  in  March.  He  returned  in  Febru-
ary, 1862,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Confederate
senate  at  Richmond  until  the  time  of  his  death.

YANDELL,  David  Wendell,  physician,  b.  in
Murfreesborough,  Tenn.,  in  1826.  He  was  gradu-
ated in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Louisville,
Ky.,  in  1846,  was  in  Europe  in  1846-'7,  and  began
practice  in  Louisville  in  1848.  He  became  a  pro-
fessor in  the  University  of  Louisville  in  1859,  and
was  a  medical  director  in  the  Confederate  army  in
1861— '0.  Dr.  Yandell  was  elected  president  of  the
American  medical  association  in  1871,  and  ap-
pointed professor  of  surgery  in  the  Indiana  medi-
cal college  in  1874.  In  1870  he  established  the
"  American  Practitioner."

YANDELL,  Lunsford  Pitts,  physician,  b.  near
Hartsville,  Tenn.,  4  July,  1805 ;  d.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  4  Feb.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  University  of  Maryland  in
1825,  and  in  1826  settled  in  Murfreesborb',  Tenn.
In  1830  he  removed  to  Nashville  and  in  1831  to
Lexington,  Ky.,  thence  in  1837  to  Louisville.  He
was  elected  professor  of  chemistry  in  Transylva-
nia university  in  1831,  and  in  1837  to  the  same
chair  in  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Louisville.  In  1849  he  was  transferred  to  the
chair  of  physiology  and  pathological  anatomy,  and
in  1859  became  professor  of  the  theory  and  prac-
tice of  medicine  in  Memphis  medical  college.  He
held  the  presidency  of  the  Louisville,  Lexington,
and  Kentucky  medical  societies,  and  of  the  Louis-
ville college  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  For  six
years  he  edited  the  "Transylvania  Journal  of
Medicine,"  and  in  1840-'56  the  "  Western  Journal
of  Medicine  and  Surgery."  He  was  the  author  of
a  prize  essay  on  "  Fever  " ;  a  report  on  "  The  Medi-
cal Sciences"  (1849);  one  on  "American  Medical
Literature "  (1873) ;  also  one  on  the  same  subject
before  the  International  medical  congress  held  in
Philadelphia  in  1876;  and  other  medical  papers
and  addresses.

YANEZ,  Placido  (yahn'-yayth),  Bolivian  sol-
dier, b.  in  Cochabamba  about  1820 ;  d.  in  La  Paz,
23  Nov.,  1861.  He  had  served  from  early  life  in
the  army,  and  by  his  frequent  participation  in
revolutions  rose  rapidly  in  rank,  being  promoted
brigadier  in  1861  by  President  Jose  Maria  Acha.
Soon  he  became  infamous  by  his  ferocity  and  the
cruel  slaughter  of  the  most  noteworthy  citizens  of
the  republic.  During  the  absence  of  Gen.  Acha
from  the  capital  Yanez  was  the  military  comman-
dant and  minister  of  war,  and  on  23  Oct.,  1861,
under  pretext  of  having  discovered  a  conspiracy
against  the  government,  he  attacked  the  defence-
less city  with  his  troops,  and,  driving  the  principal
persons  into  the  square  of  Loreto,  shot  down  and
slowly  murdered  in  cold  blood  more  than  fifty,
among  them  Gens.  Cordoba  and  Hermosa.  But
on  23  Nov.  of  the  same  year  a  popular  revolt  be-
gan, and  an  infuriated  multitude  demanded  his
head.  Knowing  his  peril,  he  took  refuge  in  the
government  palace  with  a  few  sharp-shooters,  and,
failing  to  obtain  relief  from  the  garrison  of  the
citadel,  which  fraternized  with  the  populace,  he
tried  to  escape  over  the  roofs,  but  was  discovered.
Falling  from  the  roof  of  the  palace,  he  was  crushed
on  the  pavement,  and  his  body  was  torn  to  pieces
by  the  infuriated  people.


638


YANGUAS


YATES


YANGUAS,  Mannel  (yahn'-gooahs),  Spanish
missionary,  b.  in  Guadalajara  in  1620 ;  d.  in  Caracas,
Venezuela,  in  1689.  He  entered  the  order  of  St.
Francis  in  Madrid,  became  professor  of  literature
in  the  principal  convent  of  his  order  in  that  city,
and  was  afterward  sent  to  the  missions  in  Porto
Rico.  Thence  he  was  ordered  by  the  bishop  to
found  missions  in  Cumana,  where  he  labored  for
many  years  among  the  Piritu  and  Cumanagoto  In-
dians, and  finally  became  superior  of  the  convent
in  Caracas.  He  wrote  "  Arte  de  la  Lengua  de  Cu-
mana "  (Burgos,  1683),  and  a  catechism  and  sun-
dry religious  poems  in  Cumana  dialect.  The
manuscripts  of  these  latter  works  Were  preserved
in  the  convent  of  St.  Francis  in  Caracas,  but  lost
after  the  revolution  of  independence.

YARD,  Edward  Madison,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Hunterdon,  N.  J.,  24  Nov.,  1809.  He  entered  the
navy  as  a  midshipman,  1  Nov.,  1827,  became  a
passed  midshipman,  10  June,  1833,  was  commis-
sioned a  lieutenant,  23  Feb.,  1838,  and  during  the
Mexican  war  was  part  of  the  time  executive  of  the
"  Dale,"  and  for  several  months  in  command.  He
rendered  distinguished  services  at  the  capture  of
Guaymas.  in  the  blockade  and  other  operations  on
the  west  coast  of  Mexico.  He  was  promoted  to  com-
mander, 14  Sept.,  1855,  was  light-house  inspector
in  1856-'9,  and  when  the  civil  war  began  was  as-
signed to  the  sloop  "  Dale  "  on  the  blockade,  but
by  act  of  21  Dec,  1861,  he  was  placed  on  the  re-
tired list  because  he  was  more  than  sixty-two  years
of  age.  His  services  being  no  longer  available  by
law,  he  resigned,  3  May,  1866.

Y  ARRO  VV,  Henry  Cr6c  y,  physician,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  19  Nov.,  1840.  He  studied  in  Penn-
sylvania and  in  Switzerland  and  was  graduated  at
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1861.  During  the  civil  war  he  served
as  assistant  surgeon  in  the  5th  Pennsylvania  cav-
alry, and  subsequently  he  was  surgeon  and  natural-
ist to  the  expedition  for  the  exploration  of  the  ter-
ritory west  of  the  100th  meridian,  under  Lieut.
George  M.  Wheeler,  of  the  U.  S.  engineers.  Dr.
Yarrow  is  a  member  of  the  faculty  of  the  medical
department  of  the  Columbian  university,  and  is
curator  of  the  department  of  reptiles  in  the  U.  S.
National  museum  in  Washington,  D.  0.  He  is  a
member  of  the  Philosophical,  Anthropological,
Biological,  and  Geographical  societies  of  Washing-
ton, and  of  other  scientific  bodies  in  this  country
and  abroad,  to  whose  proceedings  he  has  contrib-
uted papers.  Dr.  Yarrow  was  associated  with  Dr.
Elliott  Coues  in  the  publication  of  various  papers
on  the  natural  history  of  North  Carolina,  his  latest
work  giving  the  results  of  his  experiments  with
serpent-venom  and  so-called  antidotes.  His  writ-
ings include  articles  in  the  annual  volumes  of  the
U.  S.  National  museum  and  the  Bureau  of  ethnolo-
gy ;  in  part,  vol.  v.,  on  "  Zoology,"  of  the  "  Report
upon  Geographical  and  Geological  Explorations
and  Surveys  west  of  the  100th  Meridian  "  (Wash-
ington, 1875) ;  and  "  Study  of  the  Mortuary  Cus-
toms of  the  North  American  Indians"  (1881);  also
the  article  on  venomous  serpents  in  "  Handbook
of  the  Medical  Sciences  "  (New  York,  1888).

YATES,  Abraham,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  23  Aug.,  1724 ;  d.
there.  30  June,  1796.  He  was  an  active  patriot  in
the  Revolution,  and  wrote  a  series  of  spirited  arti-
cles under  the  signature  of  "  Sidney  "  and  other
pen-names.  He  was  state  senator  in  1777  and
1779-90  of  New  York,  and  president  of  the  Provin-
cial congress  in  1775-'6,  also  a  member  of  the  Con-
tinental congress  in  1788-'9.  He  was  receiver  of
Albany  in  1778-'9  and  its  mayor  in  1790-6.— His


grandnephew,  Joseph  Christopher,  governor  of
New  York,  b.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  9  Nov..  1768;
d.  there,  19  March,  1837,  was  a  son  of  Christo-
pher Yates  (1737-1785),  who  was  a  land-surveyor
and  served  during  the  Revolutionary  war  as  colonel
of  a  regiment  of  engineers,  and  was  quartermaster-
general  under  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler.  Yates  studied
and  practised  law  at  Schenectady,  and  was  one  of
the  founders  of  Union  college  in  1795.  He  served
as  mayor  of  Schenectady  in  1798-1808,  as  state
senator  in  1806-'7,  and  as  judge  of  the  supreme
court  in  1808-'22,  and  was  governor  of  the  state  of
New  York  in  1823-'5.  A  county  in  New  York  state
is  named  in  his  honor. — His  brother,  Andrew,
clergyman,  b.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  17  Jan.,  1773;
d.  in  Day,  N.  Y.,  14  Oct.,  1844.  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1793,  and  then  studied  theology  with  John  II.
Livingston.  In  1797  he  became  professor  of  Latin
and  Greek  in  the  first  faculty  of  Union  college,
which  chair  he  held  until  1801.  He  then  accepted
the  pastorate  of  the  East  Hartford  Congregational
church  until  1814,  when  he  returned  to  Union  as

Erofessor  of  mental  and  moral  philosophy.  In  1825
e  became  principal  of  the  Polytechnic  at  Chitten-
ango,  where  he  continued  until  1836.  The  degree  of
S.  T.  D.,  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Middlebury  in
1814. — Another  brother,  John  Barentse,  soldier,  b.
in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  1  Feb.,  1784;  d.  in  Chitten-
ango,  N.  Y.,  11  July,  1836,  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1802  and  studied  law  with  his  brother  Henry.
During  the  war  of  1812  he  served  under  Gen.  Wade
Hampton  on  the  northern  frontier  of  the  state  of
New  York,  and  later  was  appointed  aide  to  Gov.
Daniel  D.  Tompkins.  Subsequently  he  was  elected
as  a  Democrat  to  congress,  and  served  from  4  Dec,
1815,  till  3  March,  1817.  Gov.  Tompkins  made
him  senior  manager  of  the  "literature  lotteries"
during  the  last  years  of  their  existence.  Through
his  personal  influence  in  New  York  and  England,  he
aided  largely  in  the  building  of  the  Welland  canal,
receiving  from  the  Duke  of  Wellington  $  10.000
toward  the  scheme.  He  was  for  many  years  judge  of
the  county  of  Madison,  and  its  member  of  the  as-
sembly at  the  time  of  his  death. — Andrew  Yates's
grandson,  John  Barentse,  engineer,  b.  in  Schenec-
tady, N.  Y.,  19  Oct.,  1833,  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1852,  and  served  during  the  civil  war  as  colonel
of  the  1st  Michigan  engineers  under  Gen.  William
T.  Sherman.  Subsequently  he  became  a  division
engineer  on  the  New  York  state  canals. — Another
grandson,  Austin  Andrew,  lawyer,  b.  in  Schenec-
tady, N.  Y..  24  March,  1836,  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1854.  He  served  during  the  civil  war  as  captain
in  the  134th  New  York  volunteers,  and  subse-
quently was  assistant  to  Judge-Advocate-General
Joseph  Holt.  In  1868  he  was  elected  district  at-
torney of  Schenectady  county,  and  he  was  judge
from  1873  till  1876.  He  has  a'large  law-practice  in
Schenectady,  and  has  been  twice  a  member  of  the
New  York  assembly. — Another  grandson,  Arthur
Reid,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  "20
Oct.,  1838,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  acad-
emy in  1857,  and  served  during  the  civil  war.  He
was  an  aide  to  Admiral  Farragut  in  the  battle  of
Mobile  Bay,  and  was  commended  in  that  officer's
report  to  congress.  Since  9  Feb.,  1884,  he  has  been
captain,  and  he  now  has  command  of  the  steamer
"  Pensacola."

YATES,  Richard,  governor  of  Illinois,  b.  in
Warsaw,  Ky.,  18  Jan.,  1818 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
27  Nov.,  1873.  At  thirteen  years  of  age  he  went
with  his  father's  family  to  reside  in  Springfield,
111.  He  was  graduated  at  Illinois  college,  Jackson-
ville, in  1838,  studied  law,  and  practised  his  pro-
fession in  Springfield. From  1842  till  1849  he


FATES


YEAMANS


639


was  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and  in  1850  he
was  elected  to  congress.  He  was  the  youngest
member  of  the  32d  congress,  and  was  re-elected  in
1852. In  1860  he  was  elected governor,  and  he

'  was  chosen  again
in  1862.  Gov.
Yates  had  been  an
outspoken  oppo-
nent of  slavery,
and  at  the  open-
ing of  the  civil
war  was  very  ac-
tive in  raising  vol-
unteers. He  con-
vened the  legisla-
ture in  extra  ses-
sion on  12  April,
1861,  the  day  after
the  attack  on  Fort
Sumter,  and  took
military  posses-
sion of  Cairo,  gar-
risoning it  with
regular  troops.  In
Gov.  Yates's  office  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant  received
his  first  distinct  recognition  as  a  soldier  in  the  civil
war,  being  appointed  by  him  mustering  officer  for
the  state,  and  afterward  colonel  of  the  21st  Illinois
regiment.  At  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  office
as  governor  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
where  he  served  from  1865  till  1871.  His  death
occurred  while  he  was  returning  from  a  visit  to
Arkansas,  where  he  had  been  examining  a  railroad
as  U.  S.  commissioner.

YATES,  Robert,  jurist,  b.  in  Schenectady, N.Y.,
17  March,  1738  ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y..  9  Sept.,  1801.
He  received  a  classical  education  in  New  York  city,
where  he  also  studied  law  under  William  Living-
ston, and,  having  been  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1760,
established  himself  in  practice  in  Albany,  and  soon
attained  eminence  in  his  profession.  He  espoused
the  cause  of  the  colonies  from  the  beginning  t>f
the  difficulty  with  Great  Britain,  and  wrote  several
essays  under  the  signature  of  u  The  Rough  Hewer,"
which  attracted  much  attention.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  New  York  provincial  congress  of  1775,
1776,  1777,  and  in  1776  was  chosen  one  of  the
council  of  safety.  In  August,  1776,  he  served  on
the  committee  that  drafted  the  first  constitution
of  the  state,  and  in  the  same  year  became  one  of
the  judges  of  the  supreme  court,  of  which  he  was
chief  justice  from  1790  till  1798.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  convention  that  formed  the  constitution
of  the  United  States,  whose  adoption  he  opposed
in  the  State  convention.  Soon  after  this  period  he
was  commissioned  to  treat  with  the  states  of  Massa-
chusetts and  Connecticut  on  the  subject  of  terri-
tory, and  to  settle  the  claims  of  New  York  against
the  state  of  Vermont.  He  was  noted  for  his  mod-
eration and  impartiality  as  a  jurist. — His  kinsman,
Peter  W.,  member  of  the  Continental  congress,
b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y..  was  a  lawyer  by  profession,
and  well  known  in  the  courts  of  Albany  both  be-
fore and  after  the  Revolution.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  committee  on  correspondence  in  1775,
but  resigned,  having  angered  his  colleagues  by  a
letter  ridiculing  a  public  reception  that  was  given
to  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler.  His  popularity  was  so
great  that  he  was  re-elected,  but  he  declined  to
serve.  He  represented  New  York  in  the  general
congress  from  1785  till  1787. — Robert's  son,  John
Van  Ness,  lawyer,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y..  18  Dec,  1779 ;
d.  there,  10  Jan.,  1839,  was  educated  for  the  bar,
and  engaged  in  practice  at  Albany.  He  was  made
a  master  in  chancery  in  1808,  and  became  involved


in  a  legal  contest  with  Chancellor  John  Lansing,
who  had  adjudged  him  guilty  of  malpractice  and
contempt  of  court.  Though  the  full  bench  of  the
supreme  court  sustained  the  chancellor,  the  arrest
was  finally  declared  illegal  by  the  court  of  errors  ;
yet  a  subsequent  suit  for  damages  failed,  because
Lansing  had  committed  the  act  in  the  discharge
of  his  judicial  functions.  Yates  was  recorder  of
the  city  of  Albany  in  1808  and  again  in  1811— '16,
and  in  1818-'26  was  secretary  of  state.  He  also
held  other  offices,  and  was  appointed  by  the  legis-
lature to  add  notes  and  references  to  the  revised
laws  of  New  York,  performing  the  task  with  abil-
ity and  success.  He  published  also  "  Select  Cases
Adjudged  in  the  Courts  of  the  State  of  New  York,
Containing  the  Case  of  John  V.  N.  Yates  and  the
Case  of  the  Journeymen  Cordwainers  "  (New  York,
1811);  "A  Collection  of  Pleadings  and  Practical
Precedents,  with  Notes  thereon"  (2d  ed.,  1837);
a  continuation  of  Chief-Justice  William  Smith's
"  History  of  the  Province  of  New  York  "  (Albany.
1814);  with  Joseph  W.  Moulton,  a  "History  of
the  State  of  New  York"  (1824-'6);  and,  in  con-
junction with  John  L.  Tillinghast,  a  "Treatise  on
the  Principles  and  Practice,  Process,  Pleadings,
and  Entries  in  Cases  of  Writs  of  Error "  (2  vols.,
Albany.  1840).

YATES,  "William,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Sapper-
ton,  near  Burton-on-Trent,  England,  in  1767:  d.
in  Morris,  Otsego  co..  N.  Y.,  7  March,  1857.  He
studied  medicine  under  Sir  James  Earle  and  Dr.
John  Abernethy,  was  surgeon  in  St.  Bartholo-
mew's hospital,  London,  and  in  1790,  having  in-
herited an  ample  fortune,  returned  to  his  home.
With  the  purpose  of  treating  and  curing  lunatics,
he  built,  at  Burton-on-Trent,  a  house  which  he
conducted  for  several  years  at  his  own  expense,
where  he  treated  with  great  success  a  large  num-
ber of  insane  paupers.  This  benevolent  effort  cost
him  about  $35,000.  He  emigrated  to  Philadelphia
in  1799,  and  immediately  on  his  arrival  engaged
with  great  zeal  in  the  dissemination  of  the  knowl-
edge of  Dr.  Edward  Jenner's  discovery  of  vaccina-
tion. He  purchased  an  estate  in  Butternuts,  Otse-
go co.,  N.  Y.,  and  resided  there  till  his  death.

YEAMAN,  George  Helm,  lawyer,  b.  in  Hardin
county,  Ky.,  1  Nov.,  1829.  He  was  educated  at
an  academy,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1852,  and  began  to  practise  at  Owensborough,
Ky.  In  1854  he  was  elected  a  judge  of  Daviess
county.  In  1861  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the
legislature,  and  in  1862  he  recruited  a  regiment
for  the  National  army.  The  same  year  he  was
sent  to  congress  as  a  Unionist  to  fill  a  vacancy,
and,  being  re-elected,  he  served  from  1  Dec,  1862,
till  3  March.  1865.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Johnson  minister  to  Den-
mark, which  office  he  held  till  7  Nov.,  1870,  since
which  time  he  has  practised  law  in  New  York.
Besides  pamphlets  on  "  Naturalization  "  (1867)  and
"  Privateering  "  (1868).  Mr.  Yeaman  has  published
"  A  Study  of  Government "  (Boston,  1870).  He
has  also  written  for  periodicals  on  the  labor  and
currency  questions.

YEAMANS,  Sir  John,  governor  of  South  Caro-
lina, b.  in  Bristol,  England,  about  1605  ;  d.  in
Barbadoes,  W.  I.,  about  1676.  He  was  the  son  of
a  cavalier,  and,  not  being  in  good  circumstances,
emigrated  to  Barbadoes  and  became  a  planter.  In
1663  several  residents  of  that  island,  not  being
satisfied  with  their  condition,  and  desiring  to  es-
tablish a  colony  of  their  own,  sent  a  vessel  to  ex-
amine the  country  extending  from  the  36th  degree
of  north  latitude  to  the  river  San  Mateo,  which
had  already  been  erected  into  a  territory  in  Lon-


640


YEARDLEY


YELL


don  under  the  name  of  Carolina.  The  report
being  favorable,  the  planters  purchased  of  the
Indians  a  tract  of  land  thirty-two  miles  square  on
Cape  Fear  river,  and  begged  of  the  proprietaries  a
confirmation  of  the  purchase  and  a  separate  char-
ter of  government.  Not  all  their  request  was
granted,  but  Sir  John  was  appointed  their  gov-
ernor, with  a  jurisdiction  that  extended  from  Cape
Fear  to  San  Mateo.  The  country  was  called
'•  Clarendon."  In  the  autumn  of  1665  he  arrived
from  Barbadoes  with  a  band  of  emigrants  and
founded  a  town  on  the  south  bank  of  Cape  Fear
river  that  proved  so  utter  a  failure  that  even  its
site  is  now  in  dispute.  Yet  the  settlement  flour-
ished for  a  time,  and  exported  boards,  staves,  and
shingles  to  the  parent  colony.  The  traffic  proved
profitable,  emigration  increased,  and  in  1666  the
plantation  is  said  to  have  contained  800  souls.
Yeamans  seems  to  have  managed  affairs  satisfac-
torily, but  after  a  time  he  returned  to  the  West
Indies.  In  1670  three  ship-loads  of  emigrants  that
had  arrived  from  England  sailed  up  Ashley  river
and  began  a  town  on  "  the  first  high  land  conven-
ient for  tillage  and  pasturing."  In  the  copy  of  the
original  fundamental  constitutions  given  them  be-
fore leaving  London,  John  Lock,  Sir  John  Yea-
mans,  and  James  Carteret  were  created  landgraves.
The  following  year  the  colony  was  increased  by
Dutch  emigrants  from  New  York  and  others  from
Holland,  and  by  the  arrival  of  Sir  John  from  Bar-
badoes with  African  slaves,  the  first  that  were
landed  on  this  continent.  The  governor  soon
sunk  under  the  climate  and  the  hardships  to  which
all  the  settlers  were  exposed,  and  Sir  John  Yeamans
was  appointed  his  successor.  He  proved,  however,
to  be  "  a  sordid  calculator,"  bent  only  on  acquiring
a  fortune.  He  encouraged  expense,  and  enriched
himself,  but  without  gaining  either  respect  or
hatred.  The  proprietaries  complained  that  "  it
must  be  a  bad  soil "  if  industrious  men  could  not
get  a  living  out  of  it.  and  protested  that  they  did
not  propose  to  maintain  the  idle.  In  1674  Yea-
mans was  removed  from  office,  and  at  once  sailed
for  Barbadoes,  where  he  soon  afterward  died.

YEARDLEY,  Sir  George,  governor  of  Virginia,
b.  in  England  about  1580 ;  d.  there  in  November,
1627.  He  was  among  the  early  emigrants  to  Vir-
ginia, and  on  the  return  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale  to
England  in  1616,  was  appointed  deputy  governor
by  that  official.  The  appointment  did  not  please
the  friends  of  Sir  Thomas  Smythe,  the  chairman
of  the  London  company,  and  they  succeeded  in
electing  in  his  stead  Samuel  Argall,  who  had  made
several  voyages  to  Virginia  as  Smythe's  trading
agent.  Argall  arrived  in  the  colony  in  1617,  and
proving  himself  from  the  first  "arrogant,  self-
willed,  and  greedy  of  gain,"  he  was  displaced  after
the  death  of  Lord  Delaware,  and  the  "  mild  and
popular  "  Yeardley  was  re-elected  governor.  On
22  Nov.  the  king  gave  Yeardley  audience,  knighted
him,  and  held  a  long  conversation  with  him  on
the  religion  of  the  natives.  On  19  April,  1619,  Sir
George  entered  on  his  office.  From  the  moment
of  his  arrival  dates  the  real  life  of  Virginia.
Commissions  and  instructions  from  the  company
"  for  the  better  establishinge  of  a  commonwealth  '
were  brought  over  by  him,  in  accordance  with
which  he  made  proclamation  that  the  cruel  laws
by  which  the  planters  had  so  long  been  governed
were  now  abrogated.  It  was  also  "  graunted  that
a  generall  assemblie  shoulde  be  helde  yearly  once."
Yeardley  remained  in  office  until  1621,  but,  not
proving*  as  energetic  as  the  company  in  London
desired  that  he  should  be,  he  was  superseded  by
Sir  Francis  Wyatt,  who  was  the  bearer  of  a  written


constitution  for  the  colony.  A  year  after  the  ac-
cession of  Charles  I.  Wyatt  retired,  and  Yeardley
was  again  made  governor,  his  appointment  being
considered  a  guarantee  that  representative  govern-
ment would  be  maintained  as  it  had  been  intro-
duced by  him.  From  this  time  Virginia  rose
rapidly  in  public  esteem  ;  in  1627, 1,000  emigrants
arrived,  and  there  was  an  increasing  demand  for
the  products  of  the  soil.  In  November  of  that
year  Yeardley's  career  was  closed  by  death.  Pos-
terity retains  a  grateful  recollection  of  the  man
who  first  convened  a  representative  assembly  in
the  western  hemisphere,  while  the  colonists,  in  a
letter  to  the  privy  council,  pronounced  a  glowing
eulogy  on  his  character.

YEATES,  Jasper,  merchant,  b.  in  Yorkshire,
England ;  d.  near  New  Castle,  Del.,  in  1720.  He
emigrated  to  the  West  Indies,  and  afterward  re-
moved to  Chester,  Pa.,  wThere  he  built  and  resided
in  a  venerable  mansion  that  is  still  standing,  and
was  afterward  Mrs.  Deborah  Logan's.  He  also
erected  extensive  granaries  on  the  creek.  In  1701
he  was  constituted  by  William  Penn  one  of  the
four  burgesses  of  Chester,  and  in  1703  was  elected
chief  burgess.  In  1694  he  was  appointed  justice
of  the  court  for  Chester  cpunty,  and  from  1704  till
1710  and  from  1717  till  his  death  he  was  associate-
justice  of  the  supreme  courts  of  the  province  of
Pennsylvania  and  the  lower  counties  on  the  Dela-
ware. In  1696  he  was  admitted  to  a  seat  in  the
provincial  council  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1700  he
was  elected  a  representative  of  New  Castle  county
in  the  general  assembly  of  the  province,  and,  after
the  separation  of  the  lower  counties  on  the  Dela-
ware, was  chosen  a  representative  and  speaker  of
their  assembly. — His  grandson,  Jasper,  jurist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  9  April,  1745 ;  d.  in  Lancaster,
Pa.,  14  March,  1817,  was  graduated  at  the  College
of  Philadelphia  in  1761,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1765,  and  in  1774  was  chosen  a  mem-
ber of  the  Lancaster  county  committee  of  corre-
spondence, of  which  he  became  chairman  in  1776.
Fourteen  years  afterward  he  sat  in  the  convention
that  ratified  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.
From  1791  until  his  death  he  was  an  associate
justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania.  In
1794  President  Washington  appointed  him  a  com-
missioner to  confer  with  the  inhabitants  of  the
western  counties  of  Pennsylvania,  for  the  settle-
ment of  the  whisky  insurrection.  Judge  Yeates
preserved  notes  of  judicial  proceedings  in  which
he  took  part,  and  prepared  them  for  the  press.
They  were  issued,  after  his  death,  as  "  Reports  of
Cases  Adjudged  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Pennsyl-
vania, with  some  Select  Cases  at  Nisi  Prius.  and  in
the  Circuit  Courts,  from  1791  till  1808  "  (4  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1817-'19).— His  daughter,  Catha-
rine, benefactor,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  in  1783;  d.
there,  7  June,  1866,  devoted  a  legacy  of  $26,000  to
founding  the  Yeates  institute  for  the  education  of
voting  men  for  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  and  also  contributed  to  its
maintenance  the  sum  of  $800  yearly.

YELL,  Archibald,  lawyer,  b.  in  Kentucky  in
1797;  d.  in  Buena  Vista,  Mexico,  23  Feb.,  1847.
He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  removed
to  the  territory  of  Arkansas,  settled  at  Fayette*
ville,  and  was  appointed  one  of  the  U.S. territorial
judges.  He  was  elected  to  the  24th  congress,  re-
elected to  the  25th,  and  served  from  5  Dec,  1836,
till  3  March,  1839.  He  was  subsequently  chosen
governor  of  Arkansas,  and  held  the  office  from
1840  till  1844.  The  following  year  he  was  again
elected  to  congress,  and  he  served  from  1  Dec.,
1845,  till  1  July,  1846,  when  he  resigned  to  join


YELLAND


YERGER


641


the  army  in  Mexico.  He  was  mustered  into  the
service  as  colonel  of  the  1st  Arkansas  volunteer
cavalry,  and  was  killed  by  a  Mexican  lancer  while
leading  his  men  at  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista.

YELLAND,  Raymond  D.,  artist,  b.  in  Lon-
don, England,  2  Feb.,  1848.  lie  came  to  this  coun-
try, studied  at  the  National  academy  and  under
James  R.  Brevooit  and  William  Page  in  1869-'71,
and  under  Luc,  Olivier  Merson,  in  Paris,  in  1886-'7.
He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  San  Francisco  art
association  in  1874,  and  during  1877-'8  was  assist-
ant director  of  the  California  school  of  design,  of
which  he  was  elected  director  in  1888.  Among
his  works  are  "  Half-Moon  Beach,"  "  The  Lonely
Sea,"  "Sunlight  and  Shadow,"  "The  Golden
Gate  at  Even,"  "  Mount  Tacoma,"  "  Mount
Hood,"  "Columbia  River,"  "Golden  Gate,"  "Near
Dordrecht,"  and  "  Faringford,  Isle  of  Wight."

YEO,  James,  Canadian  member  of  parliament,
b.  in  Porthill,  Prince  Edward  island,  31  Oct.,  1832.
He  is  the  son  of  James,  who  came  from  Devon-
shire, England,  in  1827,  and  who  was  a  member  of
the  Prince  Edward  island  assembly  for  thirty  years.
The  son  is  a  merchant,  ship-builder,  and  ship-owner ;
was  a  representative  in  the  Prince  Edward  island
assembly  and  a  member  of  the  executive  council
for  several  years  previous  to  1872,  when  the  prov-
ince entered  the  confederation,  lie  was  elected  to
the  Dominion  parliament  in  1872,  and  re-elected
in  1874,  1878,  1882,  and  1887.

YEO,  Sir  James  Lucas,  British  naval  officer,  b.
in  Southampton,  England,  in  1782 ;  d.  off  the
coast  of  Africa  in  1819.  He  entered  the  navy  at
an  early  age  under  Admiral  Cosby.  In  1797  he
was  promoted  lieutenant,  and  assigned  to  "La
Loire,"  under  Capt.  Frederick  L.  Maitland.  While
off  the  Spanish  coast  he  was  sent  to  capture  the
enemy's  vessels  in  the  port  of  El  Muros.  Storm-
ing the  fort,  he  succeeded  in  bringing  out  of  the
port  every  vessel,  armed  and  unarmed.  For  this
achievement  he  was  made  commander,  and  given
the  "  Confiance,"  one  of  the  vessels  he  had  taken.
In  1809  he  captured  Cayenne,  in  conjunction  with
the  Portuguese,  and  was  in  consequence  made
post-captain,  and  received  from  the  prince  regent
of  Portugal  a  knight's  commandery  of  St.  Benito
d'Avis,  being  the  only  Protestant  ever  so  hon-
ored. Sir  James  "was  placed  in  command  of  the
British  naval  forces  on  Lake  Ontario,  and  on  27
May,  1813,  appeared  off  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,
on  the  "  Wolf,  twenty-four  guns,  with  a  squadron
of  five  war-vessels,  and  about  forty  bateaux,  con-
taining 1,200  troops  under  command  of  Sir  George
Prevost.  In  May,  1814,  he  again  sailed  out  of
Kingston  harbor  with  an  effective  force  of  cruis-
ing-vessels,  and  1,000  troops  under  Gen.  Sir  George
Gordon  Drummond.  The  capture  of  Oswego  was
the  first  fruits  of  the  expedition.  Subsequently  he
was  blockaded  for  six  weeks  in  Kingston  harbor
by  Capt.  Isaac  Chauncey,  of  the  American  navy,
who  had  previously  defeated  him  and  his  squad-
ron in  York  bay.  On  15  Oct.  Sir  James  once  more
sailed,  on  board  the  "  St.  Lawrence,"  pierced  for
112  guns,  and  carrying  over  a  thousand  men,  ac-
companied by  four  ships,  two  b*igs,  and  a  schooner,
and  henceforth  was  "  lord  of  the  lake."  He  did
not  deem  it  prudent,  however,  to  attack  Capt.
Chauncey,  who  had  retired  to  Sackett's  Harbor,
where  a  force  of  0,000  men  had  been  gathered.
The  lake  being  closed  soon  afterward  by  ice,  no
further  hostilities  followed,  as  the  treaty  of  peace
was  signed  in  the  following  December.  After  the
return  of  Sir  James  to  England  he  was  ordered  to
duty  off  the  west  coast  of  Africa.  His  health  hav-
ing been  already  impaired  by  arduous  service,  he
vol.  vi. — 41


was  unable  to  withstand  the  climate,  and  died
while  on  the  voyage  home.

YEOMANS,  John  William,  clergyman,  b.  in
Hinsdale,  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  7  Jan.,  1800 ;  d.  in
Danville,  Montour  co.,  Pa.,  22  June,  1863.  He  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1824,  and,  after  holding
the  office  of  tutor  there  for  a  year,  resigned  to
study  theology  at  Andover  seminary.  In  1828  he
was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at
North  Adams,  Mass.,  where  he  remained  until  1832,
when  he  took  charge  of  the  1st  Congregational
church  at  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  whence  he  was  called  in
1834  to  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  at  Trenton,
N.  J.  In  1841  he  became  president  of  Lafayette
college,  Easton,  Pa.,  but  he  resigned  in  1845  to
become  pastor  of  the  Mahoning  church  at  Dan-
ville, Pa.,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.  In
1800  he  was  moderator  of  the  General  assembly  of
the  Presbyterian  church.  As  president  of  Lafay-
ette, Dr.  Yeomans  proved  himself  a  ripe  scholar
and  an  able  teacher.  He  was  regarded  as  one  of
the  chief  theologians  of  his  denomination,  and  as
a  metaphysician  probably  had  but  few  equals
among  his  contemporaries.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Miami  university  in  1841.  Among
his  publications  are  "  Election  Sermon  "  (Boston,
1834);  "Dedication  Sermon"  (Trenton,  1840);  and
"  Address  on  the  Author's  Inauguration  as  Presi-
dent of  Lafayette  College "  (Easton,  1841).  He
was  also  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  "  Princeton
Review,"  and  was  co-author  of  a  "  History  of  the
County  of  Berkshire,  Mass.,  in  Two  Parts  "  (Pitts-
field,  1829). — His  son,  Edward  Dorr,  clergyman,
b.  in  North  Adams,  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  27  Sept.,
1829 ;  d.  in  Orange,  Essex  co.,  N.  J.,  25  Aug.,  1868,
was  educated  chiefly  by  his  father,  and  passed
through  the  Junior  year  at  Lafayette  college  before
he  was  fifteen  years  old.  On  account  of  his  youth
he  was  not  graduated,  but  he  received  from  Prince-
ton the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1849  and  that
of  D.  D.  in  1864.  After  studying  theology  at
Princeton,  he  was  licensed  to  preach,  21  April,
1847,  when  only  seventeen  years  and  a  half  old.
After  preaching  from  1847  till  1849  at  New  Co-
lumbia, Pa.,  and  serving  as  principal  of  an  acad-
emy at  Danville,  Pa.,  in  1847-'50,  he  was  pastor
successively  of  several  churches,  including  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.,  from  1847  until  his  death.  That  event
was  supposed  to  have  been  hastened  by  his  ener-
getic work  at  Orange,  which  resulted  in  doubling
the  church  membership  within  a  year,  while  he  was
undergoing  the  strain  of  severe  literary  labor.  Dr.
Yeomans  will  probably  be  longest  remembered  as  a
translator  from  the  German.  His  English  versions
of  Dr.  Philip  Schaff's  "  History  of  the  Apostolic
Church "  (New  York,  1853),  of  "  Lectures  on
America "  (1855),  and  "  History  of  the  Christian
Church  "  (1859),  have  the  idiomatic  character  of
original  compositions.  He  was  engaged  at  the  time
of  his  death  in  translating  the  large  volume  of
Lange's  "Commentary  on  John."

YERGER,  George  Shall,  lawyer,  b.  in  Hagers-
town,  Bid.,  23  Aug.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Bolivar  county,
Miss.,  20  April,  1860.  His  father,  who  was  of  Ger-
man origin,  emigrated  to  the  neighborhood  of
Lebanon,  Tenn.,  in  1816.  There  George  obtained
a  fair  education,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  He  settled  in  Nashville,  was  for  many
years  reporter  of  the  decisions  of  the  supreme
court  of  Tennessee,  and  was  elected  attorney-gen-
eral of  the  state.  After  attaining  a  wide  reputa-
tion he  removed  to  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  in  1839,  and
took  rank  among  the  chief  lawyers  of  that  local-
ity. In  1844  he  changed  his  residence  to  Jack-
son, Miss.,  where  he  practised  his  profession  untU


642


YEWELL


YOUMANS


his  death.  In  the  latter  city  he  appeared  chiefly
in  the  high  court,  confining  himself  to  cases  aris-
ing out  of  the  violations  of  commercial  law,  and
the  discussion  of  questions  of  equity.  An  excep-
tion to  this  rule  was  his  defence  of  Gen.  Daniel
Adams,  who  killed  his  antagonist  in  a  personal  en-
counter in  the  streets  of  Vicksburg  in  1844.  In
politics  Mr.  Yerger  was  a  stanch  advocate  of  the
principles  of  the  Whig  party,  and  in  the  canvasses
of  1840-'4  took  an  active  part  in  support  of  its
candidates  for  the  presidency,  but  never  sought
nor  filled  any  public  office.  While  engaged  in  a
deer-hunt,  Mr.  Yerger  shot  a  large  buck,  and  had
just  run  up  to  secure  him,  when  he  fell  dead,  from
heart-disease,  upon  the  dying  stag.  He  published
"Reports  of  Cases  Argued  and  Determined  in  the
Supreme  Court  of  Tennessee,  December,  1818.  to
December,  1837  "  (10  vols..  Nashville,  1832-'8).

YEWELL,  George  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  Havre
de  Grace,  Md.,  20  Jan.,  1830.  He  studied  at  the
National  academy  and  under  Thomas  Hicks,  and
in  1856  became  the  pupil  of  Thomas  Couture  in
Paris.  During  1867-78  he  lived  in  Italy,  except-
ing one  winter  spent  in  Egypt.  His  works  include
"Children  on  the  Sea -Shore"  (1861);  "The
Wounded  Drum mer- Boy " ;  "Roman  Shepherd-
Boy";  some  Venetian  subjects,  including  interior
views  of  the  Church  of  St.  Mark ;  "  Santa  Maria
della  Salute"  (Louisville  art-gallery):  "In  the
Church  of  San  Pietro,  Perugia"  (1877);  and  "In
the  Carpet  Bazaar,  Cairo,"  and  "  Mosque  of  Kait-
Bey,  Cairo  "  (1878). He  has  of  late  been  engaged

frincipally  on  portraits,  among  which  are  those  of
saac  Davis,  Alexander  Mitchell,  Frederick  Lay-
ton  (Layton  art-gallery,  Milwaukee),  John  Cham-
bers and  Ralph  P.  Lowe  (capitol  at  Des  Moines,
Iowa),  Robert  Lucas,  and  Charles  Mason,  his  earli-
est patron,  through  whose  aid  he  began  his  art
studies.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy  in  1862,  and  an  academician  in  1880.

YOAKUM,  Henderson  K.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Clai-
borne county,  Tenn.,  in  1810;  d.  in  Houston,  Tex.,
29  Nov.,  1856.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1832,  brevetted  2d  lieuten-
ant, and  served  in  the  Black  Hawk  expedition  the
same  year,  but  was  not  at  the  seat  of  war.  He
resigned  from  the  army,  31  March,  1833,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  in
Tennessee  from  1835  till  1845.  In  1839  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  state  senate.  He  re-
moved to  Texas  in  1845,  and  continued  to  prac-
tise his  profession  at  Huntsville  from  1846  till
1856.  From  June  till  September  of  the  former
year  he  served  in  the  Mexican  war  as  1st  lieuten-
ant of  Texas  mounted  rifle  volunteers.  In  1850-'6
he  was  colonel  of  Texas  militia.  Col.  Yoakum
was  a  contributor  to  various  periodicals,  and  pub-
lished "  A  History  of  Texas  from  its  First  Settle-
ment under  La  Salle  in  1685  to  its  Annexation  to
the  United  States  in  1845  "  (New  York,  1855).

YODER,  Jacob,  pioneer,  b.  in  Reading,  Pa.,  11
Aug.,  1758 :  d.  in  Spencer  county,  Ky.,  7  April,  1832.
He  was  of  Swiss  descent.  After  serving  through  the
Revolutionary  war  in  the  Pennsylvania  line,  he
built  a  large  boat  at  Fort  Red  Stone  (now  Browns-
ville), on  Monongahela  river,  which  he  freighted
with  flour  and  carried  to  New  Orleans  in  May,  1782.
With  the  profits  of  this  venture  he  bought  pel-
tries which  he  sold  in  Havana,  investing  the  pro-
ceeds in  sugar  for  the  Philadelphia  market.  This
was  the  first  attempt  to  navigate  the  Ohio  and
Mississippi  rivers  for  commercial  purposes.  Sub-
sequently he  settled  in  Spencer  county,  Ky.,  and
took  part  in  equipping  and  keeping  in  the  field
the  military  forces  in  the  northwest  territory.


YOU,  Dominique,  soldier,  b.  in  Hayti  in  1775:
d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  1830.  Little  is  known
of  his  early  life,  but  he  is  supposed  to  have  fol-
lowed the  sea  at  first.  Subsequently  he  served  in
the  artillery  corps  during  the  wars  of  the  French
republic,  and  in  1802  accompanied  Gen.  Victor
Leclerc  to  Santo  Domingo.  Afterward  he  found
his  way  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  was  employed
by  the  brothers  Jean  and  Pierre  Lafitte,  and  soon
became  the  pirates'  principal  captain.  He  was
nicknamed  "Captain  Dominique  by  the  French
and  "  Johnness  by  the  Americans,  and  won  repu-
tation for  boldness  and  daring.  When  Venezuela
declared  her  independence,  Capt.  Dominique  pro-
cured letters  of  marque  from  the  patriots  and  did
much  damage  to  Spanish  commerce  in  the  Gulf  of
Mexico.  During  the  following  years  he  took  part
in  the  unlawful  operations  of  the  Lafittes  in  the
bayous,  and  in  July,  1814,  was  indicted  by  a  grand
jury  for  piracies  in  the  Gulf;  but  could  not  be
apprehended.  At  the  subsequent  raid  on  the  pi-
rates' establishments  in  Barataria  he  escaped  to
the  swamps  of  the  interior ;  but  when  the  English
invaded  Louisiana  he  offered  his  services  to  the
American  authorities,  and  was  appointed  com-
mander of  a  company  of  artillery,  which  he  formed
with  the  best  gunners  of  the  pirates'  ships  and
which  did  such  good  service  in  the  battle  of  New
Orleans,  8  Jan.,  1815,  that  they  were  mentioned  in
Gen.  Andrew  Jackson's  general  order  of  21  Jan.
as  "  having  shown  uncommon  gallantry  and  skill
in  the  field."  On  the  strength  of  this,  all  pro-
ceedings against  Dominique  You  were  dropped,
and  he  settled  quietly  in  New  Orleans,  where  he
enjoyed  great  popularity  as  a  politician  and  after-
ward strongly  supported  Gen.  Jackson.  You's  ex-
ample did  much  to  pacify  Louisiana  and  secure
the  good-will  of  the  lawless  population,  and  when
he  died  he  was  given  a  military  funeral  at  the
public  expense.  See  Charles  Gayarre's  "  Histoire
de  la  Louisiane  "  (New  Orleans,  1847).

YOUMANS,  Edward  Livingston,  scientist,  b.
in  Coeymans,  N.  Y.,  3  June,  1821 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  18  Jan.,  1887.  In  childhood  his  parents
removed  to  Saratoga  county,  where  his  youth  was
passed.  He  attended  the  common  school,  and  was
an  insatiable  reader,  but  at  thirteen  years  of  age
was  attacked  with
ophthalmia.  In
1840  he  went  to
New  York  for  treat-
ment, and  the  city
became  his  home.
His  blindness  last-
ed several  years,
but  he  finally  re-
covered partially.
During  these  years
of  suffering  and
deprivation  he  was
a  constant  worker

and an  assiduous  v^  /

student of books
and  events. He  s /?  /

studied element- J £f  C^
ary  chemistry  and ' '  S
physics with the

aid  of  his  sister,  and  when  he  was  left  to  himself  his
leisure  was  spent  in  writing  with  a  pocket-machine
of  his  own  contrivance.  In  1851,  while  studying
agricultural  chemistry,  he  prepared  a  chemical
chart  that  made  clear  by  means  of  colored  dia-
grams the  laws  of  chemical  science  as  they  were
then  expounded  (revised  and  enlarged,  1856).  He
studied  medicine  during  this  period  and  received


YOUMANS


YOUNG


643


the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  University  of  Ver-
mont. In  1852  he  began  to  lecture  upon  science,
and  for  the  next  seventeen  years  he  gave  courses
of  lectures  in  connection  with  the  lyceum  system
in  many  towns  and  cities,  awakening  deep  interest
in  scientific  subjects.  In  his  lectures  on  the
"  Chemistry  of  the  Sunbeam  "  and  the  "  Dynamics
of  Life ''  he  was  the  first  to  expound  popularly  the
doctrines  of  the  conservation  of  energy  and  the
mutual  relation  of  forces.  lie  early  became  deep-
ly interested  in  the  diffusion  in  this  countrv  of
standard  scientific  works,  and  particularly  those
bearing  upon  the  evolution  philosophy,  procuring
their  republication  here,  and  doing  all  he  could
through  the  newspaper  and  periodical  press  to
make  them  known  to  the  public.  Herbert  Spen-
cer's books  alone,  in  behalf  of  which  he  spared  no
effort,  have  reached  a  sale  of  132,000  copies,  and
the  foreign  authors,  whose  works  were  in  his
charge,  have  for  years  enjoyed,  by  voluntary  ar-
rangement with  the  Messrs.  Appleton,  the  benefits
of  international  copyright,  of  the  justice  and  need
of  which  Mr.  Youmans  was  from  the  beginning  of
his  literary  life  an  ardent  advocate.  The  "  Inter-
national Scientific  Series  "  was  planned  by  him  in
1871,  and  arrangements  were  made  for  the  publi-
cation of  the  works  in  New  York,  London,  Paris,
and  Leipsic,  and  afterward  in  St.  Petersburg  and
Milan.  The  project  was  based  on  the  idea  of  pay-
ment to  authors  from  the  sale  in  all  countries.
The  series  has  reached  (1888)  its  sixty-fourth  vol-
ume. In  1872  he  established  the  "  Popular  Science
Monthly,"  and  thenceforward  the  editorial  duties
of  the  magazine  absorbed  his  chief  attention.  The
twenty-eight  volumes  issued  under  his  care  show
the  same  devotion  to  the  spread  of  scientific
thought  upon  the  chief  topics  of  the  time.  His
enthusiastic  nature  led  to  constant  overdoing,  and
the  strain  told  upon  his  strength  years  before  his
death.  From  1882  his  lungs  were  seriously  affect-
ed, but  he  worked  on  persistently  until  early  in
1886.  He  published  "  Alcohol  and  the  Constitu-
tion of  Man  "  (New  York,  1853) ;  "  The  Chemical
Atlas,"  an  extension  of  method  of  the  chemical
chart  that  has  been  mentioned  (1854) ;  "  Hand-
book of  Household  Science  "  (1857) ;  "  The  Corre-
lation and  Conservation  of  Forces,"  a  compilation
with  an  able  introduction  setting  forth  America's
contribution  to  the  modern  doctrine  of  forces
(1864);  and  "The  Culture  demanded  by  Modern
Life,"  a  compilation  from  various  authors,  present-
ing the  claims  of  their  special  sciences  as  suited
for  the  best  culture  (1868).  His  introduction  to
the  volume  is  perhaps  his  most  finished  literary
work.  He  also  contributed  to  the  body  of  the
book  an  original  lecture  given  in  London  on  "  The
Scientific  Study  of  Human  Nature." — His  brother.
William  Jay,  editor,  b.  in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  14
Oct.,  1838,  worked  on  his  father's  farm  and  at-
tended the  district-school  until  his  seventeenth
year.  He  studied  chemistry  under  his  brother,  and
in  the  Yale  scientific  school,  and  natural  history
under  Dr.  Asa  Fitch,  was  graduated  at  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  New  York  university  in
1865,  and  then  went  abroad  in  the  same  year  to
continue  his  studies  in  natural  history  under  Prof.
Thomas  II.  Huxley.  He  practised  medicine  three
years  in  Minnesota,  but  abandoned  it  to  assist  in
establishing  the  "  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  the
management  of  which  he  shared  until  the  death  of
his  brother,  when  he  became  its  sole  editor.  He
has  contributed  occasionally  to  its  pages  under  his
own  name,  and  for  many  years  has  prepared  the
articles  on  chemistry,  metallurgy,  and  physiology
for  Appletons'  "Annual Cyclopaedia." He  is  a


member  of  several  scientific  associations.  He  has
edited  Huxley's  "  Lessons  in  Elementary  Physiolo-
gy," to  which  he  added  a  second  part  on  "  Elemen-
tary Hygiene"  (New  York,  1867).— Their  sister,
Eliza  Ann,  author,  b.  in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  17  Dec,
1826,  became  interested  in  the  scientific  studies
which  she  aided  her  brother  to  pursue,  and  her
fondness  for  children  led  her  to  apply  them  to
early  education.  She  has  published  "  First  Book
of  Botany,  designed  to  Cultivate  the  Observing
Powers  of  Children  "  (New  York,  1870)  and  "  Sec-
ond Book  of  Botany  "  (1873).  These  were  intended
to  promote  the  systematic  study  of  plants  as  ob-
jects in  place  of  the  object  lessons  in  general  use.
She  has  prepared  an  enlarged  edition  of  Ilenslow's
"  Botanical  Charts "  (1873),  translated  from  the
French  Quatrefage's  "Natural  History  of  Man"
(1875),  and  contributed  to  the  "  Popular  Science
Monthly  "  and  other  periodicals.  Miss  Youmans
also  published  "  Descriptive  Botany,  a  Guide  to  the
Classification  of  Plants,  with  a  Popular  Flora "
(1885),  and  an  abridgment  of  Bently's  "  Physiologi-
cal Botany,"  as  a  sequel  (1886).

YOUMANS,  Letitia  Creighton,  Canadian  re-
former, b.  in  Cobourg,  Ont.,  in  1827.  She  was  edu-
cated at  the  Cobourg  ladies'  academy  and  at  Bur-
lington academy,  Hamilton,  and  was  for  a  short
time  teacher  in  a  ladies'  academy  at  Pictou.  In
1850  she  married  Arthur  Youmans,  and  soon  after-
ward she  became  well  known  as  a  lecturer  on  tem-
perance. She  was  superintendent  of  the  juve-
nile work  of  the  Good  Templar  organization  and
a  member  of  the  editorial  staff  of  the  "  Temper-
ance Union,"  organized  a  Women's  Christian. tem-
perance union  in  Toronto,  and  was  president  of  the
Ontario  temperance  union  from  1878  till  1883,
when  she  became  president  of  the  Dominion  or-
ganization. She  was  re-elected  in  1885.  Mrs.
Youmans  was  one  of  the  Canadian  delegates  to  the
World's  temperance  congress  at  Philadelphia  in
1876,  and  in  May,  1882,  visited  the  British  women's
temperance  association  at  London,  and  afterward
lectured  in  various  parts  of  England,  Ireland,  and
Scotland.  She  is  also  well  known  as  a  lecturer  on
temperance  throughout  this  country.

YOUNG,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  22  Sept.,  1800 ;  d.  there,  16  March,  1854.  He
was  the  son  of  Alexander  Young,  a  printer,  who,
with  Samuel  Etherege,  established  the  "  Massachu-
setts Chronicle,"  afterward  also  called  the  "New
England  Palladium,"  an  organ  of  the  Federalist
party.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1820  and
at  the  divinity-school  in  1824.  On  leaving  college
he  taught  a  year  in  the  Boston  Latin-school,  where
he  had  been  a  pupil,  and  in  1825  was  ordained  pas-
tor of  the  New  South  Unitarian  churcn  in  Boston,
which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  He  was  also
a  member  of  the  board  of  overseers  of  Harvard
from  1837  till  1853,  and  secretary  from  1849  till
1853,  and  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Massa-
chusetts historical  society  from  1849  till  1854.
Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1846.
He  was  noted  for  his  felicity  in  the  delineation  of
character,  and  his  discourses  in  memory  of  distin-
guished citizens  of  Massachusetts  ran  through  sev-
eral editions  and  were  widely  circulated.  Of  these
the  most  notable  were  the  discourses  on  Nathaniel
Bowditch  (Boston,  1838),  President  John  T.  Kirk-
land,  of  Harvard  (1840),  and  Judge  William  Pres-
cott,  father  of  the  historian  (1844).  Dr.  Young
also  rendered  essential  service  to  American  his-
tory by  the  publication  of  "Chronicles  of  the
Pilgrim  Fathers  of  the  Colony  of  Plymouth  from
1602  to  1625"  (Boston.  1841)  and  "Chronicles  of
the  First  Planters  of  the  Colony  of  Massachusetts


644


YOUNG


YOUNG


Bay  from  1623  to  1036"  (1846).  He  also  edited
"  Library  of  Old  English  Prose  Writers,"  the  first
publication  of  the  kind  in  this  country  (9  vols.,
1831-4).  There  is  a  memoir  of  Dr.  Young  by
Rev.  Chandler  Robbins,  D.  D.,  published  in  the
"Collections  of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  So-
ciety."— His  son,  Alexander,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  19  May,  1836,  was  educated  in  the  Boston
public  schools,  and  for  several  years  engaged  in
mercantile  pursuits.  In  1862  he  was  graduated
at  the  Harvard  law-school,  and  at  once  began  the
practice  of  law  in  Boston.  He  also  became  asso-
ciate editor  of  the  "  Globe  "  of  that  city  soon  after
its  establishment  in  1872.  He  has  been  a  frequent
contributor  to  periodical  literature,  and  is  now
editorially  connected  with  the  Boston  "  Post."  His
"  History  of  the  Netherlands  "  (Boston.  1884 ;  Lon-
don, 1886)  is  based  on  original  authorities,  impor-
tant additions  having  been  made  to  the  period
that  is  covered  by  Motley's  works,  and  the  history
brought  down  to  the  present  time.

YOUNG,  Alfred,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bristol,  Eng-
land, 21  Jan.,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1848,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  New  York  in  1852,  after  which  he  practised
medicine  for  a  year.  In  1850  he  became  a  convert
to  the  Roman  Catholic  faith,  and  after  ecclesiastical
studies  at  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice  in  Paris,
France,  he  was  ordained  a  priest  of  that  church  on
24  Aug.,  1856.  He  was  vice-president  of  Seton
Hall  college  in  1856-'7,  rector  of  the  Roman  Catho-
lic church  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  in  1857-'60,  and  of
the  church  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  in  1860-1.  Father
Young  then  entered  the  community  of  the  Paulists
in  New  York  city.  His  name  has  been  particu-
larly associated  with  the  reformation  of  church
music,  and  the  beginning  in  the  United  States  of
an  effort  toward  the  restoration  of  the  Gregorian
chant  for  the  entire  services  of  his  church.  This
practice  was  introduced  in  the  Paulist  church  in
1870,  and  has  since  continued  to  be  a  feature  in  its
services.  He  has  both  written  and  lectured  in
favor  of  it,  and  it  is  being  gradually  adopted  else-
where. At  present  he  is  engaged  in  the  advocacy
of  a  further  reform  tending  toward  congregational
singing.  Besides  magazine  articles  on  sundry  re-
ligious topics,  and  a  series  of  epigrammatic  poems
on  scriptural  texts  in  the  "  Catholic  World,"  he  has
published  "The  Complete  Sodality  Hymn-Book"
(New  York,  1863);  new  ed.,  entitled  "Catholic
Hymns  and  Canticles"  (1888) ;  "  The  Office  of  Ves-
pers" (1869);  "The  Catholic  Hymnal"  (1884):  and
"Carols  for  a  Merry  Christmas  and  a  Joyous  Eas-
ter" (2  vols.,  1885-6).  —  His  brother,  Edward
(1818-1870),  was  a  jeweler,  and  published  in  1859
"The  Ladve  Lillian  and  other  Poems."

YOUNG,  Sir  Allen  William,  British  explorer,
b.  in  Twickenham,  Middlesex,  England,  in  1830.
He  was  a  captain  in  the  merchant  service  at  the
time  of  the  Crimean  war,  and  rendered  useful  ser-
vice as  master  of  a  transport  to  the  British  forces
at  Balaklava.  Afterward  he  volunteered  for  the
Franklin  search  expedition  of  Capt.  Francis  L.
McClintock,  in  1857-'60,  and  was  sailing-master  of
the  "  Fox  "  during  the  voyage.  In  command  of  a
sledge  party,  between  February  and  July,  1859,  he
discovered  400  miles  of  new  coast.  In  1862  he
commanded  an  expedition  to  survey  a  route  for
a  cable  telegraph  under  the  Atlantic  ocean  by  way
of  Iceland  and  Greenland.  He  was  one  of  the  or-
ganizers of  the  Chinese  navy,  and  captain  of  a  man-
of-war  during  the  Taiping  rebellion.  In  1875  he
attempted  the  northwest  passage,  and  endeavored
to  find  the  records  of  the  lost  Franklin  expedition
on  King  William's  Land,  in  his  yacht  "  Pandora  " ;


and  in  1876  he  refitted  her  for  a  second  voyage
with  the  same  object,  but  changed  his  destination
to  Smith  sound  at  the  request  of  the  British  ad-
miralty, which  desired  to  communicate  with  the
depots  of  the  government  expedition.  He  accom-
plished his  mission  with  success,  and  for  his  ser-
vices was  knighted,  12  March,  1877.  An  account
of  the  "  Two  Voyages  of  the  '  Pandora'  in  1875  and
1876  "  has  been  published  (London.  1879).

YOUNG,  Andrew  White,  author,  b.  in  Car-
lisle, Schoharie  co:,  N.  Y,  2  March,  1802;  d.  in
Warsaw,  Wyoming  co.,  N.  Y.,  17  Feb.,  1877.  He
removed  to  Warsaw  in  1816,  received  a  common-
school  education,  taught  for  several  years,  then  en-
gaged in  mercantile  business,  and  in  1830  estab-
lished the  Warsaw  "Sentinel,"  changing  the  name
in  1832  to  the  "  Republican  Advocate."  In  1836
he  published  and  edited  a  paper  called  the  "  Ameri-
can,  Citizen."  Mr.  Young  represented  Wyoming
coupty  in  the  legislature  in  1845-'6  and  in  the  Con-
stitutional convention  of  1846.  He  published  "  In-
troduction to  the  Science  of  Government,"  which
obtained  an  extensive  circulation  (Warsaw,  1835 ;
revised  ed.,  1839) ;  "  First  Lessons  in  Civil  Govern-
ment "  (1843 ;  revised  ed.,  1847) ;  "  Citizen's  Manual
of  Government  and  Law  "  (1851 ;  revised  ed.,  1858) ;
"  The  American  Statesman :  a  Political  History  of
the  United  States  "  (1855 ;  new  ed.,  with  an  appen-
dix written  just  before  his  death.  New  York,  1888);
and  "  National  Economy  :  a  History  of  the  Ameri-
can Protective  System  "'  (1860).

YOUNG,  Sir  Aretas  William,  British  soldier,
b.  about  1778.;  d.  1  Dec,  1835.  He  entered  the  army
in  1795  as  ensign,  was  captain  in  the  13th  foot  in
1796,  and  served  in  Ireland  during  the  rebellion  of
1798.  In  1801  he  was  on  duty  in  Egypt,  and  in
1807  he  was  advanced  to  the  rank  of  major  in  the
47th  regiment.  Subsequently  he  was  engaged  in
many  battles  of  the  Peninsular  war,  and  from  1813
he  served  in  the  West  Indies  as  lieutenant-colonel,
chiefly  at  Trinidad.  In  1815  he  was  sent  to  join
the  expedition  against  Guadaloupe,  and  received
one  of  the  badges  of  the  Order  of  Merit  from
Louis  XVIII.  He  was  next  placed  in  command  of
the  troops  in  Grenada,  and,  on  his  being  ordered
back  to  Trinidad,  the  council  of  assembly  pre-
sented him  with  a  sword  valued  at  100  guineas.
From  this  time  to  the  final  disbandment  of  the  3d
West  Indian  regiment  in  1825,  he  administered  the
government  at  various  times  during  the  absence
of  Sir  Ralph  Woodford,  and  was  rewarded  for  the
"  candor,  integrity,  and  impartiality  which  had
marked  his  administration  "  by  150  guineas  for  a
sword,  and  plate  valued  at  £250.  In  1826  he  was
appointed  protector  of  slaves  in  Demerara.  and  in
1831  was  .made  lieutenant-governor  of  Prince  Ed-
ward island. In  1834  he  was  knighted.

YOUNG,  Augustus,  author,  b.  in  Arlington,
Vt,  20  March,  1785 ;  d.  in  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  17  June.
1857.  He  received  an  academic  education,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1810,  and  began
practice  at  Stow.  In  1812  he  removed  to  Crafts-
bury.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  assembly
during  twelve  successive  sessions  and  of  the  state
senate  for  three  terms,  and  was  state's  attorney  for
Orleans  county  and  judge  of  probate.  He  was  a
member  of  congress  from  Vermont  from  31  May,
1841,  till  3  March,  1843.  and  declined  a  re-election.
He  then  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  removed  to
St.  Albans  in  1847.  was  for  several  years  judge  of
the  county  court  there,  and  in  1856  was  appointed
state  naturalist.  He  published  "On  the  Quadra-
ture of  the  Circle"  (St.  Albans,  1852)  and  "Pre-
liminary Report  on  the  Natural  History  of  the
State  of  Vermont "  (Burlington,  1856).


YOUNG


YOUNG


645


dft^tyA^d/tfutv?


YOUNG,  Brigham,  president  of  the  Mormon
church,  b.  in  Whitingham,  Vt.,  1  June,  1801  ;  d.  in
Salt  Lake  City,  29  Aug.,  1877.  His  father,  John,  a
farmer,  served  in  the  Revolutionary  war.  In  1804
Brigham  went  with  his  parents  to  Sherburne,  N.

Y., where,  until  he
was  sixteen,  he  re-
ceived only  eleven
days'  schooling.
He  then  engaged
in  business  and
was  a  carpenter,
joiner,  painter,
and  glazier  in
Mendon,  N.  Y.
In  1830  he  first
saw  the  "  Book
of  Mormon,"  and
a  year  later  he
was  converted  by
Samuel  II.  Smith,
the  "  prophet's  "
brother.  On  14
~JT  GULs  April,  1832,  he
*  Or  was  baptized  and

began  to  preach  in  the  vicinity  of  Mendon.  In  the
autumn  of  1832  he  went  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  where
he  became  the  close  friend  of  Joseph  Smith.  He
was  ordained  an  elder,  and  in  the  winter  of  1832-'3
was  engaged  in  Canada,  preaching,  baptizing,  and
organizing  missions.  His  advancement  in  the
church  was  rapid,  and  on  14  Feb.,  1835,  he  was
chosen  one  of  the  twelve  apostles,  becoming  their
president  a  year  later.  Meanwhile  much  of  his  time
was  spent  in  Kirtland,  where  he  was  occupied  in
working  on  the  Temple  and  in  studying  Hebrew,
also  in  travelling,  preaching,  and  making  converts.
During  1836-'7  an  effort  was  made  to  depose  the
prophet  Joseph  and  appoint  David  Whitmer  presi-
dent of  the  church.  A  council  was  held  for  this
purpose,  at  which  Young  made  an  earnest  plea
for  Smith,  and  the  meeting  terminated  unpleas-
antly. On  22  Dec,  1837,  Brigham  Young  left  Kirt-
land. He  purchased  land  in  Far  West,  Mo.,  in
1838,  and  settled  there ;  but,  in  pursuance  of  the
order  of  Gov.  Lilburn  W.  Boggs,  he  and  his  family
left  their  home  and  much  of  their  personal  prop-
erty on  14  Feb.,  1839,  and  returned  to  Quincy,  111.
Later  he  was  one  of  the  twelve  that  founded  Nau-
voo,  and  in  September  of  that  year  set  out  on  a
mission  to  England.  His  experience  there  is  given
in  his  own  words :  "  We  landed  in  the  spring  of
1840  as  strangers  in  a  strange  land  and  penniless,
but  through  the  mercy  of  God  we  have  printed
.  .  .  5,000  '  Books  of  Mormon,'  3,000  hymn-books,
2,500  volumes  of  the  'Millennial  Star,'-and  50,000
tracts,  .  .  .  emigrated  to  Zion  1,000  souls,  yet  we
have  lacked  nothing  to  eat,  drink,  or  wear."  The
death  of  Joseph  and  Ilyrum  Smith  in  Carthage  jail
was  announced  to  him  by  letter  while  he  was  on
a  mission  in  Peterborough,  N.  II..  and  he  returned
to  Nauvoo  on  6  Aug.  Sidney  Rigdon  was  then
claiming  leadership  in  the  church,  but  two  days
later  Young  was  chosen  successor  to  Smith.  In
the  autumn  the  people  of  Hancock  and  adjacent
counties  clamored  for  the  removal  of  the  Mormons
from  the  state.  In  reply  to  such  a  demand,  Young
said,  on  1  Oct.,  1845,  that  it  was  the  intention  of
from  5,000  to  6,000  persons  to  leave  Nauvoo  early
in  1846  to  seek  a  home  in  the  wilderness.  Subse-
quently the  charter  of  Nauvoo  was  revoked,  and
the  Mormons  suffered  house-burnings,  plunderings,
whippings,  murders,  and  the  fury  of  mob  violence.
In  pursuance  of  his  promise,  many  of  the  Mormons
crossed  Mississippi  river  early  in  February,  1846,


and  on  the  15th  of  that  month  President  Young
and  his  family  set  out.  On  1  March,  while  there
was  still  several  inches  of  snow  on  the  ground,  the
exodus  began  with  about  400  wagons  in  line.
Brigham  Young  was  chosen  president  in  "  Camp  of
Israel  "  on  27  March,  and  captains  of  hundreds,  of
fifties,  and  of  tens  were  appointed  to  conduct  the
march.  By  command  of  Col.  Stephen  W.  Kearny,
a  call  was  made  on  President  Young,  on  26  June,
1846,  to  furnish  500  men  for  one  year's  service
during  the  Mexican  war.  "  You  shall  have  your
battalion  at  once,"  he  replied,  and  the  quota  of
what  was  known  as  "the  Mormon  battalion  "  was
filled  within  three  days.  On  their  arrival  near  what
is  now  Florence,  Neb.,  on  21  July,  the  Omaha  and
Pottawattamie  Indians  received  them  kindly,  and
urged  the  fugitives  to  establish  a  camp  in  their
midst.  President  Young  accepted  this  offer,  after
obtaining  the  consent  of  President  Polk,  and  made
his  winter-quarters  there.  They  laid  the  settle-
ment out  in  streets  and  blocks,  on  which  comfort-
able log-houses  were  built  and  a  grist-mill  was
erected.  On  7  April,  1847,  Young,  with  142  men,
set  out  in  search  of  a  suitable  place  for  a  settlement.
They  entered  Salt  Lake  valley  on  24  July,  1847,
and,  after  a  survey  had  been  made  of  the  locality  and
the  first  house  erected.  Young  returned  to  winter-
quarters  on  31  Oct.,  1847,  and  on  5  Dec.  was  elected
president  by  the  "  twelve  apostles,"  with  Heber
C.  Kimball  and  Willard  Richards  as  counsellors.
On  26  May,  1848,  he  set  out  again,  accompanied
by  his  family  and  2,000  followers,  for  Salt  Lake
City,  and  arrived  there  on  20  Sept.  A  provisional
government  being  requisite  until  congress  should
otherwise  provide,  he  was  elected  on  12  March,
1849.  governor  of  "  Deseret,"  which  is  understood
by  the  Mormons  to  signify  "  the  land  of  the  honey-
bee." The  territory  of  Utah  was  established  on  9
Sept.,  1850,  and  on  3  Feb.,  1851,  Young  took  the
oath  of  office  as  its  governor,  commander-in-chief
of  the  militia,  and  superintendent  of  Indian  affaire,
to  which  places  he  had  been  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Fillmore.  Under  his  administration  exten-
sive tracts  of  land  were  brought  under  cultivation
and  large  numbers  of  converts  were  brought  from
Europe.  On  29  Aug.,  1852,  the  doctrine  of  po-
lygamy was  first  announced  as  a  tenet  of  the  Mor-
mon church  by  Brigham  Young.  He  claimed  that
a  revelation  commanding  it  had  been  made  to  Jo-
seph Smith;  but  the  widow  and  four  sons  of  Smith
denied  ever  having  seen  or  heard  of  any  such  reve-
lation. Polygamy  is  strictly  forbidden  in  the
"  Book  of  Mormon,"  the  "  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants," and  all  Mormon  publications  that  were
issued  before  Smith's  death,  and  many  left  the
church  on  this  question.  Subsequently  they  formed
an  independent  organization  under  the  leadership
of  one  of  the  sons  of  Smith.  To  sustain  the  new
dogma,  papers  and  periodicals  were  established  in
various  parts  of  the  world.  Meanwhile  the  Fed-
eral judges  were  forced  by  threats  of  violence  to
leave  Utah,  and  the  laws  of  the  United  States  were
defied  and  subverted  as  early  as  1850.  Col.  Ed-
ward J.  Steptoe  was  sent  in  1854  to  Utah  as  gov-
ernor, with  a  battalion  of  soldiers ;  but  he  did  not
deem  it  prudent  to  assume  the  office,  and,  after
wintering  in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  formally  resigned
his  post  and  went  with  his  command  to  California.
Most  of  the  civil  officers  that  were  commissioned
about  the  same  time  with  Col.  Steptoe  arrived  in
Utah  a  few  months  after  he  had  departed,  and
were  harassed  and  terrified  like  their  predecessors.
In  February,  1856,  a  mob  of  armed  Mormons,  in-
stigated by  sermons  from  the  heads  of  the  church,
broke  into  the  court-room  of  the  U.  S.  district


646


YOUNG


YOUNG


judge  and  compelled  him  to  adjourn  his  court.
Soon  afterward  all  the  U.  S.  officers,  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  Indian  agent,  were  forced  to  flee
from  the  territory.  These  and  other  outrages  de-
termined President  Buchanan  to  supersede  Brig-
ham  Young  in  the  office  of  governor,  and  to  send
to  Utah  a  military  force  to  protect  the  Federal  offi-
cers. (See  Gumming,  Alfred,  and  Johnston,  Al-
bert Sidney.)  The  affair  terminated  with  the  ac-
ceptance of  a  pardon  by  the  Mormons,  who  on
their  part  promised  to  submit  to  the  Federal  au-
thority. Throughout  his  life  Young  encouraged
agriculture  and  manufactures,  the  opening  of
roads  and  the  construction  of  bridges  and  public
edifices,  and  pursued  a  conciliatory  policy  with  the
Indians.  He  successfully  completed  a  contract  to
grade  more  than  100  miles  of  the  Union  Pacific
railroad,  was  the  prime  mover  in  the  construction
of  the  Utah  Central  railroad,  aided  in  building  the
Utah  Northern  and  Utah  Western  narrow-gauge
roads,  introduced  and  fostered  co-operation  in  all
branches  of  business,  and  extended  telegraph-
wires  to  most  of  the  towns  of  Utah.  Young  took
to  himself  a  large  number  of  wives,  most  of  whom
resided  in  a  building  that  was  known  as  the  "  Lion
house,"  from  a  huge  lion  carved  in  stone  that
stands  upon  the  portico.  In  1871  he  was  indicted
for  polygamy  but  not  convicted.  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  left  seventeen  wives,  sixteen  sons,  and
twenty-eight  daughters,  and  had  been  the  father
of  fifty-six  children.  Besides  his  office  of  presi-
dent of  the  church,  Young  was  grand  archer  of
the  order  of  Danites,  a  secret  organization  within
the  church,  which  was  one  of  the  chief  sources  of
his  absolute  power,  and  whose  members,  it  is
claimed,  committed  many  murders  and  other  out-
rages by  his  orders.  By  organizing  and  directing
the  trade  and  industry  of  the  community,  he  accu-
mulated great  wealth.  His  funeral  was  celebrated
with  impressive  ceremonies,  in  which  more  than
30,000  persons  participated.  See  "  The  Mormons,"
by  Charles  Mackay  (London,  1851) ;  "  The  Mor-
mons, or  Latter- Day  Saints,  in  the  Valley  of  the
Great  Salt  Lake,"  by  Lieut.  John  W.  Gunnison
(Philadelphia,  1852) ;  "  Utah  and  the  Mormons,"  by
Benjamin  G.  Ferris  (New  York,  1856) ;  "  Mormon-
ism  :  its  Leaders  and  Designs,"  by  John  Hyde,  Jr.,
formerly  a  Mormon  elder  (New  York,  1857) ;  "  New
America,"  by  William  Hepworth  Dixon  (London,
1867) ;  "  The  Rocky  Mountain  Saints,"  bv  Thomas
B.  H.  Stenhouse  (New  York,  1873);  "History  of
Salt  Lake  City  "  (Salt  Lake  City,  1887) ;  and  "  Early
Davs  of  Mormonism,"  by  James  Harrison  Ken-
nedy (New  York,  1888).

YOUNG,  Charles  Augustus,  astronomer,  b.  in
Hanover,  N.  H.,  15  Dec,  1834  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1853,  and  then  taught  classics  at
Phillips  Andover  academy  for  three  years,  during
one  year  of  which  he  studied  at  the  theological
seminary.  In  1856  he  was  called  to  fill  the  chair
of  mathematics,  natural  philosophy,  and  astronomy
at  Western  reserve  college,  Ohio.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  captain  of  a  company  in  the  85th  Ohio
volunteers  for  three  months  in  1862.  He  was
chosen  professor  of  natural  philosophy  and  as-
tronomy at  Dartmouth  in  1865,  which  post  had
been  held  by  his  father,  Ira  Young,  in  1838-'58,
and  remained  there  until  1877,  when  he  accepted
the  chair  of  astronomy  at  Princeton.  Prof.  Young
was  a  member  of  the  astronomical  party  that  was
sent  to  observe  the  total  solar  eclipse  of  7  Aug.,
1869,  at  Burlington,  Iowa.,  and  was  given  charge
of  the  spectroscopic  observations  of  the  party.  On
this  occasion  he  discovered  the  green  line  of  the
coronal  spectrum,  and  identified  it  with  the  line


1,474  of  the  solar  spectrum.  He  was  also  a  mem-
ber of  the  expedition  under  Prof.  Joseph  Winlock
to  observe  the  eclipse  of  1870,  at  Jerez,  Spain,
and  then  discovered  that  the  so-called  "  reversing
layer  "  of  the  solar  atmosphere  produces  a  bright-
line  spectrum  correlative  to  the  ordinary  dark-line
spectrum  of  sunlight.  In  August,  1872,  he  was
stationed  at  Sherman,  Wyoming,  to  make  solar
spectroscopic  observations.  He  went  to  Pekin  as
assistant  astronomer  under  Prof.  James  C.  Watson
to  observe  the  transit  of  Venus  on  8  Dec,  1874,
and  in  1878  he  had  charge  of  the  astronomical  ex-
pedition that  was  organized  by  Princeton  to  ob-
serve the  eclipse  of  29  July  of  that  year.  He  de-
vised a  form  of  automatic  spectroscope,  which  has
been  very  generally  adopted,  and  has  made  a  great
number  of  new  observations  on  solar  prominences.
He  has  also  verified  experimentally  what  is  known
as  Doppler's  principle  as  applied  to  light,  showing
that  the  lines  of  the  spectrum  are  slightly  shifted
to  one  direction  or  the  other  according  as  the  source
of  light  is  moving  toward  the  earth  or  away  from
it.  By  this  means  he  has  been  enabled  to  measure
the  velocity  of  the  sun's  rotation.  Prof.  Young  has
given  popular  lectures  at  the  Peabody  institute  in
Baltimore  and  the  Lowell  institute  in  Boston,  and
courses  at  Wrilliams  college,  and  elsewhere.  The
degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  given  him  by  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1870,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by
Wesleyan  university  in  1876.  He  was  elected  an
associate  fellow  of  the  American  academy  of  arts
and  sciences  in  1871,  and  in  1872  a  foreign  associate
of  the  Royal  astronomical  society  of  Great  Britain.
In  1872  he  was  chosen  to  the  National  academy  of
sciences,  and  in  1876  served  as  vice-president  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, of  which  organization  he  was  president  in
1883.  Besides  large  contributions  to  astronomical
journals,  scientific  addresses,  and  magazine  articles,
he  has  published  "  The  Sun,"  in  the  "  International
Scientific  Series  "  (New  York,  1882),  and  "  A  Text-
Book  of  General  Astronomy  "  (Boston,  1888).

YOUNG,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Alleghany
county,  Pa.,  19  March,  1776;  d.  in  Harrisburg,
Ohio,  15  Sept.,  1859.  He  emigrated  to  Ohio,  was
converted  to  Methodism  by  Bishop  William  Mc-
Kendree,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1801,  and  con-
tinued in  the  active  ministry  at  various  places  till
1856.  He  published  "Autobiography  of  a  Pio-
neer "  (Cincinnati,  1857).

YOUNG,  George  Paxton,  Canadian  educator,
b.  in  Berwick-on-Tweed,  28  Nov.,  1818.  He  was
ordained  as  a  minister  of  the  Free  Church  of  Scot-
land, and  removed  to  Canada  in  1848.  The  same
year  he  was  installed  as  pastor  of  Knox  church,
Hamilton,  and  in  1851  he  became  professor  of
mental  and  moral  philosophy  in  Knox  college,  To-
ronto, which  post  he  resigned,  together  with  his
office  in  the  ministry,  in  1861.  In  1865  he  was  ap-
pointed inspector  of  grammar-schools  for  Upper
Canada,  and  in  1871  he  became  professor  of  meta-
physics and  ethics  in  University  college,  Toronto.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1882,  and
is  the  author  of  "  Miscellaneous  Discourses  and
Expositions  of  Scripture  "  (Edinburgh,  1854),  and
also  of  "The  Philosophical  Principles  of  Natu-
ral Religion  "  (1862).

YOUNG,  James,  Canadian  member  of  parlia-
ment, b.  in  Gait,  Ont.,  24  May,  1835.  He  was  edu-
cated in  his  native  place,  and  owned  and  edited
the  "Dumfries  Reformer"  from  1853  till  1863.
Mr.  Young  was  elected  to  represent  South  Water-
loo in  the  Dominion  parliament  in  1867,  and  re-
elected by  acclamation  in  1872  and  1874,  but  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  same  constitu-


YOUNG


YOUNG


647


ency  in  1878.  He  was  elected  to  the  Ontario  legis-
lature for  North  Hastings  in  1879,  re-elected  by
acclamation  in  1883,  and  on  2  June,  1882,  became
provincial  treasurer,  which  post  he  resigned  on  29
Oct.,  in  consequence  of  feeble  health,  but  continued
to  represent  Riding  till  December,  1886,  when  he
declined  a  renomination.  In  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment he  secured  the  abolition  of  the  office  of  queen's
printer,  in  1873  submitted  a  bill  in  favor  of  the
ballot,  proposed  a  committee  and  report  in  1874,
which  resulted  in  the  publication  of  the  "  Hansard,"
containing  the  house  of  commons  debates,  and  was
the  author  of  other  important  measures.  He  was
elected  president  of  the  Reform  association  of  On-
tario in  1878,  has  been  president  of  the  Sabbath-
school  association  of  that  province,  a  member  of
the  Agriculture  and  arts  association  of  Ontario,
and  is  connected  with  various  industrial  and  finan-
cial associations.  He  has  published  two  prize  essays
— "The  Agricultural  Resources  of  Canada"  (1857)
and  "The  Reciprocity  Treaty"  (1865)— "  Reminis-
cences of  the  Early  History  of  Gait  and  the  Settle-
ment of  Dumfries "  (1880),  and  "  The  National
Future  of  Canada  "  (1887).  a  collected  series  of  let-
ters published  originally  in  the  Toronto  "  Globe,"
and  in  opposition  to  a  commercial  union  with  the
United  States  and  to  imperial  federation.

YOUNG,  John,  governor  of  Hawaii,  b.  in  Mas-
sachusetts about  1755;  d.  in  Honolulu,  Hawaii,  in
1835.  He  shipped  about  1789  as  boatswain  of  the
"  Eleanor,"  which  called  at  Hawaii  a  year  later.
In  revenge  for  the  murder  of  a  sailor,  the  captain
killed  about  100  natives  with  grapeshot,  and  sailed
away,  accidentally  leaving  Young  on  shore.  The
latter  was  doomed  to  death,  but  was  saved  through
the  intercession  of  the  king's  niece,  Kaoanaeha,
who  had  fallen  in  love  with  him.  They  were  soon
afterward  married,  and  King  Kamehameha  made
him  his  chief  counsellor,  benefited  by  his  instruc-
tions in  establishing  his  empire  over  all  the  islands,
and  appointed  him  governor  of  the  island  of  Ha-
waii. Young  was  the  grandfather  of  Queen  Emma
Kaleleonalani. (See  Kalakaua.)

YOUNG,  John,  agricultural  writer,  b.  in  Fal-
kirk, Scotland,  in  September,  1773;  d.  in  Halifax,
Nova  Scotia,  6  Oct.,  1837.  He  was  educated  in
Glasgow,  became  a  merchant,  emigrated  to  Nova
Scotia  in  1814,  and  was  the  representative  of  Syd-
ney in  the  provincial  assembly  from  1825  till  his
death.  He  also  filled  the  office  of  secretary  of  the
Nova  Scotia  board  of  agriculture,  having  awakened
a  wide-spread  interest  in  agricultural  economy  by
a  series  of  letters  that  were  published  under  the
signature  of  "  Agricola  "  in  the  Halifax  "  Recorder  "
in  1818,  and  taken  an  active  part  in  the  formation
of  agricultural  societies,  to  which  the  first  impetus
was  given  by  his  letters,  which  were  published  in
book-form  under  the  title  of  "  Letters  of  Agricola
on  the  Principles  of  Vegetation  and  Tillage"  (Hali-
fax, 1822).  He  also  prepared  a  "Report  of  the
Proceedings  of  the  Agricultural  Society  of  Hali-
fax "  (Halifax,  1823-'4).— His  son,  George  R.,  au-
thor, b.  in  Scotland ;  d.  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,  was  a
member  of  parliament,  and  the  author  of  several
important  works,  the  chief  of  which  was  a  sketch
of  "  Colonial  Literature,  Science,  and  Education  "
He  was  also  the  founder  of  the  "  Nova  Scotian,"
a  paper  which  in  after  years,  under  the  editor-
ship of  Joseph  Howe,  exerted  wide  influence.
He  also  published  "  Letters  to  E.  G.  S.  Stanley,
M.  P.,  upon  the  Existing  Treaties  with  France
and  America  as  regards  their  Rights  of  Fishery "
(London,  1834),  and  "  History,  Principles,  and
Prospects  of  the  Bank  of  British  North  America
and  of  the  Colonial  Bank  "  (1838). — Another  son,


Sir  William,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Falkirk,  Stir-
lingshire, Scotland,  29  July,  1799 ;  d.  in  Halifax,
Nova  Scotia,  8  May,  1887,  was  educated  at  Glas-
gow university,  went  to  Nova  Scotia  with  his  fam-
ily in  1814,  and  aided  his  father  in  business  until
1820,  when  he  entered  a  law-office.  In  1826  he
was  admitted  a  barrister,  and  in  1843  he  became
queen's  counsel.  He  entered  into  partnership  with
his  brothers,  and  in  1832  was  elected  to  the  Prince
Edward  island  house  of  assembly.  Later,  when
the  island  was  divided,  he  sat  for  Inverness  from
1837  till  1859.  In  1838  Mr.  Young  was  sent  as  one
of  a  delegation  to  Quebec  to  meet  Lord  Durham
to  discuss  matters  affecting  the  prosperity  of  the
province.  During  the  session  of  1839  Mr.  Young
was  appointed  a  delegate  to  represent  to  the  impe-
rial government  the  views  of  Nova  Scotia  regard-
ing certain  reforms,  which  were  accomplished.  In
1840  he  was  active  in  the  demonstrations  against
Sir  Colin  Campbell,  then  lieutenant-governor  of
Nova  Scotia,  which  resulted  in  his  recall,  and  he
was  equally  hostile  to  his  successor,  the  Viscount
Falkland.  In  1843  Young  was  elected  speaker  of
the  house  of  assembly  by  a  majority  of  two  votes.
On  8  Feb.,  1844,  the  new  house  met,  when  Young,
who  had  been  elevated  to  a  seat  in  the  executive
council,  but  had  resigned  on  his  appointment  to
the  speakership,  was  re-elected  speaker.  In  1847
Sir  John  Harvey,  who  succeeded  Lord  Falkland,
proposed  a  coalition ;  but  Young  opposed  the  sug-
gestion with  his  accustomed  vigor.  A  new  elec-
tion was  determined  upon,  in  which  the  reformers
were  victors,  and  Young  was  a  third  time  elected
speaker.  In  the  session  of  1850  he  was  appointed
on  a  commission  to  consolidate  and  simplify  the
laws.  This  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  time  that
an  attempt  of  the  sort  was  ever  made  in  a  British
colony.  In  1854  Mr.  Young  assumed  the  office  of
attorney-general,  and  formed  a  ministry,  that  was
defeated  shortly  afterward,  but  in  1860  Mr.  Young
and  his  party  again  assumed  control  of  affairs.
He  became  premier  and  president  of  the  council,
and  on  the  death  of  Chief- Justice  Sir  Brenton  Hali-
burton  in  the  same  year,  was  appointed  to  that
post.  Soon  afterward  he  was  created  judge  of  the
vice-admiralty,  an  imperial  appointment,  and  in
1868  he  was  knighted  by  the  queen.  For  many
years  Sir  William  he  was  a  member  of  the  board
of  governors  of  Dalhousie  university,  Halifax,  and
chairman  of  that  body.  He  declined  the  lieu-
tenant-governorship of  Nova  Scotia.  On  4  May,
1881,  he  resigned  his  seat  on  the  bench,  and  at
his  death  he  left  the  greater  part  of  his  wealth  to
charitable  and  educational  institutions. — Another
son,  Charles,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scot-
land, 30  April,  1812,  studied  in  Dalhousie  col-
lege, Halifax,  where  he  took  honors,  and  entered
the  law-office  of  his  brothers,  George  and  Will-
iam. In  1838  he  was  called  to  the  bars  of  Nova
Scotia  and  of  Prince  Edward  island,  and,  form-
ing a  copartnership  with  his  brothers,  practised
for  several  years.  On  23  Nov.,  1847,  he  was  the
first  barrister  in  Prince  Edward  island  to  be  ap-
pointed queen's  counsel.  At  the  age  of  twenty-
eight  he  entered  the  island  house  of  assembly,  and
was  soon  transferred  to  the  legislative  council,
where  he  sat  for  twenty-three  years,  during  ten  of
which  he  was  its  president.  In  1851-'2  and  1858-'9
he  was  attorney-general,  and  he  was  also  adminis-
trator of  the  government  of  Prince  Edward  island
for  four  years.  Like  his  brother  William,  he  was
a  warm  supporter  of  the  policy  of  responsible  gov-
ernment, and  he  was  the  first  public  man  in  the
island  to  espouse  that  principle.  In  1852  he  re-
ceived his  appointment  as  judge  of  probate,  and


648


YOUNG


YOUNG


sixteen  years  later  he  became  judge  in  bankruptcy.
In  March,  1875,  he  retired  from  the  latter  post.
As  a  barrister  he  had  a  very  large  and  lucrative
practice,  hardly  a  case  of  importance  occurring  in
which  he  was  not  retained.  In  tenantry  cases  he
was  almost  invariably  retained  by  the  tenants,  and
the  peculiar  land  laws  of  the  island  found  always
in  him  a  ready  and  logical  interpreter.  He  fre-
quently delivered  public  lectures,  and  the  Mechan-
ics' institute  of  Charlottetown  owes  to  him  its
foundation.  Since  1845  he  has  been  a  warm  tem-
perance advocate,  and  he  has  been  a  local  preacher
of  the  Methodist  church  for  many  years.  In  1858
the  queen  offered  him  the  dignity  of  knighthood,
which  he  declined.

YOUNG,  John,  governor  of  New  York,  b.  in
Chelsea,  Vt..  12  June,  1802 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
23  April,  1852.  He  was  taken  in  early  life  to  Cone-
sus,  Livingston  co.,  N.  Y.,  received  a  common-
school  education,  taught  himself  the  classics,  was
a  teacher  for  several  years,  studied  law  in  Geneseo,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1827.  and  attained  a
high  reputation,  especially  as  a  jury  lawyer.  Ear-
ly in  life  he  engaged  in  politics,  supporting  An-
drew Jackson  in  1828,  and  in  the  following  year
attaching  himself  to  the  anti-Masonic  party,  by
which  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1832.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig  in  1836,  and
served  from  4  Dec.  of  that  year  till  3  March,  1837.
He  declined  a  re-election  for  the  following  term,
but  was  again  put  in  nomination  in  1840,  and  was
elected,  took  his  seat  when  congress  was  called  to-
gether in  extra  session  on  31  May,  1841,  and  served
till  3  March,  1843.  He  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature in  1844,  became  leader  of  the  Whigs,  and
carried  through  the  bill  for  a  constitutional  con-
vention, with  the  aid  of  the  Hunker  or  Radical
Democratic  vote.  He  was  re-elected  in  1845,  ac-
quired great  popularity  as  the  champion  of  the
anti-renters,  received  the  Whig  nomination  for
governor  in  1846,  and  was  elected.  He  condemned
the  Mexican  war  in  his  messages,  and  sanctioned
resolutions  of  the  legislature  in  favor  of  excluding
slavery  from  the  territory  that  had  been  acquired
from  Mexico.  He  supported  Henry  Clay's  can-
didacy in  the  Whig  national  convention  of  1848.
In  July,  1849,  he  was  appointed  assistant  treasurer
of  the  United  States  in  New  York  city.

YOUNG,  Sir  John,  Baron  Lisgar,  governor-gen-
eral of  Canada,  b.  in  the  presidency  of  Bombay,  Brit-
ish India,  3i  Aug.,
1807;  d.  in  Ire-
land, 6  Oct.,  1876.
His  father,  Sir
William  Young,
bart.,  was  a  direc-
tor of  the  East  In-
dia company.  In
his  childhood  the
son  left  India  for
England,  and  he
was  graduated  at
Oxford  in  1829.
He  studied  law,
and  in  1834  was
called  to  the  bar.
He  sat  in  the  house
of  commons  as  a
conservative  from
1831  till  1855,  from
1841  till  1844  was  a
lord  of  the  treasury,  and  during  the  next  two  years
secretary  of  the  treasury.  From  1852  till  1855,  dur-
ing the  premiership  of  the  Earl  of  Aberdeen,  Sir
John  Young  was  sent  to  Ireland  as  chief  secretary.


~S%r?^*  l/&-z*^t^y


In  1855  he  was  transferred  to  the  Ionian  islands  as
lord  high  commissioner.  On  the  death  of  his  fa-
ther in  1848  he  had  succeeded  to  the  baronetcy,  and
for  his  services  in  connection  with  the  Ionian  isl-
ands mission  he  was  decorated  by  the  queen  with
the  grand  cross  of  the  order  of  St.  Michael  and  St.
George.  In  1860  he  was  sent  to  New  South  Wales
as  governor.  His  administration  of  that  colony
lasted  nearly  seven  years,  when  he  returned  to
England,  and  in  1868  received  the  appointment  of
governor-general  of  Canada,  and  governor  and
commander-in-chief  of  Prince  Edward  island,
which  had  not  then  entered  the  union,  in  suc-
cession to  Viscount  Monck.  He  arrived  in  No-
vember, and  was  sworn  as  governor-general  on  29
Dec.  He  remained  in  office  until  June,  1872,  when
he  was  succeeded  by  the  Earl  of  Dufferin.  In
1870  his  long  public  services  were  rewarded  with
a  peerage,  when  he  took  the  title  of  Baron  Lisgar,
and  in  the  year  following  he  was  constituted  lord
lieutenant  and  custos  rotuhrum  of  the  county  of
Cavan.  As  governor  -  general  of  Canada,  Lord
Lisgar  proved  a  capable  and  dignified  ruler.  He
was  not  a  man  given  to  much  social  display,  but
he  was  a  constitutional  student  and  a  hard-work-
ing official.  He  had  been  trained  in  a  severe
school,  and  during  his  career  in  the  Dominion
he  had  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  his  talent
and  knowledge  of  public  affairs.  While  govern-
or he  had  to  deal  with  the  Red  river  rebellion,
Louis  Riel's  first  insurrection  in  the  northwest;
the  Washington  treaty  was  signed,  Nova  Scotia
secured  "  better  terms,  Manitoba  and  British  Co-
lumbia joined  in  the  confederation,  and  the  terms
for  building  the  Canadian  Pacific  railway  were
agreed  upon.  He  was  in  feeble  health  most  of  the
time  that  he  was  in  Canada,  but  he  contrived  to  do
his  duty  in  an  exceptionably  able  manner,  and  he
won  many  friends.  At  the  close  of  his  term  he
retired  to  his  estates  in  Ireland,  and  passed  the  re-
mainder of  his  days  quietly.  The  title  expired
with  him,  and,  as  he  had  no  children,  the  estate
passed  to  his  nephew,  the  present  baronet,  Sir
William  Muston  Need  Young.

YOUNG,  John,  Canadian  member  of  parlia-
ment, b.  in  Ayr,  Scotland.  4  March,  1811 ;  d.  in
Montreal,  Canada,  12  April,  1878.  He  emigrated
to  Canada  in  1826,  became  a  clerk  in  the  estab-
lishment of  John  Torrance  at  Montreal,  and  in
1835  he  entered  into  partnership  with  David  Tor-
rance at  Quebec.  During  the  rebellion  of  1837  he
served  as  a  captain  of  volunteers.  Mr.  Young  re-
turned to  Montreal  in  1840  and  joined  Harrison
Stephens  in  business.  In  1845  he  was  one  of  the
originators  of  the  project  for  the  construction  of
the  railway  to  Portland,  Me.,  and  he  also  advo-
cated the  construction  of  a  railway  from  Montreal
to  the  west  and  became  president  of  the  projected
line.  About  the  same  time  he  suggested  and  ad-
vocated the  necessity  of  a  bridge  across  the  St.
Lawrence  at  Montreal,  and  advanced  the  funds  for
the  survey,  the  route  being  adopted  for  the  Vic-
toria bridge.  In  1851  Mr.  Young  was  appointed
commissioner  of  public  works  in  the  Hincks-
Morin  cabinet,  was  elected  to  represent  the  city  of
Montreal,  and  continued  its  representative  till  his
health  compelled  him  to  retire  in  1857.  In  1851
he  resigned  the  commissionership  of  public  works
in  consequence  of  the  determination  of  the  gov-
ernment to  charge  differential  tolls  on  American
vessels  passing  through  Welland  canal.  He  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  Montreal,  west,  in
1863,  was  elected  in  1872,  and  retired  in  1874.

YOUNG,  John  Clarke,  educator,  b.  in  Green-
castle,  Pa.,  12  Aug.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Danville,  Ky.,  23


YOUNG


YOUNG


649


June,  1857.  He  was  the  son  of  an  eminent  clergy-
man of  the  Associate  Reformed  church,  studied  at
Columbia  for  three  years,  then  went  to  Dickinson
college,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1823,  spent  two
years  at  Princeton  seminary,  and,  while  acting  as
a  tutor  in  Princeton  college  during  the  next  two
years,  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  New  York
presbytery  on  7  March,  1827.  He  was  installed  as
pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in  Louisville,  Ky.,
in  1828,  and  two  years  later  was  chosen  president
of  Centre  college,  which  office  he  filled  until  his
death,  officiating  also  after  1834  as  pastor  of  a
Presbyterian  church  in  Danville.  In  a  contro-
versy with  the  Rev.  Samuel  Crothers  and  William
Steele  he  upheld  the  views  of  the  Kentucky  eman-
cipationists and  deprecated  the  aims  of  the  Abo-
litionists. He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Princeton  in  1839,  and  in  1853  was  moderator  of
the  general  assembly.  His  first  wife  was  a  niece
of  the  Rev.  Robert  J.  Breckinridge  and  his  second
a  daughter  of  John  J.  Crittenden.  His  publica-
tions include  a  "  Speech  before  the  Kentucky
Colonization  Society  (1832),  and  an  "  Addi-ess  to
the  Presbyterians  of  Kentucky,  proposing  a  Plan
for  the  Instruction  and  Emancipation  of  their
Slaves,"  which  he  prepared  in  1834  for  the  commit-
tee of  the  Kentucky  synod  that  had  passed  resolu-
tions in  favor  of  gradual  emancipation.  Of  the
address  100,000  copies  were  circulated.  It  elicited
the  strictures  of  the  Ohio  Abolitionists,  to  whom
Dr.  Young  replied  in  a  letter  entitled  "  The  Doc-
trine of  Immediate  Emancipation  Unsound,"  which
first  appeared  in  the  newspapers  in  1835.

YOUNG,  John  Freeman,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Pittston,  Kennebec  co.,  Me.,  30  Oct.,  1820;  d.  in  New
York  city,  15  Nov.,  1885.  He  began  a  scientific
course  at  Wesleyan  university  in  1841,  but  left
that  institution  during  freshman  year.  He  then
became  a  student  in  the  Virginia  theological  semi-
nary at  Alexandria,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1845.  He  was  at  once  ordained  to  the  ministry  of
the  ProtestantEpiscopal  church,  and  preached  suc-
cessively in  Florida,  Texas,  Mississippi,  and  Louisi-
ana. In  1860-'7  he  was  assistant  minister  of  Trin-
ity church,  New  York.  Having  been  elected  the
second  bishop  of  Florida,  he  was  consecrated,  25
July,  1867,  and  held  the  office  until  the  time  of  his
death.  He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from
Columbia  college  in  1865.  Bishop  Young  has  pub-
lished in  pamphlet-form  a  series  of  twenty-five
hymns  in  the  Spanish  language,  with  tunes,  also
"  Great  Hymns  of  the  Church  "  (New  York,  1887).
*  YOUNG,  John  Russell,  journalist,  b.  in  Dow-
ington,  Chester  co..  Pa.,  20  Nov.,  1841.  He  re-
ceived his  education  in  the  public  schools  of  Phila-
delphia and  the  New  Orleans  high-school.  He  en-
tered the  employment  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Press  "
in  1857  as  copy-boy,  and  was  promoted  to  other
duties  till  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was
sent  to  Virginia  as  war-correspondent.  He  re-
mained with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from  the
battle  of  Bull  Run  till  the  end  of  the  Chickahom-
iny  campaign.  In  1864  he  accompanied  Gen.  Na-
thaniel P.  Banks  on  his  Red  river  expedition,  after
which  he  returned  to  Philadelphia  to  assume  edi-
torial charge  of  the  "  Press."  He  resigned  in  1865
and  attempted  to  establish  a  new  paper  in  Phila-
delphia, which  he  called  the  "  Morning  Post,"  and
after  its  failure  began  the  publication  of  one  in
New  York  city  named  the  "  Standard,"  with  which
he  had  no  better  success.  He  then  connected  him-
self with  the  New  York  "Tribune,"  of  which  he
was  managing  editor  from  1866  till  1869.  Having
studied  law  for  the  prescribed  term,  he  obtained
admission  to  the  bar  in  1867. In  1871  he  went  to


Europe  as  a  correspondent  of  the  New  York  "  Her-
ald," and  was  engaged  in  collecting  news  in  Great
Britain  and  on  the  continent  till  1877,  when,  as
commissioner  of  the  "  Herald,"  he  accompanied
ex-President  Grant  around  the  world.  After  his
return  to  New  York  city  in  1879  he  resumed  his
place  on  the  editorial  staff.  On  15  March,  1882,
he  was  appointed  U.  S.  minister  to  China.  He
filled  that  post  until  the  accession  of  President
Cleveland,  and  then  returned  to  New  York  and  en-
gaged in  his  former  occupation.  He  has  published
"Around  the  World  with  General  Grant  "  (2  vols..
New  York,  1879).— His  brother,  James  Rankin,
journalist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  6  March,  1847,
enlisted  in  the  emergency  campaign  of  1863,  and
then  entered  the  volunteer  army  in  1864,  serving
until  the  close  of  the  war.  In  1866  he  became  con-
nected with  the  New  York  "Tribune,"  was  its
Washington  correspondent  until  1871,  when  he  be-
came executive  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  senate,  which
place  he  has  since  held.  He  is  one  of  the  owners
of  the  Philadelphia  "  Evening  Star,"  to  which  he
has  contributed  the  "S.  M."  correspondence.

YOUNG,  Jonathan,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Ohio,
27  Nov.,  1825 ;  d.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  17  May,
1885.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  19
Oct.,  1841,  and  served  in  the  West  Indies,  where  he
participated  in  an  engagement  with  pirates  on  the
Isle  of  Pines  off  the  south  coast  of  Cuba,  and
captured  a  slaver  with  500  slaves  on  board.  He
cruised  in  the  ship-of-the-line  "  Columbus  "  around
the  world,  1845-'8,  and  at  Yeddo,  Japan,  succeeded
in  forcibly  delivering  a  letter  to  the  Japanese  gov-
ernment. He  became  a  passed  midshipman,  10
Aug.,  1847,  was  commissioned  a  master,  14  Sept.,
1855,  and  a  lieutenant  the  next  day,  while  on  a
cruise  in  the  steamer  "  Massachusetts,"  of  the  Pa-
cific station.  In  this  cruise  he  participated  in
engagements  with  Indians  in  Puget  sound.  He
commanded  the  steamer  "  Western  port "  in  the
Paraguay  expedition  of  1859,  and  when  the  civil
war  began  was  serving  in  the  steamer  "Susque-
hanna "  in  the  Mediterranean,  in  which  he  returned,
6  June,  1861,  and  participated  in  the  capture  of
the  forts  at  Hatteras  inlet,  28  Aug.,  1861,  and  of
Port  Royal,  S.  C,  7  Nov.,  1861.  He  was  executive
in  the  steamer  "  Powhatan  "  in  chase  of  the  Con-
federate privateer  "  Sumter  "  to  Brazil  and  Gibral-
tar in  1861-'2,  commanded  the  steamer  "Pembi-
na," of  the  Western  Gulf  squadron,  a  short  time  in
1863,  and  was  promoted  to  lieutenant-commander,
16  July,  1862,  and  to  commander,  25  July,  1866,
commanded  the  receiving  -  ship  at  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  1866-'7,  and  steamer  "  Mahaska,"  North  At-
lantic squadron,  1868-'9,  served  at  the  naval  ob-
servatory in  Washington,  1869,  and  navy -yard,
Portsouth,  1869-72.  Pie  was  chief  of  staff  on  the
flag-ship  "  Lancaster,"  of  the  Brazil  squadron,  in
1873,  was  commissioned  a  captain,  8  Nov.,  1873,
commanded  the  steamer  "Tennessee,"  of  the  Asiatic
squadron,  in  1876-8,  and  served  at  the  navy-yard,
Portsmouth,  in  1879-'81.  He  was  promoted  to  com-
modore, 19  June,  1882,  and  commanded  the  naval
station  at  New  London  in  1882-'5.

YOUNG,  Josne"  Marie,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  the
part  of  Acton  that  is  now  called  Shapleigh,  Me.,  29
Oct.,  1808;  d.  in  Erie,  Pa.,  18  Sept.,  1866.  His
father,  Jonathan,  a  graduate  of  Harvard,  was  a
Universalist  in  religion,  and  the  son  was  educated
in  the  Congregational  faith  by  a  maternal  uncle,
who  was  a  descendant  of  the  Rev.  Samuel  Moody.
He  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer  at  Portland  in
1823,  adopted  Universalist  views  for  a  time,  and
then  became  a  convert  to  Catholicism.  For  a  year
after  his  apprenticeship  he  edited  the "  Maine


650


YOUNG


YOUNG


for
He


his
of
or-

in


Democrat "  at  Saco,  and  then  emigrated  to  the
west,  working  at  his  trade  in  Kentucky  and  after-
ward in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  His  religious  zeal  and
his  talents  attracted  the  notice  of  Bishop  John  B.
Purcell,  who  sent  him  to  Mount  St.  Mary's  col-
lege, Emmitsburg,
to  prepare
the  ministry
adopted  a  new
middle  name  in
the  place  of
original  one
Moody,  was
dained  priest
1837,  and  labored
for  seven  years  as
a  missionary  in
the  west  and  af-
terward as  parish
priest  at  Lancas-
ter, Ohio.  When
the  diocese  of  Erie
was  formed  in  1853
-.— ■ /—-/"*- ^  I \-,  *  „  />  by  the  division  of
/  /  . Ah  . J  £h^tsi  the  former  diocese

of  Pittsburg,  he
was  nominated  as  the  successor  of  Bishop  Michael
O'Connor,  who  was  translated  to  the  new  see  at  his
own  suggestion.  Dr.  Young,  however,  was  reluc-
tant to  take  the  place  of  the  older  bishop  at  Pitts-
burg, but  agreed  to  accept  an  appointment  as  bishop
of  Erie.  He  was  consecrated  on  23  April,  1854.
His  administration  of  the  diocese  was  distinguished
for  zeal  and  energy,  and  resulted  in  an  increase  of
churches  from  28  to  more  than  50,  and  of  clergy-
men from  14  to  51.  He  established  academies  and
schools,  orphan  asylums,  and  an  infirmary  and  hos-
pital, was  rigid  in  religious  exercises,  laborious  in
his  episcopal  visitations,  assiduous  in  preparing
young  men  for  the  spiritual  office,  and  active  in  the
promotion  of  temperance,  and  was  an  earnest
preacher,  attracting  many  Protestant  hearers.

YOUNG,  Loyal,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charlemont,
Mass.,  1  July,  1806.  He  was  graduated  at  Jeffer-
son college  in  1828,  and  at  the  Western  theological
seminary,  Alleghany  City,  Pa.,  in  1832,  was  licensed
to  preach  by  the  Ohio  presbytery  on  21  July  of
that  year,  and  installed  at  the  same  time  as  pastor
of  the  church  at  Butler,  Pa.  He  remained  in  this
relation  till  1868,  then  was  pastor  of  the  church  at
French  Creek,  W.  Va.,  for  eight  years,  and  for  five
years  had  charge  of  one  at  Parkersburg,  W.  Va.,
after  which  he  labored  as  a  missionary  for  four
years  in  Winfield,  W.  Va.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
given  him  by  Washington  college  in  1858.  He  has
been  a  trustee  of  Washington  college  and  of  the
Western  theological  seminary.  Dr.  Young  is  the
author  of  "  Interviews  with  Inspired  Men  (Pitts-
burg, 1857);  "  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Eccle-
siastes"  (Philadelphia,  1866);  "From  Dawn  to
Dusk,  a  Pastor's  Panorama"  (Claremont,  N.  H.,
1884) ;  and  "  Ecce  Diluvium,  or  Noah's  Account  of
the  Flood"  (Washington,  Pa.,  1887).

YOUNG,  Pierce  Manning  Butler,  soldier,  b.
in  Spartanburg,  S.  C,  15  Nov.,  1839.  He  was  taken
to  Georgia  when  he  was  a  year  old,  was  educated
at  the  military  institute  in  that  state,  began  the
study  of  law,  and  then  entered  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1857.  Within  two  months  of  the  time
for  graduation  he  resigned  on  account  of  the  se-
cession of  the  southern  states,  and  joined  the  Con-
federate army  as  a  2d  lieutenant.  He  was  suc-
cessively promoted  through  all  the  grades  of  the
service  to  that  of  major-general  on  12  Dec,  1864,
when  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a  cavalry


division.  He  resided  in  Cartersville,  Ga.,  after  the
war.  and  was  the  only  Democrat  who  was  elected
to  congress  when  representation  was  restored  un-
der the  reconstruction  acts,  taking  his  seat  on  25
July,  1868.  He  was  re-elected  for  the  three  suc-
ceeding terms,  serving  till  3  March,  1875.  Gen.
YToung  has  been  a  delegate  to  everv  National
Democratic  convention  since  1868.  Jn  1877  he
was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners  from  the
United  States  to  the  World's  fair  held  in  Paris.
He  was  appointed  consul-general  to  St.  Petersburg,
Russia,  in  1885,  but,  owing  to  the  severe  climate,
resigned  a  year  later,  and  has  since  resided  on  his
plantation  near  Atlanta,  Ga.

YOUNG,  Richard  Montgomery,  senator,  b.
in  Kentucky  in  1796;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
about  1852.  He  removed  to  Jonesboro',  111.,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  28  Sept.,  1817.  He  was  a
member  of  the  general  assembly  in  1820-'2,  became
judge  of  the  3d  judicial  district  of  Illinois,  19
July,  1825,  and  in  1828  was  presidential  elector  on
the  Democratic  ticket.  On  23  Jan.,  1829,  he  was
commissioned  judge  of  the  5th  circuit,  which  in-
cluded what  is  now  Cook  county.  In  1836  he  was
elected  U.  S.  senator,  and  in  1839  he  was  appointed
a  state  agent  to  negotiate  the  state  internal  im-
provement bonds,  and  went  to  Europe  for  that
purpose.  He  was  commissioned  associate  justice
of  the  supreme  court  on  4  Feb.,  1843,  and  held  the
post  till  he  resigned,  25  Jan.,  1847.  In  1847  he
was  appointed  commissioner  of  the  general  land
office,  and  in  1850-'l  he  was  clerk  of  the  house  of
representatives  at  Washington.

YOUNG,  Thomas  John,  clergyman,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  22  Oct.,  1803;  d.  there,  11  Oct.,
1852.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1823,  or-
dained priest  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church
in  1827,  was  pastor  of  the  united  parishes  of  St.
Luke  and  Prince  William  in  1828-'36,  of  St  John's
chui-ch,  John's  island,  in  1836-'47,  and  assistant
rector  of  St.  Michael's  church,  Charleston,  from
1847  till  his  death.  In  the  diocesan  convention  of
1838  he  was  elected  a  delegate  to  the  general  con-
vention at  Philadelphia,  and  he  was  re-elected  till
1850,  when,  owing  to  impaired  health,  he  declined
to  serve  any  longer.  In  the  diocesan  convention
of  1841  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  committee  of
three  to  revise  the  constitution,  canons,  and  the
rules  of  order  of  the  church,  and  of  this  committee
he  was  the  one  selected  to  do  the  work.  He  was
one  of  the  originators  of  the  Church  home  in
Charleston,  and  delivered  the  address  at  its  open-
ing in  1851.  In  1849  ho  visited  Europe.  He  pub-
lished sermons  and  addresses.

YOUNG,  Thomas  Lowry,  soldier,  b.  in  Killy-
leagh,  Ireland,  14  Dec,  1832 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
20  July,  18S8.  He  came  to  this  country  at  an  early
age,  served  in  the  U.  S.  army  during  the  last  year  of
the  war  with  Mexico,  and  afterward  taught  in  Cin-
cinnati. He  entered  the  National  army  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war.  and  was  promoted  colonel,
but,  having  contracted  disease  in  the  Atlanta
campaign,  he  was  honorably  discharged  in  Sep-
tember, 1864,  and  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  13  March,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Cincinnati  law-school,  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1865.  the  same  year  was  appointed  assistant  city
auditor  of  Cincinnati,  and  was  elected  a  member
of  the  state  house  of  representatives  for  a  term  of
two  years.  He  was  elected  recorder  of  Hamilton
county  in  1867,  appointed  a  supervisor  of  internal
revenue  in  1868,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  National
Republican  convention  the  same  year.  He  was
elected  state  senator  in  1871,  lieutenant-governor
in  1875,  and  in  1877  became  governor  after  Ruther-


YOUNG


YULEE


651


ford  B.  Hayes  was  chosen  president.  He  served  in
congress  in  1878-'82,  and  in  188G  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  board  of  public  affairs  of  Cincin-
nati, which  office  he  held  at  his  death.

YOUNG,  William,  journalist,  b.  in  Deptford,
England,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  15  April,
1888.  His  father  was  an  admiral  in  the  royal
navy.  He  married  an  American  lady  in  1839,  and
came  to  this  country,  where,  from  1848  till  1867,
he  edited  in  New  York  city  "  The  Albion,"  a  paper
devoted  to  British  news  and  interests.  In  1868  he
established  "  Every  Afternoon,"  which  was  discon-
tinued in  four  weeks  with  heavy  loss.  He  then  re-
moved to  Paris,  where  he  afterward  resided.  Mr.
Young  published  "Two  Hundred  Lyrical  Poems
of  Beranger,  done  into  English  Verse  "  (New  York,
1850);  "Oarmina  Collegensia"  (1868);  "  Mathieu
Ropars,  etc.,  by  an  Ex-Editor"  (1868);  and  "The
Man  who  Laughs,"  from  the  French  of  Victor
Hugo  (1869).  He  also  wrote  the  letter-press  for  a
collection  of  photographs  entitled  "  Lights  and
Shades  of  New  York  Picture  Galleries"  (1863),  and
adapted  several  plays  from  the  French.

YOUNG.  William  Henry  Harrison  Hutchin-
son, journalist,  b.  in  Amherst,  Erie  co.,  N.  Y.,  4
May,  1819.  He  was  educated  at  Fredonia  acad-
emy, N.  Y.,  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised
in  Buffalo,  but  removed  to  the  south,  took  part
in  the  Texan  revolution  and  the  Mexican  war,
and  also  edited  the  Savannah  "  Georgian "  and
"  Young's  Spirit  of  the  South "  at  Nashville,
Tenn.,  and  Louisville,  Ky.  He  has  also  been  con-
nected editorially  with  several  papers  at  the  north,
including  the  "  Spirit  of  the  Times,"  the  "  Demo-
cratic Review,"  and  the  Cincinnati  "  Sunday  De-
spatch." He  married  a  wealthy  southern  lady,
and  together  they  aided  in  establishing  the  "  Kin-
ney Colony"  in  Nicaragua,  publishing  there  the
"  Central  American."  At  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  they  raised  and  equipped  at  their  own  expense
Young's  Kentucky  light  cavalry  (afterward  the  3d
Pennsylvania  cavalry),  which  was  the  first  cavalry
regiment  to  take  the  field,  and  of  which  Mr.
Young  became  colonel.  Since  the  war  Col.  Young
has  practised  law  in  Washington,  and  has  been  in-
terested in  establishing  a  colony  of  veteran  soldiers
in  Florida.  He  and  his  wife  also  founded  the  New
York  volunteer  institute,  a  school  in  which  they
educated  900  soldiers'  orphans  at  their  own  ex-
pense. Col.  Young  has  invented  and  patented  an
artificial  stone.

YSABEAU,  Alphonse  Paul  (ee-zah-bo),  French
naval  officer,  b.  in  Dunkirk  in  1811;  d.  in  Foil  de
France,  Martinique,  in  Decmber,  1848.  He  entered
the  navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1826,  was  promoted
ensign  in  1832  and  lieutenant  in  1837,  sailed  in  the
fleet  that  under  Admiral  De  Mackau  blockaded
Buenos  Ayres  in  1840-'3,  and  was  employed  in
hydrographic  service  in  the  river  Plate.  He  made
also  a  survey  of  the  lower  basin  of  the  Parana.
After  a  short  sojourn  in  France  he  was  attached
to  the  station  of  Martinique,  and  died  in  Fort  de
France  of  yellow  fever.  He  wrote  "  Rapport  sur
le  bassin  inferieur  du  Parana "  (Paris,  1845) ;
"  Journal  d'un  temoin  du  siege  de  Buenos  Ayres  "
(2  vols.,  1846);  and  "  Etudes  sur  les  revolutions  et  les
guerres  civiles  dans  l'Amerique  du  Sud  "  (3  vols.,
Fort  de  France,  1848).

YSAMBERT,  Gustave  (ee-zahm-bair),  French
naval  officer,  b.  in  Brittany  in  1667 ;  d.  in  Rio
Janeiro,  Brazil,  18  March,  1711.  After  command-
ing a  privateer  in  the  West  Indies  and  the  Pacific
ocean,  he  entered  the  royal  navy  about  1700,  with
the  rank  of  commander.  In  i710  he  sailed  as
chief-of-staff  of  Jean  Baptiste  Duclerc  in  the  lat-


ter's  expedition  to  Brazil.  On  6  Aug.  they  sighted
Rio  Janeiro,  which  they  could  have  then  carried
by  a  speedy  attack,  but,  Duclerc's  intention  being
opposed  by  Ysambert  and  the  council  of  war,  they
anchored  on  17  Aug.  at  a  point  near  Tejuco  and
landed  900  marines.  The  Portuguese  meanwhile
had  prepared  for  resistance,  and  when  the  French
arrived  at  Novo  Engenho  dos  Padres  da  Corn-
pan  hia,  six  miles  from  Rio  Janeiro,  they  met  a
Portuguese  division  which  they  defeated.  Failing
to  receive  co-operation  from  the  fleet,  which  had
been  dispersed  by  a  tempest,  they  were  attacked,  on
18  Sept.,  by  the  viceroy,  Francisco  de  Castro  Moraes,
with  superior  forces,  but  routed  him  and  followed
the  fugitives  into  the  city.  Being  received  there
by  a  cross-fire  from  fortified  buildings,  Ysam-
bert with  a  small  party  barricaded  himself  in  the
city-hall,  while  Duclerc  took  shelter  in  the  custom-
house. After  a  heavy  loss,  Duclerc  agreed  to  ca-
pitulate on  condition  that  his  forces  should  be  re-
turned to  France ;  but  Ysambert,  whose  position
was  stronger,  was  reluctant  to  trust  the  Portu-
guese, and  continued  resistance  till  he  received
peremptory  orders  from  Duclerc  to  comply  with
the  terms  of  the  capitulation.  The  leaders  were
well  treated,  but  a  few  days  later  the  French  fleet,
unaware  of  the  surrender,  made  an  attack  on  the
city.  The  viceroy  proclaimed  the  capitulation  vio-
lated, and  the  officers  were  thereafter  kept  in  close
confinement.  Duclerc  and  Ysambert  were  killed
by  the  guard  in  an  attempt  to  escape,  or  mur-
dered, according  to  other  historians,  on  18  March,
1711.  Their  death  was  avenged  a  few  months
later  by  Dugay-Trouin,  who  released  the  surviv-
ing French  prisoners.

YSAMBERT,  Jules  Henri  d',  French  ad-
ministrator, b.  in  Nancy,  Lorraine,  in  1739;  d.
there  in  1795.  He  entered  the  quartermaster's  de-
partment of  the  French,  army  and  came  to  this
country  in  1780  with  Count  de  Rochambeau,  serv-
ing afterward  in  Santo  Domingo  till  1792,  when
he  was  recalled  to  France,  and  afterward  impris-
oned during  the  reign  of  terror.  He  published
"  Memoire  sur  les  operations  des  intendants  pen-
dant^ la  campagne  de  M.  le  Comte  de  Rochambeau
aux  Etats-Unis  de  l'Amerique  en  1780-'82,"  written
in  answer  to  charges  of  dishonesty  and  fraud
against  the  quartermaster's  department  of  Rocham-
beau's  army  (Brest,  1785);  "Journal  d'un  temoin
de  la  guerre*  d'Amerique  "  (1786) ;  and  "  Le  dernier
boucanier,"  a  historical  novel,  containing  interest-
ing information  about  the  West  Indies  and  the
life  of  a  privateer  (Nancy,  1788).

YSOART,  Sigismond  (ee-zo-ar),  Flemish  au-
thor, b.  in  Ypres  in  1604;  d.  in  Amsterdam  in
1652.  He  was  a  mariner,  made  voyages  to  South
America  and  Cape  Horn,  and,  entering  the  service
of  the  West  Indian  company  in  1641,  was  em-
ployed for  several  years  in  Guiana,  and  com-
manded the  fleet  that  devastated  the  southern
coast  of  Brazil  in  1647.  In  1649  he  made  a  chart
of  the  Caribbean  sea  and  the  coast  of  Guiana,  and,
being  promoted  in  the  following  year  a  director
of  the  West  Indian  company,  settled  in  Amster-
dam, where  he  died.  He  wrote  a  narrative  of  his
expedition  entitled  "  Diarum  nauticum  itineris
Bavatorum  in  Indias  Occidentales"  (Amsterdam,
1650),  and  contributed  to  the  second  edition  of  the
"  Histoire  du  commencement  et  des  progres  de  la
compagnie  des  Indes  Occidentales  des  Provinces
Unies  des  Pays  Bas,  con  tenant  les  principaux  voy-
ages" (3  vols.,  Amsterdam,  1655-'6).

YULEE,  Bavid  Levy,  senator,  b.  in  the  West
Indies  in  1811 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10  Oct.,  1886.
His  father,  whose  name  was  Levy,  was  of  Hebrew


652


YUNG  WING


YVES  D'EVREUX


extraction.  The  son  removed  with  him  to  Vir-
ginia when  quite  young,  and  there  received  the
rudiments  of  a  classical  education.  In  1824  he
went  to  Florida,  studied  law,  and  engaged  in  plant-
ing. He  was  elected  a  delegate  to  congress  from
that  territory,  and  served  from  31  March,  1841,  till
3  March,  1845,  under  the  name  of  David  Levy,  but
afterward  changed  it  to  David  Levy  Yulee,  under
which  designation  he  was  subsequently  known.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention, was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator  from  Florida
as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  1  Dec,  1845,  till  3
March,  1851,  and  was  again  in  the  senate  from  3
Dec,  1855,  till  21  Jan.,  1861,  when  he  retired  to
join  the  southern  Confederacy.  During  the  civil
war  he  served  as  a  member  of  the  Confederate
congress,  and  at  its  termination  was  confined  as  a
prisoner  of  state  at  Fort  Pulaski  until  he  was  par-
doned. At  one  time  he  was  president  of  the  At-
lantic and  Gulf  railroad  in  Florida.  Mr.  Yulee
was  interested  in  the  development  of  Fernandina
and  Cedar  Keys,  and  was  one  of  the  corporators  of
the  railroad  between  those  two  places.

YUNG  WING,  diplomatist,  b. in Nan Ping,

Srovince  of  Kwang  Tung,  China,  17  Nov.,  1828.
\e  became  a  pupil  of  Samuel  R.  Brown,  D.  D.,
who  was  then  a  teacher  in  China  under  the  au-
spices of  the  Morrison  education  society,  and  ac-
companied Dr.  Brown  to  the  United  States  in
April,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1854,
and  was  engaged  in  the  tea  and  silk  business  until
1864,  when  he  entered  the  service  of  the  Chinese
government,  and  was  commissioned  to  purchase
machinery  in  the  United  States  for  what  is  now
the  Kiang  Nan  arsenal.  In  1870,  at  Tientsin,  he
submitted  four  propositions  to  the  high  commis-
sioners that  had  been  appointed  to  settle  the  affair
of  the  massacre  of  Christians  at  that  place.  The
first  was  the  transportation  of  the"  tribute  rice  in
steamers  by  sea,  freight  to  be  paid  by  the  gov-
ernment as  subsidy  to  a  Chinese  stock  company
to  create  a  fleet  of  ocean  and  river  steamers,
This  company  is  now  the  well-known  China  mer-
chant steam  navigation  company.  Secondly,  he
proposed  the  education  of  Chinese  youths  abroad,
to  facilitate  intercourse  with  foreigners,  and  devel-
op the  resources  of  the  empire.  The  third  pro-
posal was  the  opening  of  the  rivers  of  China,  and
the  fourth  to  terminate  the  pretensions  of  the
Roman  Catholic  church  in  her  claim  to  exercise
jurisdiction  over  native  proselytes.  The  first  and
second  propositions  were  carried  out  in  1872,  and
within  the  next  two  years  120  youth  were  sent  to
the  United  States  in  charge  of  commissioners,  one
of  whom  was  Yung  Wing,  who  was  made  a  man-
darin of  the  third  rank  by  brevet.  In  1874  he
went  to  Peru  to  investigate  the  affairs  of  the
Chinese  laborers  there.  In  1878  he  was  appointed
assistant  minister  resident  of  China  at  Washing-
ton, with  privilege  of  wearing  the  button  of  the
second  rank  by  brevet.  In  1881  the  Chinese  stu-
dents were  recalled,  and  the  educational  scheme
was  abandoned.  In  1882  he  returned  to  China,
and  was  appointed  expectant  intendant  of  Kiang
Su  province ;  but  on  account  of  the  health  of  his
wife  he  returned  to  Hartford,  Conn.  He  was  made
a  citizen  of  the  United  States  on  30  Oct.,  1852,  and
in  1875,  married  Miss  Mary  Kellogg,  of  Avon,  Conn.,
who  died  on  29  May,  1886.


TVER  DE  CHAZELLES,  Jean  Pierre  (ee-
vair),  French  navigator,  b.  in  St.  Aubin  du  Cor-
mier in  1709;  d.  there  in  1786.  In  1750  he  ob-
tained the  command  of  an  expedition  to  search
for  the  northwest  passage,  and,  after  visiting  Ice-
land, anchored  in  June  at  Vagna-f  jord,  on  the  coast
of  Greenland,  where  he  built  barracks.  He  under-
took an  expedition  to  the  interior,  and  discovered
a  chain  of  high  mountains,  which  were  seen  again
in  1869  by  the  Austrian  scientific  expedition  of
Karl  Koldewey.  Resuming  his  journey,  he  coasted
Greenland,  prepared  a  valuable  chart  of  all  its  in-
lets and  fjords,  and  anchored  at  Vorland  island,
81°  north  latitude.  He  was  the  first  navigator  to
reach  81°  30'  north  latitude,  where  he  was  impris-
oned by  icebergs  from  December,  1750,  till  March,
1751,  and  then  drifted  to  the  south,  visiting  Spitz-
bergen  on  the  homeward  journey.  He  related  the
results  of  his  expedition  in  "  Voyage  a  la  recherche
du  passage  du  Nord  -  Ouest "  (4  vols.,  Rennes,
1752-'3).  Yver  was  promoted  brigadier-general  of
the  naval  forces,  and  fought  with  credit  in  the
West  Indies,  twice  relieving  Tobago,  raising  the
blockade  of  Cape  Francais  in  Santo  Domingo,  and
defending  St.  Vincent  and  Grenada.  From  1764  till
1766  he  was  occupied  in  making  a  chart  of  the
Caribbean  sea,  and  in  1766-'8  he  visited  Mexico.
He  made  in  1769  an  expedition  to  the  coast  of
Patagonia  and  the  Strait  of  Lemaire,  and  retired
in  1772,  but  re-entered  active  service  when  France
joined  in  the  war  for  American  independence,  and
was  employed  in  the  West  Indies  and  the  Indian
and  Pacific  oceans.  Yver's  works  include  "  Atlas
de  la  mer  des  Antilles "  (Rennes,  1773) ;  "  In-
structions aux  navigateurs  sur  le  debouquement
de  Saint  Domingue  "  (1774) ;  "  De  Mexico  a  Aca-
pulco  dans  le  royaume  de  la  Nouvelle  Espagne,
avec  un  apercu  sur  l'etat  politique  et  la  condi-
tion sociale  des  lndiens  "  (2  vols.,  1778) :  and  "  His-
toire  de  la  marine  Francaise  au  dixseptieme  siecle  "
(4  vols.,  1784-"6).

YVES  D'EVREUX,  Pierre  (eev  -  day  -  vro),
French  missionary,  b.  in  Normandy  about  1570 ;
d.  in  Evreux  about  1630.  He  entered  the  Capuchin
order  and  was  prior  of  the  convent  at  Evreux  in
1611,  when  he  was  named  one  of  the  three  mis-
sionaries to  accompany  Claude  d'Abbeville  to
Brazil.  They  anchored  opposite  Marajo  island,  at
the  mouth  of  the  Amazon,  built  houses  and  a
chapel  on  the  island,  and  were  soon  on  friendly
terms  with  the  Indians.  Father  Claude  returned
to  France  in  1612,  and  Yves  led  an  expedition
through  the  interior  of  Brazil,  collecting  medicinal
plants  and  specimens  in  natural  history.  Early  in
1613  Razilly  sailed  for  La  Rochelle,  leaving  about
twenty  soldiers  to  guard  the  fort,  and  promised  re-
enforcements  and  supplies ;  but  they  never  came,
and  Father  Claude  freighted  a  schooner,  which
carried  the  settlers  and  missionaries  to  the  West
Indies.  Yves  wrote  an  account  of  his  voyage  to
Brazil  which  was  published  at  the  end  of  Claude
d'Abbeville's  narrative,  "  Histoire  de  la  mission  des
P.  P.  Capucins,  a  l'ile  de  Maragnon  et  terres  cir-
convoisines  "  (Paris,  1615),  and  was  reprinted  with
notes  and  an  introduction  by  Ferdinand  Denis,
from  the  only  known  copy,  which  is  preserved  in
the  national  library  at  Paris.  It  is  entitled  "  Voy-
age dans  le  nord  du  Brcsil,  fait  pendant  les  annees
1611  a  1614"  (Paris,  1864).


ZABRISKIE


ZALINSKI


653


ZABRISKIE,  Abraham  Oothout,  jurist,  b.  in
Greenbush  (now  East  Albany),  N.  Y.,  10  June,
1807 ;  d.  in  Truckee.  Cal.,  27  June,  1873.  He  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1825,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1828.  He  practised  for
two  years  in  Newark,  and  then  removed  to  Hack-
ensack,  N.  J.,  where  he  remained  till  1849.  He  was
reporter  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Jersey  from
1848  till  1856.  Removing  to  Jersey  City  from
Hackensack,  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,
and  took  an  important  part  in  framing  the  city
charter  of  1851  and  in  other  legislation.  He  be-
came chancellor  of  New  Jersey  in  1866,  and  died
while  he  was  on  a  journey  soon  after  the  comple-
tion of  his  term.

ZACHOS,  John  Celivergos  (zak'^os),  educator,
b.  in  Constantinople,  Turkey,  20  Dec.  1820.  He  is
of  Greek  parentage,  and  came  to  this  country  when
he  was  ten  years  old  with  Dr.  Samuel  G.  Howe.
He  was  graduated  at  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,  in  1840,
and  in  1842-'5  studied  at  the  medical  school  of
Miami  university,  but  did  not  take  his  degree.  He
was  associate  principal  in  Cooper  female  seminary,
Dayton.  Ohio,  in  1851-'4,  and  principal  of  the  grain-
mar-school  of  Antioch  college,  Yellow  Springs,
Ohio,  in  1855-'7.  During  the  civil  war  he  served
in  the  army  as  an  assistant  surgeon,  and  in  1865,
having  studied  theology  privately,  he  was  ordained
pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  in  West  Newton,
Mass.  In  1866-'7  he  was  pastor  at  Meadville.  Pa.,
and  professor  of  rhetoric  in  the  theological  school
in  that  place.  Since  1871  he  has  been  curator  of
the  Cooper  union,  New  York  city.  Dr.  Zachos  in-
vented and  patented  in  1876  the  stenotype,  for  print-
ing a  legible  text  from  the  English  alphabet  at  a
reporting  speed.  In  this  machine  the  types  are
fixed  on  eighteen  shuttle-bars,  two  or  more  of
which  may  be  simultaneously  placed  in  position,
and  the  impression  is  given  by  a  plunger  common
to  all  the  bars.  Improvements  were  patented  in
1883  and  1886.  He  edited  the  "  Ohio  Journal  of
Education  "  in  1852,  and  is  the  author  of  "  New
American  Speaker  "  (New  York,  1852) ;  "  Analyti-
cal Elocution  "  (1861) ;  "  New  System  of  Phonic
Reading  without  changing  the  Orthography,"  a
pamphlet  (Boston,  1863) :  and  a  "  Phonic  Primer
and  Reader  "  (1864).

ZAKRZEWSKA,  Maria  Elizabeth  (sakr-
zhev'-skah),  physician,  b.  in  Berlin,  Prussia,  6  Sept.,
1829.  She  is  of  Polish  descent.  After  studying
medicine  and  serving  as  an  assistant  and  afterward
as  a  teacher  in  the  college  in  which  she  had  stud-
ied, she  came  to  this  country  in  1853,  and  was
graduated  at  Cleveland  medical  college.  With
Elizabeth  and  Emily  Blackwell  she  established  the
New  York  infirmary,  which  she  superintended  two
years,  as  resident  physician  and  manager.  After
her  removal  to  Boston  in  1863  she  founded  the
New  England  hospital  for  women  and  children.

ZALDIVAR,  Rafael,  Central  American  states-
man, b.  about  1830.  He  studied  law,  taking  part
also  in  politics,  and  when  in  1876  the  government  of
Andres  Valle  was  defeated  by  the  Guatemalan  army
under  Gen.  Rufino  Barrios,  the  Salvador  junta  de
notables  assembled  in  accordance  with  the  capitu-
lation of  25  April,  and  nominated  Zaldivar  as  pro-
visional president,  and  in  May  he  was  elected  con-
stitutionally. His  administration  was  enlightened
and  progressive ;  he  fostered  the  planting  of  cacoa,
rubber-trees,  and  the  maguey  or  American  agave
for  the  fibre  industry,  and  founded  an  agricultural


college  and  a  model  experimental  farm.  In  1883
he  was  re-elected,  in  the  next  year  made  an  ex-
tended trip  through  the  United  States.  England,
France,  and  Spain,  and  on  his  return  held  an  in-
terview in  September,  1884,  with  the  presidents  of
Guatemala  and  Honduras  regarding  the  proposed
union  of  the  five  Central  American  republics.
When  Barrios  suddenly  issued,  on  18  Feb.,  1885,
his  famous  decree  proclaiming  himself  provisional
chief  of  the  restored  Central  American  union,  Zal-
divar seemed  to  accept  the  idea  enthusiastically,
and  nearly  forced  President  Bogran,  of  Honduras,
to  subscribe  to  it,  but  when  he  saw  the  opposition
in  his  own  country  and  the  formal  protest  of  the
governments  of  Nicaragua  and  Costa  Rica,  he
opened  negotiations  with  Mexico,  and  finally  con-
cluded a  secret  treaty  with  Costa  Rica  and  Nicara-
gua, in  the  mean  time  arming  apparently  to  assist
Barrios.  Finally,  when  the  latter  prepared  to  join
the  Salvador  army,  Zaldivar  threw  aside  the  mask
and  on  9  March  telegraphed  Barrios,  declaring
against  him,  and  advanced  his  army  of  nearly  10,-
000  men,  under  Gen.  Monterosa, toward  the  frontier.
After  the  indecisive  fight  of  Chalchualpa  on  30
March,  Monterosa  retreated  to  San  Lorenzo,  after
Barrios's  death  the  Guatemalan  congress  proposed
an  armistice,  and  on  14  April  peace  was  concluded.
On  the  21st  of  that  month  Zaldivar  proposed  to
the  provisional  president  of  Guatemala,  Barillas,  a
Central  American  union,  with  a  congress  of  dele-
gates from  the  five  republics  to  meet  on  15  May  at
Santa  Rosa ;  but  the  proposal  was  not  accepted,  and
he  delivered  the  executive  to  Gen.  Figueroa,  and  in
May  sailed  for  France,  where  he  has  since  lived.

ZALDIVAR  MENDOZA,  Vicente  (thal'-dee-
var),  Mexican  soldier,  b.  in  Zacatecas  in  1565 ;  d.
there  about  1625.  He  entered  the  military  ser-
vice, and  in  1600  went  with  his  uncle,  Juan  de
Onate,  as  second  commander  of  the  expedition  that
was  sent  by  the  viceroy.  Count  de  Monterey,  to  the
conquest  of  New  Mexico.  Although  they  pene-
trated to  37°  north  latitude,  and  established  there
a  fort  and  mission,  under  the  name  of  San  Gabriel,
affairs  were  mismanaged,  for  which  some  writers
blame  Onate  and  other's  Zaldivar,  and  the  station
was  abandoned  in  1604.  On  his  return,  Zaldivar
retired  from  military  service  and  settled  in  his  na-
tive city,  where  he  endowed  in  1616  a  Jesuit  col-
lege. He  wrote  '•  Relacion  dirigida  al  Rey,  Nues-
tro  Senor,  sobre  la  expedicion  y  pacificacion  del
Nuevo  Mexico,"  which  is  preserved  in  manuscript
in  the  archives  of  the  Indies,  and  is  to  be  published
in  the  government  collection.

ZALINSKI,  I'.d  in  ii ml  Louis  Gray,  soldier,  b.
in  Kurnick,  Prussian  Poland,  13  Dec,  1849.  He
came  to  the  United  States  in  1853,  attended  school
at  Seneca  Falls,  N.  Y.,  until  1861,  and  subsequent-
ly was  at  the  high-school  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  until
1863.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  entered  the  army,
serving  at  first  as  volunteer  aide-de-camp  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Nelson  A.  Miles  from  October,  1864,
till  February,  1865.  He  was  commissioned  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  2d  New  York  heavy  artillery  in  Feb-
ruary. 1865,  having  been  recommended  for  the
appointment  by  his  superior  officers  for  gallant
and  meritorious  conduct  at  the  battle  of  Hatcher's
Run,  Va.  After  being  commissioned  he  continued
on  Gen.  Miles's  staff  until  after  the  surrender  of
Gen.  Robert  E.  Lee,  participating  in  all  of  the  en-
gagements up  to  that  date.  He  was  mustered  out
of  the  volunteer  service  in  September,  1865,  and


654


ZAMBRANA


ZAMORA


recommended  for  an  appointment  in  the  regular
armv,  where  he  was  commissioned  a  2d  lieutenant
in  the  5th  U.  S.  artillery,  23  Feb.,  1866,  and  by  regu-
lar promotion  became  1st  lieutenant  in  January,
1867,  and  captain,  9  Dec,  1887.  From  1872  till
1876  he  was  on  duty  at  the  Massachusetts  institute
of  technology  as  professor  of  military  science.  He
was  graduated  at  the  Artillery  school.  Fort  Monroe,
Va.,  1  May,  1880,  and  at  the  school  of  submarine
mining,  Willet's  point,  N.  Y.,  in  July  of  the  same
year. Capt.  Zalinski's  name  is  widely  known  in


connection  with  the  development  of  the  pneumatic
dynamite  torpedo-gun.  (See  vignette.)  He  has  in-
vented the  electrical  fuse  and  other  devices  for  the
practical  application  of  the  weapon,  and  has  also
devised  a  method  for  the  exact  sight-allowance  to
be  made  for  deviation  due  to  wind  in  the  use  of
rifled  artillery  and  small-arms.  His  other  inven-
tions include  an  intrenching-tool,  a  ramrod-bayo-
net, and  a  telescopic  sight  for  artillery.

ZAMBRANA,  Ramon  (thahm-brah'-nah).  Cu-
ban physician,  b.  in  Havana  in  1817;  d.  there  in  1866.
He  studied  medicine  in  the  university  of  his  native
city,  where  he  was  graduated  as  licentiate  in  sur-
gery in  1839,  in  1843  as  licentiate  in  medicine,  and
in  1846  as  doctor.  He  filled  successively  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Havana  and  the  San  Carlos  seminary
the  chairs  of  chemistry,  natural  philosophy,  anato-
my, physiology,  legal  medicine,  and  toxicology.  He
was  a  member  of  several  scientific  and  literary  bod-
ies, one  of  the  founders  of  the  Academy  of  medicine
and  natural  sciences  of  Havana,  and,  took  part  in
several  scientific  commissions.  He  divided  his  time
between  the  duties  of  his  profession,  his  chair  in  the
university,  and  literary  and  scientific  pursuits.  In
1841  he  founded  the  "  Repertorio  Medico  Habane-
ro,"  the  first  publication  of  its  kind  in  Cuba,  and  in
1848  he  founded  the  "  Repertorio  de  Medicina  Far-
macia  y  Ciencias  Naturales."  He  published  H  Pron-
tuario  Medico  Quinirgico"  (Havana,  1850);  "Re-
vista  Medica  de  la  Isla  de  Cuba"  (1851);  "  Obras  Lit-
erarias  y  Cientificas"  (1858);  "Diversas  epocas  de
la  poesia  en  Cuba"  (1861);  "  Tratado  de  Historia
Natural "  (1863);  "  Mis  Creencias"(1864);  "  Trabajos
Academicos  "  (1865);  and  "  Soliloquio  "  (1686).  Dr.
Zambrana  left  a  manuscript  history  of  philosophy,
which  has  never  been  published.

ZAMNA,  IZ AMNA\  or  IZAMNAT-UL,  founder
of  the  empire  of  Mayapan.  He  seems  to  have  been
of  Asiatic  extraction,  according  to  many  authori-
ties, who  claim  that  the  empires  of  Xibalbay  and
Mayapan  owed  their  civilization  to  the  Philistines,
driven  from  Palestine  by  Joshua,  who,  under  the
conduct  of  Gucumatz,  trusted  to  the  sea,  and  were
cast  on  the  shores  of  Cuba.  Thence  they  migrated
to  Yucatan  and  Guatemala,  where  they  conquered
the  natives,  who  named  them  Olmecos  and  Xica-
lancos.  Such  is  the  theory  of  Brasseur  de  Bour-
bourg  in  his  '•  Histoire  des  nations  civilisees  du
Mexique  et  du  Guatemala "  (Paris,  1858) ;  of  Las


Casas  in  his  "  Historia  Apolog.  de  las  Indias  Occi-
dentales  "  (manuscript) ;  of  Ramon  de  Ordofles  y
Aguilar  in  his  "Historia  del  cielo  y  de  la  tierra*'
(manuscript) :  of  Diego  Lopez  Cogolludo  in  his
"  Historia  de  Yucatan  "  (Madrid,  1688),  and  others.
Zamna  arrived  in  Yucatan  about  the  time  that
Balum-Votan  reigned  in  Xibalbay,  heading  the
emigration  of  a  great  people,  according  to  the  his-
torians. The  natives  of  Yucatan  opposed  his  prog-
ress, but  were  defeated,  and,  "  having  subdued  the
whole  country  in  a  few  years,  Zamna  built  Maya-
pan at  the  foot  of  the  Mani  mountains,"  according
to  John  L.  Stephens  in  his  "  Incidents  of  Travel
in  Yucatan  "  (New  York,  1858).  He  next  promul-
gated a  code  of  laws,  divided  his  empire  into  fifteen
provinces,  which  he  made  hereditary  fiefs  for  his
generals  and  the  members  of  his  family,  each  hold-
ing his  province  in  fee-simple,  but  sustaining  an
army  for  the  defence  of  the  empire,  and  being  com-
pelled to  own  a  palace  in  Mayapan  and  live  there
three  months  every  year  on  penalty  of  forfeiture.
Zamna's  reign  was  a  long  and  glorious  one,  and  he
died  at  a  great  age.  It  is  believed  that  he  invented
the  phonetic  signs  that  constituted  the  Maya  sys-
tem of  writing.  He  was  buried  in  a  magnificent
temple  built  for  that  purpose,  underground,  be-
tween two  rocks,  which  was  a  resort  for  pilgrims,
and  around  which  was  erected  a  spacious  city.
This  became  famous  under  the  name  of  Izamal,
the  sacred  city  :  a  part  of  it  still  exists  and  is  in-
habited, while  its  magnificent  ruins  are  the  admira-
tion of  the  traveller.  Zamna  was  surnamed  in  the
aboriginal  language  "  Itzen-caan,"  or  "  Itzen-
mayal,"  which  means  "  The  Rose  of  Heaven."  Ber-
nardo Lizana  has  written  the  "  Historia  de  Nuestra
Sefiora  de  Izamal,  de  la  Provincia  de  Yucatan  "
(Valladolid,  1633).

ZAMORA,  Alonso  de  (thah-mo'-rah),  Colombian
historian,  b.  in  Bogota  in  1660 ;  d.  there  about
1725.  He  entered  the  Dominican  order  in  early
life,  and,  after  finishing  his  studies  in  the  College
of  Santo  Tomas,  passed  several  years  in  the  south-
eastern missions,  laboring  among  the  Indians  of
the  head-waters  of  Meta  and  Guaviare  rivers.  On
his  return  to  Bogota  he  acquired  great  fame  as  a
theologian  and  litterateur,  and  was  appointed  ex-
aminer of  the  synod.  In  this  post  he  made  a  spe-
cialty of  the  study  of  Granadan  history,  and  col-
lected numerous  rare  documents.  In  1690  he  was
appointed  historian  of  his  order,  and  began  to  write
his  great  work,  which  was  concluded  in  1696,  under
the  title  "  Historia  del  Nuevo  Reino  de  Granada  y
de  la  provincia  de  San  Antonio  en  la  religion  do
Santo  Domingo  "  (Barcelona,  1701).

ZAMORA,  Cristobal  de,  Spanish  missionarv,  b.
about  1500;  d.  in  Tula,  Mexico,  16  March,  1566.
He  entered  the  Franciscan  order,  and  went  in  1530
to  Mexico,  where  he  was  attached  to  the  missions
of  the  province  of  Santo  Evangelio.  He  learned
the  Indian  dialects,  preached  in  Toltee  and  Aztec
after  1535,  founded  several  missions,  built  churches,
established  schools  for  the  Indians,  and  founded
the  convent  of  Tula,  for  the  support  of  which  he
obtained  a  grant  of  twelve  Indian  villages,  and  es-
tablished a  model  farm  for  their  benefit.  He  held
the  office  of  prior  of  the  convent  at  Tula  till  his
death.  He  wrote  in  Toltee  a  catechism,  a  manual
of  prayers,  and  a  history  of  Christ,  which  are  pre-
served in  the  archives  at  Simancas,and  are  consid-
ered among  the  best  existing  monuments  of  the
Toltee  language,  being  remarkable  for  purity  and
elegance  of  style.  The  state  publication,  "  Cartas
de  Indias  "  (Madrid,  1872),  contains  also  several  in-
teresting memorials  of  Zamora  on  the  condition  ot
the  Indians  in  Mexico.


ZANE


ZARAGOZA


655


ZANE,  Ebenezer,  pioneer,  b.  in  Berkeley
county,  Va.,  7  Oct.,  1747 ;  d.  in  Wheeling,  Va.,  in
1811.  He  was  of  Danish  descent.  Zane  made  the
first  permanent  establishment  on  Ohio  river  in
1770,  on  the  present  site  of  Wheeling,  and  built
there  a  block-house  called  Fort  Henry,  from  which
he  repelled  several  attacks  that  were  made  by  the
Indians  during  the  Revolution,  the  last  assault
being  in  1781.  He  was  a  disbursing  officer  under
Lord  Dunmore,  held  several  other  civil  and  mili-
tary posts,  and  attained  the  rank  of  colonel.  He
owned  the  land  where  the  city  of  Zanesville  now
stands,  on  Muskingum  river. — His  sister,  Eliza-
beth, b.  in  Berkeley  county,  Va.,  about  1759;  d.
in  St.  Clairsville,  Ohio,  about  1847,  had  returned
from  Philadelphia,  where  she  had  completed  her
education,  to  Fort  Henry  a  short  time  before  its
siege  by  the  Indians  in  September,  1777.  Among
its  defenders  were  her  brothers,  Ebenezer  and  Silas.
The  ammunition  in  the  fort  having  been  exhausted,
Ebenezer  Zane  remembered  that  there  was  a  keg
of  powder  in  his  house,  sixty  yards  distant,  but  the
person  that  should  endeavor  to  secure  it  would  be
exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  Indians.  Every  man  in
the  fort  offered  to  perform  the  perilous  service  but
at  this  juncture  Elizabeth  Zane  came  forward  and
asked  permission  to  go  for  the  powder,  giving  as  a
reason  that  her  life  was  of  less  value  to  the  garri-
son than  that  of  a  man.  She  was  so  importunate
that  a  reluctant  consent  was  finally  given.  She
went  out  of  the  gate  of  the  fort,  fearlessly  passed
the  open  space  to  her  brother's  house,  which  she
entered,  and,  having  secured  the  powder,  retraced
her  steps  amid  a  shower  of  Indian  bullets,  entering
the  fort  in  safety  with  her  valuable  prize.  She  was
twice  married,  and  resided  at  St.  Clairsville,  Ohio.

ZAPATA,  Juan  Ortiz  de  (thah-pah'-tah),  Mexi-
can author,  b.  in  Castile  about  1620;  d.  in  Chihua-
hua about  1G90.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  and  was  at-
tached to  the  missions  of  northern  Mexico.  After
learning  the  Indian  dialects  he  was  vicar  of  the
parish  of  Santa  Rosa  de  Cusihuiriachic,  where  he
labored  for  about  thirty  years.  He  wrote  in  1678
a  valuable  "  Relacion  de  las  Misiones  que  la  Com-
pafiia  de  Jesus  tiene  en  el  Reino  y  la  Provincia  de
la  Nueva  Vizcaya,"  which  has  appeared  in  the  state
publication,  "  Documentos  para  la  Historia  Mexi-
cana  "  (6  vols.,  Madrid,  1860).  Zapata's  work  is  also
mentioned  in  Father  Bernard  of  Bologne's  "  Biblio-
theca  Societatis  Jesus"  (1715) :  in  the  " Bibliotheca
Scriptorum  Societatis  Jesus"  (Pisa,  1729-'45);  and
in  Bancroft's  "  Native  Races  "  (San  Francisco,  1883).

ZAPATAMENDOZA,  Juan  Ventura,  Mexi-
can author,  lived  in  the  16th  century.  He  be-
longed to  the  nobility  of  the  former  republic  of
Tlaxcala,  and  was  cacique  of  the  village  of  Quia-
huitzlan  of  that  state,  but  in  early  life  had  been
baptized,  and  submitted  to  Spanish  rule.  He  was
a  man  of  great  learning,  and  wrote  in  Aztec  a
curious  chronicle  relating  the  history  of  his  people
since  their  immigration  to  the  plateau  of  Mexico,
under  the  title  of  "  Cronica  de  Tlaxcala  en  Lengua
Mexicana,  que  contiene  todos  los  succesos  de  los
Tlaxcaltecos  desde  su  arribo  al  Pais  de  Anahuac
hasta  el  ano  1589."  The  original  manuscript  has
not  been  found  in  the  National  library  of  Mexico,
and  may  perhaps  exist  in  the  archives  of  the  In-
dies in  Simancas.  Lorenzo  Boturini  and  Fran-
cisco J.  Clavigero  have  published  extracts  from  it.

ZAPATA  Y  SANDOVAL,  Juan,  Mexican
R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1545 ;  d.
in  Guatemala,  9  Jan.,  1630.  He  entered  the  order
of  St.  Austin  in  1563.  was  several  years  professor
of  philosophy  and  theology,  and  in  1602  was
called  to  Spain  as  director  of  studies  of  the  Col-


lege of  San  Gabriel  de  Valladolid.  In  1613  he  was
nominated  bishop  of  Chiapa,  where  he  founded
a  seminary,  and  in  1621  he  was  promoted  bishop
of  Guatemala.  In  that  city  he  laid  the  foundation
for  the  Monastery  of  the  Conception,  and  insti-
tuted the  literary  university,  and  was  so  prodigal
in  charities  that  he  died  in  debt.  He  wrote  "  De
Justitia  distributiva  et  acceptione  personarum  ei
opposita ;  Diceptatio  pro  Novi  Indiarum  Orbis  re-
rum  moderatoribus,  summisque  regalibus  "  (Madrid,
1609) ;  "  Cartas  al  Conde  de  Gomera,  Presidente  de
Guatemala,  sobre  los  Indios  de  Chiapa " ;  and
"  Cartas  al  Rey  sobre  la  Visita  y  Estado  de  la  Dio-
cesis  de  Chiapa."  The  last  two,  in  manuscript,
were  used  by  Father  Antonio  Remesal  in  his  "  His-
toria de  Chiapa  y  Guatemala  "  (Madrid,  1619),  are
now  in  the  archives  of  the  Indies  in  Simancas,  and
are  to  be  published  in  the  government  collection.

ZAPIOLA,  Jose"  (thah-pe-o'-lah),  Chilian  musi-
cian, b.  in  Santiago  in  1802;  d.  there  in  1885.
He  early  showed  great  talent  for  music,  and  was
sent  by  his  parents  in  1824  to  Buenos  Ayres  to
study  harmony  and  composition.  On  his  return
in  1826  he  participated  in  the  campaign  of  Chiloe
as  band-master  of  the  7th  regiment,  and  in  1830,
on  the  arrival  of  the  first  operatic  company  in
Chili,  whose  orchestra-leader  had  died,  Zapiola
was  called  to  occupy  his  place,  and  soon  acquired
fame,  so  that  he  was  called  repeatedly  to  Lima  to
lead  the  orchestra  of  the  opera  there.  In  1852  he
was  appointed  director  of  the  newly  founded  con-
servatory of  music  at  Santiago,  where  he  educated
many  artists,  and  he  may  be  called  the  creator  of
the  musical  art  in  Chili.  He  founded  in  1853  the
weekly  "  El  Semanario  Musical."  was  co-editor  of
the  "  Estrella  de  Chile,"  and  in  1864  was  appointed
director  of  the  choir  of  the  cathedral,  which  post
he  held  till  his  death.  His  best  musical  composi-
tions are  "  Domine  ad  adjuvandum  me"  (1835);
a  "  Requiem  "  (1836) ;  "Himno  al  triunfo  de  Yun-
gay"  (1840);  and  "Himno  a  San  Martin"  (1842);
and  he  wrote  also  a  book  of  historical  incidents  and
sketches  of  Chilian  customs,  "  Recuerdos  de  treinta
anos"  (2  vols.,  Santiago,  1872-'6).

ZARAGOZA,  Ignacio  (thah-rah-go'-thah),  Mexi-
can soldier,  b.  on  the  Bav  of  Espiritu  Santo,  Tex.,
24  March,  1829;  d.  in"Puebla,  Mexico,  8  Sept.,
1862.  His  ancestors  were  Indians,  and  he  received
his  primary  education  in  Matamoros,  completing
his  studies  in  the  Seminary  of  Monterey.  He  de-
voted himself  for  some  time  to  commerce  in  that
city,  then  entered  the  national  guard,  in  which
he  was  elected  sergeant,  and  when  Santa-Anna
created  an  active  militia  in  1853,  marched  to
Tamaulipas  as  captain  of  a  company.  He  pro-
nounced in  favor  of  the  Liberal  party  in  May,  1855,
assisted  in  the  victory  of  Saltillo  over  Santa- Anna's
forces,  and  was  promoted  colonel.  After  the  fall  of
Ignacio  Comonfort,  Zaragoza  joined  the  forces
that  opposed  the  reactionary  government  of  Zuloaga
and  Miramon,  took  part  in  the  whole  campaign,
being  promoted  brigadier,  and  during  the  absence
of  the  general-in-chief,  Gonzalez  Ortega,  com-
manded the  defence  of  Guadalajara  in  November,
1860,  taking  a  principal  part  in  the  final  victory
of  Calpulalpam,  23  Dec,  1860.  Under  the  gov-
ernment of  Juarez  he  was  secretary  of  war  from
April  till  October,  1861,  and  during  the  French
intervention  he  volunteered  for  active  service,  join-
ing the  eastern  army  under  Gen.  Uraga,  of  which
soon  afterward  he  was  appointed  commander,  with
rank  of  major-general.  He  first  met  the  French
army  at  Acultzingo,  28  April,  1862.  and  retired
before  superior  forces  to  Puebla,  where  he  fortified
the  hills  of  Guadalupe  and  Loreto  temporarily,


ZARATE


ZARCO


and  with  5,000  raw  soldiers  awaited  the  attack  of
the  disciplined  French  army  under  Gen.  Lau-
rencez.  On  5  May  the  French  commander,  despis-
ing the  small  and  badly  equipped  Mexican  force,
tried  to  carry  the  hills  by  storm,  but  was  thrice
repelled,  and  with  a  shattered  army  retired  to
Orizava.  Zaragoza  afterward  marched  against
Orizava,  in  combination  with  Gonzalez  Ortega,
but  the  surprise  of  the  latter's  division  at  Cerro
del  Borrego  forced  him  to  retire  to  Puebla,  where
he  was  preparing  his  army  for  defence  against
French  re-enforcements,  when  he  died  of  typhus
fever.  The  anniversary  of  his  defence  of  Puebla
is  celebrated  as  a  national  holiday  ;  his  name  was
inscribed  in  gold  letters  in  the  chamber  of  congress,
and  the  full  pay  of  his  grade  was  voted  to  his
family,  while  the  city  that  he  defended  bears  offi-
cially the  name  of  Puebla  de  Zaragoza.

ZARATE,  Airostin  de  (thah'-rah-tay),  Spanish
historian,  b.  in  Andalusia  about  1493 ;  d.  in  Madrid
about  1460.  He  was  appointed  in  1528  secretary
of  the  council  of  Castile  and  comptroller  of  the
province,  and  in 1543 was  promoted  treasurer-

feneral  of  the  Indies  and  Tierra  firme,  and  sent  to
'eru  to  examine  the  accounts  of  the  viceroyalty,
and  to  endeavor  to  restore  the  revenues  of  Spain,
which  had  greatly  fallen  off  since  the  rebellion  of
the  younger  Almagro.  Sailing  from  San  Lucar,
3  Nov.,  1543,  with  the  newly  appointed  viceroy,
Blasco  Nufiez  de  Vela,  he  took  an  important  part
in  the  civil  war  that  raged  in  Peru,  and  after
Nufiez's  deposition  was  despatched  by  the  au-
diencia  with  Antonio  de  Rivera  on  an  embassy
to  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  who  was  marching  against
Lima.  Zarate  urged  the  latter  to  dismiss  his
troops,  and  before  Pizarro's  council  pleaded  for
the  safety  of  Lima,  which  most  of  the  officers  were
talking  openly  of  pillaging.  He  was  sent  back
to  the  audiencia  with  Pizarro's  propositions,  and
throughout  the  difficult  negotiations  that  followed
displayed  remarkable  ability  and  acuteness.  He
employed  the  remainder  of  his  sojourn  in  Peru  in
collecting  documents  about  the  history  of  the  con-
quest and  civil  war,  but  met  with  difficulties,  as
some  of  Pizarro's  lieutenants  had  an  interest  in
the  suppression  of  all  such  papers.  On  his  return
to  Europe  he  became  treasurer  of  the  government
of  the  low  countries  at  Brussels,  which  office  he
filled  till  shortly  before  his  death.  He  wrote  "  His-
toria  del  Descubriiniento  y  Conquista  del  Peril "
(Antwerp,  1555;  Seville,  1577),  which  was  trans-
lated into  French  (2  vols.,  Paris  and  Amsterdam,
1700),  and  into  Italian  (2  vols.,  Verona,  1098),  etc.
It  extends  from  the  discovery  of  Peru  till  the
government  of  Pedro  de  la  Gasca.

ZARATE,  Geronimo,  Mexican  historian,  lived
in  the  17th  century.  He  entered  the  Franciscan
order  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  accompanied  as
chaplain  the  various  expeditions  to  New  Mexico
that  were  sent  by  the  viceroys  Luis  de  Velasco
and  Count  de  Monterey.  He  wrote  "  Relacion  de
un  Viaje  al  Nuevo  Mexico,"  dated  1617;  ''Rela-
cion de  las  Expediciones  al  Nuevo  Mexico,  remitida
al  General  del  Orden  de  San  Francisco  en  1624  " :
and  "  Relacion  de  todas  las  eosas  que  se  han  visto
y  sabido  en  el  Nuevo  Mexico,  asi  por  mar  coino
por  tierra,  desde  el  afio  1538  hasta  1626"  (13  small
volumes).  The  manuscripts  of  all  these  works
were  in  the  Franciscan  archives  in  Mexico,  but
have  been  transferred  to  the  National  library.  The
last-mentioned  is  specially  noteworthy,  as  ft  gives
an  account  of  all  the  expeditions  that  had  been
sent  to  the  north  before  the  author's  time.

ZARATE,  Miguel,  Spanish  educator,  b.  in  the
province  of  Alava  in  the  beginning  of  the  16th


century;  d.  in  Puebla,  Mexico,  in  1583.  He  en-
tered the  Franciscan  order  in  his  native  province,
and  about  1525  went  to  Mexico,  where  he  was  pro-
fessor of  philosophy  and  theology  in  the  College  of
Santa  Cruz  de  TJaltelolco.  In  a  short  time  he  be-
came so  proficient  in  Aztec  that  he  was  appointed
professor  of  that  language,  and  taught  many
scholars,  among  whom  was  the  famous  Father
Juan  Bautista.  He  was  also  an  efficient  mission-
ary, greatly  beloved  by  the  natives,  and  became
superior  of  the  convent  of  Puebla,  in  which  post
he  died,  leaving  many  interesting  manuscripts,
which  were  first  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the
College  of  San  Buenaventura,  but  are  now  in  the
National  library  in  the  city  of  Mexico.  They  in-
clude "  Noticias  interesantes  a  la  Historia  civil  y
ecclesisastica  de  Mexico "  and  "  Opusculos  doctri-
nales  y  morales  en  Lengua  Mexicana."  Agustin
Betancourt  and  Leon  Pinelo  mention  them  and
give  frequent  extracts  from  his  history.

ZARATE,  Pedro  Ortiz  de,  Spanish  judge,  b.
in  Segovia  about  1490 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1545.
He  was  grand  provost  of  Segovia,  when  he  was
appointed,  in  1543,  one  of  the  four  auditors  to
found  the  audiencia  of  Lima,  and  accompanied
the  new  viceroy,  Blasco  Nufiez  de  Vela,  but  soon
came  in  collision  with  the  latter,  who  solicited  Za-
rate's  recall  on  the  ground  that  he  was  a  poor
Latin  scholar.  When  Nufiez  gave  orders  to  seize
and  carry  on  board  a  man-of-war  the  nephews  of
Gonzalo  Pizarro,  Zarate  opposed  the  measure,  urg-
ing that  the  people  disapproved  it,  as  they  feared
Pizarro's  resentment.  Nevertheless,  when  Nufiez
was  imprisoned  by  the  audiencia,  18  Sept.,  1543,
Zarate  refused  to  take  part  in  the  proceedings,  but
remained  in  Lima,  and  at  the  entry  of  Pizarro,  21
Oct.,  by  his  influence  saved  the  city  from  pillage,
signing  the  commission  of  governor  for  Pizarro
under  the  protest  that  he  yielded  only  to  force  and
to  the  wish  to  prevent  bloodshed.  He  continued
in  office  after  the  audiencia  was  reorganized  to  the
great  displeasure  of  Gonzalo,  and  checked  many
abuses.  It  is  said  that  he  was  poisoned  by  some
powders  that  were  sent  to  him  by  Pizarro,  and,
though  this  fact  is  disputed,  it  is  conceded  that
the  latter  showed  unmistakable  signs  of  relief
when  he  heard  of  Zarate's  death.

ZARCO,  Francisco  (thar'-co),  Mexican  journal-
ist, b.  in  Durango,  4  Dec,  1829 ;  d.  in  the  city  of
Mexico,  29  Dec,  1869.  He  studied  in  his  native
city,  and  after  the  occupation  of  the  capital  by  the
American  forces,  16  Sept.,  1847,  Luis  de  la  Rosa,
the  general  minis-
ter of  the  Mexi-
can government  in
Queretaro,  appoint-
ed him  chief  clerk.
On  the  evacuation
of  the  capital  by  the
American  forces,
Zarco  became  a
member  of  the  staff
of  the  paper  "El
Siglo  XIX,"  and
shortly,  afterward
he  took  the  direc-
tion of  the  weekly
"  La Ilustracion, '

in which  he  pub- ^  v-

lished a series  of /t^Zi^zsisla^c*,  *£&
notable  articles  on

customs,  literature,  history,  and  criticism  under
the  pen-name  of  "  Fortun."  From  184!)  till  1853
he  was  editor-in-chief  of  "  El  Siglo  XIX."  He  also
edited  a  satirical  paper,  "  La  Cosquilla,"  which  at-


<2st~tZ0


ZARCO


ZEILIN


657


tacked  the  administration,  and  contributed  to  the
fall  of  the  government  of  Gen.  Arista.  He  was
elected  a  member  of  congress  in  1855,  and  in  the
session  of  1856  defended  the  reform  laws  with  en-
thusiasm. On  the  accession  of  Zuloaga  he  was
persecuted  by  the  government,  and  for  more  than
two  years  remained  concealed,  but  published  "  El
Boletin  Clandestino"and  "Los  asesinatos  de  Ta-
cubaya,"  which  were  distributed  broadcast.  Being
discovered  by  the  police,  13  May,  1860,  he  was  im-
prisoned till  the  fall  of  the  reactionary  govern-
ment, 25  Dec,  1860.  Juarez,  on  his  return  to  the
capital,  appointed  him  secretary  of  state  and  presi-
dent of  the  council.  But  when  congress  assem-
bled and  the  votes  of  five  states,  electing  him  to
that  body,  were  declared  illegal,  he  resigned,  and
returned  to  the  direction  of  "  El  Siglo  XIX."  On
the  departure  of  the  republican  government  from
Mexico,  he  followed  Juarez,  publishing  "  La  Inde-
pendencia  Mexicana  "  in  San  Luis  Potosi,  and  "  La
Action  "  in  Saltillo.  He  then  went  to  the  United
States.  After  the  return  of  the  republican  govern-
ment he  was  elected  to  congress  for  the  Federal
district.  He  died  poor,  notwithstanding  he  had
been  financial  agent  of  the  government  without
restriction  during  the  residence  of  Juarez  in  Vera
Cruz.  Congress  voted  a  pension  to  his  family,
and  inscribed  his  name  in  the  legislative  hall.

ZARCO,  Giulio,  Italian  missionary,  b.  in  Na-
ples in  1490 :  d.  in  Jalisco,  Mexico,  in  1549.  He
was  educated  in  Spain,  entered  the  Franciscan
order,  and  was  among  the  twelve  friars  that  came
to  Mexico  in  1524  with  Martin  de  Valencia.  He
learned  the  Indian  languages,  and  in  1525  was
sent  to  the  province  of  Michoacan  with  another
missionary  and  the  king  Catzonzi,  whom  he  had
just  baptized,  and  labored  there  with  success,  es-
tablishing schools  for  the  Indians,  and  building
chapels,  churches,  hospitals,  and  a  college  for  the
new  converts.  He  became  afterward  provincial  of
Jalisco,  and  met  with  remarkable  success.  Zarco
was  very  proficient  in  Indian  dialects,  and  wrote
numerous  hymns  and  prayers  in  Aztec.  He  also
translated  several  passages  of  scripture  and  com-
posed in  Tarasco  "  Doctrina  Cristiana,"  which  is
preserved  in  manuscript  in  the  Vatican  library  at
Rome,  and  mentioned  with  praise  by  several  au-
thors. He  wrote  also  "  Arte  de  la  lengua  Tarasca,"
which  is  cited  by  Ramusio  and  Ternaux  Compans.
The  manuscript  is  lost,  but  an  abridged  copy  of  it
is  in  the  National  library  of  Paris.

ZAVALA,  Lorenzo  de  (thah-vah'-lah),  Mexican
statesman,  b.  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  3  Oct,  1788;  d.
in  Harrisburg,  Tex.,  16  Nov.,  1836.  He  studied  in
the  Seminary  of  San  Ildefortso,  in  his  native  city.
In  1812  he  participated  in  the  revolutionary  move-
ment of  Yucatan,  supporting  the  junta  de  San
Juan,  and  founding  the  first  newspaper  in  the

Seninsula  that  defended  Liberal  principles.  In
lay,  1814,  he  was  arrested  and  sent  to  the  castle
of  San  Juan  de  Ulua,  where  he  remained  a  prisoner
for  three  years,  employing  his  time  in  studying
medicine  and  English.  In  1820  he  was  sent  as
deputy  for  Yucatan  to  the  Spanish  cortes.  He
returned  to  Mexico  in  1822,  was  elected  to  the  1st
congress,  and  soon  became  a  leader.  After  the  fall
of  the  empire  under  Iturbide  he  was  the  chief  de-
fender of  the  Federal  cause  in  the  "  Aguila  Mexi-
cana "  and  in  congress,  and  as  president  of  that
body  signed  the  Federal  constitution,  4  Oct.,  1824.
In  1825  he  was  elected  senator  for  Yucatan  in  the
1st  Constitutional  congress,  joining  the  Federal
party,  and  in  1827  he  became  governor  of  the  state
of  Mexico.  After  the  accession  of  Gen.  Vicente
Guerrero,  he  was  called  in  1829  to  the  portfolio  of
vol.  vi. — 42


the  treasury.  When  Guerrero's  government  was
overthrown  by  Bustamante,  Zavala  travelled  in  the
United  States  and  Europe.  In  1832,  after  the  fall
of  Bustamante,  he  returned  and  was  reinstated  as
governor  of  the  state  of  Mexico,  and  toward  the
end  of  1833  he  was  sent  as  minister  to  France,  but,
on  the  deposition  of  Vice-President  Gomez  Farias,
he  resigned  and  went  to  Texas,  where  he  had  ex-
tensive property.  When  the  province  rose  against
Mexico,  in  consequence  of  the  prohibition  against
selling  land  to  American  citizens,  Zavala  joined  the
insurgents,  who  proclaimed  the  re-establishment  of
the  Federal  constitution  of  1824,  and  was  sent  as
deputy  for  Harrisburg  to  the  convention  of  Austin,
which  on  7  Nov.,  1835.  declared  war.  He  was  also
a  member  of  the  deputation  that  was  sent  to  Wash-
ington which  declared  the  independence  of  Texas,
2  March,  1836.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Ensayo
historico  de  las  Revoluciones  de  Mexico,  desde  1808
hasta  1830"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1831)  and  "  Viaje  a  los
Estados  Unidos  de  Norte  America"  (1834).

ZEA,  Francisco  Antonio  (thay-ah),  Colombian
statesman,  b.  in  Medellin,  21  Oct.,  1770;  d.  in
Bath;  England,  22  Nov.,  1822.  He  acquired  his
primary  education  in  the  Seminary  of  Popayan,
and  in  1786  entered  the  College  of  San  Bartolome
of  Bogota.  There  he  wrote  for  the  "  Papel  Peri-
odico"  his  "Hebephilo,"  inviting  young  men  to
the  study  of  nature,  and  in  1789,  when  Jose  Celes-
tino,  sage  Mutis,  retired  from  the  academy  known
as  the  Expedition  botanica,  Zea  was  appointed  his
successor.  In  1794,  with  Antonio  Nariiio,  he  was
implicated  in  the  circulation  of  the  "  Droits  de
1'homme,"  sent  to  Spain,  and  for  two  years  kept
prisoner  in  the  fortress  of  Cadiz.  Although  ab-
solved in  1799,  he  was  sent  to  France  on  a  scien-
tific mission,  as  the  government  desired  to  keep
him  away  from  New  Granada.  On  his  return,
in  1803,  he  was  still  prohibited  from  returning
to  his  country,  and  was  appointed  director  of
the  botanical  cabinet  of  Madrid.  He  was  elected
member  of  several  Spanish  scientific  societies,  and
was  editor  of  the  "Mereurio  de  Espafia"  and
"  Semanario  de  Agricultural'  In  1808  he  espoused
the  French  cause,  was  appointed  chief  clerk  of  the
secretary  of  the  interior,  and  afterward  prefect  of
Malaga.  After  the  retreat  of  the  French  from
Spain  he  went  to  England  and  by  way  of  Jamaica
joined  Bolivar  in  Hayti  in  1815.  He  accompanied
the  liberator  in  his  expedition  to  Venezuela  in
March,  1816,  and  was  appointed  general  intendant
of  the  army.  He  was  chosen  by  Bolivar  in  1817  a
member  of  the  council  of  state  in  Angostura,
founded  with  Dr.  Roscio  the  "  Correo  de  Orinoco,"
and  in  1819,  when  the  congress  of  Angostura  met,
he  was  elected  its  president.  During  the  absence
of  Bolivar  on  his  expedition  to  New  Granada,  Zea
was  in  charge  of  the  executive  as  vice-president  till
he  resigned,  14  Sept.,  1819.  in  consequence  of  the
intrigues  of  Gen.  Arismendi.  After  the  proclama-
tion of  Colombia  as  a  republic,  Bolivar  was  elected
president  and  Zea  vice-president.  In  1820  he  went
as  minister  to  England  and  France ;  but  his  finan-
cial negotiations  were  unfortunate.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  "  Las  Quinas  de  Nueva  Granada  "  (Madrid,
1805);  "Description  del  Salto  de  Tequendama"
(1806);  and  " Historia  de  Colombia"  (Paris,  1821).

ZEILIN,  Jacob,  officer  of  marines,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa.,  16  July,  1806;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  18  Nov.,  1880.  He  entered  the  marine  corps
and  was  commissioned  a  2d  lieutenant,  1  Oct.,  1831,
promoted  to  1st  lieutenant,  12  Sept.,  1836,  and
cruised  in  the  "Columbus"  and  "Congress"  in
1845-'8  during  the  Mexican  war.  He  participated
in  the  operations  on  the  Pacific  coast  and  in  de-


658


ZEISBERGER


ZENDEJAS


^Ze^-£c*^


fence  of  Monterey,  15  July,  1846,  was  transferred
to  command  the  marines  in  the  frigate  "  Congress,"
and  took  part  with  Com.  Robert  F.  Stockton  in
the  conquest  of  California.  He  was  brevetted  ma-
jor for  gallantry  in  the  action  at  crossing  San  Ga-
briel river,  9  Jan.,
1847,  and  took
part  in  the  cap-
ture of  Los  An-
geles and  in  the
battle  of  La  Me-
sa. He  was  mili-
tary commandant
at  San  Diego  in
1847,  and  par-
ticipated in  the
capture  of  Guay-
mas  in  Septem-
ber. 1847,  and  in
the  action  at  San
Jose,  30  Sept.,
1847.  During  Oc-
tober, 1847,  and
till  the  end  of  the
war,  he  was  at
Mazatlan,  where
he  took  part  in  frequent  skirmishes  with  the  Mexi-
cans, who  had  been  obliged  to  evacuate  the  city.
He  was  commissioned  captain.  14  Sept.,  1847,  and
served  at  New  York  in  1849,  and  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  in
1849-'52.  He  was  fleet  marine-officer  in  the  flag-ship
"  Mississippi,"  in  Com.  Matthew  C.  Perry's  expedi-
tion to  Japan  in  1852-'4,  and  commanded  the  bat-
talion of  marines  at  the  landing  on  14  July,  1853.
He  was  stationed  at  Norfolk  in  1854-'7,  and  at
Washington  in  1857,  and  there  commanded  the
first  company  of  marines  which  quelled  the  riot  of
Baltimore  roughs,  1  June,  1857.  When  the  civil
war  began  he  took  command  of  the  right  company
in  the  marine  battalion  in  co-operation  with  the
army  in  1861,  participated  in  the  battle  of  Bull
Run  on  21  July,  and  was  slightly  wounded.  He
was  commissioned  major  in  the  marine  corps,  26
July,  1861,  was  commandant  at  New  York  barracks
in  1862-'3,  and  in  August,  1863,  had  command  of
the  marine  battalion  that  sailed  from  New  York
and  landed  on  Morris  island,  Charleston  harbor,  to
participate  in  the  operations  of  the  South  Atlantic
blockading  squadron  under  Admiral  Dahlgren.
In  March,  1864,  he  returned  to  the  north  and  took
command  of  the  marine  barracks  at  Portsmouth,
N.  H.  He  was  appointed  colonel  commandant  of
the  marine  corps,  10  June,  1864,  and  assumed  con-
trol at  headquarters  at  Washington,  D.  C.  He
was  commissioned  brigadier-general  commandant,
2  March,  1867.  Gen.  Zeilin  was  retired  on  account
of  age  and  long  and  faithful  service,  1  Nov.,  1876.
ZEISBERGER,  David,  missionary,  b.  in  Zauch-
tenthal,  Moravia,  11  April,  1721;  d.  in  Goshen,
Ohio,  17  Nov.,  1808.  In  1740  he  emigrated  to
Georgia,  where  his  church  was  organizing  a  mis-
sion among  the  Creeks.  Thence  he  was  sent  to
Pennsylvania,  where  he  assisted  in  the  building  of
Nazareth  and  Bethlehem.  Preparatory  to  enter-
ing the  mission  service  in  1743,  he  became  a  stu-
dent in  the  Indian  school  at  Bethlehem,  where
he  was  instructed  in  the  Delaware  and  Onon-
daga languages.  Later,  he  continued  the  study
of  the  latter  at  the  capital  of  the  Five  Nations.
In  addition  to  these  languages  he  was  conversant
with  Mohican,  Monsey-Delaware,  and  Chippewa.
From  1745  till  1750  he  was  employed  at  Shamo-
kin  and  Onondaga,  and  in  the  latter  year  he  vis-
ited Europe  in  behalf  of  the  mission.  In  1752
he  returned  to  Onondaga,  but  was  compelled  to


retire  to  Bethlehem  at  the  opening  of  the  French
and  Indian  war.  Between  1755  and  1762  he  vis-
ited North  Carolina  and  the  New  England  prov-
inces, labored  among  the  Indians  of  Connecticut,
and  also  acted  as  interpreter  for  Pennsylvania
in  their  treaty  with  Teedyuscung  and  his  allies.
During  the  Pontiac  war  he  took  charge  of  the
Moravian  Indians,  and  after  the  peace  accom-
panied them  to  Wyalusing,  Bradford  co.,  Pa.  In
1767  he  established  a  mission  among  the  Monsey-
Delawares  on  Alleghany  river,  and  three  years
later  he  began  Friedenstadt,  on  the  Beaver.  His
first  visit  to  Ohio  was  made  in  1771,  and  a  year
later  he  organized  the  mission  on  the  Muskingum,
where  he  was  joined  by  the  converts  from  Pennsyl-
vania. Early  in  the  Revolution  the  Delaware*
were  accused  of  favoring  the  American  side,  and
the  converts  were  forced  to  leave  their  towns  and
come  within  the  British  lines.  After  being  moved
from  place  to  place  they  were  finally  settled  on
Thames  river  in  Canada.  In  1798,  Zeisberger,
with  a  few  converts,  left  Canada  and  founded
Goshen,  Ohio,  where  he  passed  the  remaining  ten
years  of  his  life.  He  published  a  "  Delaware  and
English  Spelling-Book "  (Philadelphia,  1776);  "A
Collection  of  Hymns  for  the  Christian  Indians  "
(1803) ;  and  "  Sermons  for  Children  "  (1803).  Of  his
voluminous  manuscripts  there  has  been  published
"  Dictionary  in  German  and  Delaware  "  (Cambridge,
1887),  and  "  Essay  toward  an  Onondaga  Grammar  "
(Philadelphia,  1888).  The  most  important  unpub-
lished manuscripts  are  "  German  and  Onondaga
Lexicon  "  (7  vols.),  two  Delaware  Indian  grammars,
and  collections  of  hymns  and  sermons.  See  "  Life
and  Times  of  David  Zeisberger,"  by  Bishop  Edmund
de  Schweinitz  (Philadelphia,  1870),  and  "  Diary  of
David  Zeisberger,  1781-'98"  (Cincinnati,  1888).

ZELL,  Bernhard  (thell),  Flemish  explorer,  b.
in  Luxemburg  in  1715  ;  d.  there  in  1779.  He  was
apprenticed  at  Bremen,  and  lived  in  New  Orleans
from  1740  till  1759,  where  he  founded  a  German
mercantile  house,  and,  having  acquired  a  for-
tune, he  visited  Florida.  After  the  cession  of
Louisiana  to  Spain  he  obtained  permission  to
travel  through  Mexico,  and  made  an  explora-
tion of  California  and  Texas  among  difficulties
of  all  kinds.  In  studying  the  geology  of  Califor-
nia he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  country
possessed  gold-mines,  and  addressed  a  memoir  to
the  Marquis  de  Croix,  viceroy  of  Mexico;  but  little
attention  was  paid  to  it,  as  explorations  sent  in
former  centuries  to  search  for  gold  in  California
had  utterly  failed.  The  viceroy  gave  him  permis-
sion to  organize  an  expedition ;  but,  as  he  refused
further  support,  Zell  returned  in  1770  to  his  native
city,  where  he  died.  He  wrote  "  Reisen  im  Innern
von  Neu  Spanien  und  Californien,"  containing  an
analysis  of  the  soil  of  several  districts  of  Mexico
and  California,  from  which  the  author  concluded
that  California  is  a  mining  country  (2  vols.,  Lux-
emburg, 1771-'2),  and  "  Land  und  Leutc  der  Span-
isch-Amerikanischen  Colonien"  (2  vols.,  1778).

ZENDEJAS,  Miguel  Ger6nimo  (thaynday-
has),  Mexican  artist,  b.  in  Puebla  in  1724  ;  d.  there
in  1816.  He  came  of  a  poor  family,  and  probably
would  have  died  in  obscurity  and  ignorance  not-
withstanding his  natural  talent  for  drawing;  but
Bishop  Antonio  J.  Perez,  at  that  time  secretary  ot
Bishop  Bienpica,  saw  a  rough  painting  by  Zende-
jas,  and,  discovering  an  extraordinary  gift  in  the
poor  artist,  caused  him  to  receive  lessons  by  well-
known  masters.  He  was  then  too  old  to  acquire
the  rudimentary  principles  of  drawing,  ana  al-
ways adhered  to  his  former  custom  of  not  making
any  outline  sketch  of  his  figures,  but,  unrolling  the


ZENDER


ZENO


659


cloth  gradually,  began  his  paintings  from  the  top
and  finished  every  detail  thoroughly  before  he
painted  the  lower  parts.  Therefore  some  of  his
outlines  are  defective;  but  his  genius  gave  him
such  facility  of  composition  and  such  rich,  soft
coloring  to  his  works,  that  his  numerous  paintings
are  esteemed  highly  among  the  artistic  gems  of
Mexico.  They  are  preserved  for  the  greater  part
in  his  native  city,  which  he  never  left.  His  best
work  is  a  "  Calvary  "  in  the  cathedral  of  Puebla.

ZENDER,  Joachim  Denis  Laurent,  physi-
cian, b.  in  Paris,  22  Nov.,  1805.  He  received  his
education  in  the  College  Louis-le-Grand,  studied
theology  in  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  and  in
1827  joining  the  order  of  the  Foreign  missions,
came  to  this  country  as  a  missionary  in  1828.  Af-
ter teaching  humanities  in  several  Roman  Catholic
colleges  in  Missouri  and  Maryland,  he  left  the
church  in  1832,  studied  medicine  in  New  York,
obtained  his  diploma  in  1842,  and  in  1844  was  or-
dained in  the  latter  city  as  a  Protestant  minister
of  the  Congregational  church,  and  gathered  a
small  French  congregation.  Later  he  devoted  him-
self to  scientific  works,  and  also  travelled  through
the  country,  conducting  revivals.  He  published
"  Anthroponomy,  or  Magneto  -  Physiognomico
Craniology :  A  New  System  on  the  Magnetic  Con-
stitution of  Man"  (Philadelphia,  1843;  revised
ed.,  New  York,  1850);  "Abecedaire  Francais- An-
glais illustre,  suivi  d'un  vocabulaire  pittoresque"
(1853);  and  "Guide  des  Etats-Unis,  pour  les  chemins
de  fer,  la  navigation,  les  lois  et  les  constitutions  de
l'Amerique  du  Nord"  (1858).  From  1848  till
1868  Mr.  Zender  edited  yearly  the  "  Almanach  et
Directoire  des  Francais  aux  Etats-Unis,"  a  French
business  directory  for  the  United  States,  and  he
also  published  at  intervals  between  1845  and  1865
several  large  phrenological  charts  in  Spanish,  Eng-
lish, and  French.

ZENEA,  Juan  Clemente  (thay-nay'-ah),  Cuban
author,  b.  in  Bayamo  in  1834 ;  d.  in  Havana,  25
Aug.,  1871.  When  he  was  very  young  he  went  to
Havana,  where  he  received  his  education,  and  then
devoted  himself  to  teaching  and  literary  pursuits.
His  liberal  ideas  forced  him  to  emigrate  several
times,  fixing  his  residence  alternately  in  the  United
States  and  Mexico,  with  short  sojourns  at  Havana.
In  1861  he  founded  the  "  Revista  Habanera,"  which
was  suppressed  by  the  government  after  two  years
of  existence.  When  the  Cuban  insurrection  began
in  1868  he  went  to  New  York,  where  he  published
a  newspaper  in  aid  of  the  Cuban  patriots.  In  1870
he  was  sent  to  Cuba  by  the  revolutionary  committee
of  New  York  on  a  special  mission  to  President
Cespedes.  When  he  was  attempting  to  leave  the
island,  after  fulfilling  his  mission,  he  was  made  a
prisoner  by  the  Spanish  forces,  confined  several
months  in  Fort  Cabanas,  of  Havana,  and  finally
court-martialed  and  shot.  Zenea  enjoys  a  wide
reputation  as  a  lyrical  poet  in  all  Spanish-speaking
countries,  and  his  poems  have  been  frequently  re-
printed. He  published  "Cantos  de  la  Tarde"
(Havana,  1860) ;  "  Lejos  de  la  patria,"  a  novel
(1861) :  "  En  dias  de  esclavitud  "  (New  York,  1870) ;
and  "  Diario  de  un  Martir,"  written  in  his  prison.
A  complete  edition  of  Zenea's  poems  was  published
in  New  York  (1872).

ZENGER,  John  Peter,  printer,  b.  in  Germany
about  1680;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1746.  He
came  to  this  country  about  1700,  and  was  an  ap-
prentice in  the  printing-office  of  William  Bradford
the  elder.  On  5  Nov.,  1733,  he  began  the  publica-
tion of  the  "  New  York  Weekly  Journal."  This
paper  was  the  organ  of  the  party  that  was  opposed
to  the  governor  of  the  province,  and  was  power-


fully supported  by  Chief  -  Justice  Lewis  Morris,
Rip  Van  Dam.  and  James  Alexander.  It  abounded
in  lampoons  and  pasquinades  that  attracted  wide
attention,  and  attacked  the  government  with  se-
verity, contributing  greatly  toward  loosening  the
bonds  between  England  and  the  colonies.  On  17
Nov.,  1734,  Zenger  was  arrested  and  imprisoned  by
virtue  of  a  warrant  from  Gov.  William  Cosby  and
the  council  for  "  printing  and  publishing  several
seditious  libels."  The  house  of  assembly  refused
to  concur  with  the  governor,  and  he  ordered  the
mayor  to  burn  the  papers  containing  the  alleged
libels  by  aid  of  the  hangman.  The  order  was
obeyed,  but  by  the  sheriff's  servant,  not  the  hang-
man, and  the  jury  failing  to  find  an  indictment
against  Zenger,  the  attorney-general  was  directed
to  file  an  information  against  him  for  the  said
libels  at  the  next  term  of  the  court.  His  political
friends  employed  Andrew  Hamilton,  of  Philadel-
phia, to  plead  his  cause,  which  proved  at  the  same
time  to  be  the  question  of  the  liberty  of  the  press
in  America,  and  all  the  central  colonies  regarded
the  controversy  as  their  own.  (See  Hamilton,
Andrew.)  At  the  trial  the  publishing  was  con-
fessed, but  Hamilton  justified  the  publication  by
asserting  its  truth.  "  You  cannot  be  permitted,"
interrupted  the  chief  justice,  "to  give  the  truth  of
a  libel  in  evidence."  "  Then,"  said  Hamilton  to
the  jury,  "  we  appeal  to  you  for  witnesses  of  the
facts.  The  jury  have  a  right  to  determine  ■  both
the  law  and  the  fact,  and  they  ought  to  do  so.
The  question  before  you  is  not  the  cause  of  a  poor
printer,  nor  of  New  York  alone;  it  is  the  cause
of  liberty  .  .  .  the  liberty  of  opposing  arbitrary
power  by  speaking  and  writing  truth."  The  jury
gave  their  verdict  "not  guilty,"  and  Zenger,  re-
leased from  his  imprisonment  of  thirty-five  weeks,
was  received  with  tumultuous  applause  by  a  con-
course of  people  who  had  assembled  to  learn  the
result.  This  event  has  been  termed  "the  morn-
ing-star of  that  liberty  which  subsequently  revo-
lutionized America."  After  his  death  Zenger's
widow  and  his  son  John  conducted  the  "  Journal "
until  1752.  A  narrative  of  the  trial  was  published
with  that  of  William  Owen  (Boston,  1765).

ZENO,  Nicolo,  Venetian  navigator,  b.  in  Ven-
ice about  1340;  d.  in  Newfoundland  about  1391.
He  was  a  member  of  a  patrician  family  in  Venice,
and  about  1375  went  at  his  own  expense  on  a  voy-
age to  the  northern  seas,  but  was  wrecked  on  what
he  describes  as  the  island  of  Frislanda  (probably
in  the  Faroe  group),  and  rescued  by  Zichmin,
the  chief  of  a  neighboring  island,  into  whose
service  he  entered.  He  remained  with  Zichmin
for  some  time,  assisted  in  the  conquest  of  Fris-
landa, and  invited  his  brother  Antonio  to  join
him.  They  visited  Greenland  (which  they  named
Engronelanda)  and  Newfoundland,  and  in  company
with  fishermen  navigated  along  the  coast  of  North
America  as  far,  it  is  claimed,  as  Virginia.  Nicolo
died  four  years  after  Antonio's  arrival,  often  send-
ing to  a  third  brother.  Carlo,  grand-admiral  of  Ven-
ice, accounts  of  his  discoveries.  Antonio  remained
ten  years  more  in  the  service  of  Zichmin,  and  then
returned  to  Venice,  where  he  died  about  1405,
Zeno  wrote  an  account  of  his  voyages,  which  he
showed  to  several  persons,  but  his  papers  were
partly  burned  by  Antonio's  young  grandson,  Cate-
rino  (b.  in  Venice  in  1515).  The  latter,  realizing
afterward  the  value  of  his  grand-uncle's  papers,
was  able,  with  a  few  letters  that  had  been  sent
from  Frislanda  to  Carlo,  to  compile  from  them
a  narrative,  which  he  published  under  the  title
"  Scoprimento  dellas  isolas  Frislanda,  Eslanda,
Engronelanda, Estotilanda,  et Icaria "  (Venice.


660


ZEXON  DE  ROUVROY


ZEPHIRIN


1558,  with  a  map  of  North  America  dated  1390).
The  authenticity  of  the  two  brothers'  discoveries
was  attacked  during  the  following  centuries,  and
even  their  existence  was  doubted,  but  later  re-
searches have  proved  that  Marco  Barbaro,  in  his
"  Discendenze  Patrizie  "  (Venice,  1526),  knew  of  the
existence  of  Zeno's  letters,  narrative,  and  map  thirty
years  before  their  publication.  The  Hakluyt  society
published  an  English  translation,  with  an  introduc-
tion and  notes,  entitled  "  The  Voyages  of  the  Ve-
netian Brothers,  Nicolo  and  Antonio  Zeno,  to  the
Northern  Seas  in  the  14th  Century,  comprising  the
latest  known  Accounts  of  the  Lost  Colony  of  Green-
land, and  of  the  Northmen  in  America,  before  Co-
lumbus," translated  by  Richard  Henry  Major  (Lon-
don, 1873).  Zeno'smapof  Greenland,  Newfoundland,
and  the  northern  coast  of  America  is  remarkably
accurate,  and  his  narrative  demonstrates  also  the
existence,  more  than  a  century  before  the  time  of
Columbus,  of  the  remains  of  the  Scandinavian
colonies  that  are  mentioned  by  Adam  of  Bremen
in  the  11th  century,  and  by  Odericus  Vitalis  in
the  12th  century,  and  whose  history  was  recently
written  by  Karl  C.  Rafn.  See  also  Placido  Zurla's
"  Uissertazione  intorno  ai  viaggi  e  scoperte  setten-
trionali  di  Nicolo  ed  Antonio,  fratelli  Zeni,"  which
includes  a  copy  of  the  original  text  and  also  a
chart  (Venice,  1808).

ZENON  DE  ROUVROY,  Charles  Albert  (zay-
nong),  French  author,  b.  in  Dreux  in  1698 ;  d.  in
Pans  in  1759.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Academy
of  Caen,  and  frequented  the  literary  salons  of  the
time,  among  them  that  of  Madame  Doublet  de  Per-
sau,  of  whom  he  was  secretary  for  several  years.
He  obtained  later  an  office  in  the  navy  and  colo;
nial  department,  and  wrote  the  instructions  for
the  colonial  governors.  His  books  include  "  Let-
tre  sur  les  colonies  Francaises  de  l'Amerique,"  an
anonymous  work,  which  was  widely  read  and
caused  much  discussion,  as  the  author  predicted
the  capture  of  the  colonies  by  the  English  (Amster-
dam, 1732);  "Memoire  sur  la  politique  des  Jesuites
dans  les  pays  de  l'Amerique  "  (1735) ;  "  Histoire  de
la  compagnie  des  Indes  (2  vols,  1738);  and  "Me-
moire nistorique  sur  la  Louisiane  et  la  compagnie
du  Mississippi"  (1743).  The  last  is  a  very  curious
work,  which  contains  interesting  information
about  the  operations  of  John  Law  and  the  policy
of  the  Mississippi  company.  The  latter  caused  all
available  copies  of  the  work  to  be  destroyed,  and  it
is  now  extremely  rare.  Zenon  also  wrote  "  Discus-
sion succinte  sur  les  operations  de  la  compagnie
des  Indes  Occidentals (1751).

ZENTENO,  Carlos  de  Tapia  (thayn-tay'-no),
Mexican  author,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1698 ;
d.  there  about  1770.  He  studied  in  Trinity  semi-
nary of  his  native  city,  where  he  was  graduated  in
theology  and  canonical  law.  After  receiving  holy
orders  he  was  appointed  to  the  parish  of  Tampa-
molon,  and  later  was  made  ecclesiastical  judge  of
the  district,  but  gave  his  leisure  time  to  the  study
of  the  Aztec  and  Huastec  dialects,  in  which  he  be-
came proficient.  Resigning  his  parish,  he  settled
in  Mexico,  where  he  became  secretary  of  the  Col-
lege of  San  Pedro  and,  by  competitive  examina-
tion, professor  of  Aztec  in  the  university.  He
wrote  "Arte  Novisimo.de  la  Lengua  Mexicana"
(Mexico,  1753) ;  "  Noticia  de  la  Lengua  Huasteca  "
(1767);  "Apologia  de  la  Provincia  de  la  Huasteca,
desacreditada  por  su  intemperie  " ;  and  dictionaries
and  catechisms  in  Aztec  and  Huastec,  the  manu-
scripts of  which  are  preserved  in  the  National
library  of  Mexico.  Hubert  H.  Bancroft,  in  his
"Native  Races"  (San  Francisco,  1883),  often  re-
fers to  Zenteno's  works.


<^»T-/fet-^V'—


ZENTENO,  Jose"  Ignacio,  Chilian  soldier,  b.
in  Santiago  in  1785;  d.  there  in  1847.  Having
taken  part  in  the  movement  for  independence,
he  was  forced  in  1814,  after  the  defeat  of  Ran-
cagua,  to  emigrate
to  Mendoza,  to-
gether with  other
patriots,  where,
soon  after  his  ar-
rival, he  was  ap-
pointed secretary
of  the  treasury  of
that  province.  He
formed  part  of  the
liberating  army,
and  when  Gen.
Bernardo  O'Hig-
gins  was  elected
supreme  director,
he  appointed  Zen-
teno  minister  of
war,  in  which  post
he  distinguished
himself  by  his  ac-
tivity. He  made
the  campaigns  of  1817  and  1818,  taking  part  in  the
battles  of  Cancha  Rayada  and  Maypu.  After  the
latter  engagement  the  government  intrusted  him
with  the  formation  of  a  naval  force,  and  he  laid
the  foundation  of  the  navy  which,  under  Admiral
Cochrane,  obtained  such  glorious  results.  In  1821,
after  retiring  from  the  ministry  of  war,  he  was
appointed  political  and  military  governor  of  Valpa-
raiso, and  in  1822  was  promoted  brigadier.  In  1831
he  was  appointed  inspector-general  of  the  army,  and
from  1833  till  1846  he  filled  several  important  offices
in  the  war  department.  He  was  also  a  member  of
the  supreme  council  of  war,  the  Society  of  agricul-
ture, and  the  University  of  Chili,  and  was  several
times  elected  to  congress,  serving  as  vice-president
of  the  chamber  of  deputies.  He  was  founder  and
first  editor  of  the  "  Mercurio  "  of  Valparaiso.

ZEPEDA,  Francisco  (thay-pay'-dah),  Spanish
missionary,  b.  in  La  Roda,  Mancha.  about  1525 ;  d.
in  Guatemala  in  1602.  He  entered  the  Dominican
order  in  Ocafia,  and  was  soon  transferred  to  the
missions  in  the  province  of  Chiapa,  where  he  be-
came a  thorough  student  and  expert  in  the  Indian
languages  of  that  province  and  Guatemala.  After
being  prior  of  different  convents,  he  was  elected
provincial  in  the  chapter  of  1593,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  became  commissary  of  the  Inquisition
in  Guatemala.  To  unify  the  teaching  of  the  In-
dians in  the  province,  he  was  commissioned  to
examine  and  correct  the  different  grammars  that
had  been  written  by  missionaries  in  the  popular
dialects  or  languages,  and  from  them  compiled
his  "  Arte  de  los  Jdiofnas  Chiapense,  Zoquense,
Calrlulense.  y  Cinacontlano  "  (Mexico,  1560).

ZEPHIRIN,  Antoine  (say-fee-reng),  Spanish

Eilot,  b..  in  Franche-Comte  about  1475 ;  d.  in  Noin-
re  de  Dios,  Isthmus  of  Panama,  about  1530.  Ho
followed  the  sea,  and  in  early  life  went  to  Santo
Domingo.  Afterward  he  entered  the  service  of
Pedrarias  Davila,  and  was  chief  pilot  in  Pascual  do
Andogoya's  expedition  in  1522,  which  discovered  •
San  Juan  river  and  brought  the  first  news  of  Peru.
In  the  following  year  he  sailed  as  chief  pilot  in
Francisco  de  Becerra's  expedition,  which  explored
the  Pacific  coast.  In  1525  he  conducted  Fr.m-
cisco  Pizarro  to  Peru,  and  afterward  he  made  ex-

f  editions  to  Guatemala  and  along  the  coast  of  the
sthmus  of  Darien,  of  which  he  prepared  the  first
chart.  Nothing  is  known  of  the  remainder  of  his
life,  except  that  he  died  in  Nombre  de  Dios,  where


ZEQUEIRA


ZINZENDORF


661


he  owned  extensive  lands  that  had  been  granted
to  him  by  Pedrarias  Davila.

ZEQUEIRA,  Manuel  de  (thay-kay-ee'-rah),
Cuban  author,  b.  in  Havana  about  1760 ;  d.  there
in  1846.  He  entered  the  army  when  very  young
and  sailed  to  Santo  Domingo  in  1793,  when  he
took  part  in  the  attempts  to  quell  the  revolt  of  the
negroes  in  the  French  part  of  the  island.  In  1813
he  went  to  New  Grenada,  in  1814  he  was  appointed
governor  of  the  province  of  Rio  Hacha,  and  he
was  also  governor  of  Santa  Marta  in  1815  and  of
Cartagena  in  1816.  He  was  brevetted  colonel  in
1817,  and  returned  to  Havana,  where  he  fixed  his
residence.  He  lost  his  reason  in  1821.  His  first
poetical  essays  were  published  in  1795  in  the
"  Papel  Periodico,"  of  Havana,  the  first  newspaper
in  Cuba.  "  America  y  Apolo,"  an  allegorical  work,
appeared  in  1817,  and  "  Batalla  de  Cortes  en  la
Laguna."  an  epic,  was  published  in  1820.  The
first  edition  of  his  "  Poems "  appeared  in  New
York  in  1829,  and  a  larger  one  was  published  by
his  son  (Havana,  1852).

ZERRAHN,  Carl,  musician,  b.  in  Malchow,
Mecklenburg-Schwerin,  Germany,  28  July,  1826.
He  began  the  study  of  music  in  Rostock  at  the
age  of  twelve  years,  and  completed  his  education
in  Hanover  and  Berlin.  About  1848,  with  twenty-
five  others,  he  organized  "  The  Germania  Musi-
cal Society  "  and  came  to  this  country,  giving  con-
certs in  London  on  their  way.  They  reached  New
York  in  September,  1848,  and  gave  successful  con-
certs in  New  York  and  Brooklyn,  which  were  fol-
lowed by  others  in  Philadelphia,  Baltimore,  Wash-
ington, and  New  England.  They  appeared  for
five  or  six  years  with  Jenny  Lind,  Madame  Sonn-
tag,  Ole  Bull,  Thalberg,  Alfred  Jaell,  Camilla  Urso,
and  other  artists,  disbanding  in  1854.  In  that
year  Zerrahn  became  musical  director  of  the  Han-
del and  Haydn  society  of  Boston,  which  post  he
now  holds.  From  18G6  till  1882  he  was  conductor
of  the  Harvard  musical  association.  He  has  con-
ducted the  music  festivals  of  the  Worcester  county
musical  association  every  year  since  1865,  with  the
exception  of  1868,  which  he  spent  in  Germany,
and  took  part  in  the  New  York  festivals  of  1869
and  1873.  He  is  a  member  of  several  musical  socie-
ties, and  has  edited  two  books  designed  for  musi-
cal organizations,  "The  Index"  (Boston,  1881)  and
"  The  Apograph  "  (1885).

ZEUNER,  Charles,  musician,  b.  in  Eisleben,
Prussian  Saxony,  20  Sept.,  1795;  d.  near  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  7  Nov.,  1857.  He  was  baptized  as
Heinrich  Christopher,  but  seems  to  have  changed
his  name  when  he  came  to  the  United  States  in
1824.  He  settled  in  Boston,  where  he  became  or-
ganist of  Park  street  church  and  of  the  Handel
and  Haydn  society  (1830-7).  In  1854  he  removed
to  Philadelphia,  where  he  held  various  posts  as
organist.  For  several  years  he  showed  symptoms
of  insanity,  which,  however,  were  not  thought  to
be  serious.  On  7  Nov.,  1857,  he  left  for  West  Phila-
delphia, and  on  the  same  day  committed  suicide.
His  oratorio,  "  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,"  was  pub-
lished in  1832.  He  issued  also  some  collections  of
music,  notably  "The  American  Harp"  (Boston,
1839)  and  "  Ancient  Lyre  "  (1848).

ZEVALLO  Y  BALBOA,  Miguel  (thay-val'-yo),
Spanish  missionary,  d.  in  Quito  about  1595.  He
joined  early  the  army,  and  served  in  the  Nether-
lands and  Italy,  but  entered  the  Franciscan  order
and  went  to  South  America  in  1566.  In  the  con-
vent of  his  order  at  Santa  Fe  de  Bogota  a  lay
friar,  Juan  de  Orozco,  communicated  to  him  some
documents  relating  to  American  antiquities,  and
he  was  induced  to  undertake  their  study. He  was


afterward  attached  to  the  missions  of  Nicaragua,
and  in  1576  became  librarian  of  a  convent  in  Quito.
After  that  time  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study
of  ancient  Indian  monuments,  receiving  encour-
agement from  Bishop  Pedro  de  la  Peiia.  In  1586
he  finished  his  "Miscelanea  Austral"  and  dedi-
cated it  to  the  Count  de  Villar,  viceroy  of  Peru ;
but  the  work  was  not  printed  till  Henry  Ternaux-
Compans  translated  it  into  French  and  published
it  in  his  collection  under  the  title  "  Histoire  du
Perou  "  (Paris,  1840).  Zevallo's  narrative  contra-
dicts in  several  important  particulars  that  of  Gar-
cilaso  de  la  Vega,  and  contains  many  details  about
the  early  history  of  Peru  which  are  not  found
elsewhere.  The  original  manuscript  is  preserved
in  the  archives  at  Seville,  and  a  copy  is  in  the
National  library  at  Paris.

ZIEGLER,  Henry,  theologian,  b.  near  Old  Fort,
Centre  co.,  Pa.,  19  Aug.,  1816.  lie  was  graduated
at  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in  1841,  and
at  Gettysburg  theological  seminary  in  1843,  and
in  the  latter  year  was  licensed  to  preach.  He  was
pastor  at  Selinsgrove,  Pa.,  in  1843-'5,  travelling
missionary  and  missionary  president  of  Pittsburg
synod  in  1845-'50,  pastor  at  Williamsport,  Pa.,  in
1850-'3,  agent  for  the  Parent  education  society,  re-
siding at  Selinsgrove,  Pa.,  in  1853-'5,  pastor  at  Sa-
lona,  Pa.,  in  1855-'8,  and  professor  of  theology  in
Missionary  institute,  Selinsgrove,  Pa.,  in  1858-'81.
Failing  health  then  compelled  him  to  retire  from
active  duties.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1860  from  Wittenberg  college,  Springfield,  Ohio.
Dr.  Ziegler  has  a  wide  reputation  as  an  author,  and
as  a  teacher  of  theology  he  has  been  eminently  suc-
cessful. Before  his  health  failed  he  was  a  fre-
quent contributor  to  the  periodicals  of  his  church,
especially  the  "  Evangelical  Review  and  Lutheran
Quarterly  "  and  the  "  Lutheran  Observer."  Besides
numerous  baccalaureate  and  other  addresses,  he  has
published  "  Treatise  on  Natural  Theology  "  (1860) ;
"  Treatise  on  Apologetic  Theology  "  (1861) ;  "Cate-
chetics — Historical,  Theoretical,  and  Practical  "
(Philadelphia,  1873)  ;  "  The  Pastor,  his  Relation
to  Christ  and  the  Church  "  (1876) ;  "  The  Preacher,
his  Relation  to  the  Study  and  the  Pulpit "  (1876) ;
"  Dogmatic  Theology  "  (Selinsgrove.  Pa.,  1878) ;
and  "  The  Value  to  the  Lutheran  Church  of  her
Confessions :  An  Essay  "  (Philadelphia,  1878).

ZILLIOX,  James,  R.  G  prelate,  b.  in  Newark,
N.  J.,  14  Oct.,  1849.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Vin-
cent's college,  Westmoreland  co.,  Pa.  and  on  com-
pleting his  course,  entered  the  Benedictine  order
in  1865.  After  studying  theology  he  was  or-
dained priest  on  27  July,  1873,  and  took  the  degree
of  D.  D.  at  the  university  in  Rome  on  6  Aug.,
1875.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  was
called  to  fill  the  chair  of  theology  in  St.  Vincent's
college,  which  he  held  for  several  years,  also  fill-
ing the  office  of  master  of  novices  and  that  of
prior  of  the  monastery.  In  1885  he  was  elected
abbot  of  the  newly  established  abbey  at  St.  Mary's
church  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  which  place  failing  health
compelled  him  to  resign  a  year  later.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Album  Benedictinum  "  (Beatty,  1880).

ZINZENDORF,  Nicholas  Lewis,  Count  of,  b.
in  Dresden,  Saxony,  26  May,  1700;  d.  inHerrnhut,
9  May,  1760.  He  was  educated  at  Halle  and  Wit-
tenberg. In  1722  he  conceived  the  idea  of  a  purer
church  discipline,  marks  of  which  he  observed
among  the  descendants  of  the  Unitas  Fratrum  of
Bohemia  and  Moravia,  whom  he  permitted  to  settle
on  his  estate,  and  Herrnhut  was  built  for  these
refugees.  He  finally  united  with  them,  and  in
1736  was  consecrated  one  of  their  bishops.  John
Wesley  was  indebted  to  him  both  for  his  religious


662


ZOGBAUM


ZORRILLA


organizations  and  his  missionary  plans.  In  behalf
of  his  church,  the  count  visited  England  and  trav-
elled extensively  in  Europe,  and  sent  out  mission-
aries to  all  parts  of  the  world.  His  first  visit  to
the  Western  continent  was  in  1739,  to  inspect  the
mission  organized  among  the  negroes  in  the  West
Indies.  In  December,  1741,  he  arrived  at  New
York,  and  later  went  to  Philadelphia.  He  visited
the  Moravian  tract  on  the  Lehigh,  in  Pennsyl-
vania, and  gave  the  name  of  Bethlehem  to  the  new
settlement.  The  first  six  months  of  1742  cover
the  period  of  his  most  varied  activity  during  his
sojourn  in  Pennsylvania.  Besides  conducting  the
deliberations  of  seven  religious  convocations,  he
preached  statedly  in  the  Lutheran  and  Reformed
churches,  travelled  through  the  rural  districts,  sup-
plying destitute  and  isolated  neighborhoods  with
the  gospel  and  the  means  of  education,  organized
churches,  wrote  many  papers  and  essays — some
theological,  others  controversial  and  apologetical —
and  carried  on  a  large  correspondence  with  friends
in  England  and  on  the  continent.  During  July
and  August,  1742,  he  visited  among  the  Dela wares
of  Pennsylvania  and  the  Mohicans  of  New  York
and  Connecticut,  and  in  September  among  the  In-
dians on  the  north  and  west  branches  of  the  Sus-
quehanna, preaching  the  gospel  and  organizing
missions.  He  returned  to  Europe  in  January,  1743.
For  a  list  of  Zinzendorf's  writings  see  "  Verzeichniss
der  Schriften  des  Grafen  Ludwig  von  Zinzendorf  "
(Stettin,  1824).  See  also  August  Gottlieb  Spang-
enberg's  "  Life  of  Zinzendorf "  (8  vols.,  Barby,
1772-%  ;  English  translation,  London,  1838) ;  "  No-
tices of  Count  Zinzendorf,"  by  Abraham  Ritter
(Philadelphia,  1857) ;  and  "  Moravian  Life  and
Character,"  by  James  Henry  (Philadelphia,  1859).
ZOGBAUM,  Rufiis  Fairchild,  artist,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  28  Aug.,  1849.  He  received  his
art  education  at  the  Art  students'  league,  New
York,  in  1878-'9,  and  during  1880-2  under  Leon
J.  P.  Bonnat  in  Paris.  He  has  studied  many  of  the
great  armies  of  Europe  in  field  and  garrison,  and
is  known  as  a  delineator  of  military  subjects.  He
is  a  member  of  the  American  water-color  society.
In  1884  there  appeared  in  "Harper's  Monthly  "  the
first  of  a  series  of  military  articles  written  and  il-
lustrated by  himself,  and  he  has  since  published
"  Horse,  Foot,  and  Dragoons  "  (New  York,  1887).

ZOLLICOFFER,  Felix  Kirk,  soldier,  b.  in
Maury  county,  Tenn.,  19  May,  1812 :  d.  near  Mill
Springs,  Ky.,  19  Jan.,  1862.  George,  his  grand-
father, was  a  captain  in  the  Revolutionary  army.

The  family  came
to  this  country
from  Switzerland,
and  is  of  ancestry
that  was  ennobled
by  Rodolphus  II.
in  1528.  Felix  K.
received  a  com-
mon-school educa-
tion, learned  the
printer's  trade,
and  for  about  a
year  published  a
weekly  newspaper
at  Paris,  Tenn.
He  subsequently
^g-  ^AsJp si,,  •  worked  as  a  print-

c^s&  f^-gg^^^- er fc, Knoxville.

Tenn.,  and  Hunts-
ville,  Ala. He  began  at  this  time  to  write  for

Eublic  journals,  and  one  of  his  prose  fancies  may
e  found  in  Field's  "  Scrap-Book." From  Hunts-
ville  he  removed  to  Columbia,  Tenn.,  and  took


editorial  charge  of  the  "  Observer."  He  served
as  a  soldier,  and  afterward  as  a  commissioned
officer,  in  the  Seminole  war,  and,  returning  in
1837,  resumed  the  "Observer"  and  edited  it  in  the
canvass  of  1840  in  the  interest  of  the  Whig  candi-
date. He  published  and  edited  also  a  weekly  agri-
cultural paper.  In  1841  he  became  associate  editor
of  the  Nashville  "  Banner,"  the  organ  of  the  Whig
party  in  Tennessee.  He  was  elected  comptroller  of
the  state  in  1844,  and  resigned  in  1849.  In  August
of  the  latter  year  he  was  elected  a  state  senator.
He  was  chosen  to  congress  in  April,  1853,  and  served
continuously  for  three  terms,  attaining  reputation
as  an  able  debater.  He  retired  from  public  life  in
1859,  but  was  chosen  as  a  delegate  to  the  peace
conference  of  1861.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  entered  the  Confederate  service  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-general.  9  July,  1861.  When  the
National  army  was  about  to  enter  east  Tennessee
by  way  of  Cumberland  Gap,  Gen.  Zollicoffer,  with
2.000  men,  went  by  way  of  Knoxville  to  the  point
of  threatened  attack.  Soon  after  he  had  estab-
lished his  camp  near  Mill  Springs,  on  Cumberland
river,  Gen.  George  B.  Crittenden  arrived  and  as-
sumed command.  In  the  battle  that  ensued  (see
Thomas,  George  H.),  Gen  Zollicoffer,  having  or-
dered an  advance,  rode  forward  with  several  of  his
staff  officers  to  inspect  the  enemy's  position,  and
passed  by  mistake  beyond  their  lines.  He  endeav-
ored to  retrace  his  route,  and  was  soon  in  front  of
the  4th  Kentucky  regiment,  commanded  by  Col.
Speed  S.  Fry.  with  whom  he  exchanged  salutes,  and
rode  off  undetected  (as  he  wore  an  oil-cloth  over-
coat). But  one  of  his  staff  fired  a  pistol  toward
the  National  line,  which  was  at  once  answered  by
a  volley  that  killed  Gen.  Zollicoffer  and  two  other
officers.  Another  account  represents  that  Gen.  Zol-
licoffer was  shot  by  Col.  Speed  S.  Fry.

ZOOK,  Samuel  Kosciuzko,  soldier,  b.  in  Penn-
sylvania about  1823 ;  d.  in  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  2  July,
1863.  He  learned  the  telegraph  business  early  in
life,  and  made  several  discoveries  in  electric  science
that  gave  him  reputation.  He  settled  in  New  York
about  1848,  became  connected  with  several  mili-
tary organizations,  and  in  1857  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  6th  New  York  militia.  His  health  had
failed,  but  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  ac-
companied his  regiment  to  the  scat  of  hostilities,
and  was  appointed  military  governor  of  Annapo-
lis, Md.  After  his  return  he  recruited  the  o  7 1 1 1
regiment  of  New  York  volunteers,  was  commis-
sioned colonel,  and  led  it  to  the  Virginia  peninsula.
During  that  campaign  he  generally  commanded  a
brigade,  and  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  he  became  briga-
dier-general  of  volunteers.  He  led  the  57th  New
York  regiment  at  Chancellorsville  and  Gettysburg,
and  was  killed  in  the  latter  battle.

ZORRILLA,  Francisco  (thor-ril'-yah),  Span-
ish administrator,  b.  in  Murcia  about  1490 :  d.  in
Santiago,  Guatemala,  in  1546.  He  was  a  knight  of
the  order  of  Santiago,  and,  after  serving  as  chief
clerk  in  the  office  of  the  council  of  the  Indies,  was
promoted  treasurer  of  the  city  of  Santiago  de
Guatemala,  and  sailed  with  Pedfo  de  Alvarado,  ar-
riving in  1530.  He  became  regidor  of  Santiago  in
1534,  and,  during  the  absence  of  Alvarado,  in  1540
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  council  of  govern-
ment, which  elected  Beatriz  de  la  Cueva  regent.
After  the  death  of  the  latter,  11  Sept.,  1541,  Zorril-
la  assisted  Bishop  Francisco  Marroquin  in  the  gov-
ernment of  Santiago  and  in  rebuilding  the  city,
which  had  been  totally  destroyed  by  volcanic  erup-
tions, in  which  Dofia  Beatriz  perished.  Zonilla
left  a  valuable  manuscript,  which  is  preserved  in
the  archives  of  the  Indies  at  Seville  and  which  is


ZORRILLA  Y  MORAL


ZULOAGA


663


soon  to  be  published  by  the  Spanish  government.
It  is  entitled  "  Historia  del  descubrimiento,  de  la
conquista,  y  de  la  administracion  de  la  provincia
de  Santiago  de  Guatemala."  The  recent  state
publication,  "  Cartas  de  Indias  "  (Madrid,  1872),
contains  also  several  interesting  memoirs  of  Zor-
rilla  upon  the  administration  of  Pedro  de  Alvara-
do,  the  Indians  of  Guatemala,  and  the  intestine
divisions  among  the  earlv  conquerors.

ZORRILLA  Y  MORAL,  Jos6,  Spanish  poet,
b.  in  Valladolid,  21  Feb.,  1817.  He  studied  law  in
Toledo  and  Valladolid.  and  became  clerk  to  a  jus-
tice of  the  peace  in  the  latter  city ;  but  he  soon
devoted  himself  exclusively  to  literature.  His
father,  an  attorney  of  reputation,  being  displeased
with  his  occupation,  sent  him  home ;  but  young
Jose  made  his  way  to  Madrid,  where  he  remained
hidden  for  several  weeks.  On  15  Feb.,  1837,  at
the  funeral  of  the  noted  poet  Larra,  he  repeated  an
elegy  which  was  universally  praised,  and  this  was
the  means  of  effecting  a  reconciliation  with  his
father.  Zorrilla  published,  a  few  months  later,  his
first  volume  of  poetry,  which  increased  his  reputa-
tion. After  1845  he  resided  partly  in  Paris  and
partly  in  Brussels  till  about  1851,  when  he  went
to  Mexico  and  was  director  of  the  theatre  in  the
city  of  Mexico  in  1853-'5.  He  wrote  several  come-
dies there,  which  were  represented  in  Mexico  and
in  South  America  with  great  success.  In  18G3
he  returned  to  Mexico,  was  given  an  employment
in  Emperor  Maximilian's  household,  and  published
several  poems  in  praise  of  the  emperor  and  his
wife,  which  were  severely  criticised  by  the  patriots
and  engaged  their  author  in  a  controversy  with  a
Mexican  poet.  He  left  Mexico  in  1865  for  Spain,
where  he  has  since  partly  resided.  Zorrilla's  works
include  "  Cantos  del  travador,  colleccion  de  leyen-
das  y  tradiciones  historicas  "  (3  vols.,  Madrid,  1841) ;
"  Flores  Perdidas"  (1843) ;  "El  Zapatero  y  el  rey,"
which  is  considered  his  best  comedy  (1844);  "Gra-
nada," a  long  romantic  poem,  imitated  from  Vic-
tor Hugo,  which  is  considered  his  masterpiece
(2  vols.,  Paris,  1853-4) ;  "•  Album  de  un  loco "
(Madrid,  1867);  and  "Poema  religioso"  (1869).
Complete  editions  of  his  works  have  been  pub-
lished several  times  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1847 ;  3  vols.,
1853 ;  6  vols.,  Madrid,  1877).

ZUAZO,  Alonso  (thoo-ah'-tho),  Spanish  jurist,
b.  in  Olmedo  in  1466;  d.  in  Santo  Domingo  in
1527.  He  was  canon  of  Valladolid  and  well  known
for  his  erudition,  when  he  was  attached  as  jurist
to  the  commission  that  was  sent  by  Cardinal  Xime-
nes  to  the  New  World  at  the  solicitation  of  Bish-
op Las  Casas.  Zuazo's  instructions  gave  him  the
power  of  organizing  justiee  in  the  West  Indies,
and  appointing  judges  at  his  own  discretion.  After
liberating  the  Indians  in  Santo  Domingo  that  had
been  reduced  to  slavery  by  the  Spanish  officials,
Zuazo  advised  the  commissioners  to  oppose  Las
Casas's  schemes  of  prohibiting  forced  labor  entire-
ly, and  thus  won  the  support  of  the  settlers,  while
Las  Casas  denounced  him  to  the  court.  Zuazo
befriended  both  the  Indians  and  settlers,  while  he
was  opposed  by  the  officials.  After  Ximenes  had
surrendered  the  regency  to  Charles  V.,  Zuazo  was
sent  to  Cuba  in  1518  to  organize  the  administra-
tion of  justice  there.  At  Diego  Velazquez's  ad-
vice, he  went  afterward  to  Mexico  to  settle  the
quarrel  between  Garay  and  Cortes  concerning  the
government  of  Panuco,  and  was  well  received  by
Cortes.  In  1523  he  returned  to  Cuba,  and  two
years  later  was  appointed  auditor  of  the  audiencia
of  Santo  Domingo,  which  post  he  retained  till  his
death.  An  interesting  memoir  of  Zuazo  on  the
condition  of  the  Indians  in  Santo  Domingo  and


Cuba,  written  from  Cuba  in  1521,  was  published  by
Joaquin  Garcia  Icazbalceta  in  his  "  Colleccion  de
Documentos  para  la  Historia  de  Mexico  "  (Mexico,
1858-'66),  and  another  in  which  Zuazo  recounts  the
cruelties  of  the  Spaniards  in  Santo  Domingo  and
Cuba,  is  mentioned  by  Icazbalceta.

ZUBLY,  John  Joachim,  clergyman,  b.  in  St.
Gall,  Switzerland,  in  1725 :  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  23
July,  1781.  It  is  not  known  when  he  came  to  this
country,  but  in  the  early  records  of  the  Independ-
ent Presbyterian  church  in  Savannah  the  follow-
ing entry  appears:  "On  the  25th  of  April,  1758,
Mr.  Zubly  was  called  to  Savannah  from  Wando
Neck,  S.  C,  and  accepted  the  call,  preaching  his
farewell  sermon,  28  Jan.,  1759,  in  the  Independent
Presbyterian  church  in  Charles  Town  [sic].  He
took  charge  of  the  Independent  Presbyterian
church  in  Savannah  the  following  year,  1760,  be-
ing the  first  regular  pastor."  He  was  a  man  of
marked  ability  and  learning,  and  in  1770  received
from  Princeton  the  degree  of  D.  D.  In  1774  he
was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress,  and
was  there  selected  to  prepare  a  petition  to  the  king
"  upon  the  present  unhappy  situation  of  affairs."
He  served  also  as  member  of  the  committee  of  cor-
respondence for  Georgia.  He  wrote  an  emphatic
letter  to  Lord  Dartmouth,  3  Sept.,  1775,  with  refer-
ence to  Lord  Dunmore's  attempt  to  incite  the
negroes  in  Virginia  to  insurrection.  He  co-operated
zealously  with  the  popular  party  until  it  became
evident  that  congress  was  about  to  declare  the
independence  of  the  United  States.  He  declared
in  congress  that  "a  republic  was  little  better  than
a  government  of  devils."  Presently  he  opened  a
correspondence  with  Sir  James  Wright,  royal  gov-
ernor of  Georgia,  in  which  he  betrayed  the  plans
of  the  popular  party.  His  conduct  and  language
exciting  suspicion,  he  was  closely  watched,  and
one  of  his  letters  was  seized.  These  facts  were
mentioned  in  congress  by  Samuel  Chase,  whereat
Dr.  Zubly  fled  from  Philadelphia  and  returned  to
Georgia,  where  he  threw  off  all  disguise  and  made
common  cause  with  the  Tories.  In  1777  he  was
banished  from  Savannah  with  the  loss  of  half  his
estate.  He  then  remained  with  Tory  friends  in
South  Carolina  until  Sir  James  Wright  was  rein-
stated in  the  government  of  Georgia.  Dr.  Zubly
then  returned  to  his  pastoral  work  in  Savannah,
and  remained  there  until  his  death.  He  has  left
his  name  upon  Joachim  street  and  Zubly  street
in  Savannah,  and  upon  the  hamlet  of  St.  Gall.
See  William  B.  Stevens's  "History  of  Georgia"
(vol.  ii.,  p.  121,  New  York,  1859),  and  Charles  C.
Jones's  "  History  of  Georgia  "  (vol.  ii.,  pp.  188-204,
Boston,  1883).  The  letter  to  Lord  Dartmouth  was
published,  at  the  request  of  Gen.  James  Oglethorpe,
in  the  "London  Magazine"  for  January,  1776.

ZULOAGA,  Felix,  president  of  Mexico,  b.  in
Alamos,  Chihuahua,  in  1814;  d.  in  the  city  of
Mexico  in  1876.  In  his  twentieth  year  he  entered
the  national  guard  as  lieutenant,  and  served  until
1837  on  the  frontier  against  the  Apaches,  entering
the  engineer  corps  the  same  year.  He  served  dur-
ing the  riots  of  July,  1840,  and  against  the  seces-
sionists of  Yucatan  in  1842-'3,  and  in  the  latter
year  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel.  During
the  preparations  for  the  war  against  the  United
States  he  directed  the  construction  of  the  defences
of  Monterey  and  Saltillo,  and  in  1847  fortified  the
southern  approaches  to  the  capital.  In  1848  he
retired  to  Chihuahua,  but  in  1853  was  recalled  to
active  service,  promoted  colonel,  made  president  of
the  perpetual  court-martial,  and  sent  to  the  south
against  the  revolution  of  Ayutla  in  1854,  as  com-
mander of  a  brigade. He  was  forced  to  capitulate


664


ZULOAGA


ZUNDEL


at  Nuxco  in  1855,  but  Comonfort  saved  him  from
being  shot,  keeping  him  on  his  staff,  and  after  the
triumph  of  the  Liberal  party  Zuloaga  was  sent  to
pacify  the  mountaineers  of  Queretaro,  and  served
in  the  iwo  sieges  of  Puebla.  His  former  affilia-
tion with  the  Conservative  and  Church  party  caused

him  to  conspire
against  the  Lib-
eral government,
and  on  17  Dec,
1857,  he  pro-
nounced with  his
brigade  in  Tacu-
baya  against  the
new  constitution,
and  for  invest-
ing Comonfort
with  extraordi-
nary powers.  The
latter  wavered  for
a  long  time  be-
tween the  two
Sarties,  and  on  11
an.,  1858,  Zuloa-
ga's  brigade,  un-
der command  of
Gen.  Parra,  occu-
pied the  principal  points  of  the  capital,  proclaim-
ing that  Comonfort  was  deposed  and  that  Zuloaga
was  president  in  his  stead.  He  took  possession  of
the  executive  on  23  Jan.,  all  the  reactionary  chiefs
flocked  round  him,  and  the  bloody  so-called  '•  war
of  reform  "  soon  began,  the  Liberals  under  Juarez
opposing  the  Church  party,  which  proclaimed,  un-
der the  banner  of  "  religion  and  special  legislation
for  the  church  and  military,"  the  abolishment  of  the
reform  laws,  and  received  secret  but  strong  support
from  the  Spanish  government.  Zuloaga  despatched
forces  under  Miramon,  Osollo,  and  other  chiefs
against  the  former;  but  he  found  opposition  in  his
own  party.  In  December,  1858,  the  garrison  rose
against  him,  and  on  the  23d  of  that  month  he  was
deposed  and  took  refuge  in  the  British  legation.
The  provisional  president  that  was  elected  by  the
representative  junta,  Gen.  Miramon,  on  his  return
from  the  campaign  of  the  interior,  21  Jan.,  1859,
declared  the  deposition  of  Zuloaga  illegal,  and  re-
instated him ;  but  the  latter  resigned  and  appoint-
ed Miramon  his  substitute,  delivering  the  execu-
tive on  2  Feb.  Several  times  afterward  he  seemed
inclined  to  resume  his  place  at  the  head  of  the  gov-
ernment, and  he  was  forced  to  accompany  Mira-
mon nominally  as  chief  of  engineers,  but  in  reality
as  a  prisoner.  On  Miramon  s  march  to  Jalisco,
Zuloaga  escaped  from  Leon  in  July,  1860,  and  im-
mediately issued  a  manifesto,  revoking  his  resigna-
tion of  2  Feb.,  1859,  and  declaring  himself  consti-
tutional president,  and,  although  he  did  not  find
followers,  Miramon  went  to  the  capital,  resigned
as  substitute,  and  caused  himself  to  be  appointed
provisional  president  by  the  representative  junta.
Shortly  before  the  final  defeat  of  the  reactionary
party,  Zuloaga  made  his  peace  with  Miramon,  and
was  with  him  in  Mexico  the  day  after  the  battle
of  Calpulalpam,  when  the  funds  in  the  treasury
were  divided.  Zuloaga  then  made  his  way  to  the
mountains  to  raise  partisans,  and  shortly  reap-
peared at  the  head  of  a  force  to  oppose  the  Liberal
government,  together  with  Marquez,  Mejia,  Ne-
grete,  Taboada,  and  other  chiefs.  The  ex-minister,
Melchor  Ocampo,  was  delivered  by  the  guerilla
chief,  Cajigas,  to  him  and  Marquez,  and  shot  at
Tepeji,  by  the  orders  of  one  of  the  two,  for  which
cruel  act  they  were  declared  outlaws  by  congress,
and  a  price  of  $10,000  was  set  on  their  heads. On


the  invasion  of  the  French  in  1862,  unlike  Mar-
quez, Almonte  and  other  reactionary  chiefs,  he  re-
fused to  serve  the  foreigners  and  retired  to  Europe,
but  in  August,  1864.  he  returned  and  made  his
submission  to  the  empire  without  taking  any  fur-
ther part,  in  politics.

ZUMARRAGA,  Juan  de  (thoo-mar'-rah-gah),
first  bishop  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Durango,  Biscay,  in
1468 ;  d.  in  Mexico  city  in  1548.  He  entered  the
Franciscan  order  at  Aranzazu,  and  was  superior
of  several  convents  till  Charles  V.  appointed  him
inquisitor  of  Biscay.  In  1527  he  was  named  first
bishop  of  New  Spain,  and  in  1528  sailed  for  Mex-
ico as  visitor  of  his  order  and  protector  of  the
Indians.  He  had  difficulties  with  the  first  audi-
encia  under  Nufio  de  Guzman,  whose  cruel  meas-
ures against  the  Indians  he  opposed.  After  the
second  audiencia,  under  the  presidency  of  Sebas-
tian Ramirez  de  Fuenleal,  took  charge  of  the  gov-
ernment in  1531,  Zumarraga  returned  to  Spain,
was  consecrated  bishop  in  September,  1534,  and
sailed  soon  afterward  to  Mexico,  where  he  con-
tinued to  befriend  the  Indians.  He  began  the
construction  of  the  first  cathedral,  founded  the
hospitals  of  Amor  de  Dios  in  Mexico  and  Vera
Cruz,  and  established  also  a  hospital  for  Francis-
can monks.  The  image  of  Our  Lady  of  Guadalupe,
fainted  on  the  Indian  cloak,  was  first  seen  by  him.
n  1538  he  assembled  the  first  Mexican  council,
and  in  1545  Pope  Paul  III.  raised  him  to  the  dig-
nity of  metropolitan  archbishop  of  New  Spain.
He  is  probably  the  author  of  a  "  Doctrina  Cristi-
ana,"  or  catechism  (Seville,  1532),  which  still  ex-
ists in  the  Franciscan  convent  of  Texeoco,  with
his  autograph  dedication  to  Friar  Toribio  Motoli-
nia,  who  translated  it  into  Aztec.  It  was  the  first
book  that  was  printed  in  the  New  World,  on  a

Sress  and  material  furnished  by  the  famous  printer
uan  Cromberger,  of  Seville,  and  brought  to  Mexi-
co by  the  first  viceroy,  Antonio  de  Mendoza  (Mexi-
co, 1540).  He  also  wrote  several  catechisms  and
other  religious  works,  which  were  translated  into
Aztec  (Mexico,  1543-'6) ;  "  Varias  Cartas  al  Empera-
dor  Carlos  V." ;  and  "  Memorias  de  la  Nueva  Es-
pafia,"  giving  noteworthy  details  about  the  condi-
tion of  Mexico  soon  after  the  conquest.  The  letters
and  history  are  preserved  in  manuscript  in  the  ar-
chives of  the  Indies,  and  will  appear  in  the  continua-
tion of  the  state  publication,  "  Cartas  de  Indias."

ZUMAYA,  Manuel  (thoo-mah'-yah),  Mexican
clergyman,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  about  1670;
d.  in'Oaxaea  about  1740.  He  studied  theology  in
the  College  of  San  Ildefonso,  but  early  showed  a
proclivity  for  music,  and  was  appointed  director
of  the  choir  of  the  cathedral  in  his  native  city.
On  account  of  his  dramatic  and  musical  talent,  he
was  a  favorite  of  the  viceroys, Dukes  of  Albu-

?uerque  and  of  Linares,  and  he  translated  several
talian  operas  for  representation  in  the  viceregal
palace.  In  1737  he  followed  the  bishop-elect  of
Oaxaca  to  his  diocese,  where  he  became  rector  of
the  cathedral  and  devoted  himself  thenceforth  ex-
clusively to  his  clerical  duties.  Besides  the  operas
translated  from  the  Italian,  he  is  the  author  of  "  El
Rodrigo,"  a  drama  represented  in  the  viceregal

{talace  to  celebrate  the  birth  of  the  crown-prince
juis  (Mexico,  1708),  and  "  La  Partenope,"'  an  opera,
text  and  music  by  Zumaya  (1711).

ZUNDEL,  John,  musician,  b.  in  Hochdorf,
near  Stuttgart,  Germany,  in  1815;  d.  in  Cannstadt,
Germany,  in  July,  1882.  He  studied  at  the  Royal
academy  of  Esslingen,  Germany,  during  1829-'31,
and  began  the  study  of  the  violin,  but  relinquished
that  instrument  for  the  organ.  In  1840  he  went
to  St.  Petersburg,  and  in  1847  came  to  the  United


zuniga


ZUNIGA Y  ACEVEDO


665


States.  He  held  various  posts  as  organist,  notably
in  Plymouth  church,  Brooklyn,  where  he  was  al-
most uninterruptedly  from  1850  till  1865.  In  1865
he  went  to  Europe,  remaining  two  years.  After  his
return  he  resumed  his  duties  at  Plymouth  church,
but  in  1878  went  again  to  Europe.  He  composed
a  large  number  of  pieces  for  the  organ,  as  well  as
some  sacred  and  vocal  music,  and  published  "  Mod-
ern Organ-School  "  (Boston,  1860) :  "  The  Amateur
Organist  "  (1854) ;  a  "  Treatise  on  Harmony  and
Modulation"  ;  ,and  other  books.

ZtJNIGA,  Alvaro  Manrique  de  (thoon'-ye-
gah),  Marquis  de  Villa-Manrique,  seventh  viceroy
of  Mexico,  b.  in  Seville.  Spain,  about  1530 ;  d.  in
Madrid  about  1600.  He  entered  Mexico,  18  Oct.,
1585,  and  one  of  his  first  measures  was  to  send  re-
enforcements  to  Acapulco  and  fortify  that  city
against  English  corsairs.  He  also  ordered  the
arming  of  a  fleet  to  attack  their  vessels ;  but  the
Licenciado  Palacios,  who  was  in  command,  hear-
ing that  Sir  Francis  Drake  had  sailed  for  the  East
Indies,  remained  in  port  and  allowed  a  privateer
that  was  lying  in  wait  at  Cape  San  Lucas  to  cap-
ture the  galleon  '•  Santa  Ana,"  with  a  rich  cargo
of  treasure  and  silk  from  Manila.  Zufiiga  was
well  liked,  both  by  Spaniards  and  Indians,  whom
he  treated  humanely,  but  although,  according  to
Torquemada,  he  was  wise  and  prudent,  his  hasty
temper  led  him,  in  a  dispute  about  jurisdiction
with  the  audiencia  of  Guadalajara,  to  resort  to
force,  and,  as  the  audiencia  armed  also,  the  colony
was  on  the  eve  of  a  civil  war.  His  enemies  mean-
while spread  calumnies  at  court,  and  Philip  II.  in
1589  ordered  his  relief  by  Luis  de  Velasco,  and
commanded  the  bishop  of  Tlaxcala,  Pedro  Ro-
mano, to  investigate  Zuiiiga's  government.  Ro-
mano, who  had  an  old  grudge  against  the  viceroy,
arrived  in  Mexico  before  Velasco,  and  on  17  Jan.,
1590,  relieved  Zuniga,  going  so  far,  in  his  enmity
toward  the  latter,  as  to  attach  even  the  clothes  of
his  wife  in  the  seizure  of  his  property.  For  six
vears  Zuniga  continued  in  Texcoco,  the  object  of
Romano's  persecution,  till  in  1596  he  sailed  for
Spain  to  seek  justice,  and  obtained  at  last  the  re-
versal of  the  sentence  of  confiscation,  but  he  died
beforejie  could  recover  his  property.

ZUNIGA,  Baltasar  de,  Marquis  de  Valero,
thirty-sixth  viceroy  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Andalusia
about  1670;  d.  in  Madrid  about  1730.  He  was  ap-
pointed in  1716,  and  on  16  Aug.  received  the  gov-
ernment from  his  predecessor,  the  Duke  of  Linares.
Shortly  afterward  the  governor  of  Texas,  Capt.
Diego  Ramon,  sent  information  that  for  want  of
provisions  he  would  have  to  abandon  the  territory
and  retire  to  Coahuila  unless  relieved,  and  Zufiiga
at  once  hurried  forward  provisions,  ammunition,
troops,  and  artisan  settlers  to  teach  the  Indians.  In
1717  a  Florida  chief,  Tixjanaque,  who  had  mani-
fested to  the  governor  of  Pensacola  a  desire  to
visit  the  viceroy,  arrived  in  Mexico,  and  was  so
well  treated  by  Zufiiga  that  he  accepted  baptism
and  offered  the  perpetual  friendship  of  his  tribe.
In  the  next  year  the  English  wood-cutters  in  La-
guna  de  Terminos,  and  French  settlers  in  Texas,
not  having  complied  with  an  order  of  evacuation,
were  forcibly  expelled,  and  several  colonies  were
founded  in  Texas.  In  1719  the  viceroy  received
the  visit  of  Toniatuh,  a  chief  of  the  Cora  Indians
of  the  Nayarit  mountains,  upon  whom  he  prevailed
to  receive  a  Spanish  force  in  his  mountains,  which
had  been  the  refuge  of  criminals  from  New  Galicia
and  New  Vizcaya.  When  the  chief  afterward  re-
fused compliance  with  the  treaty,  Zufiiga  sent  a
large  force,  which,  after  long  warfare,  conquered  the
tribe  and  established  in  their  territory  a  town,


which  was  called  San  Francisco  de  Valero.  In
1719  war  began  with  the  French,  and  on  19  May
they  captured  Pensacola,  which  was  restored  in
1720.  On  account  of  feeble  health,  the  viceroy  re-
peatedly resigned,  and  when,  on  15  Oct.,  1722,  his
successor  arrived,  he  returned  to  Spain.

ZUNIGA,  Dionisio  de,  Central  American  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Guatemala  about  1550  ;  d.  in  Chiapa
about  1620.  He  entered  the  Dominican  order  in
the  province  of  Chiapa,  and  labored  the  greater
part  of  his  life  in  the  missions  among  the  Quiche
Indians,  in  whose  language  he  was  so  proficient  that,
besides  translating  Friar  Francisco  Viana's  works,
written,  in  the  dialect  of  Vera  Paz,  into  Quiche,  he
also  wrote  a  grammar,  a  volume  of  sermons,  and
several  religious  treatises  in  that  language,  the
manuscripts  of  which  are  preserved  in  the  episco-
pal archives  of  Guatemala.  There  also  existed  the
manuscript  of  another  work  of  his,  "  El  Mare  Mag-
num," a  fantastical  history  of  the  Indian  mon-
archies on  the  Pacific  coast,  but  it  is  lost.

ZUNIGA  Y  ACEVEDO,  Gaspar  de,  Count  de
Monterey,  viceroy  of  Mexico  and  Peru,  b.  in  Anda-
lusia about  1540 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  10  Feb.,  1606.
Being  appointed  to  succeed  in  Mexico  Luis  de
Velasco  the  younger,  who  had  been  promoted  to
Peru,  he  sailed  from  Spain  in  1595,  and  took
charge  of  the  government  on  5  Nov.  of  that  year.
He  was  a  protector  of  the  native  race,  and  nearly
every  Sunday  went  personally  to  the  square  to  su-
perintend the  hiring  of  the  Indians  and  prevent
abuses  by  the  employers  and  inferior  authorities.
In  1596  he  despatched  an  expedition  under  Sebas-
tian Vizcayno  for  the  exploration  and  coloniza-
tion of  Lower  California,  which  returned  in  the
next  year  without  accomplishing  much  for  want
of  provisions.  An  English  buccaneer,  William
Park,  surprised  and  captured  the  city  of  Cam-
peachy  in  1597,  obliging  the  alcalde  to  take  refuge
with  a  small  force  in  the  convent  of  San  Fran-
cisco, but  during  the  sacking  of  the  town  the  gov-
ernor returned  from  an  expedition,  and,  joining
the  forces  of  the  alcalde,  totally  defeated  the  Eng-
lish, forcing  them  to  re-embark  with  heavy  loss.
In  1600  the  city  of  Vera  Cruz  was  removed  from
the  former  unhealthy  locality  to  the  present  site
opposite  San  Juan
de  Ulua,  and  in  the
same  year  an  expe-
dition under  Juan
de  Ofiate  and  Vi-
cente Zaldivar  was
sent  for  the  con-
quest of  New  Mexi-
co. By  order  of  the
king,  Zufiiga  de-
spatched, in  1602, a
second  expedition
under  Sebastian
Vizcayno  to  explore
the  coast  of  Upper
California  and  ac-
quire information
about  the  fabulous
Strait  of  Anian.
That  expedition
named  the  Bay  of
Monterey  in  honor
of  the  viceroy,  and
the  same  name  was
given  to  a  colony
that  was  founded
in  New  Leon.  In
1603  Zufiiga  was  promoted  viceroy  of  Peru,  and.  on
the  arrival  of  his  successor,  he  delivered  the  gov-


666


ZUSlGA  Y  ONTIVEROS


ZURITA


eminent  in  October,  to  the  great  sorrow  of  the  na-
tives, who  thronged,  weeping,  round  their  benefac-
tor to  take  leave  of  him.  The  settling  of  his  pri-
vate affairs  and  detentions  in  Panama  and  Paita
delayed  him  for  more  than  a  year,  and  he  did  not
enter  Lima  till  28  Nov.,  1604.  With  great  activity
he  concluded  the  preparations  for  the  fleet  that
was  about  to  be  sent  by  royal  order  for  the  explo-
ration of  the  South  sea  under  Pedro  Fernandez
Quiros.  It  sailed  on  21  Dec,  1605,  and  shortly
afterward  he  died,  without  being  able  to  execute
numerous  measures  that  he  had  prepared  for  the
benefit  of  the  countrv.

ZUSlGA  Y  ONTIVEROS,  Felipe,  Mexican
mathematician,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  about
1720;  d.  there  in  1780.  He  was  a  printer  by  trade,
and  had  an  establishment  in  his  native  city,  but
had  a  passion  for  mathematical  studies,  became
proficient  in  that  science,  and,  after  examination,
was  appointed  royal  land-surveyor  and  hydraulic
and  mining  engineer.  He  was  author  of  the  fol-
lowing works,  all  printed  in  his  establishment :
"  Efemerides  calculadas  y  pronosticadas  segun  el
Meridiano  de  Mexico''  (1752);  "Explication  del
Pronostico  de  Mexico  "  (1753) ;  "  Respuesta  satis-
factoria  a  las  Anotaciones  hechas  a  las  Efemerides
Mexicanas  "  (1756) :  and  "  Bomba  hidraulica  para
levantar  las  aguas"  (1770).

ZURILLA,  Pedro  de  (thoo-reel'-yah),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Seville  about  1500  ;  d.  near  Asuncion,
Paraguay,  in  1544.  He  early  entered  military  ser-
vice, fought  in  Italy,  and  joined  Pedro  de  Men-
doza's  expedition  to  the  river  Plate,  assisting  in
the  foundation  of  Buenos  Ayres,  2  Feb.,  1535,  and
serving  as  one  of  Juan  de  Ayolas's  lieutenants  in
the  expedition  that  explored  Parana  and  Paraguay
rivers.  He  participated  in  founding  Asuncion,  15
Aug.,  1536,  and  was  a  member  of  the  common
council  of  the  new  city.  When  Ayolas  resumed
the  march  forward,  Zurilla  commanded  the  rear-
guard, and  later  was  despatched  to  the  ships  that
had  been  left  in  charge  of  Domingo  de  Irala,  with
the  sick  and  to  obtain  supplies.  But  the  soldiers
refused  to  accompany  him  to  rejoin  his  chief,  and
when  news  was  received  of  Ayolas's  death  he  was
the  first  to  propose  the  election  of  Irala  as  com-
mander-in-cnief.  After  the  arrival  of  the  new
governor,  Alvar  Nunez  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  in  1542,
when  difficulties  arose  between  the  latter  and  Irala,
Zurilla  advised  a  compromise,  and  induced  Irala
to  accept  Cabeza  de  Vaca's  offers  to  make  the
former  deputy  governor.  After  assisting  Irala  in
subduing  the  Guaycurus,  he  was  detached  in  1544
against  the  Cacove  Indians,  whom  he  defeated  in
several  encounters,  and  built  the  fortress  of  San
Juan  in  their  territory.  While  he  marched  against
the  Xarayes,  who  had  rebelled,  the  Cacoves  stormed
the  fort  of  San  Juan,  and,  joining  forces  with  the
Xarayes,  attacked  Zurilla.  The  latter  retreated
about  eighty  miles  from  Asuncion,  where  he  resist-
ed the  Indians  till  the  arrival  of  succor,  dying  a
few  days  later  from  the  wound  of  a  poisoned  arrow.


ZURITA,  or  ZORITA,  Alonso  (thoo-ree'-tah),
Spanish  statesman,  b.  in  New  Castile  about  1500;
d.  in  Seville  about  1570.  He  studied  law,  was  ap-
pointed in  1544  auditor  of  the  audiencia  of  Santo
Domingo,  and  was  sent  two  years  later  to  organize
the  administration  of  New  Granada  at  Santa  Marta
and  Cartagena.  Returning  to  Santo  Domingo  in
1549,  he  was  transferred  a  few  months  later  to  the
audiencia  of  Los  Confines  or  Comayagua,  and,  vis-
iting nearly  the  whole  country,  organized  cdurts  of
justice  everywhere  during  a  sojourn  of  three  years.
He  was  promoted  member  of  the  audiencia  of  Mexi-
co in  1553,  retired  from  active  service  about  1564,
and  then  returned  to  Spain.  He  studied  in  Amer-
ica the  early  history  and  antiquities  of  the  Indians,
and  addressed  several  interesting  memorials  to  the
king,  one  of  which  was  printed  in  the  2d  volume
of  Joaquin  Garcia  Icazbalceta's  "  Coleccion  de
documentos  para  la  historia  de  Mexico  "  (Mexico,
1858-'66).  Another  memorial,  preserved  in  the
archives  of  San  Francisco  in  Mexico,  was  utilized
by  Lorenzo  Boturini  and  Father  Clavigero,  and  is
also  mentioned  in  Jose  Mariano  Beristain's  cata-
logue, under  the  title  of  "  Breve  y  sumaria  Relaeion
de  los  Caciques  y  Seiiores  y  sus  maneras,  y  diferen-
cia  que  habia  de  ellos  en  la  Nueva  Espana,  Leyes  y
Costumbres  de  los  Indios  y  Tributos  que  pagaban
a  sus  Principes."  An  abridged  copy  of  it  was  pub-
lished in  Jose  F.  Ramirez's  "  Coleccion  de  Docu-
mentos ineditos  relativos  al  Descubrimiento,  Con-
quista,  y  Colonization  de  las  Posesiones  Espafiolas
en  America  y  Oceania,"  but  the  original  narrative
was  for  the  first  time  printed  in  its  entirety  in  a
French  translation  in  Henry  Ternaux-Compans's
collection,  under  the  title  "  Rapports  sur  les  diffe-
rentes  classes  de  chefs  dans  la  Nouvelle  Espagne  "
(Paris,  1840).  Zurita  wrote  also  a  treatise  on  taxa-
tion and,  according  to  Boturini,  a  "  Narrative  of
Facts  concerning  New  Spain,"  which  is  lost.

ZURITA,  Fernando,  Spanish- American  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Huete,  Spain,  in  the  16th  century.
He  was  graduated  in  theology  at  the  University  of
Alcala,  and,  after  his  ordination,  came  as  a  mis-
sionary to  this  country,  where  he  soon  acquired
the  Indian  language.  He  was  the  author  of  a  book
concerning  the  religion  of  the  aborigines,  "  Theolo-
gicarum  in  Indis  Questionum  Enchiridion  :  ad  II-
lustrissimum  Dominum  Gemozium  Zapata,  Epis-
copum  Conchensera  "  (Madrid,  1586).

ZURITA,  Pedro,  Mexican  Jesuit,  b.  in  Puebla
about  1690;  d.  in  Oaxaca  in  1739.  He  entered  the
Society  of  Jesus  in  1712,  and  was  very  proficient  in
philosophy,  which  chair  he  held  in  the  principal
college  of  Mexico  till  1727,  when  he  was  elected
rector  of  the  college  in  Oaxaca.  He  published
"  Elegia  et  Epigrammata  in  laudem  Academiae
Mexicana?  in  funere  111  mi.  Dom.  Nicolai  Gomez  de
Cervantes"  (Mexico,  1736);  and  the  following  are
still  in  manuscript  in  the  library  of  the  University
of  Mexico :  "  Naturalis  Philosophise  Explanatio  " ;
"Funiculus  Theologian  Scholastics " ;  and  "De
Summa  Trinitate  et  de  Fide  Divina."


SUPPLEMENT.


ABBETT


AGNUS


ABBETT,  Leon,  governor  of  New  Jersey,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  8  Oct.,  1836.  He  was  educated
in  his  native  city,  studied  law,  and  settled  in  Phil-
adelphia, but  subsequently  removed  to  New  York
city,  entered  into  partnership  with  William  J.  A.
Fuller,  and  took  high  rank  at  the  bar.  He  settled
in  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  in  1862,  and  served  in  the  New
Jersey  legislature  in  1865-6  and  1869-70,  being
twice  speaker.  He  was  chairman  of  the  Demo-
cratic state  convention  in  1868,  president  of  the
state  board  of  education  in  1869,  a  member  of  the
state  senate  in  1875-'7,  and  governor  of  New  Jersey
in  1884-'6.  He  was  chairman  of  the  state  delega-
tion to  the  National  Democratic  conventions  in
1872,  1876,  and  1880,  and  in  1888-'9  he  was  a  can-
didate for  the  U.  S.  senate.

ABBOTT,  Josiah  Gardner,  lawyer,  b.  in
Chelmsford,  Mass.,  1  Nov.,  1815.  He  was  prepared
for  college  by  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1832,  and  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1835.  Mr.  Abbott  served  in  the  legislature  in
1836-'7,  became  state  senator  in  1841,  and  from  1864
until  1888  was  a  delegate-at-large  to  every  Na-
tional Democratic  convention.  He  was  a  judge
of  the  superior  court  of  Suffolk  county,  Mass.,  in
1855-'8  removed  to  Boston,  where  he  resumed  his
profession,  and  in  1874  was  a  Democratic  candidate
for  congress.  After  successfully  contesting  the
election  of  his  opponent,  he  served  from  28  July,
1876,  till  3  March,  1877,  but  declined  renomination,
and  resumed  practice.  In  1876  he  was  a  member
of  the  electoral  commission.  Williams  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1863.

ACTON,  Thomas  Coxon,  banker,  b.  in  New
York  city,  23  Feb.,  1823.  He  was  educated  in  his
native  city,  was  assistant  deputy  county  clerk  for
three  years,  and  then  clerk  in  the  surrogate's  office,
afterward  deputy  register  for  six  years,  in  1860
became  commissioner  of  the  New  York  metropoli-
tan police,  and  two  years  later  was  president  of  that
board,  where  he  remained  for  seven  years,  in  which
office  he  did  good  service  in  suppressing  the  draft
riots.  In  1870  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of
the  U.  S.  assay-office,  which  post  he  held  for  twelve
years.  He  became  U.  S.  assistant  treasurer  at  New
York  in  1882,  and  since  1887  he  has  been  president
of  the  bank  of  New  Amsterdam  in  that  city.

AGNEW,  David  Hayes,  surgeon,  b.  in  Lan-
caster county,  Pa.,  24  Nov.,  1818.  His  education
was  received  at  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  and  at  New-
ark college,  Del.  He  was  graduated  in  medicine  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1838,  and  began
to  practise  in  Chester  county,  but  removed  to  Phila-
delphia and  became  a  lecturer  in  the  School  of
anatomy,  also  establishing  the  Philadelphia  school
of  operative  surgery.  In  1854  he  was  elected  one
of  the  surgeons  of  the  Philadelphia  hospital,  where
he  founded  a  pathological  museum,  and  was  also


surgeon  to  the  Pennsylvania  hospital.  In  1863  he
was  appointed  demonstrator  of  anatomy  and  assist-
ant lecturer  on  clinical  surgery  in  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  in  1870
he  was  chosen  to  the  chair  of  clinical  surgery,  and
in  1871  he  became  professor  of  the  principles  and
practice  of  surgery  there,  and  of  clinical  surgery,
in  the  University  hospital.  For  several  years  he
was  one  of  the  surgeons  at  Wills  ophthalmic  hospi-
tal, and  also  one  of  the  surgeons  to  the  orthopedic
surgery.  He  has  at-
tained wide  reputa-
tion as  a  surgeon,
and  is  a  rapid  and
skilful  operator  in
every  department.
In  his  capacity  of
efficient  surgeon,  as
well  as  of  consult-
ing physician,  he
has  had  many  cases
of  great  public
and  scientific  im-
portance, the  best
known  being  that
of  President  Gar-
field. He  has  made
many  valuable  con-
tributions to  the
literature  of  his
profession,  among
which  are  works  on  "  Practical  Anatomy  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1867)  and  "  Lacerations  of  the  Female  Per-
inasum  and  Vesico- vaginal  Fistula"  (1867) ;  a  series
of  sixty  papers  on  "  Anatomy  and  its  Relation  to
Medicine  and  Surgery " ;  and  an  exhaustive  work
on  the  "  Principles  and  Practice  of  Surgery"  (3  vols.,
1878),  which  has  been  translated  into  the  Japanese
language,  and  is  the  great  work  of  his  life.

AGNUS,  Felix,  soldier,  b.  in  Lyons,  France,  4
July,  1839.  He  was  educated  at  College  Jolie  Clair,
near  Paris,  and  in  1852  set  out  on  a  voyage  around
the  world,  spending  four  years  in  that  manner.  In
1860  he  came  to  the  United  States,  and  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  enlisted  in  Duryea's  5th
New  York  zouaves.  At  the  battle  of  Big  Bethel
he  saved  the  life  of  Gen.  Judson  Kilpatrick,  and
was  promoted  to  2d  lieutenant.  He  aided  in  rais-
ing the  165th  New  York  volunteers,  in  which  he
was  given  the  color  company.  In  the  autumn  of
1862  his  regiment  was  sent  to  Louisiana,  and  he
took  part  in  the  siege  of  Port  Hudson,  where  he
was  promoted  major  and  for  a  time  had  com-
mand of  his  regiment.  Subsequently  he  served  in
Texas,  and,  after  attaining  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  was  ordered  to  the  19th  corps,  and  served
under  Gen.  Philip  H.  Sheridan,  taking  part  in  the
battles  of  Opequan,  Fisher's  Hill,  Winchester,  and


/3r%  eL^t^dk/hMfif'


668


ALDRICH


AUSTIN


Cedar  Creek.  His  last  service  was  in  the  Depart-
ment of  the  South,  where  he  was  commissioned  to
dismantle  the  old  Confederate  forts  in  South  Caro-
lina, Georgia,  and  Florida,  and  turn  all  the  prop-
erty over  to  the  U.  S.  government.  He  received  the
brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  13
March,  1865,  and  was  mustered  out  of  service  on
22  Aug.,  1865.  On  resuming  civil  life  he  was  given
charge  of  the  business  department  of  the  Baltimore
"American,"  and  he  has  since  become  its  publisher.

ALDRICH,  Charles,  journalist,  b.  in  Elling-
ton, Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  2  Oct.,  1828.  He  re-
ceived a  common-school  education,  and  spent  one
fear  in  Jamestown  academy.  In  1857  he  went  to
owa  and  established  the  "  Freeman  "  in  Webster
City.  He  served  as  chief  clerk  of  the  Iowa  house
of  representatives  in  1860-'2,  1866,  and  1870,  and
was  a  member  of  that  body  in  1882-'3.  Mr.  Aldrich
is  the  author  of  many  of  the  important  laws  of
Iowa,  including  that  changing  the  system  of  county
government  from  dictatorship  of  a  single  county
judge  to  a  board  of  supervisors,  for  the  protection
of  birds,  and  for  the  preservation  of  the  public  docu-
ments of  the  state.  He  originated  the  agitation  in
the  public  press  that  resulted  in  the  repeal  in  Iowa
of  the  so-called  granger  laws  for  the  regulation  of
the  transportation  on  the  railways  and  the  adoption
of  a  commission  system.  In  1882  he  became  widely
known  through  his  efforts  to  secure  legislation  pro-
hibiting the  issue  of  railroad  passes  to  public  officers.
His  speeches  and  articles  in  the  "  North  American
Review  "  and  elsewhere  were  circulated  extensively
in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  This  agitation
was  largely  instrumental  in  promoting  the  passage
of  the  interstate  commerce  act.  He  presented  to
the  state  of  Iowa,  in  1884,  his  large  and  valuable
collection  of  manuscripts,  portraits,  and  autograph
letters.  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Iowa  college  in  1869.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  American  ornithologist's  union  in
New  York  in  1883,  and  was  elected  corresponding
member  of  the  Wisconsin  historical  society  in  1887.

ALEXANDER,  Robert,  member  of  the  Conti-
nental congress,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  about  1740;
d.  probably  in  England  after  1796.  He  was  elect-
ed a  member  of  the  people's  committee,  12  Nov.,
1774,  and  of  the  Provincial  convention  of  Mary-
land in  1775,  and  chosen  a  deputy  to  the  Conti-
nental congress,  9  Dec,  1775,  being  re-elected,  4
July,  1776,  but  soon  after  the  promulgation  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence  he  sailed  for  Eng-
land with  other  Baltimore  loyalists.  He  was  after-
ward appointed  agent  for  Maryland  loyalists  to
present  and  prosecute  their  claims  before  the  Brit-
ish government.

ANDERSON,  David,  Canadian  Anglican  bish-
op, b.  in  London,  England,  10  Feb.,  1814 ;  d.  in
Bristol,  England,  5  Nov.,  1885.  He  was  graduated
at  Oxford  in  1836,  was  vice-principal  of  St.  Bee's
college,  Cumberland,  in  1841-'7,  and  incumbent  of
All  Saints',  Derby,  in  1848-'9.  From  1849  till  1864
he  was  bishop  of  Prince  Rupert's  Land,  Canada,  and
upon  his  resignation  he  returned  to  England  and
was  appointed  vicar  of  Clifton,  and  made  chancel-
lor of  St.  Paul's  cathedral,  London.  Bishop  An-
derson received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1849.  He
was  the  author  of  "  Notes  on  the  Flood  " ;  "  Net
in  the  Bav  " ;  and  other  works.

APPLETON,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Ipswich,
N.  H.,  12  July,  1804.  He  is  the  nephew  of  Jesse
Appleton  (vol.  i.,  p.  84).  After  his  graduation  at
Bowdoin  in  1822,  he  taught,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  in  1832  settled  in  Bangor,
Me.  He  was  reporter  of  decisions  in  1841,  in  1852
was  appointed  a  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court,


and  in  1862-'83  was  chief  justice.  Bowdoin  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1860.  Judge  Apple-
ton  published  two  volumes  of  "Reports"  (Hal-
lowell,  1841)  and  "  The  Rules  of  .Evidence,  Stated
and  Discussed"  (Philadelphia,  1860). — His  son,
John  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in  Bangor,  Me.,  29  Aug.,
1839;  d.  there,  31  Aug.,  1871,  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1860,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  raised  and  commanded  a  company  in  the  12th
Maine  volunteers.  He  was  commissioned  colonel
of  the  81st  U.  S.  colored  troops,  served  in  the  De-
partment of  the  Gulf,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  1865.  Subse-
quently he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Maine,  and  appointed  U.  S.  judge  for  the  district
of  eastern  Texas,  but  declined.

ARMSTRONG,  Samnel  Chapman,  soldier,  b.
in  Wailuka,  Maui,  Hawaiian  islands,  30  Jan.,  1839.
His  parents  were  among  the  first  missionaries  to
the  Sandwich  islands,  where  he  resided  until  1860.
After  graduation  at  Williams  in  1862  he  entered
the  volunteer  army  as  a  captain  in  the  125th  New
York  regiment,  and  in  1863  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  9th  U.  S.  colored  infantry.  Sub-
sequently he  was  colonel  of  the  8th  U.  S.  colored
regiment.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  on  13  March,  1865,  and  after  the  war
went  to  Hampton,  Va.,  to  work  among  the  freed-
men.  Gen.  Armstrong  was  a  founder  of  the  Hamp-
ton normal  and  agricultural  institute  for  negroes
in  1868,  and  since  that  date  has  served  as  its  prin-
cipal. In  1878,  Indians  were  admitted.

ASHHURST,  John,  surgeon,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  23  Aug.,  1839.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1857,  and  at  the  medi-
cal department  in  1860,  and  from  1862  till  1865  he
served  as  acting  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army.
Since  1877  he  has  been  professor  of  clinical  surgery
in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  he  has  been
connected  with  several  hospitals.  He  is  the  author
of  "  Injuries  of  the  Spine  "  (Philadelphia,  1867)  and
"  Principles  and  Practice  of  Surgery  "  (1871).  and
the  editor  of  "  Transactions  of  the  International
Medical  Congress  "  (1877)  and  the  "  International
Encyclopaedia  of  Surgery"  (6  vols.,  New  York,
1881-'6 ;  2d  ed.,  1888).

ATWOOD,  Isaac  Morgan,  clergyman,  b.  in
Pembroke,  Genesee  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  March,  1838.  He
was  educated  at  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  entered  the  Uni-
versal ist  ministry  in  1859,  and  was  pastor  of
churches  in  New  York,  Maine,  and  Massachusetts.
Since  1879  he  has  been  president  of  Canton  theo-
logical seminary,  St.  Lawrence  university,  where  he
is  also  professor  of  theology  and  ethics.  The  de-
gree of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  bv  St.  Law-
rence university  in  1872,  and  that  of  D.  D.  by  Tufts
in  1879.  He  was  editor  of  the  "  Boston  Universal-
ist "  in  1867-72,  and  of  the  "  Christian  Leader"  in
1873-'5,  and  has  been  associate  editor  of  the  latter
journal  since  1875.  Dr.  Atwood  is  the  author  of
"Have.  We  Outgrown  Christianity f "  (Boston,
1870);  "Glance  at  the  Religious  Progress  of  the
United  States"  (1874);  "Latest  Word  of  Univer-
salism  "  (1878) ;  "Walks  about  Zion"  (1881);  and
"  Manual  of  Revelation  "  (1888).

AUSTIN,  Jane  Goodwin,  author,  b.  in  Wor-
cester, Mass.,  25  Feb.,  1831.  She  is  the  daughter
of  Isaac  Goodwin,  of  Worcester,  was  educated  in
private  schools  in  Boston,  and  on  24  June,  1850,
married  Loring  H.  Austin.  Her  publications  are
"Fairy  Dreams"  (Boston,  1859);  "  Dora  Darling"
(1864);  "Outpost"  (1866):  "Cipher"  (New  York,
1869) ;  "  The  Shadow  of  Moloch  Mountain  "  (1870) ;
"Moonfolk"  (1874);  "Mrs.  Beauchamp  Brown"
(Boston,  1880) ;  "A  Nameless  Nobleman"  (1881);


BA1RD


BARNES


669


"  The  Desmond  Hundred  "  (1882) :  and  "  Nantucket
Scraps  "  (1883).  Mrs.  Austin  has  in  press  "  The
Sword  of  Miles  Standish."


BAIRD,  Henry  Samuel,  lawver,  b.  in  Dublin,
Ireland,  16  May,  1800 ;  d.  in  Green  Bay,  Wis.,  28
April,  1875.  His  father,  Thomas  Baird,  one  of  the
United  Irishmen,  was  imprisoned  for  a  year  in  Kil-
mainham  jail,  Dublin,  and  on  his  release  in  1802
came  to  the  United  States,  whence  in  1805  he  was
followed  by  his  family.  Henry  studied  law  at
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  Cleveland,  Ohio,  and  in  1822
settled  in  Mackinaw,  Mich.,  where  he  opened  a
school.  In  the  spring  of  1823  a  new  court  was  es-
tablished by  act  of  congress,  and  he  was  admitted
to  practice.  In  September,  1824,  he  removed  to
Green  Bay.  In  1832  he  served  as  quartermaster-
general  in  the  Black  Hawk  war,  in  1836  was
elected  a  member  and  chosen  president  of  the  first
legislative  council  of  the  territory  of  Wisconsin,
and  the  same  year  was  appointed  the  first  attor-
ney-general of  the  territory,  and  subsequently  in
that  year  was  secretary  of  Gov.  Henry  Dodge,
U.  S.  commissioner  to  negotiate  the  treaty  with
the  Menomenee  Indians  at  Cedar  Rapids,  when
about  4,000,000  acres  were  ceded  to  the  U.  S.  gov-
ernment. In  1846  he  was  a  member  of  the  Con-
stitutional convention,  and  was  chairman  of  the
committee  on  the  organization  and  officers  of  coun-
ties and  towns,  and  their  powers  and  duties.  He
was  the  last  Whig  candidate  for  governor  of  Wis-
consin. For  many  years  he  was  a  vice-president
of  the  State  historical  society,  and  a  contributor  to
its  published  collections.  In  1861-'2  he  was  mayor
of  Green  Bay. — His  brother,  Thomas  James,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  30  April,  1794;  d.  in  Pottsville,
Pa..  5  April,  1842 ;  was  graduated  at  West  Point
in  1814,  served  in  the  war  against  Great  Britain,
and  resigned  a  captain  of  artillery  in  1828. — The
son  of  the  latter,  Edward  Carey,  b,  in  Pottsville,
Pa.,  in  April,  1836 ;  d.  near  Ashland,  Va.,  14  Nov.,
1874,  served  in  the  civil  war  for  nearly  four  years,
was  assistant  adjutant-general  to  Gen.  John  F.
Reynolds,  in  command  of  the  left  wing  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac;  and  on  the  first  day  of
the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  that  general  died  in  his
arms.  Baird  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  major
for  gallant  conduct.

BAKER,  Peter  Carpenter,  publisher,  b.  in
North  Hempstead,  N.  Y.,  25  March,  1822.  Four
of  his  ancestors  were  in  the  Revolutionary  army.
He  was  educated  at  Harlem  academy,  entered  a
book-store  in  New  York,  learned  the  printer's
trade,  and  in  1850,  with  Daniel  Godwin,  estab-
lished the  firm  of  Baker  and  Godwin,  which  made
a  specialty  of  printing  law-books  and  became
widely  known  for  fine  work.  In  1865  Mr.  Baker
established  the  law-publishing  firm  of  Baker,
Voorhis  and  Co.,  which  is  still  in  existence  and  has
a  large  catalogue.  Mr.  Baker  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Metropolitan  literary  association,
edited  the  "  Steam  Press,"  a  patriotic  periodical,
during  the  civil  war  (1861-'5),  and  originated  the
plan  for  a  statue  of  Benjamin  Franklin  in  Print-
ing-house square,  New  York,  which  was  given"  by
Albert  De  Groot.  He  early  became  known  as  a
public  speaker,  delivering  orations  at  Fort  Inde-
pendence, N.  Y.,  4  July,  1848 ;  at  Trenton,  N.  J.,
4  July,  1849 ;  and  in  the  old  Broadway  tabernacle,
New  York,  on  the  anniversary  of  Bunker  Hill,
1853.  He  has  published  addresses  and  mono-
graphs, including,  besides  the  orations  noted
above,  "  European  Recollections "  (New  York,
1861)  and  "  Franklin  "  (1865).


BAKER,  Wendell,  runner,  b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.
Y.,  19  Oct.,  1862.  He  is  a  son  of  Francis  Baker,  a
New  York  merchant,  with  whom  he  is  now  associ-
ated in  business.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1886.  During  his  preparation  for  college  and  sub-
sequently until  his  graduation  he  distinguished
himself  by  winning  twenty-one  championships  at
university  and  intercollegiate  meetings.  He  placed
to  his  credit  twelve  best  college  records,  and  in  his
senior  year  made  the  world's  records  on  the  100,
220,  and  440  yards  dash.  Of  these  the  first  two  he
shares  with  numerous  other  amateurs,  but  on  the
440  yards  his  time  of  47f  seconds  is  the  best
record  by  either  amateur  or  professional  runners.

BAKER,  William  Spoil  n.  antiquarian,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  April,  1824.  He  became  a
conveyancer,  but  retired  on  account  of  his  health,
and  turned  his  attention  to  art  and  literary  pur-
suits. Mr.  Baker  possesses  a  collection  of  en-
graved portraits  of  George  Washington  which  is
the  most  complete  that  is  known,  and  his  num-
ber of  medals  of  Washington  is  second  only  to
that  of  William  S.  Appleton,  of  Boston,  while  his
collection  of  biographies  of  Washington  is  the
most  noted  in  existence.  He  is  a  member  of  the
American  philosophical  society,  one  of  the  council
of  the  Pennsylvania  historical  society,  and  since
1885  has  been  vice-president  of  the  Pennsylvania
academy  of  fine  arts.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Origin
and  Antiquity  of  Engraving"  (Philadelphia,  1872;
2d  ed.,  illustrated,  Boston,  1875) ;  "  American  En-
gravers and  their  Works "  (Philadelphia,  1875) ;
"'  William  Sharp,  Engraver,  and  his  Works  "  (1875) ;
"  Engraved  Portraits  of  Washington  "  (1880) ;  "  Me-
dallic  Portraits  of  Washington  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Char-
acter Portraits  of  Washington"  (1887) ;  and  he  is  pre-
paring for  the  press  (1889)  "A  List  of  Biographies
and  Biographical  Sketches  of  George  Washington."

BALDWIN,  Maurice  Scollard,  Canadian  An-
glican bishop,  b.  in  Toronto,  Canada,  21  June,
1836.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college,  To-
ronto, in  1859,  ordained  deacon  in  April,  1860,  and
became  a  presbyter  in  July,  1861.  He  was  incum-
bent of  Port  Dover,  Ont.,  in  1862-5,  and  in  1870
was  appointed  curate  of  Christ  church  cathedral,
Montreal.  He  became  canon  of  the  cathedral  in
the  following  year,  and  in  1872  was  elected  rector
of  the  parish.  In  1882  he  was  appointed  dean  of
Montreal,  and  on  17  Oct.,  1883,  was  elected  bishop
of  Huron,  to  which  office  he  was  consecrated  on
30  Nov.  of  the  same  year.  He  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Trinity  college,  Toronto,  in  1882.
Bishop  Baldwin  is  the  author  of  "  A  Break  in  the
Ocean  Cable  "  (Montreal,  1877),  "  Life  in  a  Look  "
(1879),  and  a  volume  of  "  Sermons."

BARBOUR,  John  Strode,  senator,  b.  in  Cul-
peper  county,  Va.,  29  Dec,  1820.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  University  of  Virginia,  adopted  the
profession  of  law,  served  several  terms  in  the  legis-
lature, and  was  active  in  state  politics.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1880,  and
served  three  terms.  In  1883  he  became  chairman
of  the  Democratic  organization  in  Virginia,  suc-
ceeded in  preventing  the  re-election  of  Gen.  Will-
iam Mahone,  and  secured  the  defeat  of  the  Re-
adjuster  party.  He  continued  chairman  of  the
Virginia  Democratic  committee  in  1884-'8,  and
was  active  in  the  canvass  for  the  election  of  Gro-
ver  Cleveland  to  the  presidency.  In  1888  he  was
chosen  U.  S.  senator  as  a  Democrat.  He  has  been
active  in  railroad  matters,  and  is  president  of  the
Virginia  midland  railroad  company.

BARNES,  Alfred  Smith,  publisher,  b.  in  New
Haven.  Conn.,  28  Jan.,  1817 ;  d.  in  Brooklvn,  N.
Y.,  17  Feb.,  1888. He  entered  the  book-publishing


670


BAXTER


B1DDLE


business  at  sixteen  years  of  age  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
went  to  New  York  in  1885,  and  in  1838  formed  a
partnership  with  Prof.  Charles  Davies  for  the  pub-
lication of  the  latter's  mathematical  works.  He
removed  to  Philadelphia  in  1840,  but  returned  to
New  York  in  1845,  and  continued  in  the  active
management  of  his  business  till  1880.  Soon  after
settling  in  New  York  he  formed  the  plan  of  pub-
lishing the  "  National  Series  of  Standard  School-
Books,"  and  the  firm's  principal  business  has  been
in  educational  works.  Mr.  Barnes  was  interested
in  the  establishment  of  the  elevated  railroads  of
New  York  city,  and  was  connected  with  the  central
branch  of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  and  several
banking  and  insurance  institutions.  He  gave  lib-
erally, and  left  $25,000  to  be  equally  divided  be-
tween twenty-five  educational  institutions,  $25,000
to  be  equally  divided  between  five  religious  socie-
ties, and  $45,000  to  the  Young  men's  Christian  as-
sociation of  Cornell.

BAXTER,  James  Phinney,  author,  b.  in  Gor-
harn,  Me.,  23  March,  1831.  He  was  educated  in
Portland,  Me.,  and  Lynn,  Mass.,  and  became  a  mer-
chant and  manufacturer.  He  organized  the  asso-
ciated charities  in  Portland,  and  was  instrumental
in  founding  the  Maine  industrial  school  for  girls.
Mr.  Baxter  in  1887  presented  to  the  Portland
public  library,  the  Portland  society  of  art,  and
the  Maine  historical  society  conjointly,  a  lot  of
land,  and  is  erecting  upon  it,  at  a  cost  of  $100,-
000,  a  building  for  these  societies.  He  is  the
author  of  a  volume  of  poems  entitled  "Idyls
of  the  Year"  (Portland,  1884);  "The  Trelawney
Papers,"  published  as  the  3d  volume  of  the  "  Docu-
mentary History  of  Maine  "  (1884) ;  "  George  Cleeve,
of  Casco  Bay,  1630-1667"  (1885);  and  "Sir  Ferdi-
nando  Gorges  and  his  Province  of  Maine  "  (1889).
He  has  also  edited  "  Digby's  Journal,"  the  writer
of  which  served  under  Burgoyne,  under  the  title  of
"  The  British  Invasion  from  the  North  "  (Albany,
1887),  and  the  4th  volume  of  the  "  Documentary
History  of  Maine,"  containing  documents  from
American  and  foreign  archives  (Portland,  1889).

BELLAMY,  Edward,  author,  b.  in  Chicopee
Falls,  Mass.,  26  March,  1850.  He  was  educated  at
Union  college  but  was  not  graduated.  In  1871,
after  studying  law,  he  was  admitted  to  practice.
For  several  years  he  was  assistant  editor  of  the
Springfield,  Mass.,  "  Union,"  an  editorial  writer  of
the  New  York  "  Evening  Post,"  and  a  founder  of
the  Springfield  "  Daily  News."  He  is  now  a  con-
tributor to  various  magazines.  His  published
works  are  "Six  to  One,  a  Nantucket  Idyl "  (New
York,  1877) ;  "  Dr.  Heidenhoff's  Process  "  (1879) ;
"Miss  Ludington's  Sister"  (Boston,  1885);  and
"  Looking  Backward  "  (1888).

BENHAM,  Andrew  Ellicott  Kennedy,  naval
officer,  b.  on  Staten  island,  10  April,  1832.  He  en-
tered the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  24  Nov.,  1847,
and  became  a  passed  midshipman,  10  June,  1853.
He  was  ordered  to  the  "  Princeton  "  in  July,  1853,
transferred  to  the  "St.  Mary's,"  Pacific  squadron,
and  served  on  her  till  1857,  and  was  commissioned
a  master,  15  Sept.,  and  lieutenant,  16  Sept.,  1855.
He  was  attached  to  the  "  Crusader,"  on  the  Home
station,  in  1860-'l,  and  when  the  civil  war  began
he  was  made  executive  officer  of  the  "  Bienville,"
on  the  South  Atlantic  blockade,  where  he  partici-
pated in  the  capture  of  Port  Royal,  S.  C,  and  in
1863  served  in  the  "  Sacramento."  Benham  was
promoted  to  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,
and  given  the  "  Penobscot,"  in  the  Western  Gulf
blockading  squadron,  until  the  close  of  the  war  in

1865.  He  was  on  duty  at  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  in

1866,  and  on special  service in the "Susque-


hanna" in  1867.  He  was  promoted  to  com-
mander, 25  July,  1866,  served  at  the  Brooklyn
navy-yard  in  1868-'9,  as  light-house  inspector  in
1870-'l,  and  commanded  the  monitors  "Saugus"
in  1871-2  and  "Canonicus"  in  1872-'3,  on  the
North  Atlantic  station.  He  then  served  as  light-
house inspector  in  1874-'8,  was  promoted  to  cap-
tain, 12  March,  1875,  and  commanded  the  flag-ship
"  Richmond,"  on  the  Asiatic  station,  in  1878-'81.
He  was  on  duty  at  Portsmouth  navy-yard  from
8  Dec,  1881,  until  15  Nov.,  1884,  when  he  was
appointed  lighthouse  inspector,  and  served  until
January,  1888.  He  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of
commodore,  30  Oct.,  1885.

BIDDLE,  James  Stokes,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  15  Jan.,  1818.  He  was  ap-
pointed a  midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  18  Oct.,
1833,  and  became  lieutenant,  20  Aug.,  1844.  He
was  engaged  in  the  Florida  war  with  a  fleet  of
boats,  and  during  the  Mexican  war  he  was  in
command  of  a  gun-boat  and  served  with  the
naval  batteries  in  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz  and
the  capture  of  Tobasco.  In  1856  he  resigned  from
the  navy  and  was  elected  president  of  the  Shamo-
kin  Valley  railroad.  In  1861,  at  the  opening  of  the
civil  war,  he  offered  his  services  to  the  secretary  of
the  navy,  agreeing  to  retire' at  the  close  of  the  war,
but  no  formal  action  was  taken  in  regard  to  it.  In
1871  he  was  the  Democratic  candidate  for  mayor
of  Philadelphia,  but  was  not  elected. — His  kins-
man, Craig,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  10  Jan.,  1823,
is  a  son  of  Nicholas  Biddle  (1786-1844),  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1841,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  of  Philadelphia  in  1844.  He  represented
Philadelphia  in  the  legislature  in  1849-'50.  In
April,  1861,  he  was  made  a  major  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  Robert  Patterson,  and  served  in  the  Shenan-
doah valley.  He  was  then  appointed  on  the  staff
of  Gov.  Andrew  G.  Curtin,  and  was  detailed  to
organize  new  regiments.  On  the  invasion  of
Maryland  and  Pennsylvania  by  the  Confederate
army  in  1863,  he  joined  a  regiment  of  Philadelphia
militia  as  a  private,  and  marched  to  the  front.  In
January,  1875,  he  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  of  Philadelphia,  and  in
the  following  autumn  was  elected  to  the  same
office,  as  a  Republican,  by  a  large  majority.  In
1885  he  was  re-elected,  having  been  renominated
as  well  by  the  Democratic  party  as  by  his  own.
He  has  been  president  of  the  Philadelphia  agri-
cultural society,  and  has  written  on  agriculture
and  on  a  variety  of  other  subjects.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  the  Historical  society  of  Pennsylvania,
and  has  been  one  of  its  vice-presidents.  —  An-
other kinsman,  Chapman,  lawyer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  22  Jan.,  1822 ;  d.  there,  9  Dec,  1880,
was  the  son  of  Clement  C.  Biddle  (1784-1855),
who  organized  and  was  first  captain  of  the  State
fencibles,  and  had  command  of  the  1st  volunteer
light  infantry  in  the  war  of  1812.  The  son  was
educated  at  St.  Marv's  college  in  Baltimore,  and
was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in  1848.  He
soon  attained  a  lucrative  practice,  and  was  so-
licitor of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad  company,  and
subsequently  counsel  for  that  corporation.  In
April,  1861,  he  formed  a  company  of  artillery  to
aid  in  protecting  Philadelphia,  and  was  made  its
captain.  During  the  summer  of  1862  he  under-
took the  raising  of  a  regiment  of  infantry,  which
on  1  Sept.,  1862,  as  the  121st  Pennsylvania  volun-
teers, took  the  field  with  him  as  its  colonel.  He
took  part  in  the  battles  of  Fredericksburg  and
Chancellorsville,  and  at  Gettysburg  had  command
of  a  brigade  in  the  1st  corps.  In  December,  18(53,
he  resigned  from  the  army  and  resumed  the  prac-


BINGHAM


BRIGHTLY


671


tice  of  his  profession,  which  he  continued  until
shortly  before  his  death.  Col.  Biddle  was  connect-
ed with  the  Fairmount  park  art  association,  and,
through  his  counsel,  beautiful  fountains  and  groups
were  placed  in  the  park.

BINGHAM,  Henry  Harrison,  congressman,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10  July,  1841.  He  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  college  in  1862,  became  a
lieutenant  in  the  140th  Pennsylvania  volunteers,
was  wounded  at  Gettysburg,  Spottsylvania,  and
Farmville,  and  in  July,  1866,  was  mustered  out  as
judge  advocate,  with  the  rank  of  major  and  brevet
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  was  postmaster
at  Philadelphia  in  1867-'?2,  but  resigned  to  become
clerk  of  the  courts  of  oyer  and  terminer  and  quar-
ter sessions  of  Philadelphia,  to  which  office  he  was
re-elected  in  1875,  and  served  till  1878,  when  he
was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Republican.  He  has
since  occupied  a  seat  in  the  latter  body  by  re-elec-
tion. Gen.  Bingham  was  a  delegate-at-large  from
Pennsylvania  to  the  National  Republican  conven-
tion in  1872,  and  a  delegate  from  the  first  district
to  the  conventions  of  1876,  1884,  and  1888.

BISHOP,  Judson  Wade,  soldier,  b.  in  Evans-
ville,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  June,  1831.  He  re-
ceived his  education  at  Predonia  academy,  N.  Y.,
where  his  father  was  settled  as  pastor  of  the  Bap-
tist church  for  several  years,  and  later  at  Belleville,
Jefferson  co.  After  serving  as  a  clerk  and  book-
keeper, he  taught  for  two  winters,  then  studied
civil  engineering,  and  in  1853  entered  the  office  of
the  Grand  Trunk  railway  at  Kingston,  Ont.  After
serving  as  an  assistant  engineer  there  and  in  Min-
nesota, he  settled  in  Chatfield,  Minn.,  as  a  survey-
or, publishing  a  map  and  pamphlet  history  of  that
county.  He  also  taught  there,  and  then  purchas-
ing the  "  Democrat "  in  1859,  which  he  published
until  1861,  when  he  sold  it  and  recruited  a  compa-
ny of  volunteers.  He  was  mustered  as  a  captain
of  the  2d  Minnesota  regiment  on  26  June,  1861,
and  served  through  the  war  in  the  west.  He  rose
to  be  colonel,  14  July,  1864,  and  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  on  7  June,  1865.  Since
the  war  he  has  been  engaged  in  building  and  op-
erating railroads  in  Minnesota.  He  resigned  m
April,  1881,  to  engage  in  railroad  construction.

BLODGETT,  Henry  Williams,  jurist,  b.  in
Amherst,  Mass.,  21  July,  1821.  His  parents  re-
moved, to  Illinois  about  1831.  When  seventeen
years  of  age  Henry  attended  the  Amherst  acad-
emy one  year,  whence  he  returned  to  Illinois  and
engaged  in  teaching  and  subsequently  in  land-
surveying  until  twenty -one  years  of  age.  He
studied  law  in  Chicago  with  Jonathan  Y.  Scam-
mon  and  Norman  B.  Judd,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1845,  and  began  practice  in  Waukegan,  111.,
where  he  still  resides.  In  1844  he  voted  the  Anti-
slavery  ticket,  and  he  has  since  been  an  adherent
of  the  Anti-slavery  and  Republican  parties.  In  1852
he  was  elected  to  the  general  assembly  of  Illinois,
being  the  first  avowed  Anti-slavery  member  that
ever  occupied  a  seat  in  that  body,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  was  elected  to  the  state  senate.  As  a
legislator  he  was  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  useful,
and  was  largely  instrumental  in  shaping  the  legis-
lation of  the  commonwealth  and  in  promoting  the
development  of  the  resources  of  Illinois.  In  1855
and  for  several  years  subsequently  he  was  associ-
ated with  the  legal  department  of  the  Chicago  and
Northwestern  railway,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the
projectors.  He  was  the  pioneer  in  the  building  of
the  Chicago  and  Milwaukee  railroad,  and  was  iden-
tified with  it  in  the  capacities  of  attorney,  direct-
or, and  president.  Later  he  was  solicitor  of  the
Michigan  Southern,  Fort  Wayne,  Rock  Island,  and


Northwestern  roads,  and  he  retired  when  the  busi-
ness reached  such  proportions  that  it  was  impos-
sible for  one  man  to  attend  to  it.  In  1870  he  was
appointed  by  President  Grant  a  judge  of  the  U.  S.
district  court  for  the  northern  district  of  Illinois,
which  office  he  still  holds.

BLODGETT,  Rufus,  senator,  b.  in  Dorchester,
N.  H.,  9  Oct.,  1834.  He  studied  in  local  schools
and  academies,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen  was  ap-

Srenticed  to  the  Amoskeag  locomotive  works,  at
[anchester,  N.  H.,  where  he  learned  the  trade  of
a  machinist.  In  1866  he  removed  to  New  Jersey
and  engaged  in  the  railroad  business.  From  1874
till  1884  he  was  superintendent  of  the  New  Jersey
southern  railroad,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  ap-
pointed superintendent  of  the  New  York  and  Long
Branch  railroad,  which  place  he  still  holds.  Sena-
tor Blodgett  is  also  president  of  the  Long  Branch
city  bank.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New  Jersey
legislature  in  1878-'80,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
Democratic  national  convention  in  1880.  In  1887
he  was  elected  as  a  Democrat  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
and  took  his  seat  on  4  March  of  that  year.

BONNEY,  Charles  Carroll,  reformer,  b.  in
Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  4  Sept.,  1831.  He  was  educated
at  Hamilton  academy,  settled  in  Peoria,  111.,  in
1850,  and  in  1852  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He
removed  to  Chicago  in  1860,  where  he  soon  attained
a  large  practice.  Mr.  Bonney  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  National  law  and  order  league  in  New
York  in  1885,  and  has  since  been  annually  re-elect-
ed to  that  office.  He  has  been  president  of  the
Illinois  state  bar  association,  and  a  member  of  the
American  bar  association.  Among  the  reform
measures  proposed  by  him  are  constitutional  pro-
hibition of  special  legislation ;  a  national  currency
under  a  national  law ;  national  uniformity  of  com-
mercial paper ;  an  extension  of  equity  practice  to
bankruptcy  and  other  law  proceedings ;  civil-ser-
vice pensions ;  and  state  boards  of  labor  and  capi-
tal. Besides  numerous  pamphlets,  addresses,  and
essays  on  public  questions,  he  has  published  "  Rules
of  Law  for  the  Carriage  and  Delivery  of  Persons
and  Property  by  Railway"  (Chicago,  1864)  and
"  A  Summary  of  the  Law  of  Marine,  Fire,  and  Life
Insurance"  (1865),  and  edited  "  Poems  by  Alfred  W.
Arrington,  with  a  Sketch  of  his  Character  "  (1869).
BRIGHTLY,  Frederick  Charles,  lawyer,  b.
in  Bungay,  Suffolk,  England,  26  Aug.,  1812 ;  d.  in
Germantown,  Pa.,  24  Jan.,  1888.  After  serving  as
a  midshipman  under  the  East  Indian  company  he
came  to  this  country  in  1831,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839.  Mr.  Brightly  retired
from  active  practice  about  1870,  and  devoted  his
time  to  legal  authorship.  His  collection  of  about
5,000  volumes  is  one  of  the  best  private  law  libra-
ries in  this  country.  He  printed  a  descriptive  cata-
logue of  his  books,  with  critical  notices  of  authors
and  subjects,  for  private  circulation  (Philadelphia,
1885).  His  legal  works  are  "  The  Law  of  Costs  in
Pennsylvania  "  (1847) ;  "  Reports  of  Cases  decided
by  the  Judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Pennsyl-
vania," with  notes  (1851) ;  "  The  Equitable  Juris-
diction of  the  Courts  of  Pennsylvania "  (1855) ;
"  An  Analytical  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  the  United
States,  1789-1869"  (2  vols.,  1865-'9);  "A  Digest
of  the  Decisions  of  the  Federal  Courts "  (2  vols.,
1868-73);  "The  Bankrupt  Law  of  the  United
States  "  (1871) ;  "  A  Collection  of  Leading  Cases  on
the  Law  of  Elections  in  the  United  States  "  (1871) ;
"  Constitution  of  Pennsylvania,  as  Amended  in  the
Year  1874,"  to  which  is  appended  the  constitution
of  1838  (1874) ;  "  A  Digest  of  the  Decisions  of  the
Courts  of  the  State  of  New  York  to  January,  1884"
(3  vols.,  New  York,  1875-'84);  and  "A  Digest  of


672


BROOKS


BURTON


the  Decisions  of  the  Courts  of  the  State  of  Penn-
sylvania from  1754  to  1882  "  (3  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1877-'83).  "  A  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  Pennsylvania
from  1700  to  1883 "  (1883).  He  also  republished
two  editions  of  "Binn's  Justice,  or  Magistrate's
Daily  Companion-'  (1870-'86);  also  "The  Practice
in  Civil  Actions  and  Proceedings  in  the  Courts  of
Pennsylvania  "  (2  vols.,  1880),  popularly  known  as
'•  Troiibat  and  Haley's  Practice,  and  has  edited
numerous  volumes  of  reports  and  other  legal
works. — His  son,  Francis  Frederick,  lawyer,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  Feb.,  1845,  was  graduated
at  the  law  department  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1866.  He  has  published  "  A  Digest  of
the  Laws  and  Ordinances  of  the  City  of  Philadel-
phia "  (2  vols.,  1887),  and  "  A  Digest  of  the  Laws  of
Pennsylvania  from  1883  to  18877'  (1887).

BROOKS,  William  Robert,  astronomer,  b.  in
Maidstone,  England,  11  June,  1844.  He  came  to
this  country  in  1857,  and  settled  with  his  parents
in  Darien,  N.  Y.  When  he  was  only  fourteen  years
of  age  he  constructed  a  telescope ;  and  at  the  age
of  eighteen  delivered  his  first  astronomical  lectures.
Subsequently  he  was  employed  as  a  mechanical
draughtsman,  and  invented  various  improvements
in  astronomical,  photographic,  and  other  scientific
instruments.  In  1870  he  settled  in  Phelps,  N.  Y.,
where,  in  1874,  he  founded  and  became  the  di-
rector of  the  Red  House  observatory.  In  1888
he  removed  to  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  to  take  charge  of
Smith  observatory.  His  work  has  consisted  largely
in  the  discovery  of  comets,  and  thirteen  of  these
bodies  have  been  credited  to  him  since  1881,  of
which  two  were  the  first  observed  return  of  the
notable  long-period  comets  of  1812  and  of  1815.
He  found  two  in  1885  and  the  first  three  that  were
discovered  in  1886,  making  a  record  of  five  comets
within  a  period  of  nine  months,  of  which  four
were  in  succession  and  two  within  four  days.
Three  of  these,  bearing  his  name,  were  visible  at
the  same  time,  which  is  unparalleled  in  the  history
of  astronomy.  Mr.  Brooks  is  a  fellow  of  the  Ameri-
can association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  and
a  fellow  of  the  Royal  astronomical  society  of
Great  Britain,  and  has  won  a  number  of  prizes  by
his  discoveries.  He  has  lectured  frequently,  and,
besides papers  on  his specialty, has published

Eoems,  of  which  "  Milton  "  and  "  The  Pilgrim  of
iavergne  "  have  been  widely  copied.
BROWNE,  John  Mills,  surgeon,  b.  in  Hinsdale,
N.  H,  10  May,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  the
medical  department  of  Harvard  in  March,  1852,
and  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  an  assistant  sur-
geon, 26  March,  1853.  In  1855-'6  he  participated
in  the  Indian  war  on  Puget  sound,  and  subse-
quently he  took  part  in  the  survey  of  the  north-
west boundary.  He  became  a  passed  assistant  sur-
geon, 12  May,  1858,  served  in  the  brig  "  Dolphin,"
suppressing  the  slave-trade  on  the  west  coast  of
Africa  in  1858,  and  in  October  of  that  year  joined
the  Paraguay  expedition.  He  was  commissioned  a
surgeon,  19  June,  1861,  and  attached  to  the  steamer
"Kearsarge"  until  9  Dec,  1864,  participating  in
the  engagement  with  the  Confederate  cruiser  "  Ala-
bama. He  served  at  the  Mare  island  navy-yard
from  1869  till  1871,  during  which  time  he  superin-
tended the  erection  of  the  naval  hospital  there.
He  was  commissioned  as  medical  inspector,  1  Dec,
1871,  and  was  fleet-surgeon  of  the  Pacific  fleet  in
1872-'6.  He  served  at  the  naval  hospital  at  Mare
island,  Cal.,  in  1876-'80,  was  commissioned  a  medi-
cal director,  6  Oct.,  1878,  and  was  a  member  of  the
examining  board  at  Washington,  from  2  July,  1880,
to  26  Oct.,  1882,  when  he  took  charge  of  the  Muse-
um of  hygiene  until  1  July,  1886,  after  which  he


was  again  appointed  a  member  of  the  examining
and  retiring  board.  On  27  March,  1888,  he  was
appointed  chief  of  the  bureau  of  medicine  and
surgery  and  surgeon-general  of  the  navy.

BUCHANAN,  Joseph,  inventor,  b.  in  Washing-
ton county,  Va.,  24  Aug.,  1785;  d.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  29  Sept.,  1829.  He  removed  to  Tennessee  in
1795,  was  educated  at  Transylvania  university,
Kentucky,  studied  medicine,  and  practised  in  Port
Gibson,  Miss.,  but  in  1808  removed  to  Lexington,
Ky.,  where  in  1811  he  was  appointed  professor  of
the  institutes  of  medicine  in  the  medical  depart-
ment of  Transylvania  university.  Among  his  nu-
merous inventions  was  a  new  musical  instrument,
in  which  the  notes  were  produced  by  glasses  of  dif-
ferent chemical  composition,  and  a  steam-engine
with  which,  in  1824,  he  ran  a  wagon  through  the
streets  of  Louisville.  He  claimed  to  have  discov-
ered a  new  motive  power,  derived  from  combus-
tion without  the  aid  of  water  and  steam,  which  is
now  utilized  in  the  air-engines  of  John  Ericsson
and  others ;  and  also  originated  what  he  called
"  the  music  of  light,"  to  be  produced  by  means  of
"  harmonific  colors  luminously  displayed."  Dr.
Buchanan  edited  the  "Palladium"  in  Frankfort,
the  "  Western  Spy  "  and  the  "  Literary  Cadet "  in
Cincinnati,  and  the  "  Focus  "  in  Louisville,  and  was
the  author  of  the  "  Philosophy  of  Human  Nature  "
(Richmond,  Ky.,  1812).  He  was  the  father  of  Joseph
Rodes  Buchanan  (vol.  i.,  p.  436).

BUNGAY,  George  Washington,  journalist,  b.
in  Walsham-le-Willows,  Suffolk,  England,  28  Nov.,
1826.  He  came  to  this  country  at  an  early  age,
was  educated  in  New  York  city,  and  engaged  in
journalism.  From  1873  till  1887  he  was  employed
in  the  New  York  custom-house.  He  is  a  well-
known  lecturer,  has  contributed  to  the  press,  was
literary  editor  of  the  "Metropolitan."  a  weekly
journal  in  New  York,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Off-
Hand  Takings,  or  Crayon  Sketches "  (New  York,
1854);  "Traits  of  Representative  Men"  (1882);
"Pen  Portraits  of  Illustrious  Abstainers,",  pub-
lished by  the  National  temperance  society  (1884) ;
and  "  The  Creeds  of  the  Bells,"  a  poem.

BURKE,  Maurice  Francis,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Ireland,  15  May,  1845.  He  came  to  this  country
with  his  parents  in  1849,  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's
university.  Chicago,  111.,  and  in  the  American  college
at  Rome,  Italy,  and  in  1875  was  ordained  a  'priest
in  the  Roman  Catholic  church.  He  was  assistant
at  St.  Mary's  church,  Chicago,  for  the  three  subse-
quent years,  and  afterward  pastor  of  St.  Mary's
church,  Joliet,  111.,  till  1887,  when  he  became
bishop  of  Chevenne,  Wvoming  territory.

BURLEIGH,  George  Shepard,  poet,  b.  in
Plainfield,  Conn.,  26  March,  1821.  He  was  edu-
cated in  the  district  schools,  assisted  his  brother,
William  H.  Burleigh  (vol.  i.,  p.  455),  in  editing  the
"  Charter  Oak,"  and  subsequently  devoted  his  time
to  intellectual  pursuits.  He  has  published  "  Anti-
Slavery  Hymns"  (New  London,  Conn.,  1842);
"The  Maniac,  and  other  Poems"  (Philadelphia,
1849);  and  "Signal  Fires,  or  the  Trail  of  the
Pathfinder"  (New  York,  1856);  and  translated
into  English  verse  Victor  Hugo's  "La  legende
des  siecles  "  (printed  privately,  1867).

BURTON,  Robert,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Mecklenburg  county,  Va.,  in  1747 ;
d.  in  Granville  county,  N.  C,  10  April,  1825.  He
removed  to  Granville  county,  N.  C.,  about  1775,
was  a  commissioned  officer  in  the  Continental
army,  and  in  1787  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress.  He  was  one  of  the  commissioners  to  run
the  line  between  the  states  of  North  Carolina,
South  Carolina,  and  Georgia  in  1801.


BUTLER


CADWALADER


673


BUTLER,  George  Bernand,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  8  Feb.,  1838.  His  father,  of  the  same
name,  and  his  uncle  Charles  were  both  well-known
lawyers.  He  began  under  Thomas  Hicks  to  study
painting,  and  in  1859  spent  some  time  in  Thomas
Couture's  studio  in  Paris.  In  the  autumn  of  1860
he  returned  to  the  United  States  and  served
in  the  National  army  during  the  civil  war,  los-
ing an  arm  at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg.  He  re-
turned to  Europe  in  1865  and  devoted  himself  to
painting  animals,  also  studying  with  Otto  Weber.
For  two  years  he  continued  his  work  under  Cou-
ture at  Senlis,  and  spent  the  winter  of  1867-'8  in
Italy.  He  then  returned  to  this  country,  but  in
1873  visited  Europe  again,  and  was  during  the  ten
following  years  in  Italy,  chiefly  in  Rome  and  Ven-
ice. At  this  time  he  met  James  A.  M.  Whistler,
who  exerted  very  great  influence  on  his  work.
Since  1883  he  has  been  engaged  principally  in
portraiture.  In  1873  he  was  elected  a  National
academician.  His  paintings  include  "  The  Shep-
herd and  Dogs  on  the  Campagna";  "The  Capri
Rose,"  purchased  by  Alexander  T.  Stewart ;  "  The
Lace-Maker  "  ;  "  An  Italian  Peasant "  ;  and  sev-
eral striking  groups  of  animals.

BYERS,  Samuel  Hawkins  Marshall,  poet,
b.  in  Pulaski,  Pa.,  23  July,  1838.  He  was  educated
in  the  public  schools  of  Oskaloosa,  Iowa,  and  stud-
ied law,  but  did  not  practice.  He  served  in  the
National  army,  was  taken  prisoner  in  November,
1863,  and  while  in  confinement  in  Columbia,  S.  C,
wrote  the  song  entitled  "  Sherman's  March  to  the
Sea,"  whose  popularity  gave  its  name  to  the  cam-
paign it  celebrated.  He  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Zurich,
Switzerland,  in  1869-'84,  and  consul-general  to
Italy  in  1885.  In  addition  to  being  a  frequent
contributor  to  magazines,  Mr.  Byers  is  the  author
of  "  The  Happy  Isles,  and  other  Poems "  (Bos-
ton, 1885) ;  "  History  of  Switzerland  "  (New  York,
1886);  and  "Military  History  of  Iowa"  (Des
Moines,  Iowa,  1888).


CADWALADER,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1708 ;  d.  near  Trenton,  N.  J.,
14  Nov.,  1779.  He  began  the  study  of  medicine  in
Philadelphia  and  completed  his  course  in  London.
About  1731  he  returned  to  Philadelphia,  and  con-
tinued his  profes-
sion there  for  fif-
teen years.  Dur-
ing the  winter  of
1736-'7  he  is  men-
tioned as  one
of  the  physicians
that  inoculated
for  the  small-pox.
In  1746  he  re-
moved to  Tren-
ton, N.  J.,  but  in

1750  he  returned
to  Philadelphia.
He  subscribed  in

1751  toward  the
capital  stock  of
the  Pennsylvania
hospital,  of  which
he  became  one  of

the  original  physicians,  and  in  the  same  year  was
elected  a  member  of  the  common  council,  in  which
he  served  until  1774.  Dr.  Cadwalader.  was  called  to
the  provincial  council  on  2  Nov.,  1755,  and  signed
the  non-importation  articles.  In  July,  1776,  the
committee  of  safety  of  Pennsylvania  appointed
him  on  a  committee  for  the  examination  of  all
vol.  vi. — 43


^Q^faj^ccA^c


candidates  that  applied  for  the  post  of  surgeon  in
the  navy,  and  at  the  same  time  he  was  appointed
a  medical  director  of  the  army  hospitals.  In  1778
he  succeeded  the  elder  William  Shippen  as  sur-
geon of  Pennsylvania  hospital,  and  previously,  in
1765,  he  had  been  elected  trustee  of  the  Medical
college  of  Philadelphia,  where  he  gave  a  course  of
lectures.  Dr.  Cadwalader  was  a  member  of  the
American  philosophical  society  and  the  American
society  for  promoting  useful  knowledge  before
their  union  in  1769.  He  was  one  of  the  original
corporators  of  the  Philadelphia  library  company
in  1731.  It  is  reported  that  he  saved  the  life  of  a
son  of  Gov.  Jonathan  Belcher  by  the  application
of  electricity  before  1750,  and  he  published  an
"  Essay  on  the  West  India  Dry  Gripes  "  (1745).  Its
purpose  was  to  prove  that  quicksilver  and  drastic
purgatives  were  highly  injurious  to  the  system.
He  was  the  father  of  Gen.  John  Cadwalader  and
of  Col.  Lambert  Cadwalader.  —  His  grandson,
Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  Oct.,
1779;  d.  there,  31  Oct.,  1841,  was  the  son  of  Gen.
John  Cadwalader,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in. 1795.  After  studying
law  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,'  but  took  charge
of  the  interests  of  the  Penn  family,  which  with-
drew him  from  practice.  In  April,  1799,  he  was  a
private  soldier  in  a  cavalry  troop,  and  was  one  of
the  sixteen  that  captured  the  ringleaders  of  the
insurrection  in  Pennsylvania.  During  the  war  of
1812  he  was  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  cavalry,  and
he  was  afterward  appointed  to  command  the  ad-
vanced light-brigade.  Under  Gen.  Cadwalader's
training  these  troops  became  remarkable  for  their
efficiency  and  discipline.  In  1812  he  was  appointed
major-general  of  the  1st  division  of  Pennsylvania
militia.  With  Winfield  Scott  and  Zachary  Taylor
he  was  appointed  in  1826  to  revise  the  tactics  of
the  U.  S.  army.  In  1816  he  was  appointed  a  trustee
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania. — His  son,  John,
lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  April,  1805 ;  d.
there,  26  Jan.,  1879,  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  in  1821,  and  in  1825,  after
studying  law  with  Horace  Binney,  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  The  place  of  solicitor  of  the  Bank  of  the
United  States  was  given  to  him  by  his  relative,
Nicholas  Biddle,  then  its  president,  and  his  services
were  also  retained  by  the  government  in  impor-
tant cases,  among  which  was  the  Blackburne  cloth
prosecution.  Mr.  Cadwalader  afterward  confined
himself  to  private  practice  in  his  profession,  and
was  one  of  the  best-known  commercial  lawyers  in
the  United  States.  In  1844,  after  the  riots  of  that
year,  he  raised  a  company  for  the  city  artillery
composed  chiefly  of  lawyers,  which  was  partially
supported  by  the  city  authorities.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat  and  served  from  3
Dec,  1855,  till  3  March.  1857.  In  1858  he  was
appointed  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court,  and
he  served  thereafter  on  the  bench  until  his  death.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1870.  —  Dr.
Thomas's  grandson.  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  near
Trenton,  N.  J.,  11  Sept.,  1795 ;  d.  there,  22  Oct..
1873,  was  the  son  of  Col.  Lambert  Cadwalader
(vol.  i.,  p.  494).  He  was  born  at  Greenwood,  a
property  that  was  purchased  by  his  father  in  1 776,
and  is  still  owned  by  the  family.  Young  Cad-
walader was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1815  and
then  studied  law,  but  never  practised.  He  was
appointed  deputy  adjutant-general  of  the  New
Jersey  militia  on  2  June,  1830,  aide-de-camp  to  the
governor,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  and
adjutant-general  of  the  state,  with  the  rank  of
brigadier-general,  on  30  July,  1842. This  office  he


674


CAMERON


CLARK


retained  through  several  political  changes,  until
his  resignation  on  26  Jan.,  1858.  In  1856,  at  the
request  of  the  governor,  he  travelled  through  vari-
ous European  countries  and  reported  on  the  fire-
arms there  in  use,  which  report  was  printed.  He
was  brevetted  major-general  in  March,  1858,  in
pursuance  of  a  special  act  of  the  legislature  for  his
long  and  meritorious  services. — His  son,  John
Lambert,  lawyer,  b.  near  Trenton,  N.  J.,  17
Nov.,  1836,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1856
and  at  Harvard  law-school  in  1860.  His  legal
studies  were  made  with  Daniel  Lord  in  New  York
city,  and  subsequently  he  practised  his  profession
in  that  place.  During  1874^'6  he  was  assistant
secretary  of  state  under  Hamilton  Fish. — Another
son,  Richard  McCall,  lawyer,  b.  in  Trenton,
N.  J.,  17  Sept.,  1839,  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1860,  and  at  Harvard  law-school  in  1863.  He
was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar  in  1864,
where  he  has  since  practised  successfully.  Mr.  Cad-
walader  is  the  author  of  "  The  Law  of  Ground
Rents  "  (Philadelphia,  1879).

CAMERON,  Henry  Clay,  educator,  b.  in  Shep-
herdstown,  Va.,  1  Sept.,  1827.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1847,  and  at  the  theological  sem-
inary in  1855.  Meanwhile  he  was  principal  of
the  Edgehill  school  in  Princeton  in  1851,  and  in
1852-'5  tutor  at  the  college.  He  was  made  ad-
junct professor  of  Greek  in  1855,  associate  in  1860,
and  professor  in  1861,  and  since  1877  he  has  held
the  chair  of  the  Greek  language  and  literature.  In
addition  he  was  instructor  in  French  in  1859-'70,
and  librarian  in  1865-'72.  Prof.  Cameron  was  or-
dained a  clergyman  by  the  presbytery  of  Philadel-
phia on  1  Feb.,  1863.  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was
given  him  by  Princeton  in  1866,  and  he  received
that  of  D.  D.  from  both  Rutgers  and  Wooster  in
1875.  For  more  than  twenty  years  he  edited  the
"  General  Catalogue  of  the  College  of  New  Jersey,"
and,  in  addition  to  cyclopaedia  articles  and  essays,
including  one  on  "Jonathan  Dickinson  and  the
Rise  of  Colleges  in  America."  he  has  published
"  Princeton  Roll  of  Honor."  a  list  of  the  graduates
of  that  college  that  fought  in  the  war  for  the
Union  (Princeton,  1865) ;  "  The  History  of  the
American  Whig  Society"  (1871),  and  with  Prof.
Arnold  Guyot  a  series  of  classical  maps.

CASEY,  Thomas  Lincoln,  soldier,  b.  in  Madi-
son Barracks,  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  10  May,
1831.  He  is  the  son  of  Gen.  Silas  Casey  (vol.  i.,  p.
550),  and  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  as  bre-
vet 2d  lieutenant  of
engineers  in  1852.  In
1854-'9  he  was  assist-
ant professor  of  en-
gineering at  the  mili-
tary academy.  From
1859  till  1861  he  had
command  of  the  en-

fineer  troops  on  the
acific  coast.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he
served  at  first  as  staff
engineer  at  Fort
Monroe,  Va.,  became
captain  in  the  engi-
neer corps  on  6  Aug.,
1861,  was  superin-
tending engineer  of  the  permanent  defences  and
field  fortifications  upon  the  coast  of  Maine,  and
served  on  special  duty  with  the  North  Atlantic
squadron  during  the  first  expedition  to  Fort  Fish-
er, N.  C,  8-29  Dec,  1864. He  was  made  major  on


2iurtLdco<Uy


2  Oct.,  1863,  and  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  and
colonel  on  13  March,  1865.  In  1877  he  was  placed
in  charge  of  the  public  buildings  and  grounds  in
the  District  of  Columbia,  the  Washington  aque-
duct, and  the  construction  of  the  building  for  the
state,  war,  and  navy  departments,  which  was  com-
pleted on  31  May,  1888.  He  was  engineer  of  the
Washington  monument  from  1878  till  its  comple-
tion in  1884,  and  on  1  Nov.,  1886,  he  became  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  engineers,  in  New  York  city.
On  6  July,  1888,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-gen-
eral, and  chief  of  engineers,  U.  S.  army,  and  on  2
Oct.,  1888,  he  was,  by  act  of  congress,  placed  in
charge  of  the  erection  of  the  building  for  the  Libra-
ry of  congress.  Besides  numerous  official  reports,
and  articles  upon  engineering,  he  has  contributed
sketches  to  historical  and  genealogical  magazines.
CATHCART,  Charles  Murray,  governor  of
Canada,  b.  in  England,  21  Dec,  1783 ;  d.  there,  16
July,  1859.  He  was  educated  at  Eton,  and  at  the
age  of  fifteen  entered  the  army  as  an  ensign.  He
served  on  the  continent  under  the  Duke  of  Wel-
lington, and  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  where  he
led  several  charges,  three  horses  were  killed  under
him.  He  succeeded  his  father  as  second  Earl
Cathcart,  in  1843,  was  appointed  commander-in-
chief  of  the  troops  in  British  North  America  in

1845,  and  on  the  retirement  of  Lord  Metcalfe  in

1846,  he  assumed  the  civil  government  as  well.  A
year  later  he  resigned  his  military  command,  re-
turned to  England,  and  was  then  succeeded  in
his  civil  office  by  Lord  Elgin.  Subsequently  he
was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  Northern
and  Midland  district  of  England,  which  post  he
retained  until  1854.  He  also  served  on  various
commissions  and  was  for  several  years  a  mem-
ber of  parliament.

CATHERWOOD,  Mary  Hartwell,  author,  b.
in  Luray,  Ohio,  16  Dec,  1847.  She  was  graduated
at  the  Female  college,  Granville,  Ohio,  in  1868,  and
on  27  Dec,  1887,  married  James  S.  Catherwood,
with  whom  she  resides  in  Hoopeston,  111.  Mrs.
Catherwood  is  the  author  of  "  Craque-o'-doom "
(Philadelphia,  1881) ;  "  Rocky  Fork  "  (Boston,  1882);
"Old  Caravan  Days"  (1884);  "The  Secrets  at
Roseladies"  (1888);  "The  Romance  of  Dollard"
(1889)  and  "  The  Bells  of  Ste.  Anne  "  (1889).

CHARNAY,  Desire\  explorer,  b.  in  Fleurie,
France,  2  May,  1828.  He  was  educated  at  the  Col-
lege Charlemagne,  and  has  been  sent  by  the  French
government  on  many  scientific  explorations,  in-
cluding one  in  1880  to  Central  America,  which  was
aided  by  the  generosity  of  Pierre  Lorillard.  He
is  the  author  of  "  Cites  et  ruines  americaines "
(Paris,  1861) ;  "  Le  Mexique  "  (1862) ;  "  Explora-
tions au  Mexique  et  Amerique  du  Centre  "  (1883) ;
"Les  anciennes  villes  du  nouveau  monde"  (1883);
and  "  Une  princesse  indienne  avant  la  conquete"
(1888).  "  The  Ancient  Cities  of  the  New  World  "
was  translated  by  Mrs.  J.  Gonino  and  Mrs.  Helen
S.  Conant.  with  an  introductory  chapter  by  Allen
Thorndike  Rice  (New  York,  1887).

CLARK,  Emmons,  secretary,  b.  in  Huron,
Wayne  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Oct.,  1827.  He  received  his
early  education  at  Owego  and  Groton,  and  was
graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in  1847.  Before
arriving  at  his  majority  he  studied  medicine,  but
shortly  thereafter,  removing  to  New  York  city,  he
became  a  clerk  in  the  first  office  established  in
Broadway  for  the  transportation  of  through  freight
and  passengers  to  Chicago  and  the  west,  and  he
rose  rapidly  to  the  place  of  manager.  Retiring
from  mercantile  pursuits,  he  was  appointed  secre-
tary of  the  Board  of  health  at  its  organization  in
1866,  and  he  has  since  held  that  office. In  Janu-


CLARKE


CONY


675


^-■^+&*x*m0Mmm;


ary,  1857,  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  Second
company  of  the  7th  regiment  ("  National  Guard  "),
N.  Y.  state  militia ;  was  elected  1st  sergeant,
April.  1858 ;  2d  lieutenant,  September,  1859 ;  1st
lieutenant,  June,  1860;  and  captain  in  December

of  the  same
year ;  and  was
in  command
of  his  com-
pany in  the
three  cam-
paigns made
by  the  regi-
ment, in  1861,
1862,andl863,
during  the
civil  war,  and
in  the  draft
riots  of  1863.
He  command-
ed the  7th
regiment  in  the  Orange  riot  of  1871  and  in  the
labor  riots  of  1877.  In  1864  he  published  a  "  His-
tory of  the  Second  Company  of  the  Seventh  Regi-
ment, N.  Y.  State  Militia."  He  was  elected  colo-
nel of  his  regiment  on  21  June,  1864,  and  still  holds
that  command.  To  his  energy  and  perseverance  is
due  the  successful  completion  by  private  subscrip-
tion in  1880  of  the  armory  (see  illustration)  now
occupied  by  the  7th  regiment,  while  his  executive
ability  and  untiring  attention  have  not  only  main-
tained, but  increased,  the  superiority,  efficiency.
and  prosperity  of  that  celebrated  military  organi-
zation. Col.  Clark  has  in  preparation  a  "  History
of  the  Seventh  Regiment,"  to  be  published  in  1889,
during  which  year  he  has  announced  his  intention
of  resigning  on  the  completion  of  a  quarter  of  a
century's  service  as  colonel  of  the  regiment.

CLARKE,  Rebecca  Sophia,  author,  b.  in  Nor-
ridgewock,  Me.,  22  Feb.,  1833.  She  was  carefully
educated,  has  engaged  in  literary  pursuits  since
her  youth,  and  is  the  author,  under  the  pen-name  of
"  Sophie  May,"  of  "  Little  Prudy  Stories  "  (Boston,
1864-'5);  "Dotty  Dimple  Stories"  (1868-'70) ;
"  Flyaway  Stories  "  (1871-'4) ;  "  The  Doctor's
Daughter"  (1873);  "Our  Helen"  (1875);  "The
Asbury  Twins"  (1876) ;  "  Flaxie  Frizzle  Stories  "
(1877-'85);  "  Quinnebasset  Girls  "  (1878) ;  "Janet"
(1883) ;  and  "  Drones'  Honey  "  (1887).

CLARKSON,  Matthew,  philanthropist,  b.  in
New  York,  17  Oct.,  1758 ;  d.  there,  25  April,  1825.

He  was  the  great-
grandson  of  Mat-
thew Clarkson,  who
for  thirteen  years
was  secretary  of  the
province,  and  his
father  and  grand-
father also  held  im-
portant places  in
the  colony.  At  the
beginning  of  the
Revolutionary  war,
in  1775,  the  son  be-
came a  private  in  a
company  of  fusi-
leers  under  R  udol  ph
Ritzema,  and  after-
ward he  served  in
Col.  Josiah  Smith's
regiment  of  minute-
men,  which  was
raised  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  Long  Island
from  invasion.  He  joined  the  northern  army  in
1777,  was  wounded  at  Fort  Edward,  and  at  Saratoga


rendered  effective  service  to  Col.  Daniel  Morgan,
also  acted  as  aide-de-camp  to  Benedict  Arnold,
and  was  present  at  the  surrender  of  Gen.  John
Burgoyne.  In  1779  he  was  appointed  aide  to  Gen.
Benjamin  Lincoln,  under  whom  he  participated
in  the  siege  of  Savannah,  and  in  the  defence  of
Charleston  he  served  as  a  major  of  infantry,  and
became  a  prisoner  at  the  surrender.  In  1781  he
returned  to  his  place  as  aide  to  Gen.  Lincoln,  and
was  with  him  at  the  reduction  of  Yorktown.  He
also  served  on  the  expedition  of  Com.  Abraham
Whipple  during  the  siege  of  Charleston,  and  later
in  the  "Jason."  When  Lincoln  became  secretary
of  war,  Clarkson  acted  as  his  assistant,  and  on  the
conclusion  of  hostilities  he  received  the  brevet  of
lieutenant-colonel,  and  for  more  than  fourteen
years  was  major-general  of  the  state  militia.  He
served  in  both  branches  of  the  legislature,  and  was
candidate  of  the  Federal  party  for  U.  S.  senator.
For  twenty-one  years  he  was  president  of  the
Bank  of  New  York,  one  of  the  first  promoters
of  the  free-school  system,  a  regent  of  the  Univer-
sity of  the  state  of  New  York  in  1784-1825,  gov-
ernor of  the  New  York  hospital  for  thirty  years,
during  twenty-three  of  which  he  was  president,
and  one  of  the  vice-presidents  and  founders  of  the
American  Bible  society,  and  his  name  is  associated
with  the  foundation  of  nearly  all  the  early  philan-
thropic societies  of  that  city.

CLEVELAND,  Cynthia  Eloise,  author,  b.  in
Canton,  N.  Y.,  13  Aug.,  1845.  She  was  educated
in  Michigan  and  Medina,  N.  Y.,  and  engaged  in
business  in  that  place  and  Pontiac,  Mich.  In
1880-'2,  as  president  of  the  Women's  Christian
temperance  union  of  Dakota,  she  organized  unions
with  so  great  success  as  to  influence  the  vote  of
the  territory  for  constitutional  prohibition.  She
then  settled  in  Pierre,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1883.  In  1884  she  entered  the  presidential
canvass  in  Michigan  and  Indiana,  being  the  first
woman  that  ever  spoke  in  public  for  the  Demo-
cratic party.  She  removed  to  Washington,  D.  C,
in  1885,  and  was  appointed  a  law-clerk  in  the  treas-
ury department.  She  has  written  "  See-Saw,  or
Civil  Service  in  the  Departments  "  (Detroit,  188?),
a  political  novel,  and  "  Is  it  Fate  ?  "  (1888).

COFFEE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince  Edward
county,  Va.,  2  June,  1772 ;  d.  near  Florence,  Ala.,
in  July,  1834.  He  removed  to  Davidson  county,
Tenn.,  in  1798,  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits
till  1807,  when  he  began  to  survey  public  lands. .
In  October,  1809,  he  married  Mary  Donelson,  a  sis-
ter of  Andrew  Jackson's  wife.  At  the  beginning
of  the  war  of  1812  he  raised  a  cavalry  regiment,
and  after  the  massacre  at  Fort  Minns  he  organized
two  others,  became  brigadier-general  of  militia,
and  fought  and  won  the  battle  of  Tallushatchie.
He  participated  also  in  the  battles  of  Talladega,
Emuckfaro,  Ala.,  where  he  was  severely  wounded,
Enotochopco,  and  the  Horseshoe.  He  was  subse-
quently at  the  battles  of  Pensacola  and  New  Or-
leans, reaching  the  latter  in  time  for  the  fight  by
a  forced  march  from  Baton  Rouge  in  two  days,
and  commanding  Jackson's  left  wing.  He  was  fre-
quently commissioned  to  treat  with  the  Indians,
became  surveyor-general  of  the  Southwest  territory
in  1817,  removed  to  Huntsville,  Ala.,  and  later  to
Florida. He  was  known  as  "  brave  Jack  Coffee."

CONY,  Daniel,  jurist,  b.  in  that  part  of  Stough-
ton,  Mass..  that  is  now  Sharon,  3  Aug.,  1752;  d.  in
Augusta,  Me.,  21  Jan.,  1842.  His  grandfather,  Na-
thanael,  came  from  England  to  Massachusetts  in
the  latter  part  of  the  17th  century  and  settled  in
Boston,  but  in  1728  went  to  Stoughton.  Daniel  re-
moved in  1778  to  "  Fort  Western  settlement "  (now


676


COPE


COWEN


Augusta,  Me.).  He  had  prepared  himself  before  leav-
ing Massachusetts  for  the  profession  of  medicine,
and  was  a  successful  practitioner  for  many  years.
He  was  in  public  life  for  several  successive  years
as  representative  and  senator  in  the  general  court
and  as  a  member  of  the  executive  council,  and  he
was  one  of  the  electors  that  chose  Washington
president  for  his  second  term.  He  held  the  office
of  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  and  of
judge  of  probate  from  Kennebec  county,  and  was
a  delegate  to  the  convention  that  framed  the  con-
stitution of  Maine.  Judge  Cony  in  1815  founded
and  liberally  endowed  the  Cony  female  academy  in
Augusta  (now  the  Cony  high-school).  His  daugh-
ter married  Nathan  Weston,  chief  justice  of  com-
mon pleas  in  Massachusetts  in  1810-'20,  and  sub-
sequently chief  justice  and  associate  justice  of  the
supreme  court  of  Maine  in  1820-'41,  and  a  daugh-
ter by  this  marriage  was  the  mother  of  Melville
W.  Puller,  chief  justice  of  the  United  States.

COPE,  Gilbert,  genealogist,  b.  in  East  Brad-
ford, Chester  co.,  Pa.,  17  Aug.,  1840.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Friends'  select  school  in  West  Chester
and  at  the  Friends'  boarding-school  in  Westtown,
and  for  a  few  years  followed  farming.  He  is  a
member  of  the  Pennsylvania  historical  society  and
of  the  New  England  historic-genealogical  society,
and  has  published  "  A  Record  of  the  Cope  Family  "
(Philadelphia,  1860);  "The  Browns  of  Notting-
ham'" (1864);  "Genealogy  of  the  Dutton  Family"
(West  Chester,  1871) ;  and,  with  J.  Smith  Futhey,
"  History  of  Chester  County"  (Philadelphia,  1881),
and  "  Genealogy  of  the  Sharpless  Family  "  (1887).

CORBIN,  Austin,  financier,  b.  in  Newport,
N.  H.,  11  July,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard law-school  in  1849,  practised  in  his  native  vil-
lage, and  in  1852  removed  to  Davenport,  Iowa,
and  in  1866  to  New  York,  where  he  engaged  in
banking  business,  and  in  1880  became  president  of
the  Long  Island  railroad.  In  1886  he  was  chosen
president  of  the  Philadelphia  and  Reading  rail-
road company.  Mr.  Corbin  is  actively  associated
in  various  organizations  that  have  for  their  ob-
jects the  development  of  artistic  and  philanthropic
purposes  in  New  York  city.

CORNSTALK,  Shawnee  chief,  b.  in  Mason  coun-
ty, Va.  (now  W.  Va.),  about  1720;  d.  in  Point
Pleasant,  W.  Va.,  in  the  summer  of  1777.  He  was
the  chief  of  the  Shawnee  Indians,  and  at  the  bat-
tle of  Point  Pleasant,  10  Oct.,  1774,  his  plan  of  al-
ternate attack  and  retreat  occasioned  the  princi-
pal loss  of  the  whites.  After  the  battle  he  con-
vened his  tribe  to  consult  what  must  next  be  done,
and,  after  upbraiding  them  for  not  suffering  him
to  make  peace  with  the  settlers  the  day  before  the
fight,  struck  his  tomahawk  in  the  post  in  the  cen-
tre of  the  town-house  and  said :  "  I  will  go  and
make  peace."  He  kept  his  treaty  with  the  Ameri-
cans till  1777,  when  the  Shawnees,  being  incited
by  the  British,  began  to  disturb  the  frontier  settle-
ment. One  day  Cornstalk  appeared  at  Point  Pleas-
ant,and,  summoningthe  principal  settlers,  told  them
that  he  could  make  no  secret  of  the  disposition  of  the
greater  part  of  his  tribe  toward  them,  but  that,  al-
though he  was  opposed  to  the  British,  he  was  afraid
they  would  force  him  "  to  run  with  the  stream."  The
council  then  determined  to  detain  him  as  a  host-
age, and  while  in  confinement  he  and  his  son  were
murdered  by  colonists  in  retaliation  for  an  outrage
by  Indians.  The  governor  offered  a  reward  for
the  apprehension  of  the  murderers,  but  without
effect.  Cornstalk  was  regarded  as  the  ablest  sol-
dier among  the  Indians  on  the  Virginia  frontier.

COURTNEY,  Frederick,  Canadian  Anglican
bishop,  b.  in  Plymouth,  England,  5  Jan.,  1837. He


was  educated  in  the  Bluecoat  school  and  at  King's
college.  London,  and,  after  holding  pastorates  in
Kent,  Plymouth,  and  Glasgow,  was  assistant  at  St.
Thomas's  church  in  New  York  from  1876  till  1880.
He  was  rector  in  1880-'2  of  St.  James  church,  Chi-
cago, and  then  of  St.  Paul's,  Boston.  On  1  Feb.,
1888,  he  was  elected  bishop  of  Nova  Scotia.

COUSIN,  Jean  (coo-zang),  French  navigator,  b.
in  Dieppe,  lived  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th
century.  His  discoveries  are  related  by  Louis
Estancelin  in  his  "  Recherches  sur  les  voyages  et
decouvertes  des  navigateurs  Normands  en  Afrique,
dans  les  Indes  Orientales,  et  en  Amerique"  (Paris,
1832),  Leon  Guerin  in  his  "Les  navigateurs
Francais"  (Paris,  1846),  and  Amans  Alexis  Mon-
teil  in  his  "  Traite  des  materiaux  manuscrits  des
divers  genres  d'histoire  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1835),  and
confirmed  by  the  anonymous  publication  "Me-
moires  pour  servir  a  l'histoire  de  Dieppe  "  (Dieppe,
1740),  and  bv  Francis  Parkman  in  his  "Pioneers
of  France  in  "the  New  World  "  (Boston,  1860).  Ac-
cording to  these  authorities,  in  1488,  four  years  be-
fore Columbus's  voyage,  Cousin,  being  at  sea  off
the  African  coast,  was  forced  westward  by  winds
and  currents  to  within  sight  of  an  unknown  shore,
where  he  presently  descried  the  mouth  of  a  great
river  (probably  the  Orinoco).  On  board  his  ship
was  one  Pinzon,  who,  being  dismissed  for  mutinous
conduct,  went  to  Spain,  became  known  to  Colum-
bus, and  accompanied  him  in  his  voyage  of  1492.
Cousin's  discovery  is  also  mentioned  in  the  "  Jour-
nal de  l'Amerique"  (Troyes,  1709)  and  in  "De-
scription des  cotes  de  la  mer  Oceane."  It  is  also
said  that  a  French  pilot  discovered  America.  Un-
fortunately, the  archives  of  the  city  of  Dieppe  were
destroyed  during  the  bombardment  of  1694,  and
no  information  is  now  to  be  obtained  there  about
Cousin's  voyage  to  America,  a  narrative  of  which
was  undoubtedly  deposited  in  the  city  archives.

COWEN,  Esek.  jurist,  b.  in  Rhode  Island,  24
Feb.,  1787;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  11  Feb.,  1844.  He
was  descended  from  John  Cowen,  a  native  of  Scot-
land, who  settled  in  Scituate,  Mass.,  in  1656.  His
father's  family  re-
moved in  1790  to
Greenfield,  Sarato-
ga co.  Four  years
afterward  he  re-
moved to  Hartford,
Washington  co.,  N.
Y.,  and  at  sixteen
years  of  age  began
the  study  of  law,
at  the  same  time
teaching  during  the
winters.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar
in  1810,  and  began
practice  in  North-
umberland, N.  Y.
In  1812  he  removed
toSaratoga  Springs,
which  was  after-
ward his  residence.
He  was  reporter  of
the  supreme  court  in  1821-8,  and  was  then  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  4th  circuit.  In  1835  he  was
appointed  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  supreme  court,
and  continued  in  that  office  until  his  decease.
Judge  Cowen's  opinion  in  the  celebrated  McLeod
case,  in  connection  with  the  Canadian  rebellion,
in  which  were  discussed  the  question  of  perfect
and  imperfect  war  and  other  great  national  prin-
ciples, attracted  wide  attention.  Of  his  opinions
in  general  it  has  been  said  that  "  in  their  depth


COWLES


DAVIN


677


and  breadth  of  research,  and  their  strength  and
reason  of  bearing,  they  are  not  excelled  by  any
judge  in  England  or  America."  He  has  frequently
been  compared  to  Lord  Mansfield.  Judge  Cowen
was  more  than  six  feet  in  height,  and  possessed
great  dignity  of  presence  and  unassuming  man-
ners. In  1812  he  was  one  of  the  founders,  in
Northumberland,  Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y.,  of  the  first
temperance  society  in  the  United  States.  He  was
the  author  of  "  Civil  Jurisdiction  of  Justices  of
the  Peace  in  New  York "  (2  vols.,  1844) ;  "  New
York  Reports,  1823-'8  "  (9  vols.,  1824-'30) ;  and  a
"Digested  Index  of  Reports"  (1831);  and  edited
"  Phillipps  on  Evidence  h  (5  vols.,  1850).

COWLES,  Augustus  Woodruff,  educator,  b.
in  Reading,  N.  Y.,  12  July,  1819.  After  gradua-
tion at  Union  college  in  1841,  he  taught,  studied
theology  in  New  York  city,  and  in  1847-'56  was
pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Brockport.
He  was  then  made  president  of  Elmira  college,
where  he  still  remains.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
given  to  him  by  Ingham  university  in  1858,  and
that  of  LL.  D.  by  Hamilton  college  in  1886.  Dr.
Cowles  was  the  first  president  of  a  college  that
was  fully  chartered  expressly  for  the  collegiate
education  of  women,  with  a  course  of  study  honor-
ably equivalent  to  the  courses  in  colleges  for  men.
He  has  gained  considerable  reputation  as  an  artist,
first  introduced  the  special  study  of  art  criticism
into  a  college  curriculum,  and  has  delivered  free-
hand illustrated  lectures  on  art.

CURTIS,  James  Langdon,  presidential  candi-
date, b.  in  Stratford,  Conn.,  19  Feb.,  1816.  He
was  educated  in  his  native  town,  and  engaged  in
business  in  New  York  city,  where,  as  colonel  of  the
9th  regiment,  he  did  good  service  in  putting  down
the  flour  riots  in  1835.  He  was  nominated  by  the
Labor  party  for  governor  of  Connecticut  in  1884,
and  in  1888  became  the  candidate  of  the  National
American  party  for  president.

CUSHINfjr,  William,  author,  b.  in  Lunenburg,
Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  15  May,  1811.  His  brother,
Edmund  Lambert  (1807-'83),  was  chief  justice  of
New  Hampshire  in  1874-'6.  William  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1832,  and  at  the  divinity-school
there  in  1839,  and  preached  till  1857,  when  he  re-
moved to  a  farm  in  Clinton,  Mass.  He  went  to
Cambridge  in  1868,  became  library  assistant  in
the  Harvard  library,  and  since  1878,  when  he
was  discharged,  has  engaged  in  literary  pursuits.
He  spent  several  years  in  collecting  material  for  a
volume  entitled  "  The  Century  of  Authors',  1778-
1880,"  the  manuscript  of  which  has  been  used  in
the  preparation  of  this  work.  His  published  books
are  "  Index  to  the  North  American  Review  "  (Bos-
ton, 1878) ;  "  Index  to  the  Christian  Examiner  "
(1879);  and  "  Initials  and  Pseudonyms  "  (1885-'8);
and  he  has  in  preparation  a  work  entitled  "  Ano-
nyms." Another  brother  is  Luther  Stearns  Cu'sh-
ing  (vol.  ii.,  p.  39).


DAME,  Harriet  Patience,  nurse,  b.  in  Barn-
stead,  N.  H.,  5  Jan.,  1815.  Her  parents  moved  to
Barnstead  about  1797,  and  in  1843  Miss  Dame
went  to  Concord,  where  she  resided  until  the  civil
war.  She  joined  the  2d  New  Hampshire  regiment
as  hospital  matron  in  June,  1861,  and  remained
with  it  until  it  was  mustered  out  in  December,
1865.  Miss  Dame  was  inside  the  trenches  at  Fair
Oaks,  where  she  passed  a  dark  night  alone  in  the
thick  woods,  the  only  woman  in  the  brigade,  car-
ing for  the  wounded  of  other  regiments  as  well  as
her  own.  She  was  on  duty  as  nurse  near  the  old
stone  church  at  Centreville  while  her  regiment


participated  in  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run.
There  she  was  taken  prisoner,  but  was  soon  released.
Miss  Dame  was  appointed  matron  of  the  18th  army
corps  hospital  in  September,  1864,  and  had  super-
vision of  the  nurses  on  duty.  Of  her  services,  Gen.
Gilman  Marston,  who  was  long  colonel  of  the  2d
regiment,  said :  "  Wherever  the  regiment  went
she  went,  often  going  on  foot,  and  sometimes
camping  on  the  field  without  tent.  .  .  .  She  was
truly  an  angel  of  mercy,  the  bravest  woman  I  ever
knew.  I  have  seen  her  face  a  battery  without
flinching.  In  August,  1867,  she  was  appointed  to
a  clerkship  in  the  treasury  department,  where  she
still  remains.  In  1886  she  deposited  $1,000  with
a  committee  of  the  2d  regiment  veterans  to  erect
a  building  for  headquarters  for  their  encampment
at  Lake  Winnipiseogee,  N.  H.

DARWIN,  Charles  Robert,  English  naturalist,
b.  in  Shrewsbury,  England,  12  Feb.,  1809;  d.  in
Down,  Kent,  England,  18  April,  1882.  He  was
a  grandson  of  Dr.
Erasmus  Darwin.
Immediately  after
his  graduation  at
Cambridge  in  1831
he  volunteered  to
accompany  the  ship
'•  Beagle"  as  natural-
ist on  an  exploring
expedition  around
the  world,  on  which
he  was  engaged  till  2
Oct.,  1836.  Leaving
the  ship  at  Valparai-
so, Darwin  crossed
the  South  American
continent  to  Buenos
Ayres,  discovering
on  his  way  the  gi-
gantic fossil  remains
that  first  brought
his  name  into  notice.  On  his  return  he  settled  on
a  country  estate  in  Kent,  where  he  spent  his  life
in  scientific  occupations,  writing  his  remarkable
works  on  botany  and  natural  history,  and  pro-
pounding the  theory  of  the  origin  of  species  by
the  natural  selection  of  favorable  variations,  which
soon  became  celebrated  as  the  Darwinian  theory.
His  writings  that  relate  to  this  hemisphere  include
"Journal  of  Researches  during  a  Voyage  Around
the  World  "  (1839) ;  "  Geological  Observations  in
South  America"  (1846);  and  many  papers,  such  as
"  The  Connection  of  Certain  Volcanic  Phenomena
in  South  America."  See  "  Darwin  "  by  Grant  Al-
len (1885),  also  "  Life  and  Letters  of  Charles  Dar-
win," by  his  son  Francis  Darwin  (2  vols.,  New
York,  1888).

DAVIN,  Nicholas  Flood,  Canadian  journalist,
b.  in  Kilfinane,  Ireland,  13  Jan.,  1843.  He  was
educated  in  London,  and  also  studied  at  Queen's
university,  but  never  took  a  degree.  In  1868  he
was  called  to  the  English  bar,  and  he  has  practised
both  in  London  and  in  Toronto.  For  five  years
he  was  a  reporter  in  the  gallery  of  the  British
house  of  commons,  and  also  a  contributor  to  the
"  Pall  Mall  Gazette."  During  the  Franco-Prussian
war  he  was  correspondent  of  the  "  Irish  Times  "
and  the  London  "  Standard."  In  1872  he  went
to  Canada,  and  he  has  there  edited  the  Toronto
"Globe"  and  "Mail,"  and  in  1882  established  the
Regina  "  Leader,"  the  first  large  paper  in  Assini-
boia.  He  was  sent  by  the  Canadian  government
in  1879  to  Washington  to  inquire  into  the  work-
ing of  the  American  system  of  educating  Indian
children. Subsequently  he  investigated  the  same


CISC


6wnA/(sH


678


DAVIS


DOMEYKO


subject  in  Winnipeg.  In  1881-'2  he  was  secretary
to  the  royal  commission  appointed  to  inquire  into
all  matters  connected  with  the  Canadian  Pacific
railway,  and  in  1884-'5  was  secretary  to  the  Chi-
nese commission,  in  which  capacity  he  visited  San
Francisco,  Cal.,  and  Victoria,  B.  C.  Mr.  Davin
served  as  a  volunteer  during  the  Canadian  rebellion
of  1885,  and  was  elected  to  the  parliament  in  1887
from  Western  Assiniboia.  He  has  published  "The
Irishman  in  Canada  "  (1877),  and  other  works.

DAVIS,  Alexander  Jackson,  architect,  b.  in
New  York,  24  July,  1803.  He  passed  some  time
in  the  study  of  architecture,  and  in  1826  opened
an  office.  He  was  in  partnership  with  Ithiel  Town
in  1829-'43,  and  the  two  introduced  many  novel-
ties and  improvements  in  building  in  this  country.
Mr.  Davis  designed  the  executive  department  and

fatent-office  in  Washington  (1834),  the  capitals  of
Uinois  and  Indiana  (1837),  Ohio  (1839),  and  North
Carolina,  the  University  of  Michigan,  and  the  Vir-
ginia military  institute.  In  1831  he  was  elected  an
associate  member  of  the  National  academy.

DAWSON,  ./Eneas  MacDonell,  Canadian  au-
thor, b.  in  Redhaven,  Scotland,  30  July,  1810.  He
was  educated  in  Scotland  and  France,  entered  the
Roman  Catholic  priesthood  on  2  April,  1835,  and
has  held  charges  in  Canada.  The  University  of
Kingston  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1886.
He  is  the  author  of  "  The  Temporal  Sovereignty
of  the  Pope  "  (London,  1860) ;  "  Our  Strength  and
their  Strength  "  (Ottawa,  1870);  "Life  and  Time
of  Pius  IX."  (1880);  "  The  Last  Defender  of  Jeru-
salem," a  poem  (1882) ;  "  Zenobia,"  a  poem  (1883) ;
and  several  translations.

DELAND,  Margaretta  Wade,  author,  b.  in
Alleghany,  Pa.,  23  Feb.,  1857.  Her  maiden  name
was  Campbell.  She  was  educated  at  Pelham
priory,  New  Rochelle,  N.  Y.,  then  studied  at
Cooper  Union,  and  in  1878-'9  taught  industrial
design  in  the  Girls'  normal  college.  On  12  May,
1880,  she  married  Lorin  F.  Deland,  of  Boston,
Mass.  Mrs.  Deland  has  published  "  The  Old  Gar-
den." a  volume  of  verses  (Boston,  1886),  and  "  John
Ward,  Preacher,"  a  novel  that  has  attained  great
success  (1888).

DEMAREST,  Mary  Augusta  Lee,  b.  in  New
York  city,  26  June,  1838;  d.  in  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,
8  Jan.,  1888.  She  was  a  daughter  of  Thomas  R.
Lee,  and  became  the  wife  of  Theodore  F.  C.  Dem-
arest.  For  many  years  she  was  a  resident  of  Pas-
saic, N.  J.  Mrs.  Demarest  bequeathed  $10,000  to
various  religious  institutions.  She  was  the  author
of  many  poems,  a  volume  of  which  was  published
(New  York,  1882).  The  best  known  of  these  is  "  My
Ain  Countrie,"  which  first  appeared  in  the  New
York  "  Observer"  in  December.  1861.

DE  VARENNES,  Pierre  Gauthicr,  Sieur  de
la  Verendrye,  French  traveller,  b.  in  France  ;  d.  in
Quebec  in  1749.  He  emigrated  to  Canada,  and
was  for  some  time  engaged  in  trading  in  peltry
with  the  Indians.  M.  de  Beauharnais,  governor  of
Canada,  originated  a  scheme  to  reach  the  Pacific,
and  its  execution  and  expense  were  undertaken  by
De  Varennes,  who  discovered  the  Rocky  mountains
in  1731.  While  on  this  tour  he  discovered,  among
massive  stone  pillars,  a  small  stone  bearing  on  two
sides  graven  characters  of  an  unknown  language.
The  stone  was  afterward  sent  to  Paris,  and  there
the  resemblance  the  characters  were  thought  to
bear  to  the  Tartaric  was  regarded  as  supporting
the  hypothesis  of  an  Asiatic  immigration  into
America.  The  king  of  France  conferred  the  cross
of  St.  Louis  upon  De  Varennes,  and  at  the  time  of
his  death  he  was  about  to  resume,  by  the  king's
desire,  his  attempt  to  reach  the  Pacific  ocean.


DEWEY,  Joel  Allen,  soldier,  b.  in  Georgia,
Franklin  co.,  Vt.,  20  Sept.,  1840;  d.  in  Knoxville,
Tenn.,  17  June,  1873.  He  entered  Oberlin  in  1858,
but  left  in  1861  to  enter  the  National  army,  and
served  as  1st  lieutenant  and  captain  of  Ohio  volun-
teers under  Gen.  John  Pope  in  the  west,  and  then
with  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman.  He  was  at  one
time  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  William  S.  Rosecrans.
He  became  colonel  of  the  111th  U.  S.  colored  regi-
ment in  1863,  and  led  a  brigade  near  Huntsville.
He  was  captured  near  Athens,  Ala.,  in  September,
1864,  after  a  day's  severe  engagement  with  Gen.
Forrest's  cavalry.  After  his  liberation  in  Novem-
ber he  served  in  Tennessee  and  northern  Alabama
till  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  13  Dec,  1865,
and  was  mustered  out,  31  Jan.,  1866,  after  declin-
ing a  captain's  commission  in  the  regular  army.
Gen.  Dewey  then  entered  the  law-school  at  Albany,
N.  Y.,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1867,  and  prac-
tised in  Dandridge,  Tenn.  In  1869  he  was  elected
attorney-general  of  the  state,  which  office  he  held
till  his  death.

DEWING,  Thomas  Wilmer,  artist,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  4  May,  1852.  He  studied  in  1876-'9
under  Jules  J.  Lefebvre  in  Paris.  His  more  im-
portant paintings  are  "  Young  Sorcerer  "  (1877) ;
"Morning"  (1879);  "Prelude"  (1883);  "A  Gar-
den "  (1884) ;  "  The  Davs,"  which  gained  the  Clarke
prize  in  1887  (1884-'6);  and  "Tobias  and  the  An-
gel "  (1887).  He  has  produced,  among  other  por-
traits, those  of  Mrs.  Lloyd  Bryee,  Mrs.  Robert  Goe-
let,  and  Mrs.  Delancey  Kane.  He  is  a  member  of
the  Society  of  American  artists,  and  was  elected
an  associate  member  of  the  National  academy  in
1887,  and  an  academician  the  year  following. — His
wife,  Maria  Richards,  whose  maiden  name  was
Oakey,  b.  in  New  York,  27  Oct.,  1855,  studied  at
the  National  academy  and  under  John  Lafarge,
and,  in  1876,  Thomas  Couture.  She  has  painted
numerous  figure-  and  flower-pieces,  among  which
are  "Violets"  (1878)  and  "Mother  and  Child""
(1880),  and  a  number  of  portraits,  including  "  Por-
trait of  a  Boy  "  (1875) ;  "  Portrait  of  her  Father  "
(1877) :  and  "  Sleeping  Child  "  (1878).

DICKINSON,  Donald  McDonald,  cabinet  offi-
cer, b.  in  Port  Ontario,  Oswego  co.,  N.  Y.,  17  Jan.,
1847.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Michi-
gan in  1867,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  has  been  engaged  in  many  important  cases.
He  became  chairman  of  the  Democratic  state  com-
mittee of  Michigan  in  1876,  and  in  1880  was  chair-
man of  the  Michigan  delegation  in  the  Democratic
national  convention.  Since  1884  he  has  represented
Michigan  on  the  national  Democratic  committee.
On  17  Jan.,  1888,  he  became  postmaster-general  of
the  United  States.

DOMEYKO,  Ignaz,  Chilian  scientist,  b.  in  Po-
land in  1802.  He  received  his  primary  education
in  Cracow,  and  in  1817  continued  his  studies  in
the  University  of  Vienna,  where  he  was  graduated.
Taking  part  in  the  Polish  insurrection  of  1830-'l,
he  was  obliged  to  emigrate  to  France,  where  he
labored  in  the  mines  of  Alsace,  and  afterward  fin-
ished special  studies  at  Paris.  In  1838  he  accepted
the  professorship  of  physics  and  chemistry  at  the
lyceum  of  Serena,  Chili.  In  1846  he  was  called  to
the  same  chair  in  the  National  institute  and  the
University  of  Chili,  of  which  he  was  rector  from
1876  till  1883.  He  was  an  associate  editor  of
"  El  Araucano,"  "  Los  Anales  de  Minas,"  and  "  El
Semanario  de  Santiago,"  and  in  1888  began  a  scien-
tific journey  through  Europe.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Tratado  de  ensayes "  (Serena,  1843 ;  Santiago,
1873) ;  "  Elementos"  de  ^lineralogia "  (1844) ;  "La


DOOLITTLE


PERMOY


679


Araucania  y  sus  habitantes  "  (1845) ;  "  Geologia  y
Geometria  Subterranea"  (1873);  "Excursion  a  las
Cordilleras  de  Copiapo  "  (1875) ;  and  "  Constitucion
Geologica  de  Chile  "  (1876).

DOOLITTLE,  Charles  Camp,  soldier,  b.  in
Burlington,  Vt.,  16  March,  1832.  He  was  educated
at  the  High-school  in  Montreal,  Canada,  but  was
not  graduated  on  account  of  his  removal  to  New
York  city  in  1847.  He  subsequently  went  to  Michi-
gan, and  on  16  May,  1861,  became  1st  lieutenant  in
the  4th  Michigan  regiment.  He  was  made  colonel
of  the  18th  regiment  of  that  state  on  22  July,  1862,
served  in  the  peninsular  campaign,  and  was  slightly
wounded  at  Gaines's  Mills.  He  served  in  Kentucky
in  1862-'3,  and  in  Tennessee  in  1863-'4,  and  was  in
command  of  Decatur,  Ala.,  during  the  first  day's
successful  defence  of  that  town  against  Gen.  John
B.  Hood.  He  led  a  brigade  at  Nashville,  and  was
in  command  of  that  city  in  1865,  and  of  the  north-
eastern district  of  Louisiana  in  the  autumn  of  that
year.  On  27  Jan.,  1865,  he  was  made  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  and  on  13  June  he  was  brevetted
major-general.  He  was  mustered  out  on  30  Nov.,
at  his  own  request,  and  since  1871  has  been  cashier
of  the  Merchants'  national  bank,  Toledo,  Ohio.

DOUGHTY,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Jersey
about  1746 ;  d.  after  1802.  He  acted  as  commander
of  the  American  army  by  seniority  of  rank  or  by  the
appointment  of  Gen.  Washington,  from  June,  1784,
till  September,  1789. There  was  no  United  States


army  during  that  period,  except  two  companies  of
artillery,  the  Continental  army  having  been  dis-
banded and  the  new  army  not  formed.  He  became
major  of  an  artillery  company  in  1789,  lieutenant-
colonel  of  artillery  and  engineers  in  June,  1798,  and
on  26  May,  1800,  he  resigned.  Col.  Doughty,  in
1785,  built  Fort  Harmar,  at  the  junction  of  the
Muskingum  with  the  Ohio  river  (the  site  of  Mari-
etta), which  was  the  first  post  of  the  kind  within
the  bounds  of  Ohio.  In  1790  he  built  Fort  Wash-
ington, consisting  of  hewn-log  cabins  with  connect-
ing palisades,  where  now  stands  the  city  of  Cincin-
nati.' It  was  between  the  present  Third  and  Fourth
streets,  and  is  represented  in  the  illustration.

DOWD,  Charles  Ferdinand,  educator,  b.  in
Madison,  Conn.,  25  April,  1825.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1853,  and  has  successively  held  the  posts
of  principal  of  the  preparatory  department  of
Newton  university,  Baltimore,  Md.,  professor  of
mathematics  there,  principal  of  the  high-school,
Waterbury,  Conn.,  associate  principal  of  the  Con-
necticut normal  school  at  New  Britain,  superin-
tendent of  public  schools,  Waterbury,  Conn.,
principal  of  the  Granville  (N.  Y.)  military  acade-
my, and  president  of  Temple  Grove  seminary,
Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.  He  conceived  the  idea  of
adopting  one  standard  for  railway  time,  and  after
submitting  it  to  a  railway  convention  in  New  York
city  in  October,  1869,  he  devised  a  complete  plan,
which  he  published,  with  a  map  (1870). Prof.


Dowd  attended  conventions  of  railway  managers
in  Boston,  in  New  York,  and  in  the  west,  and  finally
secured  the  adoption  of  the  present  system  of  rail-
way standai'd  time,  which  is  a  modification  of  his
first  plan.  In  this  system  the  country  is  divided
into  sections,  in  each  of  which  the  time  is  made
uniform,  and  the  standards  in  adjacent  sections
differ  by  one  hour.  It  went  into  effect  on  18  Nov.,
1883.  Prof.  Dowd  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
from  the  University  of  New  York  in  1888.  He  is
writing  "  A  Theory  of  Ethics."

DRAKE,  Francis  Marion,  soldier,  b.  in  Rush-
ville,  Schuyler  co.,  111.,  30  Dec,  1830.  His  father,
John,  a  native  of  North  Carolina,  founded  the
town  of  Drakesville,  Iowa.  The  son  was  educated
in  the  district  schools,  and  entered  a  mercantile
life  at  sixteen  years  of  age.  He  crossed  the  plains
to  Sacramento,  Cal.,  in  1852  and  1854,  engaged  in
Indian  warfare,  and  in  1859  settled  in  business  in
Unionville,  Iowa.  He  served  through  the  civil
war,  becoming  in  1862  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
36th  Iowa  cavalry,  was  severely  wounded  at  Mark's
Mills,  and  in  1865  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
of  volunteers.  He  re-entered  mercantile  life  at  the
end  of  the  war,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1866,  but  subsequently  engaged  in  railroad-build-
ing. In  1881  he  became  a  founder  of  Drake  univer-
sity, contributing  the  principal  amount.


ELKIN,  William  Lewis,  astronomer,  b.  in
New  Orleans,  La.,  29  April,  1855.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Royal  polytechnic  school  in  Stuttgart,
Germany,  and  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Strasburg  in  1880.  Subsequently  he  was  asso-
ciated with  Dr.  David  Gill,  of  the  Royal  observatory
at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in  investigating  the
parallaxes  of  southern  stars.  In  1884  he  became
an  astronomer  at  the  observatory  of  Yale  univer-
sity, which  post  he  still  holds.  His  investigations
at  this  place  have  included  a  triangulation  of  the
Pleiades  with  the  heliometer,  and  other  researches
with  that  instrument,  the  only  one  of  its  kind  in
America ;  also  researches  on  the  parallaxes  of
northern  stars.  These  results  have  been  published
in  current  astronomical  journals,  and  have  given
Dr.  Elkin  wide  reputation  among  astronomers.

ESTE,  George  Peahody,  soldier,  b.  in  Nashua,
N.  H.,  24  April,  1829 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  Feb.,
1881.  He  wrote  his  family  name  Estey  till  he  en-
tered the  army,  when  he  adopted  an  older  spelling.
He  entered  Dartmouth,  but  left  on  account  of  ill-
ness before  graduation,  and,  after  going  to  Cali-
fornia, studied  law,  and  settled  in  Toledo,  where
he  became  a  partner  of  Morrison  R.  Waite.  He
was  solicitor  of  his  county  in  1860,  but,  entering
the  National  service  as  a  private,  became  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  14th  Ohio  infantry,  and  in  1862
succeeded  to  the  command.  During  the  Atlanta
campaign  and  afterward  he  led  a  brigade,  and  at
Jonesboro'  he  averted  defeat  by  a  timely  bayonet
charge.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers, 9  Dec,  1864,  and  on  26  June,  1865,  was
given  full  rank.  Gen.  Este  resigned  on  4  Dec,
1865,  and  afterward  practised  his  profession  in
Washington,  D.  C.  He  was  presented  by  his  regi-
ment wijh  a  sword  with  diamond-studded  hilt.


FERMOY,  Matthias  Alexis  Roche  de,  French
soldier,  b.  in  the  West  Indies  about  1737;  d.  after
1778.  He  was  34th  on  the  list  of  Continental  briga-
dier-generals, his  commission  dating  5  Nov..  1776.
On  coming  to  this  country  in  that  year  and  offering
his  services  to  congress,  Fermoy  represented  him-


680


FIELD


FULLER


self  as  a  colonel  of  engineers  in  the  French  army.
He  served  under  Washington  in  the  Trenton-
Princeton  campaign.  On  1  Jan.,  1777,  he  was  or-
dered to  take  his  brigade  to  hold  an  advanced  post
at  Mile-Run,  beyond  Maiden-Head  (now  Lawrence-
ville).  That  same  night  he  returned  to  Trenton,
leaving  his  command  in  a  somewhat  questionable
way.  The  following  year  (1777)  he  was  placed  in
command  of  Fort  Independence,  opposite  Fort  Ti-
conderoga,  by  orders  of  congress,  and  against  the
protest  of  Washington.  On  the  retreat  of  Gen.  Ar-
thur St.  Clair  from  Ticonderoga,  Fermoy,  against
the  orders  of  the  commanding  general,  set  fire  to
his  quarters  on  Mount  Independence  at  two  o'clock
on  the  morning  of  6  July,  1777,  thus  revealing  to
Burgoyne  St.  Clair's  evacuation  of  Ticonderoga.
Had  it  not  been  for  this,  St.  Clair  would  have  made
good  his  retreat  in  safety.  In  December,  1777,  he
applied  for  promotion  to  a  major-generalship,  but
congress,  on  31  Jan.,  1778,  refused  his  request,  and
on  16  Feb.,  1778,  he  was  allowed  to  resign,  receiving
$800  to  enable  him  to  return  to  the  West  Indies.

FIELD,  William  Hildreth,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  16  April,  1843.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1863,  and  at  Columbia  college  law-
school  in  1865.  He  was  taken  into  partnership  by
Judge  John  W.  Edmonds,  and  remained  with  him
until  his  death  in  1874.  He  was  elected  president  of
the  Catholic  club  of  New  York  in  June,  1887,  and  re-
elected in  1888.  Under  his  management  this  body
has  become  the  most  influential  Roman  Catholic
organization  in  the  state.  He  has  tried  many  cases
before  the  court  of  appeals,  some  of  great  public
importance,  involving  the  interpretation  of  stat-
utes, in  which  the  law  has  been  settled  in  accord-
ance with  the  construction  that  he  advocated.  He
edited,  with  Judge  Edmonds,  "  Statutes  at  Large  of
the  State  of  New  York  "  (9  vols.,  Albany,  1863-'75).

FLETCHER,  Alice  Cunningham,  ethnolo-
gist, b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  about  1845.  She  was  care-
fully educated,  and,  after  study  among  the  archaeo-
logical remains  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  valleys,
went  in  1881  to  reside  among  the  Omaha  Indians,
investigating  their  customs  and  traditions  under
the  auspices  of  the  Peabody  museum  of  American
archaeology  and  ethnology  of  Harvard.  In  1883
she  was  appointed  by  the  secretary  of  the  interior
to  allot  the  Omahas  their  lands  in  severalty,  and
brought  to  the  Indian  schools  at  Carlisle,  Pa.,  and
Hampton,  Va.,  a  large  party  of  their  children  and
two  married  couples.  Under  the  care  of  the  Wom-
an's national  Indian  association,  Miss  Fletcher
established  a  system  by  which  small  sums  of  money
were  lent  to  such  Indians  as  wished  to  buy  tracts
of  land  and  build  houses.  At  the  request  of  the
Indian  bureau,  she  prepared  an  exhibit  for  the  New
Orleans  exposition  in  1884-'5  showing  the  progress
of  Indian  civilization  for  the  last  twenty-five  years.
In  1886  she  was  sent  by  the  commissioner  of  edu-
cation to  visit  Alaskan  and  Aleutian  Indians,  and
in  1888  completed  her  report  on  "  Indian  Educa-
tion and  Civilization,"  in  which  is  a  synopsis  of  all
Indian  treaties,  their  laws  and  regulations,  and  sta-
tistics concerning  population,  schools,  etc.  (Wash-
ington, 1888).  In  1887  she  was  appointed  special
agent,  and  assigned  to  the  Winnebago  tribe.  She
has  published  numerous  papers  and  monographs.

FLICKINGER,  Daniel  Kumler,  bishop  of  the
United  Brethren,  b.  in  Sevenmile,  Ohio,  25  May,
1824.  He  received  an  academic  education,  became
corresponding  secretary  of  the  United-Brethren
church  missionary  society  in  1857,  and  held  office
by  re-election  till  1885,  when  he  was  chosen  foreign
missionary  bishop.  He  has  made  eight  missionary
tours  to  Africa,  and  done  work  on  the  frontiers  of


the  United  States  and  among  Chinese  emigrants.
Otterbein  university,  Ohio,  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1875.  Dr.  Flickinger  has  published  "  Off-
Hand  Sketches  in  Africa  "  (Dayton,  Ohio,  1857) ;
"Sermons,"  with  Rev.  William  J.  Shuey  (1859);
"  Ethiopia,  or  Twenty-six  Years  of  Missionarv  Life
in  Western  Africa"  (1877);  and  "The  Church's
Marching  Orders  "  (1879).

FLOOD,  James  Clair,  capitalist,  b.  in  Ireland
in  1825.  He  emigrated  to  New  York  when  a  young
man  in  the  same  ship  with  William  O'Brien,  with
whom  he  formed  an  intimate  friendship  during
the  voyage.  After  working  in  ship-yards  the  two
went  to  California  in  1851,  and  opened  a  saloon  in
San  Francisco.  They  made  money  by  speculating
in  mining  stock,  and  several  years  later  formed  a
partnership  with  James  G.  Fair  and  John  W.
Mackay,  who  were  then  young  miners.  Flood  and
O'Brien  agreed  to  furnish  money  for  tools  and  out-
fit, while  Fair  and  Mackay  prospected  in  the
Sierras.  The  result  was  the  discovery  of  the  Com-
stock  lode,  which  made  them  four  of  the  wealthiest
men  in  the  world.  They  subsequently  established
the  Nevada  bank  in  San  Francisco,  and  the  part-
nership continued  till  1881,  when  Mr.  Fair  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate.  Soon  afterward  Mr.
Flood  withdrew  from  active  business.

FOLEY,  John  Samuel,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Baltimore.  Md.,  5  Nov.,  1833.  He  was  graduated
at  St.  Mary's  college,  Baltimore,  in  1850,  studied
theology  there  and  in  Rome,  and  was  ordained  a
priest,  20  Dec,  1856.  After  filling  several  appoint-
ments in  Maryland,  he  was  commissioned  by  Arch-
bishop Spalding  to  establish  a  new  congregation
in  the  western  part  of  Baltimore,  and  built  for  it
the  Church  of  St.  Martin,  one  of  the  finest  in  the
city,  also  taking  an  active  interest  in  educational
matters.  Dr.  Foley  was  employed  on  important
private  missions  by  Archbishop  Spalding  and
Cardinal  Gibbons,  and  had  much  influence  in  the
Baltimore  council  of  1884.  He  was  appointed  to
the  see  of  Detroit  5  Aug.  1888.  He  is  a  brother  of
Thomas  Foley,  bishop  of  Chicago  (q.  v.).

FOULON,  Clement,  known  as  Father  Claude
D'Abbeville,  French  missionary,  b.  in  Abbeville,
Somme,  about  1557 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  1632.  In  1612
he  accompanied  Commander  Isaac  de  Razilly  to
South  America,  and,  after  exploring  the  northern
shore  of  Brazil,  began  a  small  settlement  on  the
island  of  Maranhao,  near  the  coast.  Returning  to
France  a  few  months  later,  he  vainly  solicited  aid
from  the  church,  and  in  1614  recalled  the  three
missionaries  that  he  had  left  on  Marafion  island.
He  was  a  preacher  of  much  repute,  and  for  many
years  the  superior  of  the  convent  of  Capucins  at
Abbeville  which  he  had  founded.  He  published
"  Histoire  de  la  mission  des  P.  P.  Capucins  a  File
de  Maragnon  et  terres  circonvoisines  "  (Paris,  1614).

FULLER,  Melville  Weston,  jurist,  b.  in  Au-
gusta, Me.,  11  Feb.,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1853,  studied  law  in  Bangor  with  his
uncle,  George  M.  Weston,  and  then  at  Harvard,
and  began  to  practise  in  1855  in  his  native  city.
There  he  was  an  associate  editor  of  the  "Age,"
served  as  president  of  the  common  council,  and  be-
came city  attorney  in  1856 ;  but  he  resigned  in  June
of  that  year,  and  removed  to  Chicago,  111.,  where
he  was  in  active  practice  for  thirty-two  years.  He
rose  to  the  highest  rank  in  his  profession,  and  was
concerned  in  many  important  cases,  among  which
were  the  National  bank  tax  cases,  one  of  which  was
the  first  that  was  argued  before  Chief-Justice
Waite,  the  Cheney  ecclesiastical  case,  the  South
park  commissioners  cases,  and  the  Lake  front
case. He  was a  member  of the  State consti-


PULLER


GARIBALDI


681


tutional  convention  of  1862,  and  in  1863-'5  of  the
lower  house  of  the  legislature,  where  he  was  a
leader  of  the  Douglas  branch  of  the  Democratic
party.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Democratic  na-
tional conventions  of
1864,  1872,  1876,  and
1880.  On  30  April,
1888,  he  was  nomi-
nated by  President
Cleveland  to  be  chief
justice  of  the  United
States,  and  on  20
July  he  was  con-
firmed by  the  senate.
On  8  Oct.  he  took  the
oath  of  office  and  en-
tered on  his  duties.
Judge  Fuller  is,  with
one  exception,  the
youngest  member  of
the  supreme  court.
He  has  attained  repu-
tation as  a  speaker.
Among  his  addresses
is  one  welcoming  Stephen  A.  Douglas  to  Chicago
in  1860,  and  another  on  Sidney  Breese,  which  is
prefixed  to  Judge  Breese's  '•  Early  History  of  Illi-
nois "  (1884).  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  has  been  con-
ferred on  him  by  the  Northwestern  university,  and
Bowdoin  college  in  1888.

FULLER,  Thomas,  Canadian  architect,  b.  in
Bath,  England,  8  March,  1822.  He  was  educated  in
his  native  place,  and.  after  leaving  school,  was
articled  to  an  architect  there,  subsequently  studying
his  profession  in  London.  At  an  early  age  he  was  in-
trusted with  the  erection  of  a  cathedral  at  Antigua,
West  Indies.  In  1857  he  went  to  Toronto.  Canada,
and  formed  a  partnership  with  Chilion  Jones.  In
1859  their  designs  were  accepted  by  the  government
for  the  parliament  and  departmental  buildings  and
governor-general's  residence  at  Ottawa.  (See  illus-
tration of  the  capitol.)  In  the  competition  for  the
new  capitol  for  the  state  of  New  York,  at  Albany,
his  design  was  one  of  the  three  to  which  equal  pre-
miums were  awarded.  In  the  second  competition,  to
which  the  three  successful  competitors  were  invited,
Augustus  Laver,  one  of  the  three,  prepared  a  joint
design  with  Mr.  Puller  which  was  ultimately
adopted  in  1867. Mr.  Puller  remained in  New


York  state  until  1881,  when  he  returned  to  Ottawa,
and  on  9  Dec.  of  that  year  he  was  appointed  chief
architect  of  the  Dominion  of  Canada.


GAMBLE,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Duross,
County  Tyrone,  Ireland,  1  Jan.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Nica-
ragua, Central  America,  20  Dec,  1866.  He  studied
civil  engineering,  and  was  employed  on  the  govern-
ment survey  of  the  north  of  Ireland,  but  came  to
the  United  States  when  he  was  twenty  years  old,
and  enlisted  in  the  1st  U.  S.  dragoons. He  served


in  the  Florida  war  and  on  the  western  frontier,
and  rose  to  be  sergeant-major,  but  on  the  expira-
tion of  his  term  of  enlistment  went  to  Chicago,
111.,  where  he  followed  his  profession.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the  8th
Illinois  cavalry,  was  chosen  its  lieutenant-colonel,
afterward  was  promoted  colonel,  and  fought  with
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  receiving  a  wound  at
Malvern  Hill  that  was  nearly  fatal.  He  was  for
two  years  at  the  head  of  a  brigade  in  defence  of
Washington,  with  headquarters  at  Fairfax  Court-
House,  Va.,  and  on  25  Sept.,  1865,  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  After  service  in
the  west  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  ser-
vice on  13  March,  1866,  and  on  28  July  accepted
a  major's  commission  in  the  8th  regular  cavalry.
He  was  on  his  way  with  his  regiment  to  California
when  he  died  of  cholera.

GARIBALDI,  Giuseppe,  Italian  patriot,  b.  in
Nice,  4  July,  1807;  d.  in  Caprera,  2  June,  1882.
He  followed  the  sea  from  his  earliest  youth,
and  in  1836  went  to  Rio  Janeiro,  where  he  en-
gaged in  the  coasting  trade.  In  1837  he  offered
his  services  to  the  revolted  Brazilian  province  of
RioGrandedo  Sul,
and  commanded  a
fleet  of  gun-boats.
After  many  dar-
ing exploits  he
was  forced  to  burn
his  vessels,  and
went  to  Montevi-
deo, where  he  be-
came a  broker  and
teacher  of  mathe-
matics. He  took
service  in  Uru-
guay in  the  war
against  Rosas,  and
was  given  thecom-
mand  of  a  small
naval  force  which
he  was
abandon

battle  at  Costa
Brava,  15  and  16  June,  1842.  Garibaldi  then  organ-
ized the  famous  Italian  legion,  with  which  for  four
years  he  fought  numerous  battles  for  the  republic.
In  1845  he  commanded  an  expedition  to  Salto,
where  he  established  his  headquarters,  and  toward
the  end  of  the  year  he  resisted  with  500  men  for
three  days  the  assault  of  Urquiza's  army  of  4.000
men.  On  8  Feb.,  1846,  he  repelled  at  San  Antonio,
with  scarcely  200  men,  Gen.  Servando  Gomez  with
1,200  soldiers.  In  1847,  when  he  heard  of  Italy's
rising  against  Austrian  dominion,  he  went  to  assist
his  country,  accompanied  by  a  portion  of  the  Ital-
ian legion  ;  but,  after  taking  part  in  several  unsuc-
cessful attempts,  including  the  defence  of  Rome
against  the  French  in  1849,  he  sailed  in  June,  1850,
for  New  York.  On  Staten  island  he  worked  for
a  time  with  a  countryman  manufacturing  candles
and  soap,  and  in  1851  he  went  by  way  of  Cen-
tral America  and  Panama  to  Callao,  whence  he
sailed  in  1852  in  command  of  a  vessel  for  China.
Early  in  1854  he  returned  to  Italy,  where  he  lived
quietly  in  the  island  of  Caprera.  At  the  opening
of  war  against  Austria  in  1859  he  organized  the
Alpine  chasseurs,  and  defeated  the  enemy  in  sev-
eral encounters.  After  the  peace  of  Villafranca  he
began  preparations  for  the  expedition  which  was
secretly  encouraged  by  the  government.  Having
conquered  Sicily  and  being  proclaimed  dictator,
he  entered  Naples  in  triumph  on  7  Sept.,  1860,  but
afterward  resigned  the  dictatorship  and  proclaimed


m after a ^ s£o/^4^sC*^<ccsC<s


682


GERHARDT


GILCHRIST


Victor  Emmanuel  king  of  Italy,  declining  all  prof-
fered honors  and  retiring  to  Caprera.  In  1862  he
planned  the  rescue  of  Rome  from  the  French,  and
again  invaded  Calabria  from  Sicily,  but  was  wound-
ed and  captured  at  Aspromonte,  29  Aug.,  1862,  and
sent  back  to  Caprera.  In  June,  1866,  during  the
Austro-Prussian  war,  he  commanded  for  a  short
time  an  army  of  volunteers,  and  on  14  Oct..  1867,
he  undertook  another  expedition  to  liberate  Rome,
but  was  routed  by  the  Papal  troops  and  the  French.
He  entered  the  service  of  the  French  republic  in
1870,  and  he  organized  and  commanded  the  chas-
seurs of  the  Vosges.  In  1871  he  was  elected  to  the
Italian  parliament,  and  took  an  active  part  in  poli-
tics till  the  end  of  his  life.  In  1888  the  Italians  in
New  York  erected  a  bronze  statue  of  him  which
was  unveiled  in  Washington  square,  4  June,  1888.
He  wrote  several  novels,  including  "  Cantoni  il  vol-
ontario  "  (Genoa,  1870) ;  "  Clelia,  ovvero  il  governo
monaco ;  Roma  del  secolo  XIX  "  (1870),  which  in
the  same  year  was  translated  into  English  under
the  title  of  "  The  Rule  of  the  Monk,  or  Rome  in
the  19th  Century";  "  II  frate  dominatore  "  (1873) ;
and  a  poem,  "  Le  Mila  di  Marsala  "  (1873).  Many
biographies  of  Garibaldi  have  been  written  and
translated  into  English,  including  those  by  W.  Rob-
son  (London,  1860),  by  Theodore  Dwight  (New
York,  1860),  and  by  Mrs.  Gaskell  (London,  1862).
An  autobiography  appeared  after  his  death,  under
the  title  "  Garibaldi ;  Memorie  autobiografiche  "
(Florence,  1888).

GERHARDT,  Karl,  sculptor,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  7  Jan.,  1853.  He  is  of  German  parentage,
and  in  early  life  was  a  machinist  in  Chicopee,
Mass.,  and  then  a  designer  of  machinery  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.  His  first  works  were  a  bust  of  his
wife  and  "  A  Startled  Bather,"  which  so  strongly
indicated  talent  that  he  was  sent  to  Paris  for
study.  In  his  second  year  he  contributed  to  the
salon,  where  he  also  exhibited  in  1884  "  Echo,"  a
statuette,  and  "  Eve's  Lullaby,"  a  life-size  group.
His  other  works  include  a  bust  of  Gen.  Ulysses  S.
Grant,  taken  in  the  last  days  of  his  illness ;  busts
of  Samuel  L.  Clemens  (1883)  and  the  Rev.  Henry
Ward  Beecher  (1886) ;  a  statue  of  Nathan  Hale
(see  vol.  iii.,  p.  31)  in  the  state  capitol  at  Hartford
(1885);  an  equestrian  statue  of  Gen.  Israel  Put-
nam in  Brooklyn,  Conn.  (1887) ;  a  statue  of  Josiah
Bartlett,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,
in  Amesbury,  Mass.  (1888) ;  Welton  Fountain,
Waterbury,  Conn.  (1888) ;  statue  of  Gen.  Gouver-

neur  K.  Warren
(see  p.  362)  at
Gettysburg;  Pa.
(1888);  and  tab-
let to  John  Fitch,
in  the  state  capi-
tol in  Hartford,
Conn.  (1888).

GIBSON,  Rob-
ert Williams,  ar-
chitect, b.  in  Ave-
ley,  Essex,  Eng-
land, 17  Nov.,1854.
He  was  educated
at  a  private  school
in  Gravesend,  and
then  at  the  Royal
academy  of  arts
in  London,  where
he  completed  his
course  in  1879.  Subsequently  he  settled  in  New
York  city,  where  he  has  since  followed  his  profes-
sion. His  work  includes  the  U.  S.  trust  company's
building  in New  York city  and  the  Cathedral


church  in  Buffalo,  and  he  has  submitted  a  design
for  the  projected  cathedral  of  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church  to  be  built  in  New  York  city.  Mr.
Gibson's  best-known  work  is  the  cathedral  of  All
Saints'  in  Albany,  which  is  shown  in  the  illustra-
tion, the  design  of  which  was  selected  in  competi-
tion. This  church,  although  not  completed,  was
dedicated  on  20  Nov.,  1888,  with  appropriate  cere-
monies, extending  through  an  entire  week.  He
published  in  the  "American  Architect,"  during
1884,  a  series  of  articles  on  "Spanish  Architec-
ture," with  illustrations  made  by  himself  in  Spain,
and,  in  the  "  Engineering  Record,"  "  Observations
on  Heavy  Buildings"  (1888).

GILBERG,  Charles  Alexander,  chess-player,
b.  in  Camden,  N.  J.,  17  June,  1835.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  College  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1854,
and  is  the  managing  partner  in  a  large  West  India
house  in  that  city.  He  is  widely  known  as  an
amateur  chess-player,  and  has  served  as  judge  in
almost  every  public  contest  that  has  taken  place.
His  chess  library  of  more  than  1,500  volumes  is
the  largest  in  this  country  with  the  exception  of
that  of  John  G.  White,  of  Cleveland,  Ohio.  Mr.
Gilberg  has  received  prizes  for  his  chess  prob-
lems, and  has  edited  "American  Chess-Nuts"  (New
York,  1868)  and  "  The  Book  of  the  Fifth  Ameri-
can Congress"  (1881).

GILBERT,  Samuel  Augustus,  soldier,  b.  in
Zanesville,  Ohio,  25  Aug.,  1825;  d.  in  St.  Paul,
Minn..  9  June,  1868.  He  was  educated  at  Ohio
university,  Athens,  Ohio,  and  then  entered  the  U
S.  coast  survey,  in  which  service  he  continued  until
the  civil  war,  attaining  a  rank  next  to  that  of
superintendent.  On  11  June,  1861,  he  was  ap-
pointed lieutenant-colonel  of  the  24th  Ohio  volun-
teers, and  accompanied  his  regiment  to  western
Virginia.  He  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  44th
Ohio  regiment  on  14  Oct.,  1861,  and  in  May,  1862,
he  took  part  in  the  raid  upon  the  Central  railroad,
in  which  he  marched  more  than  eighty  miles  in
sixty  hours,  including  all  stops.  He  commanded
the  right  in  the  battle  of  Lewisburg,  W.  Va.,  21
May,  1862,  and  captured  a  Confederate  battery.  In
August,  1862,  he  was  ordered  to  join  Gen.  John
Pope  east  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  and  he  served  there
until  1863,  when  he  commanded  a  brigade  in
Kentucky,  and  dispersed  a  political  convention
in  Frankfort  which  he  considered  to  be  plotting
treason.  He  continued  in  Kentucky  and  Tennes-
see until  November,  1863,  when  he  became  engineer
on  the  staff  of  Gen.  John  G.  Foster  until  Gen.
James  Longstreet  retreated,  when  he  resumed  com-
mand of  his  brigade.  Col.  Gilbert's  health  hav-
ing been  impaired  by  exposure,  he  resigned  on  20
April,  1864.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
of  volunteers,  13  March.  1865.

GILCHRIST,  Robert,  lawver,  b.  in  Jersey  City,
N.  J.,  21  Aug.,  1825 ;  d.  there,  6  July,  1888.  He
was  educated  in  private  schools,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1847.  Subsequently  he
became  a  counsellor  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  He
was  a  member  of  the  New  Jersey  legislature  in
1859.  At  the  first  call  for  troops  in  1861  he  went
to  the  front  as  a  captain  in  the  2d  New  Jersey  regi-
ment. Until  the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  was  a
Republican,  but  he  left  that  party  on  the  question
of  reconstruction,  and  in  1866  he  was  a  Democratic
candidate  for  congress.  In  1869  he  was  appointed
attorney-general  of  New  Jersey,  to  fill  the  unexpired
term  of  George  M.  Robeson  (appointed  secretary  of
the  navy  in  President  Grant's  cabinet),  and  in  1873
was  reappointed  for  a  full  term.  In  1875  he  was  a
candidate  for  U.  S.  senator.  He  had  been  appoint-
ed one  of  the  commissioners  to  revise  the  constitu-


GILPIN


(HIKER


683


tion  of  the  state  in  1873,  but  resigned  before  the
work  was  completed,  and  he  also  declined  the  office
of  chief-justice  of  New  Jersey.  Mr.  Gilchrist  was
especially  versed  in  constitutional  law,  and  he  was
employed  in  many  notable  cases.  His  interpreta-
tion of  the  fifteenth  amendment  to  the  national
constitution  secured  the  right  of  suffrage  to  colored
men  in  New  Jersey.  He  was  the  author  of  the
riparian-rights  act,  and  was  counsel  for  the  state  in
the  suit  that  tested  its  constitutionality.  From  this
source  the  fund  for  maintenance  of  public  schools
in  New  Jersey  is  now  chiefly  derived.  He  also
secured  to  the  United  States  a  half  million  dollars
left  by  Joseph  L.  Lewis  to  be  applied  in  payment
of  the  national  debt.  His  large  law  library,  en-
riched with  thousands  of  marginal  notes,  was  sold  at
auction  in  New  York  six  months  after  his  death. —
His  wife,  Fredericka,  b.  in  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  in  1846,
is  a  daughter  of  Samuel  Raymond  Beardsley  (q.  v.).
She  has  published  "  The  True  Story  of  Hamlet  and
Ophelia,"  a  minute  study  and  completely  new  in-
terpretation of  Shakespeare's  play  (Boston,  1889).

GILPIN,  William,  governor  of  Colorado,  b.  in
Newcastle  county,  Del.,  4  Oct.,  1812.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1833,  studied  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  and
served  in  the  Seminole  war,  but  resigned  his  com-
mission and  removed  to  Independence,  Mo.,  in
1841,  where  he  practised  law,  which  he  had
studied  under  his  brother.  He  was  secretary  of  the
general  assembly  in  1841-'3.  On  4  March,  1844,
with  a  party  of  125  pioneers,  he  founded  Portland,
Ore.,  about  four  miles  above  its  present  site,  and
drew  up  the  articles  of  agreement  for  a  territorial
government.  He  afterward  re-entered  the  army,
serving  through  the  Mexican  war  as  major  of  the
1st  Missouri  cavalry,  and  in  1848  he  made  a  suc-
cessful expedition  against  the  hostile  Indians  of
Colorado,  which  resulted  in  a  peace  for  eighteen
years.  In  1851  he  returned  to  Independence,  and
in  1861  he  was  appointed  first  governor  of  Colo-
rado. Gov,  Gilpin  has  published  "The  Central
Gold  Region"  (Philadelphia,  1859)  and  "The  Mis-
sion of  the  North  American  People"  (1873).  In
the  latter  he  showed  by  charts  the  practicability  of
establishing  a  railroad  around  the  world  on  the
40th  parallel  of  latitude,  on  which  are  located
nearly  all  the  great  cities  of  both  continents.

GOMARA,  Francisco  Lopez  de  (go-mah'-rah),
Spanish  historian,  b.  in  Seville,  or,  according  to
some  authorities,  in  Gomera.  Canary  islands,  in
1510 :  d.  in  Seville  in  1560  or  1576.  His  parents
had  destined  him  for  a  military  career,  but  he
took  holy  orders,  and  was  employed  for  several
years  as  professor  of  rhetoric  at  Alcala.  Desiring
to  acquire  a  personal  knowledge  of  the  New  World,
he  went  to  Mexico  about  1540,  and  remained  there
four  years,  part  of  the  time  as  secretary  of  Hernan
Cortes.  On  his  return  he  resided  for  some  time  in
Italy,  and  became  intimate  with  Saxo  Grammaticus
and  Olaus  Magnus.  His  work  is  entitled  "  Pri-
mera  y  segnnda  parte  de  la  historia  general  de  las
Indias  con  la  conquista  de  Mejico  y  de  la  Nueva
Espana"  (Medina,  1553;  Antwerp,  1554).  It  had
great  success,  passing  in  quick  succession  through
two  editions,  and  was  translated  into  Italian  by
Gravalis  (Rome,  1566)  and  by  Lucio  Mauro  (Ven-
ice, 1566).  and  into  French  by  Martin  Fumee  (Paris,
1606).  The  second  part,  which  is  a  history  of
the  life  of  Cortes,  has  been  reprinted  by  Busta-
mante  (Mexico,  1826).  Gomara's  style  is  clear  and
fluent,  but,  unfortunately,  the  second  part  of  his
work  seems  to  have  been  written  from  notes,  which
were  not  complete  or  exact,  and  often  supplied  by
a  fervid  imagination. In  the  royal  library  of


Madrid  there  are  two  of  his  works  in  manuscript,
"  Historia  de  Horuc  y  Aradin  Barbaroja,  reyes  de
Argel  "  and  "  Anales  del  Em perador  Carlos  V,"the
publication  of  which  has  not  been  permitted  by
the  royal  government,  because  they  depict  the  em-
peror's character  in  an  unfavorable  light.

GOODSELL,  Daniel  Ayres,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  5  Nov.,  1840.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York,
but  left  before  graduation  to  enter  the  ministry  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  every  general  conference  from  1876  till
1888,  and  at  the  one  in  New  York  city  in  May.
1888,  he  was  elected  bishop.  Wesleyan  university
conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  in  1880.
Bishop  Goodsell  has  been  literary  editor  and  edito-
rial contributor  of  the  New  York  "  Christian  Ad-
vocate "  since  1880,  and  was  an  editorial  contribu-
tor of  the  "  Methodist  Review  "  until  May,  1888.

GOODWIN,  Isaac,  author,  b.  in  Plymouth,
Mass.,  28  June,  1786  ;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,
16  Sept.,  1832.  He  was  educated  in  Plymouth,
studied  law  there,  practised  his  profession,  and
held  local  offices  in  Stirling  and  Worcester,  Mass,
From  1813  till  1832  he  was  a  member  and  coun-
cillor of  the  American  antiquarian  society  of
Worcester.  Besides  many  addresses  and  orations,
he  published  "Historv  of  the  Town  of  Stirling.
Mass."  (Worcester,  1815);  "The  Town  Officer"
(1824) ;  and  "  The  New  England  Sheriff  "  (1830).—
His  son,  John  Abbott,  author,  b.  in  Stirling,
Mass.,  21  May,  1824;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass,  21  Sept.,
1884,  was  educated  at  the  Rensselaer  polytechnic
institute  in  the  class  of  1847,  but  was  not  gradu-
ated. He  was  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature  in
1854-'7  and  1859-'61,  serving  in  the  last  years  as
speaker  of  the  house,  held  local  offices  in  Lowell,
and  delivered  many  speeches.  Among  his  publi-
cations are  "  The  Pilgrim  Fathers  neither  Puritans
nor  Persecutors "  (Lowell,  1875)  and  "  The  Pil-
grim Republic  "  (Boston,  1888).

GOTTHEIL,  Gustave,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pinne,
Poland,  28  May,  1827.  He  is  of  Jewish  parentage,
was  educated  according  to  the  rabbinical  code,
attended  lectures  in  the  University  of  Berlin  and
at  the  institute  for  Hebrew  literature,  and  in  1855
became  assistant  minister  to  the  celebrated  Dr.
Samuel  Holdheim  of  the  Berlin  reform  temple.
He  was  called  to  Manchester,  England,  in  1860,  and
to  Temple  Emanuel,  New  York  city,  in  1873.  Dr.
Gottheil  is  a  liberal  in  his  religious  opinions,  and  a
leader  in  the  reform  branch  of  the  Hebrew  church.
He  has  been  active  in  educational,  social,  and
charitable  reforms,  contributing  many  papers  on
these  subjects  to  the  reviews.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Hymns  and  Anthems  "  (New  York,  1887).

GREER,  David  Hnmniell,  clergyman,  b.  in
Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  20  March,  1844.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Washington  college,  Pa.,  in  1862,  studied
theology  at  the  Protestant  Episcopal  seminary  at
Gambier,  Ohio,  was  ordered  deacon  in  Christ  church.
Clarkesburg,  W.  Va.,  in  June,  1866,  and  remained  in
charge  of  that  parish  for  a  year.  He  was  ordained
priest  at  Alexandria,  Va.,  in  1868,  and  became
rector  of  Trinity  church,  Covington,  Ky.  He  went
abroad  in  1871,  and  on  his  return  was  elected  rector
of  Grace  church,  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  entered
upon  his  work  there  on  15  Sept.,  1872.  He  organ-
ized several  missions  in  connection  with  the  parish
church,  founded  St.  Elizabeth's  home  for  incura-
bles in  1882,  and  was  deputy  from  the  diocese  to
four  successive  general  conventions.  He  accepted
the  rectorship  of  St.  Bartholomew's  church,  New
York  city,  in  1888.  He  is  a  broad-churchman,  and
an  eloquent  extemporaneous  preacher.


684


GRIFFIN


HAND


GRIFFIN,  Samuel  P.,  navigator,  b.  in  Savan-
nah, Ga.,  in  1826 ;  d.  in  Aspinwall,  Panama,  4  July,
1887.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  acade-
my in  1841,  served  throughout  the  Mexican  war  in
Californian  waters,  and  in  1849  was  in  the  first  IT.  S.
arctic  expedition  that  was  sent  out  to  search  for
Sir  John  Franklin.  He  resigned  from  the  navy  in
1854,  engaged  in  business  in  New  Orleans,  and  dur-
ing the  civil  war  was  detailed  by  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.
Banks  to  collect  a  fleet  for  the  Red  river  expedi-
tion. He  soon  afterward  entered  the  service  of  the
Pacific  mail  steamship  company,  commanding,  as
their  commodore,  successive  steamers  of  their  fleet
till  1882.  Capt.  Griffin  was  an  authority  on  ship-
building, and  the  author  of  the  code  of  interna-
tional fog-signals  and  of  essays  on  ship-building.

GRISWOLD,  Alphonso  Miner,  journalist,  b.
in  Westmoreland,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  26  Jan.,  1834.
He  was  educated  at  Hamilton  college  and  became
a  journalist  in  Buffalo,  Detroit,  Cleveland,  and
Cincinnati.  His  paragraphs  and  humorous  essays
under  the  pen-name  of  "  The  Fat  Contributor  "  won
him  reputation,  and  he  spent  the  years  1865-'78  in
the  lecture  field,  his  topics  being  "'  American  An-
tiquities," "Injun  Meal,''  and  "  Queer  Folks."  In
1872-'83  he  owned  the  Cincinnati  "  Saturday
Night,"  a  humorous  literary  journal,  and  since
1886  he  has  been  an  editor  and  one  of  the  pro-
prietors of  •'  Texas  Siftings."

GUINEY,  Louise  Imogen  (gui'-ny),  poet,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  7  Jan.,  1861.  Her  father,  Patrick
R.  Guiney,  served  in  the  National  army  during  the
civil  war,  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers in  1864,  and  died  from  the  effects  of  a  wound
that  he  received  in  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness.
Louise  was  graduated  at  Elmhurst  academy,  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  in  1879,  and  early  contributed  verses
to  papers.  Her  publications  are  "Songs  at  the
Start"  (Boston,  1884);  "Goose -Quill  Papers"
(1885) ;  "  The  White  Sail,  and  other  Poems  "  (1887) ;
and  "  Brownies  and  Bogles  "  (1888).

GUNN,  Frederick  William,  educator,  b.  in
Washington,  Litchfield  co.,  Conn.,  4  Oct.,  1816 ;  d.
there,  10  Aug.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1837,  taught  in  New  Preston,  Conn.,  and  subse-
quently in  Towanda.  Pa.,  with  Orville  II.  Piatt.  In
1850  he  established  in  Washington,  Conn.,  the
boys'  boarding-school  that  is  now  known  as  the
Gunnery.  His  unique  methods  and  the  homelike
character  of  the  school  soon  won  it  a  wide  repu-
tation, and  he  continued  in  its  charge  till  nis
death.  The  school  is  described  in  Josiah  G.  Hol-
land's novel  entitled  "  Arthur  Bonnicastle  "  as  the
"  Bird's  Nest,"  and  also  in  William  Hamilton  Gib-
son's "Snug  Hamlet."  See  also  "The  Master  of
the  Gunnery  "  (New  York,  1884).


HADDOCK,  George  (ha  lining,  clergyman,  b.
in  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  23  Jan.,  1832 ;  d.  in  Sioux
City.  Iowa,  3  Aug.,  1886.  He  was  partially  edu-
cated at  Black  river  institute  in  his  native  town,
learned  the  printer's  trade,  and  was  connected  with
several  Republican  newspapers  in  Wisconsin.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  1859,  and  from  1860  until  1882  was  ac-
tively engaged  in  temperance  work  and  in  oppos-
ing Spiritualism.  He  was  transferred  to  the  Iowa
conference  in  1882,  and  while  endeavoring  to  en-
force the  prohibition  laws  of  that  state  was  assas-
sinated in  Sioux  City.  Besides  pamphlets  and
tracts,  he  published  several  fugitive  poems  that  be-
came popular,  including  "  Autumn  Leaves,"  "  The
Skeleton  Guest,"  and  "  The  Cross  of  Gold."  See
his  "  Life  "  by  his  son  (New  York,  1887).


HALL,  Anne,  artist,  b.  in  Pomfret,  Conn.,  26
May,  1792 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  11  Dec,  1863.
She  was  the  sister  of  Jonathan  Prescott  Hall  (vol.
iii.,  p.  42).  She  took  some  lessons  in  applying  col-
ors to  ivory  from  Samuel  King,  who  taught  Wash-
ington Allston,  and  received  instruction  in  oil-
painting  from  Alexander  Robertson,  in  New  York,
and  John  Trumbull,  but  soon  turned  her  entire
attention  to  miniature  painting,  in  which  she  be-
came celebrated.  She  was  elected  a  member  of  the
National  academy  of  design,  where  she  occasionally
exhibited.  Her  miniature  portrait  of  Garafilia
Mohalbi,  the  Greek  girl,  has  been  considered  her
masterpiece,  and  has  been  engraved  repeatedly.
Her  beautiful  picture  of  Dr.  John  W.  Francis's
son  John  has  been  long  engraved  under  the  name
of  "  Oberon."  Her  miniatures  are  scattered  widely
over  the  country,  but  many  of  the  best  are  in  the
possession  of  her  relatives  in  New  York;  her
nephew,  Col.  John  Ward,  owning  those  of  Gara-
filia. and  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  Ward.

HALL,  Granville  Stanley,  psychologist,  b.  in
Ashfield,  Mass.,  6  May,  1845.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1867,  was  professor  of  psychology
at  Antioch  college,  Ohio,  in  1872-6,  studied  in
Berlin,  Bonn,  Heidelberg,  and  Leipsic,  and  was
lecturer  on  psychology  at  Harvard  in  1876  and
again  in  1881-'2,  becoming  professor  of  that  branch
at  Johns  Hopkins  in  1882.  In  1888  he  accepted
the  presidency  of  Clark  university,  Worcester,
Mass.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in
1876.  Prof.  Hall  has  written  extensively  for  peri-
odicals on  psychological  and  educational  topics,
and  is  editor  of  the  "  American  Journal  of  Psy-
chology," and  the  author  of  "  Aspects  of  German
Culture  "  (Boston,  1881);  and,  with  John  M.  Mans-
field, "  Hints  toward  a  Select  and  Descriptive  Bib-
liography of  Education  "  (1886).

HALLOCK,  Charles,  journalist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  13  March,  1834.  He  is  the  son  of  Ger-
ard Hallock  (vol.  iii.,  p.  52).  He  studied  at  Yale
in  1850-'l  and  at  Amherst  in  1851-2,  receiving
his  degree  from  the  latter  in  1871,  was  associate
editor  and  proprietor  of  the  New  York  "Journal
of  Commerce  "  from  1855  till  1862,  financial  editor
of  "  Harper's  Weekly  "  from  1868,  and  founder  and
proprietor  of  "  Forest  and  Stream  "  from  1873  till
1880.  In  1877  he  prepared  a  glossary  of  provincial
and  quaint  words.  In  1884-'5  he  illustrated  front-
ier life  on  the  Canadian  border  by  an  exhibit  of
life-size  groups  at  the  New  Orleans  exposition.
Mr.  Hallock  was  an  incorporator  and  director  of
the  Flushing  and  Queens  county  bank,  New  York,
and  a  money  broker  and  commission  merchant  in
St.  John  and  Halifax  for  several  years.  His  busi-
ness ventures  have  included  sunflower  culture
for  the  oil  product,  the  restoration  of  abandoned
New  England  farms,  sheep  culture  in  the  north-
west on  Indian  model  farms,  a  farm  colony  for
sportsmen  in  Minnesota,  the  development  of
Alaska,  the  substitution  of  porous  terra-cotta  for
adobe  and  titipati  in  Mexico,  a  crematory  for
burning  garbage,  a  smoke-consumer  and  coal-
saver,  and  many  other  economic  schemes.  He
has  published  "  The  Fishing  Tourist "  (New  York,
1873);  "Life  of  Stonewall  Jackson";  "The  Hu-
morist"; "Camp  Life  in  Florida"  (1875);  "The
Sportsman's  Gazetteer"  (1877);  and  "Our  New
Alaska"  (1886).

HAND,  Daniel,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Madison,
Conn.,  in  1801.  For  many  years  he  was  a  mer-
chant in  Augusta,  Ga.,  and  Charleston,  S.  C,  where
he  accumulated  a  fortune.  After  the  civil  war  he
retired  and  returned  to  the  north,  where  he  became
known  as  a  philanthropist,  his  first  gift  being  a


B  AtPLETON  &  C?


HARRISON


HARRISON


685


high-school  building  to  his  native  town.  In  1888
he  gave  to  the  American  missionary  association
more  than  $1,000,000,  to  be  held  in  trust  and  known
as  the  Daniel  Hand  educational  fund  for  colored
people,  to  be  used  in  the  "  states  in  which  slavery
was  recognized  in  1861."  Mr.  Hand  has  for  many
years  lived  in  Guilford,  Conn.

HARRISON,  Benjamin,  president-elect  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  North  Bend,  Ohio,  20  Aug.,
1833.  He  is  the  third  son  of  John  Scott  Harri-
son (who  was  a  son  of  President  Harrison),  and  was
born  in  his  grandfather's  house.  John  Scott  Har-
rison was  a  farmer,  and  in  early  life  cared  for  his
own  little  plantation  and  assisted  his  father  in  the
management  of  the  family  property. This  occu-

Eation  he  varied  by  boating  to  New  Orleans,  whither
e  went  almost  every  year  with  a  cargo  of  produce
of  his  own  raising.  Benjamin  passed  his  boyhood
in  the  usual  occupations  of  a  farmer's  son — feed-
ing the  cattle  and  aiding  in  the  harvesting  of  the
crops.  He  received  his  early  education  in  an  old-
fashioned  log  school-house  fronting  on  the  Ohio
river.  Subsequently  he  was  sent  to  a  school  called
Farmer's  college,  on  College  hill,  near  Cincinnati,
where  he  spent  two  years,  and  then  went  to  Miami
university,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1852.  While
at  college  he  formed  an  attachment  for  Miss  Caro-
line L.  Scott,  whose  father  at  that  time  was  presi-
dent of  the  Female  seminary  in  Oxford.  Among
his  classmates  were  Milton  Sayler,  who  took  first
honors,  and  David  Swing,  who  stood  second,  while
Harrison  was  fourth.  His  graduating  oration  was
on  "  The  Poor  of  England."  He  entered  the  law
office  of  Storer  and  Gwynne  in  Cincinnati,  and  on
20  Oct.,  1853,  before  the  completion  of  his  studies
and  before  attaining  his  majority,  he  was  married.
In  March,  1854,  he  settled  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,
which  has  since  been  his  place  of  residence.  He
obtained  desk-room  with  John  H.  Rea,  and  an-
nounced himself  to  the  world  as  attorney  at  law.
Through  the  kindness  of  friends,  he  was  soon  ap-
pointed crier  of  the  Federal  court,  the  salary  of
which  in  term-time  was  $2.50  a  day.  The  money
that  he  received  for  these  services  was  the  first
that  he  earned.  The  story  of  his  earliest  case  is
typical  of  the  man.  An  indictment  for  burglary
had  been  found  against  an  individual,  and  Harri-
son was  intrusted  with  the  making  of  the  final
argument.  The  court  was  held  at  night,  and  the
room  was  dimly  lighted  with  candles.  He  had
taken  full  notes  of  the  evidence,  which  he  had  in-
tended to  read  from,  and,  after  his  opening  remarks,
he  turned  to  his  papers,  but,  owing  to  the  imper-
fect light,  was  unable  to  decipher  them.  A  mo-
ment's embarrassment  followed,  but  quickly  cast-
ing aside  his  notes  and  trusting  to  his  memory,  he
continued.  The  verdict  was  in  his  favor,  and  with
this  first  success  came  increased  business  and  repu-
tation. Soon  afterward  Gov.  Joseph  A.  Wright
intrusted  him  with  a  legislative  investigation,
which  he  conducted  successfully.  In  1855  he  was
invited  by  William  Wallace  to  become  his  partner.
He  is  described  at  that  time  as  "  quick  of  appre-
hension, clear,  methodical,  and  logical  in  his  analy-
sis and  statement  of  a  case."  This  connection
continued  until  1860,  when  it  was  succeeded  by
that  of  Harrison  and  Fish  back.

In  1860  his  first  entry  into  active  politics  took
place  with  his  nomination  by  the  Republicans  for
the  office  of  reporter  of  the  supreme  court.  He
canvassed  the  state  for  his  party,  and  in  Rockville,
Parke  county,  he  spoke  at  a  meeting  where  Thomas
A.  Hendricks,  the  Democratic  candidate  for  gov-
ernor, was  his  opponent.  He  had  already  attained
reputation  as  an  orator,  but  the  ability  with  which


he  answered  point  after  point  in  Gov.  Hendricks's
address  gained  for  him  increased  favor  with  the
people,  and  he  was  elected  by  a  majority  cf  9,688.
While  he  held  this  office  the  civil  war  began,  and
in  1862  he  assisted  in  raising  the  70th  Indiana  regi-
ment, in  which  he  was  made  2d  lieutenant.  When
the  regiment  was  completed,  Gov.  Oliver  P.  Mor-
ton appointed  him  colonel,  and  it  was  hurried  for-
ward to  join  the  army  under  Gen.  Don  Carlos
Buell  at  Bowling  Green,  Ky.,  then  opposed  by  the
Confederate  forces  under  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg.
His  first  independent  action  was  as  commander  of
an  expedition  sent  against  a  body  of  Confederate
soldiers  stationed  at  Russellville.  Dividing  his
forces,  he  surrounded  the  camp  and  captured  all
their  horses  and  arms,  besides  taking  a  number  of
prisoners.  The  70th  Indiana  was  given  the  right
of  the  brigade  under  Gen.  William  T.  Ward,  and
continued  so  until  the  close  of  the  war.  Col.  Har-'
rison's  command  was  occupied  chiefly  in  the  west,
guarding  railroads  and  in  fighting  guerillas.  In  this
and  similar  duties  he  was  occupied  until  January,
1864,  when  he  was  placed  in  command  of  his  bri-
gade, and  added  to  the  1st  division  of  the  11th
army  corps.  Subsequently  it  was  attached  to  the
3d  division  of  the  20th  army  corps  under  Gen.
Joseph  Hooker,  and  made  the  campaign  from  Chat-
tanooga to  Atlanta.  His  first  engagement  of  im-
portance was  that  of  Resaca,  on  14  May,  1864,
where  he  led  his  command.  A  few  days  later  he
took  part  in  the  capture  of  Cassville,  and  then  in  the
actions  at  New  Hope  church  and  Golgotha  church.
He  participated  in  the  battles  of  Kenesaw  Mount-
ain and  Peach  Tree  Creek,  at  the  latter  of  which
his  gallantry  so  pleased  Gen.  Hooker  that  he  wrote
to  the  secretary  of  war  "  to  call  the  attention  of
the  department  to  the  claims  of  Col.  Benjamin
Harrison,  of  the  70th  Indiana  volunteers,  for  pro-
motion to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers." Gen.  Hooker  also  said  :  "My  attention  was
first  attracted  to  this  young  officer  by  the  supe-
rior excellence  of  his  brigade  in  discipline  and
instruction,  the  result  of  his  labor,  skill,  and  devo-
tion. With  more  foresight  than  I  have  witnessed
in  any  officer  of  his  experience,  he  seemed  to  act
upon  the  principle  that  success  depended  upon
the  thorough  preparation  in  discipline  and  esprit
of  his  command  for  conflict,  more  than  on  any  in-
fluence that  could  be  exerted  upon  the  field  itself,
and  when  collision  came  his  command  vindicated
his  wisdom  as  much  as  his  valor.  In  all  of  the
achievements  of  the  20th  corps  in  that  campaign
(from  Chattanooga  to  Atlanta)  Col.  Harrison  bore
a  conspicuous  part.  At  Resaca  and  Peach  Tree
creek  the  conduct  of  himself  and  command  was
especially  distinguished."  When.  Gen  Sherman
reached  Atlanta,  Harrison  was  ordered  to  Indiana
to  obtain  recruits,  and  he  spent  the  time  from  Sep-
tember till  November,  1864,  in  that  work.  Owing
to  the  destruction  of  the  railroads,  he  was  unable
to  rejoin  Gen.  Sherman  before  the  army  made  its
march  to  the  sea,  and  he  was  transferred  to  Nash-
ville. The  winter  of  1864-'5  he  spent  with  Gen.
George  H.  Thomas  in  Tennessee,  but  in  the  spring
he  resumed  command  of  his  brigade  in  the  20th
army  corps,  with  which  he  remained  until  the  close
of  the  war.  He  then  took  part  in  the  grand  re-
view in  Washington,  and  was  mustered  out  on  8
June,  1865.  The  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  was  conferred  upon  him,  to  date  from
23  Jan.,  1865,  "  for  ability  and  manifest  energy  and
gallantry  in  command  of  the  brigade*."  To  his
men  he  was  familiarly  known  as  "  Little  Ben,"  and
many  acts  of  kindness  to  his  subordinates,  expres-
sive of  his  sympathy  with  them,  have  been  related.


686


HARRISON


HARRISON


<*v  -«***imm;.^


r^********^  Ki


Gen.  Harrison  returned  to  Indianapolis  and  as-
sumed the  duties  of  his  office  as  reporter  of  the
supreme  court,  to  which  he  had  been  re-elected  in
1864  by  a  majority  of  19,913.  At  the  expiration
of  his  term  of  office  he  declined  a  renomination,
and  cesumed  his  practice,  which  he  has  since  fol-
lowed success-
fully. During
the  presiden-
tial canvasses
of  1808  and
1872  he  trav-
elled through
Indiana  and
addressed  large
audiences,  but
did  not  again
enter  politics
until  1876,  when
he  declined  the
nomination  for

fovernor.  Godlove  S.  Orth  was  then  chosen,  but
uring  the  canvass  he  withdrew,  and  Gen.  Harri-
son reluctantly  allowed  his  name  to  be  used,  in  the
hope  of  saving  Indiana  to  the  Republican  candi-
date for  the  presidency.  The  work  was  begun  too
late,  and,  although  an' energetic  canvass  was  car-
ried on,  James  D.  Williams  was  elected  by  a  plu-
rality of  5,084,  in  a  total  vote  of  434,457 ;  but  Gen.
Harrison  was  2,000  stronger  than  his  party.  In
1879  President  Hayes  appointed  him  a  member  of
the  Mississippi  river  commission.  He  was  chair-
man of  the  delegation  from  Indiana  at  the  National
convention  held  in  Chicago  in  1880,  and  on  the  bal-
lot that  nominated  James  A.  Garfield  he  cast  the
entire  vote  of  his  state  for  that  candidate.  His  own
name  was  placed  in  nomination  at  the  beginning  of
the  convention,  but,  although  some  votes  were  cast
in  his  favor,  he  persisted  in  withdrawing.  He  ac-
companied Gen.  Garfield  on  his  trip  to  New  York,
and  participated  in  the  speech-making  along  the
route.  Subsequently  he  was  offered  a  place  in  the
cabinet  of  President  Garfield,  but  declined  it.

The  Republicans  regained  control  of  the  Indiana
legislature  in  the  election  of  1880.  and  Gen.  Harri-
son was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,  and  took  his  seat  as
such  on  4  March,  1881,  holding  it  until  3  March,
1887.  His  career  in  the  senate  was  marked  by  the
delivery  of  numerous  speeches  on  subjects  of  gen-
eral interest.  He  pronounced  in  favor  of  a  judi-
cious tariff  reform,  advocated  the  rights  of  the
working  classes,  opposed  President  Cleveland's  ve-
toes of  pension  bills,  advised  the  restoration  of
the  American  navy,  and  voted  for  civil-service  re-
form. In  1884  he  was  a  delegate-at-large  from  his
state  to  the  National  Republican  convention  held
in  Chicago,  and  his  name  was  again  discussed  in
connection  with  the  presidency.  The  Republican
national  convention  of  1888  was  held  in  Chicago  in
June.  For  some  time  previous  he  had  been  fre-
quently referred  to  as  a  desirable  candidate  for  the
presidency,  and  on  the  first  ballot  he  received  83
votes,  standing  fifth  on  the  list,  John  Sherman
standing  first  with  225.  Seven  more  ballots  were
taken,  during  which  Chauncey  M.  Depew  withdrew
and  transferred  his  strength  to  Gen.  Harrison,  who
then  received  544  votes  on  the  eighth  and  final
ballot.  On  4  July  following  he  received  the  formal
notification  of  his  nomination,  and  on  11  Sept.  sig-
nified his  acceptance  in  a  letter  in  which  he  said :
"  The  tariff  issue  cannot  now  be  obscured.  It  is
not  a  contest  between  schedules,  but  between  wide-
apart  principles.  The  foreign  competitors  for  our
market  have,  with  quick  instinct,  seen  how  one
issue  of  this  contest  may  bring  them  advantage,


and  our  own  people  are  not  so  dull  as  to  miss  or
neglect  the  grave  interests  that  are  involved  for
them.  The  assault  upon  our  protective  system  is
open  and  defiant.  Protection  is  assailed  as  uncon-
stitutional in  law,  or  as  vicious  in  principle,  and
those  who  hold  such  views  sincerely  cannot  stop
short  of  an  absolute  elimination  from  our  tariff
laws  of  the  principle  of  protection.  The  Mills  bill
is  only  a  step,  but  it  is  toward  an  object  that  the
leaders  of  Democratic  thought  and  legislation  have
clearly  in  mind.  The  important  question  is  not  so
much  the  length  of  the  step  as  the  direction  of  it.
Judged  by  the  executive  message  of  December  last,
by  the  Mills  bill,  by  the  debates  in  congress,  and
by  the  St.  Louis  platform,  the  Democratic  party
will,  if  supported  by  the  country,  place  the  tariff
laws  upon  a  purely  revenue  basis.  1  his  is  practical
free  trade — free-trade  in  the  English  sense.  .  .  .
Those  who  teach  that  the  import  duty  upon  foreign
goods  sold  in  our  market  is  paid  by  the  consumer,
and  that  the  price  of  the  domestic  competing  arti-
cle is  enhanced  to  the  amount  of  the  dutv  on  the
imported  article — that  every  million  of  dollars  col-
lected for  customs  duties  represents  many  millions
more  which  do  not  reach  the  treasury,  but  are  paid
by  our  citizens  as  the  increased  cost  of  domestic
productions  resulting  from  the  tariff  laws — may
not  intend  to  discredit  in  the  minds  of  others  our
system  of  levying  duties  on  competing  foreign
products,  but  it  is  clearly  already  discredited  in
their  own.  We  cannot  doubt,  without  impugning
their  integrity,  that,  if  free  to  act  upon  their  con-
victions, they  would  so  revise  our  laws  as  to  lay  the
burden  of  the  customs  revenue  upon  articles  that
are  not  produced  in  this  country,  and  to  place  upon
the  free  list  all  competing  foreign  products.  I  do
not  stop  to  refute  tins  theory  as  to  the  effect  of  our
tariff  duties.  Those  who  advance  it  are  students
of  maxims  and  not  of  the  markets.  .  .  .  The  sur-
plus now  in  the  treasury  should  be  used  in  the  pur-
chase of  bonds.  The  law  authorizes  this  use  of  it,
and,  if  it  is  not  needed  for  current  or  deficiency  ap-
propriations, the  people,  and  not  the  banks  in  which
it  has  been  deposited,  should  have  the  advantage
of  its  use  by  stopping  interest  upon  the  public  debt.
.  .  .  The  law  regulating  appointments  to  the  classi-
fied civil  service  received  my  support  in  the  senate,
in  the  belief  that  it  opened  the  way  to  a  much-
needed  reform.  I  still  think  so,  and  therefore  cor-
dially approve  the  clear  and  forcible  expression  of
the  convention  upon  this  subject.  The  law  should
have  the  aid  of  a
friendly  interpre-
tation, and  be
faithfully  and  vig-
orously enforced.
All  appointments
under  it  should
be  absolutely  free
from  partisan  con-
siderations and  in-
fluence." The  elec-
tion resulted  in
Mr.  Harrison's  fa-
vor, who  received
233  votes  in  the
Electoral  college,
against  168  for
Grover  Cleveland.
The  above  engrav-
ing is  a  view  of  his

home  in  Indianapolis.  His  life  has  been  written  by
Gen.  Lewis  Wallace  (Philadelphia,  1888).— His  wife,
Caroline  Lavinia  Scott,  b.  in  Oxford,  Ohio.  1
Oct.,  1832,  is  the  daughter  of  John  W.  Scott,  who


^>-^o>z^


iff  t^rtl^^^z^t^yio


HARTLEY


HILLERN


687


was  a  professor  in  Miami  university  at  the  time  of
her  birth,  and  afterward  became  president  of  the
seminary  in  Oxford.  She  was  graduated  at  the
seminary  in  1852.  the  same  year  that  Gen.  Harrison
took  his  degree  at  the  university,  and  was  married
to  him  on  20  Oct.,  1853.  She  is  a  musician,  and  is
also  devoted  to  painting,  besides  which  she  is  a
diligent  reader,  giving  part  of  her  time  to  literary
clubs,  of  several  of  which  she  is  a  member.  Mrs.
Harrison  is  a  manager  of  the  orphan  asylum  in
Indianapolis  and  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  that  city,  and  until  her  removal  to  Wash-
ington taught  a  class  in  Sunday-school.  They  have
two  children.  The  son,  Russell,  was  graduated  at
Lafayette  in  1877  as  a  mining  engineer,  and,  in
addition  to  other  engineering  work,  has  been  con-
nected with  the  U.  S.  mints  at  New  Orleans  and
Helena  as  assayer.  He  is  now  a  resident  of  Mon-
tana, where  he  has  a  cattle-ranch,  and  is  also  en-
gaged in  journalism.  The  daughter,  Mary,  married
Robert  J.  McKee,  a  merchant  of  Indianapolis.

HARTLEY,  Robert  Milham,  philanthropist,
b.  in  Cockermouth,  England,  17  Feb.,  1796 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  3  March,  1881.  He  was  a  nephew
of  David  Hartley  (vol.  iii.,  p.  104).  He  came  to  this
country  in  infancy  and  became  a  merchant  in  New
York  city,  but  in  1829  he  founded  the  New  York
city  temperance  society,  and  in  1833-'42  held  its
secretaryship.  In  1842  he  originated  the  New
York  association  for  improving  the  condition  of
the  poor,  remaining  with  it  thirty-five  years,  and
issuing  34  octavo  volumes  of  reports.  Various
charitable  institutions  in  New  York  had  their
origin  in  him.  Besides  numerous  contributions
to  the  press,  he  published  "  Historical,  Scientific,
and  Practical  Essay  on  Milk  "  (New  York,  (1841),
and  "Intemperance  in  Cities  and  Large  Towns"
(1851). — His  son,  Isaac  Smil  hson,  clergyman,  b.
in  New  York  city,  27  Sept.,  1830,  was  graduated
at  New  York  university  in  1852  and  at  Andover
theological  seminary  in  1856,  and  after  extensive
travels  became  pastor  of  the  Union  Reformed
Dutch  church,  New  York  city,  in  1863.  Seven
years  later  he  removed  to  Philadelphia  to  become
a  pastor  in  that  city,  and  in  1871  he  accepted  the

Eastorate  of  the  Reformed  church  at  Utiea,  N.  Y.
le  received  in  1873  from  Rutgers  the  degree  of
D.  D.,  and  the  same  year  founded  at  that  college
the  Vedder  lectureship  on  modern  infidelity,  and
published  under  its  auspices  "  Prayer  and  its  Rela-
tion to  Modern  Thought  and  Criticism  "  (New  York,
1874).  His  other  works  are  "  History  of  the  Re-
formed Church,  Utica,  N.  Y.  *»  (1880) ;  "  Memorial
of  Rev.  Philip  H.  Fowler,  D.  D.  "  (New  York,  1881) :
"  Memorial  of  Robert  Milham  Hartley "  (Utica,
1881) ;  "  Old  Fort  Schuyler  in  History  "  (1884) ;  and
m  The  Twelve  Gates,"  poems  (Utica,  1887).

HASKELL,  James  Richards,  inventor,  b.  in
Geneva,  N.  Y.,  17  Sept.,  1825.  He  was  educated  at
Richfield  (Ohio)  academy,  and  at  the  preparatory  de-
partment of  Western  Reserve  college.  He  was  as-
sistant postmaster  of  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  1849-'53,
and  then  engaged  unsuccessfully  in  business  in
New  York.  In  1854  he  began  a  series  of  experi-
ments with  steel  breech-loading  rifled  cannon  and
breech-loading  small-arms,  manufacturing  twenty-
five  of  the  former,  which  were  purchased  by  the
Mexican  government,  and  were  tne  first  of  the  de-
scription that  were  made  in  the  United  States.  In
1855  he  began  experimenting  with  multicharge
guns  in  association  with  Azel  S.  Lyman,  who  first
conceived  the  idea  of  applying  successive  charges
of  powder  to  accelerate  the  velocity  of  a  projectile.
In  1885  congress  appropriated  funds  in  order  to
test  these  guns,  but  the  bureau  of  ordnance  op-


Eosed  such  action.  Mr.  Haskell's  experiments
ave  cost  more  than  $300,000,  and  the  system  is
now  completed,  so  that  the  power  of  these  guns
is  more  than  doubled,  and  at  the  same  time  the
maximum  pressure  used  is  less  than  that  in  other
guns.  In  1862,  with  Rafael  Rafael,  he  invented
and  constructed  a  machine  gun  for  very  rapid  fir-
ing, but,  notwithstanding  a  favorable  report  on  it
by  a  board  of  army  officers,  the  authorities  refused
to  adopt  it.  Mr.  Haskell  is  a  member  of  the  Ameri-
can association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  and
has  written  several  pamphlets  on  national  arma-
ment and  on  ordnance  problems.

HENDRIX,  Eugene  Russell,  M.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Fayette,  Mo.,  17  May,  1847.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Wesleyan  in  1867,  and  at  Union  theologi-
cal seminary,  New  York,  in  1869,  and  after  holding
several  pastorates  in  the  Methodist  church,  south,
became  in  1878  president  of  Central  college,  Fay-
ette, Mo.  In  1886  he  was  made  a  bishop.  In  1878
he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Emory  col-
lege, Ga.  Dr.  Hendrix  declined  the  vice-chancellor-
ship of  Vanderbilt  university  in  1885,  and  also  the
g residency  of  the  University  of  Missouri.  Bishop
[endrix  was  chairman  of  the  committee  to  arrange
for  the  centennial  celebration  of  organized  Ameri-
can Methodism  in  behalf  of  the  church,  south,  when
$2,000,000  were  raised  as  a  thank-offering.  He  was
a  delegate  to  the  oecumenical  conference  in  London
in  1881  and  to  the  centennial  conference  in  Balti-
more in  1884,  and  a  member  of  the  general  confer-
ences of  1882  and  1886.  He  made  a  missionary  tour
of  the  world  in  1876-7  with  Bishop  Marvin,  of  St.
Louis,  and  on  his  return  published  "Around  the
World  "  (Nashville,  Tenn.,  1878).  In  1876-'8  he  was
an  editor  of  the  St.  Louis  "  Christian  Advocate."

HENNESSY,  John  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
near  Cloyne,  County  Cork,  Ireland,  19  July,  1847.
He  came  to  the  United  States  in  his  youth,  was
graduated  at  the  College  of  the  Christian  Brothers,
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1862,  and  pursued  theological
studies  in  the  Seminary  of  St.  Francis  de  Sales,
Milwaukee,  Wis.  After  his  ordination  he  was  rector
of  Iron  Mountain,  Mo.,  in  1870-80,  and  then  of  the
cathedral  of  St.  Louis.  He  was  appointed  bishop
of  Wichita,  Kan.,  on  28  Aug.,  1888,  and  conse-
crated on  30  Nov.

HERBERT  OF  LEA,  Elizabeth,  Baroness,
philanthropist,  b.  in  England  about  1825.  She  is
the  only  daughter  of  Lieut.-Gen.  Charles  Ashe
A'Court",  and  niece  of  Lord  Heytesbury,  and  on  12
Aug.,  1846,  married  Sidney  Herbert,  second  son  of
the  11th  Earl  of  Pembroke.  Her  husband  was
created  Baron  Herbert  of  Lea,  15  Jan.,  1861,  held
for  some  time  the  secretaryship  of  state  for  war,
and  died,  2  Aug.,  1861.  His  elder  brother  died
childless,  and  Lady  Herbert's  eldest  son,  George
Robert  Charles,  succeeded  to  the  earldom  of  Pem-
broke in  1862.  Lady  Herbert  has  passed  many
years  in  the  West  Indies  in  philanthropic  labors
among  the  negroes,  and  came  to  this  country  in
1888  to  work  among  the  colored  people  of  the  ,
south,  seeking  their  conversion  to  Roman  Catholi-
cism. She  purposes  to  erect  an  orphanage  in
Baltimore. — Her  son,  Michel  Henry,  b.  25  June,
1857,  as  attache  of  the  British  legation  at  Wash-
ington, became  acting  minister  in  November,  1888,
on  the  dismissal  of  Lord  Sackville,  and  on  the  27th
of  that  month  married  an  American.

HILLERN,  Bertha  von,  artist,  b.  in  Treves,
Germany,  4  Aug.,  1857.  She  came  to  this  country
in  1877,  and  for  two  years  devoted  her  time  to  ad-
vocating athletic  exercises  for  women,  appearing
in  public  as  a  pedestrian.  She  then  devoted  her-
self to  the  study  of  art,  which  she  has  since  pur-


688


HINTENACH


HUMBOLDT


sued  as  a  profession  in  Boston.  Among  her  pic-
tures are  "  The  Monk  Felix,"  from  Longfellow's
"  Golden  Legend  " ;  "  Evening  Prayer  at  the  Way-
side Shrine,  Germany"  (1883);  "The  Conversion
of  the  Heathen  General,  Placidus,  by  a  Miracle
while  Hunting"  (1885):  "Live-Oak  Forest  in  the
Ojai  Valley,  California"  (1887);  "St.  Paul,  the
first  Hermit,"  and  "A  Walk  through  the  Pine
Barrens,  Florida  "  (1888).  In  1888  she  exhibited  a
large  number  of  landscapes  in  Boston.  She  has
also  devoted  much  time  to  writing  for  the  press  on
hygienic  subjects,  and  is  preparing  for  publication
a  work  on  "  Physical  Culture."

HINTENACH,  Andrew,  R.  C.  prelate,  b.  in
Schollbrunn,  Baden,  Germany,  12  May,  1844.  He
entered  St.  Vincent's  college,  Westmoreland  co.,
Pa.,  in  August,  1854.  joined  the  Benedictine  order,
11  July,  1861,  and  was  ordained  priest  on  12  April,
1867.  Since  then  he  has  been  occupied  successively
as  professor  in  the  college,  master  of  novices,  and
prior  of  the  monastery  until  7  Feb.,  1888,  when  he
was  chosen  abbot  of  St.  Vincent's  abbey.

HOFFMAN,  Eugene  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.
in  New  York  city,  21  March,  1829.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Harvard  in  1848,  and  from  the  General
theological  seminary  in  1851,  and  was  ordained  a
priest  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  In
1851-'3  he  was  engaged  in  missionary  work  in
Elizabethport,  N.  J.,  and  then  was  called  to  Christ
church  in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  where  he  continued  for
ten  years,  after  which  he  had  St.  Mary's  church  in
Burlington,  N.  J.,  until  1864.  During  these  years
he  built  Christ  church  and  rectory  in  Elizabeth,
St.  Stephen's  church  in  Milburn,  and  Trinity  church
in  Woodbridge,  N.  J.  He  was  rector  of  Grace
church  on  Brooklvn  heights  in  1864-'9.  and  of  St.
Mark's  church,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1869-79.  He
then  became  dean  of  the  General  theological  semi-
nary in  New  York  city,  which  post  he  still  holds.
In  connection  with  his  father,  Samuel  Verplanck
Hoffman,  he  endowed  the  chair  of  pastoral  theology
with  $80,000.  and  on  the  death  of  the  former  his
mother  contributed  $125,000  for  the  building  of  the
Chapel  of  the  Good  Shepherd  as  a  memorial  to  her
husband,  and  for  other  purposes  she  contributed
generously  during  her  lifetime  to  the  support  of
the  seminary.  The  deanery  is  the  gift  of  Dr.  Hoff-
man himself,  who,  in  1864,  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Rutgers,  and  from  Racine  in  1882.  He
is  the  author  of  "  Free  Churches,"  "  The  Eucharis-
tic  Week,"  and  other  works. — His  brother,  Charles
Frederick,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York  city,  18
Nov.,  1834,  was  graduated  at  Trinity  in  1851,  and
was  subsequently  ordained  to  priest's  orders  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church.  In  1872  he  was  called
to  All  Angels'  church  in  New  York  city.  In  1881
he  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Rutgers,
and  has  given  largely  to  the  support  of  the  Gen-
eral theological  seminary.  Dr.  Hoffman,  in  De-
cember, 1888,  agreed  to  erect  a  new  church  for  his
parish,  on  the  west  side  of  Central  Park,  at  a  cost
of  not  less  than  $100,000.

HORTON,  Samuel  Dana,  publicist,  b.  in  Pome-
roy,  Ohio,  16  Jan.,  1844.  He  is  the  son  of  Valen-
tine B.  Horton  (vol.  iii..  p.  266).  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1864  and  at  the  law-school  in  1868,
studied  in  Berlin  university  in  1869-'70,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Ohio  in  187L  He  published
in  1876  a  treatise  on  "  Silver  and  Gold  and  their
Relation  to  the  Problem  of  Resumption,"  the  first
of  a  series  of  works  advocating  a  settlement  of  the
silver  question  by  joint  action  of  nations.  This
policy  was  adopted  by  congress,  and  he  has  been
identified  with  its  advancement  in  Europe  as  dele-
gate to  the  international  monetary  conferences  of


•^Vl4spptAft^<?CC'.


1878  and  1881,  and  as  an  author.  The  most  impor-
tant of  his  later  works  is  "  The  Silver  Pound  and
England's  Monetary  Policy  since  the  Restoration  "
(London,  1877).

HOWARTH,  Ellen  Clementine,  poet,  b.  in
Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  20  May,  1827.  Her  maiden
name  was  Doran.  She  left  school  at  seven  years
of  age  to  work  in  a  factory,  married  Joseph
Howarth  in  1846,  and  has  since  resided  in  Tren-
ton, N.  J.  Mrs.  Howarth  has  published  "  The
Wind- Harp,  and  other  Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1864),.
and  "  Poems,"  with  an  introduction  by  Richard
Watson  Gilder  (Newark,  N.  J.,  1868).  Her  best-
known  poem  is  "  Thou  wilt  never  grow  Old."

HUMBOLDT,  Friedrich  Heinrich  Alexan-
der yon,  German  naturalist,  b.  in  Berlin,  14  Sept.,
1769;  d.  there,  6  May,  1859.  He  studied  at  the
universities  of  Frankfort  and  Gottingen,  and  the
mining  academy
at  Freiberg,  and
from  1794  till  1799
was  engaged  in
scientific  research,
writing,  and  trav-
el. In  1799  he
went  to  Spain  and
procured  from  the
king  permission  to
visit  and  make
scientific  investi-
gations in  all  the
Spanish  posses-
sions in  Europe,
America,  and  the
East  Indies.  Such
extensive  privi-
leges had  never  be-
fore been  granted
to  any  traveller.  His  exploration  of  Orinoco  river
was  the  first  that  furnished  any  positive  knowl-
edge of  the  long  -  disputed  bifurcation  of  that
stream.  In  1802,  in  exploring  the  volcanoes  of
Ecuador,  he  ascended  heights  that  had  not  pre-
viously been  attained,  and  on  Chimborazo  reached
the  altitude  of  19,286  feet.  Afterward  he  made  a
profile  of  Mexico  from  sea  to  sea,  the  first  that  was
ever  given  of  any  entire  country.  Humboldt  then
went  to  Havana,  and  after  two  months'  residence
there  completed  the  materials  for  his  "  Essai  poli-
tique sur  File  de  Cuba"  (Paris,  1826).  He  em-
barked thence  for  Philadelphia,  was  received  with
cordiality  by  President  Jefferson,  and,  leaving  this
country,  landed  at  Bordeaux,  3  Aug.,  1804,  having
spent  five  years  in  America,  and  gained  a  larger
store  of  observations  and  collections  in  all  depart-
ments of  natural  science,  geography,  statistics,  and
ethnography  than  all  previous  travellers.  His  sub-
sequent life  was  devoted  to  the  prosecution  of  sci-
entific research  and  discovery.  His  journey  in
South  America  is  an  important  event  in  the  his-
tory of  that  country.  With  his  own  hands  he  made
the  map  of  the  Orinoco  and  the  Magdalena.  and
the  greater  part  of  the  atlas  of  Mexico.  He  trav-
elled with  the  barometer  in  his  hands  from  Bogota
to  Lima,  and  made  459  measurements  of  altitudes,
which  were  often  confirmed  by  trigonometrical
calculations.  His  works  include  "Ansichten  der
Natur,"  a  general  sketch  of  the  results  of  his  in-
quiries in  America  (Stuttgart,  1808),  and  "  Kos-
mos"  (5  vols.,  1845-'62).  Many  biographies  of
him  have  been  published,  the  best  being  "Alex-
ander von  Ilumooldt,  eine  wissenschaftliche  Bio-
graphic," edited  by  Karl  Bruhns  (3  vols.,  Leipsic.
1872:  English  translation  by  Jane  and  Caroline
Lassells,  2  vols.,  London,  1872). His  most  impor-


IZARD


JANSSEN


689


tant  works  relating  to  America  are  "  Voyage  aux
regions  equinoxiales  du  nouveau  continent  dans
les  annees  1799  a  1804"  (Paris,  1807-16),  and
'•Essai  politique  sur  le  royaume  de  la  Nouvelle
Espagne  "  (Paris,  1811).


IZARD,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 21  Oct.,  1776 ;  d.  in  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  22  Oct.,
1828.  He  was  a  son  of  Ralph  Izard  (vol.  iii.,  p.
372).  He  came  to  this  country,  and,  after  re-
siding with  his  family  in  Charleston,  graduated  at
the  College  of  Philadelphia  (now  University  of
Pennsylvania)  in  1792,  was  sent  by  his  father  to  a
military  school  near  London  and  then  to  one  at
Marburg  in  Hesse-Cassel.  Subsequently,  through
the  agency  of  James  Monroe,  he  spent  two  years
in  the  French  government  school  for  engineers  of
the  army  at  Metz.  While  there  he  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant  in  the  IT.  S.  corps  of  artillerists
and  engineers.  Returning,  he  was  ordered  to
Charleston  as  engineer  of  Fort  Pinckney,  then
served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Alexander  Hamilton
during  the  threat  of  the  French  war,  and  was  then
allowed  to  accept  the  place  of  secretary  of  legation
at  Lisbon.  In  1803  he  resigned  from  the  army  on
account  of  the  secretary's  having  assigned  him  to
the  artillery  instead  of  the  engineers  in  the  reduc-
tion of  the  army  under  Jefferson.  Early  in  1812  he
was  appointed  colonel  of  the  2d  artillery,  and  com-
manded the  Department  of  Pennsylvania,  Mary-
land, and  Delaware.  In  February,  1813,  he  com-
manded District  No.  3,  with  New  York  as  head-
quarters, and  was  promoted  brigadier-general.  In
August  of  that  year,  the  English  fleet  having  left
the  vicinity  of  New  York,  he  was  ordered  to  com-
mand one  of  the  brigades  under  Gen.  Wade  Hamp-
ton, holding  the  line  of  Chateaugay  river  near  Lake
Champlain.  In  Hampton's  defeat  of  26  Oct.  he
handled  his  brigade  with  ability,  and  conducted
the  retreat  in  an  orderly  manner.  He  was  pro-
moted major-general  in  March,  1814,  and  on  4  May
took  command  of  the  division  of  the  right  with
headquarters  at  Plattsburg.  There  he  found  only
2,000  badly-equipped  and  half-disciplined  men,
which  number  was  increased  by  August  to  7,000.
all  raw  recruits.  Izard  was  unremitting  in  their
instruction  and  active  in  fortifying  the  post.  The
arrivals  on  the British  side  in the  mean  time

amounted  to  more
than  30,000  men,
all  regulars,  and
mainly  Welling-
ton's veterans.
Late  in  August
he  was  ordered  to
Sackett's  Harbor
and  Niagara  with
4,000  men,  leav-
ing Plattsburg  in
condition  success-
fully to  resist  Pre-
vost's  attack.  Af-
ter an  arduous
marchof400miles
over  bad  roads  he
marshalled  his
troops,  with  those
of  General  Ja-
cob Brown,  on
(/* tf 0_^  the  Canada  side

cZ-e^.JJsasu/  0f  Niagara  river,

"  and found the

British general, Drummond,  intrenched behind
Chippewa  river. His  carefully  considered  opinion
vol.  vi. — 44


was  that  he  outnumbered  the  enemy  but  by  a  few
hundred  men.  He  offered  battle  in  the  open,  but  it
was  declined,  and,  being  deficient  in  artillery,  and
winter  weather  being  at  hand,  he  decided  not  to
attempt  to  turn  Drummond's  position.  His  entire
evacuation  of  the  peninsula,  including  the  destruc-
tion of  Fort  Erie,  which  followed,  was  approved  by
the  president  and  secretary  of  war.  Gen.  Izard  was
the  only  officer  of  the  war  of  1812  who  had  been
completely  educated  in  the  schools.  The  war  was
undertaken  without  an  adequate  military  establish-
ment, and  when,  after  repeated  disasters,  an  officer
with  a  complete  education  and  good  record  was
placed  in  command,  he  was  paralyzed  in  his  efforts
by  the  overwhelming  odds  against  him.  Izard's
military  judgment  seems  to  have  been  correct,  and
in  reading  the  severe  strictures  against  him  by
Ingersoll  and  Armstrong,  not  only  the  conditions
surrounding  him  should  be  taken  into  account,
but  the  competency  of  his  judges  as  military  crit-
ics should  also  be  considered.  Gen.  Izard  resigned
from  the  army  in  January,  1815,  and  was  appoint-
ed governor  of  Arkansas  in  1825.


JACKSON,  Richard  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Ire-
land, 14  July,  1830.  He  was  educated  in  Dublin,
came  to  this  country  in  early  life,  enlisted  in  the
U.  S.  army  in  1851,  and  became  1st  sergeant  in  the
4th  artillery.  After  serving  in  Florida  and  the
west,  he  passed  his  examination  for  a  2d  lieuten-
ancy, receiving  his  commission,  13  Sept.,  1859.  He
was  promoted  to  1st  lieutenant,  14  May,  1861,  com-
manded a  company  at  Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  during
its  bombardments,  and  in  the  capture  of  Pensacola,
and  was  made  captain,  20  Feb.,  1862.  He  after-
ward served  as  assistant  inspector-general,  and  was
also  acting  chief  of  artillery  on  Morris  and  Folly
islands  during  the  operations  against  Fort  Sumter,
and  then  chief  of  artillery  of  the  10th  and  25th
corps,  Army  of  the  James.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  1  Jan.,  1865,  for
services  in  the  campaign  of  1864,  and  commanded
the  2d  division  of  the  25th  corps  in  the  operations
that  preceded  Lee's  surrender.  He  was  commis-
sioned full  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  19  May,
1865,  and  brevet  major-general  on  24  Nov.  Gen.
Jackson  also  received  during  the  war  the  regular
army  brevets  of  major  for  Drury's  Bluff,  lieutenant-
colonel  for  Newmarket  Heights,  and  colonel  and
brigadier-general  for  services  in  the  war.  Since
the  war  Gen.  Jackson  has  served  in  various  posts.
He  was  promoted  major  1  July,  1880,  and  is  now
(1889)  in  command  of  Fort  Schuyler,  N.  Y.

JANSSEN,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Keppelnf,
Rhenish  Prussia,  3  March,  1835.  He  was  educated
at  the  bishop's  colleges  in  Gaesdonckand  Munster1.
In  1858  he  came  to  the  United  States  and  was  or-
dained priest  in  Alton,  111.,  on  19  Nov.  of  that
year.  He  was  then  appointed  pastor  of  the  German
Catholic  congregation  in  Springfield,  111.,  and  also
had  charge  of  the  German  Catholics  in  the  counties
of  Sangamon,  Morgan,  and  Menard.  In  1863-'8  he
was  secretary  of  Bishop  Henry  D.  Juncker,  and  he
was  chancellor  of  the  diocese  of  Alton  from  1863
till  1870.  Father  Janssen  was  vicar-general  to
Bishop  Peter  J.  Baltes  in  1870-'86,  and  rector  of
St.  Boniface's  church,  Quincy,  111.,  in  1877-9.  On
the  death  of  Bishop  Baltes  in  1886  he  was  admin-
istrator of  the  diocese  until  the  appointment  of  a
new  bishop.  In  January,  1887,  the  diocese  of  Alton
was  divided,  and  the  new  diocese  of  Belleville  was
erected.  He  was  then  made  administrator  of  both
dioceses,  and  on  28  Feb.,  1888,  became  bishop  of
Belleville,  being  consecrated  on  25  April,  1888.


690


JENKINS


JONES


JENKINS,  Micah,  soldier,  b.  on  Edisto  island,
S.  C,  in  1836 ;  d.  in  the  Wilderness,  Va.,  6  May,
1864.  He  was  graduated  at  South  Carolina  mili-
tary institute  in  1854,  and  established  a  private
military  school  at  Yorkville,  S.  C,  in  1855.  He
was  elected  colonel  of  the  5th  South  Carolina  regi-
ment at  the  opening  of  the  civil  war  and  reorgan-
ized it  at  the  end  of  its  year's  enlistment  as  Jenk-
ins's palmetto  sharp-shooters.  He  led  a  brigade  in
the  seven  days'  battles  around  Richmond,  and,
after  Gaines's  Mills  and  Prazer's  Farm,  brought  out
his  sharp-shooters,  originally  numbering  more  than
1,000,  with  but  125  men,  his  personal  aide  having
been  shot  at  his  side,  and  his  hat  and  clothing
pierced  by  seventeen  bullets.  He  was  promoted  to
brigadier-general,  and  was  present  at  the  second
battle  of  Bull  Run,  where  he  was  severely  wounded
and  where  two  of  his  colonels  and  his  adjutant-
general  were  killed.  In  the  spring  of  1863  he  led
a  corps  of  observation  on  the  Blackwater,  near
Richmond  and  Petersburg.  In  September  follow-
ing he  went  to  Georgia  with  Longstreet,  but  was
too  late  for  the  battle  of  Chickamauga.  He  then
commanded  Horn's  division  and  accompanied
Longstreet  to  Tennessee.  He  moved  thence  in  the
spring  to  Virginia,  where  he  met  his  death,  from  his
own  men  by  mistake  at  night,  on  the  second  day  of
Grant's  advance  through  the  Wilderness.

JENNINGS,  Francis,  hymnologist,  b.  at  Melks-
ham,  Wiltshire,  England,  3  Nov.,  1808.  His  father,
William,  was  in  the  cloth  trade,  and  afterward  in
the  British  army.  Until  Francis  was  seven  years
old  he  attended  li  a  dame's  school,"  and  he  was  then

(>ut  to  work  in  a  cloth-factory  and  a  rope-yard.  At
ast  he  was  employed  by  a  physician  and  learned
to  write.  In  1842  he  came  to  the  United  States
and  settled  in  Philadelphia.  He  has  become  one
of  the  most  thorough  hymnologists  in  America.  In
1871  the  "  Baptist  Hymn-Book  "  was  published,  and
he  prepared  for  it  a  biographical  index,  giving  the
names,  dates  of  birth,  and  death  of  the  authors
and  their  birthplaces,  and  also  the  time  when  the
hymns  were  first  printed.  His  first  collection  of
hymn-books,  numbering  300  volumes,  belongs  to
the  Baptist  publication  society ;  his  second,  of  600
volumes,  he  gave  to  the  Baptist  historical  society.
Besides  numerous  contributions  to  various  papers
and  magazines,  he  wrote  "Hymns, and  other  Poems"
(Philadelphia,  1864).

JOHNSTON,  James  Steptoe,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Church  Hill,  Jefferson  co.,  Miss.,  9  June,  1843.
He  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Virginia,
left  that  institution  to  join  the  Confederate  army,
and  fought  through  the  civil  war,  becoming  a
lieutenant  in  Gen.  James  E.  B.  Stuart's  cavalry.
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1868,  but  received
holy  orders  in  the  following  year,  taking  charge
of  St.  James'  church  at  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  till
1876,  and  then  for  four  years  of  the  church  of  the
Ascension,  in  Mount  Sterling,  Ky.,  after  which  he
became  rector  of  Trinity  parish,  Mobile,  Ala.  On
28  Oct.,  1887,  he  was  elected  to  the  office  of  mis-
sionary bishop  of  western  Texas,  and  on  6  Jan.,
1888,  he  was  consecrated  in  Mobile.

JONES,  Patrick  Henry,  lawyer,  b.  in  West-
meath,  Ireland,  20  Nov.,  1830.  He  came  to  this
country  in  1840,  attended  the  common  schools,
worked  on  his  father's  farm  in  Cattaraugus  county,
N.  Y.,  and  then  read  law  at  Ellicottville.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  May,  1856,  and  practised  at
that  place  till  the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  when
he  entered  the  37th  New  York  regiment  as  2d
lieutenant,  7  June,  1861.  He  was  promoted  to
adjutant  and  then  major  of  that  regiment,  and  was
made  colonel  of  the  154th  New  York  regiment  on


8  Oct.,  1862.  He  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner
at  Chancellorsville,  and  after  his  exchange  in  Octo-
ber, 1863,  served  in  the  west  and  in  the  Atlanta
campaign,  and  on  6  June,  1864,  was  assigned  com-
mand of  a  brigade,  at  whose  head  he  continued  un-
til the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  4  Dec,  1864,  and
on  27  June,  1865,  resigned  and  returned  to  the

Eractice  of  his  profession  at  Ellicottville.  In  1865
e  was  elected  clerk  of  the  court  of  appeals  of  the
state,  and  at  the  close  of  his  three  years'  term  he
removed  to  New  York  city.  On  1  April,  1869,  he
was  appointed  postmaster  of  New  York,  and  he
served  as  such  during  the  first  presidential  term  of
Gen.  Grant,  after  which  he  resigned  and  resumed
the  practice  of  law  in  that  city.  In  1874  he  was
elected  register  of  New  York,  and,  after  serving  his
term  of  three  years,  returned  to  his  profession,  in
the  practice  of  which  he  is  still  engaged.

JONES,  Roger,  soldier,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
25  Feb.,  1831.  He  is  a  son  of  Gen.  Roger  Jones  (vol.
iii.,  p.  470).  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1851,  served  on  the  Texas  frontier  and
in  New  Mexico,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  was  on  duty  at  Harper's  Ferry,  where  he  de-
stroyed the  arsenal  with  20,000  stand  of  arms,  when
it  was  seized  by  Virginia  state  troops  on  18  April,
1861 — for  which  act,  done  in  the  face  of  the  enemy,
he  received  the  thanks  of  the  government.  He  was
appointed  captain  and  assistant  quartermaster  on
22  April,  and  as  such  served  in  the  office  of  the
quartermaster-general  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, and  on  12  Nov.  was  made  a  major  on  the  staff
and  assigned  to  special  duty  as  assistant  inspector-
general.  He  was  attached  to  Gen.  John  Pope's  staff
for  two  months  in  1862,  when  he  was  relieved,  and
was  awaiting  orders  and  on  miscellaneous  duty  till
December,  1865.  From  1866  till  1876  he  served  as
inspector-general  of  the  Division  of  the  Pacific.
He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  on  13  June,
1867,  assigned  to  duty  in  the  inspector-general's
office  at  Washington  on  15  Jan.,  1877,  became  a
colonel  on  5  Feb.,  1885,  afterward  acted  as  inspector-
general  of  the  Division  of  the  Atlantic  on  Gover-
nor's island,  and  in  August,  1888,  was  made  briga-
dier-general and  inspector-general  of  the  army.

JONES,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bettws  par-
ish, Glamorganshire,  South  Wales,  14  Jan.,  1735 ;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7  Feb.,  1814.  He  was  a  son
of  Rev.  Thomas  Jones,  who  brought  him  to  Phila-
delphia, 22  July,  1737.  In  1738  Thomas,  with  a
small  colony  of  Welsh  Baptists,  founded  the  Tul-
pehoken  Baptist  church,  Berks  county,  where  he
labored  for  many  years.  Samuel  was  graduated
at  the  College  of  Philadelphia  in  1762,  and  was  or-
dained as  a  Baptist  minister,  8  Jan.,  1763.  He  be-
came pastor  of  the  Southampton  and  Pennepek
(now  Lower  Dublin)  churches,  but  in  1770  devoted
his  whole  time  to  Pennepek,  where  he  remained
until  his  death  in  1814.  For  many  years  he  also  con-
ducted an  academy.  In  1769  Brown  conferred  on
him  the  degree  of  A.  M.,  and  in  1786  that  of  D.  D.,
which  latter  was  also  granted  him  in  1788  by  the
University  of  Pennsylvania.  Dr.  Jones  was  one  of
the  most  active  members  of  the  Philadelphia  Bap-
tist association,  and  when  it  was  incorporated  in
1797  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  board  of  trus-
tees, remaining  so  during  his  life.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  "  The  Doctrine  of  the  Covenants  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1783) ;  "  A  Treatise  on  Church  Discipline  "
(1 797) ;  "  A  Selection  of  Psalms  and  Hymns  "  (Bur-
lington, N.  J.,  1800) ;  "A  Brief  History  of  the  Im-
position of  Hands  on  Baptized  Persons"  (Philadel-
phia, 1804) ;  and  "  A  Century  Sermon  before  the
Philadelphia  Baptist  Association"  (1807).


JONES


LARRABEE


691


JONES,  Sibyl,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in  Bruns-
wick, Me.,  in  1808 ;  d.  near  Augusta,  Me.,  4  Dec,
1873.  Her  early  life  was  spent  in  Augusta,  and  for
eight  years  she  taught  in  public  schools.  Htr
maiden  name  was  Jones,  and  in  1833  she  married
Eli  Jones.  During  1845-'0  she  visited,  with  her
husband,  all  the  yearly  meetings  of  Friends  in  the
United  States,  and  made  three  journeys  to  Nova
Scotia  and  New  Brunswick.  They  visited  Liberia
in  1851,  Ireland  in  1852,  and  subsequently  Norway,
Sweden,  and  the  continent  of  Europe,  returning  to
this  country  in  1854.  During  the  civil  war  she
preached  to  nearly  30,000  soldiers  in  hospitals,  and
in  1867  she  embarked  on  her  last  missionary  voy-
age, visiting  Europe,  Egypt,  and  Syria,  and  pre-
senting Christianity  from  the  Quaker  standpoint  to
Mohammedan  women.  Her  travels  in  the  East
are  set  forth  in  "  Eastern  Sketches  "  by  Ellen  Clare
Miller,  her  companion  (Edinburgh,  1872).


KAVANAUGH,  Hubbard  Hinde,  M.  E.  bish-
op, b.  in  Clarke  county,  Ky.,  14  Jan.,  1802 ;  d.  in
Columbus,  Miss.,  19  March,  1884.  He  was  appren-
ticed to  the  printing  trade,  but  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1822,  settled  in  Augusta,  Ky.,  where  he
edited  the  "Western  Watchman,"  and  was  appoint-
ed in  1823  on  the  Little  Sandy  circuit,  afterward
holding  various  charges.  On  the  establishment  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  he  adhered
to  that  branch,  and  was  appointed  presiding  elder
of  the  Lexington  district.  In  1854  the  general
conference  chose  him  bishop.  He  was  correspond-
ing editor  of  the  "Methodist  Expositor  and  True
Issue."  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  general  confer-
ences of  his  church,  over  several  of  which  he  pre-
sided. See  "  Life  and  Times  of  Bishop  Kavanaugh,"
by  A.  II.  Redford  (Nashville,  1884).— His  brother,
Benjamin  Taylor,  clergyman,  b.  in  Jefferson
county,  28  April,  1805 ;  d.  in  Boonsborough,  Ky.,
3  July,  1888,  also  entered  the  ministry,  and  from
1839  till.  1842  had  charge  of  the  Indian  mission  at
the  head  of  Mississippi  river.  He  afterward  stud-
ied medicine  and  practised  in  St.  Louis,  where  he
also  held  a  chair  in  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Missouri.  In  1857  he  resumed  his
ministerial  duties,  and  during  the  civil  war  served  as
chaplain  and  assistant  surgeon  in  the  Confederate
army.  After  the  war  he  was  professor  of  intellect-
ual and  moral  science  in  Soule  university  for  some
time,  but  in  1881  returned  to  Kentucky.  He  has
published  "Electricity  the  Motor  Power  of  the
Solar  System"  (New  York,  1886),  and  had  ready  for
publication  "The  Great  Central  Valley  of  North
America  "  and  "  Notes  of  a  Western  Rambler."

KEPHART,  Ezekiel  Boring,  bishop  of  the
United  Brethren  in  Christ,  b.  in  Decatur,  Pa.,  6
Nov.,  1834.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1857,
entered  the  ministry  in  1859,  and  became  princi-
pal of  Michigan  collegiate  institute,  Leonti,  Mich.,
in  1865,  in  which  year  he  was  graduated  at  Otter-
bein  university,  Ohio.  He  accepted  a  pastorate
in  Pennsylvania  in  1866,  became  president  of  West-
ern college,  Iowa,  in  1868,  and  in  1881  was  raised
to  the  episcopate.  Otterbein  university  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1881.  Bishop  Kephart
served  in  the  state  senate  of  Iowa  in  1871-'5.

KINZIE,  John  Harris,  pioneer,  b.  in  Sand-
wich, Canada,  7  July,  1803 ;  d.  on  the  Pittsburg
and  Fort  Wayne  railroad,  21  June,  1865.  He  is
the  son  of  John  Kinzie  (vol.  hi.,  p.  552),  removed
with  his  father  to  Chicago,  111.,  in  1803,  and  in
1816  settled  in  Detroit,  Mich.  He  became  a  clerk
in  the  employ  of  the  American  fur  company  in
1818,  was  proficient  in  many  Indian  languages,


and  in,  1829  was  government  agent  for  all  the  north-
western Indians.  He  returned  to  Chicago  in  1834,
was  first  president  of  the  village,  register  of  public
lands  in  1841,  and  receiver  of  public  money  in
1849.  He  was  made  paymaster  in  the  U.  S.  army
in  1861,  and  in  1865  was  brevetted  lieutenant-
colonel.  Col.  Kinzie  was  the  first  president  of
the  Chicago  historical  society,  and  built  the  first
Episcopal  church  in  that  city. — His  wife,  Juliette
Augusta,  author,  b.  in  Middietown,  Conn.,  11  Sept.,
1806 ;  d.  in  Amagansett,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  15
Sept.,  1870,  was  the  daughter  of  Arthur  W.  Magill.
She  married  Mr.  Kinzie  in  1830,  accompanied
him  to  Fort  Winnebago,  Wis.,  and  subsequently
to  Chicago.  She  was  the  author  of  "Wau-bun,
or  the  Early  Day  in  the  Northwest,"  a  history  of
Chicago  (New  York,  1856),  and  two  posthumous
novels,  entitled  "  Walter  Ogilby  "  (Philadelphia,
1869)  and  "  Mark  Logan  "  (1876).

KNIGHT,  Cyrus  Frederic,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Marblehead,  Mass.,  28  March,  1831.  He  studied
at  Burlington  college,  N.  J.,  and  at  Harvard,  and
was  graduated  at  the  General  theological  semi-
nary, New  York  city,  in  1854.  After  being  or-
dained a  priest  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church
he  was  rector  of  St.  Mark's  church,  Boston,  in
1855-'67,  and  later  he  had  charge  of  St.  James's,
in  Hartford,  Conn.,  until  1877,  when  he  was  called
to  St.  James's  in  Lancaster,  Pa.  He  was  elected
bishop  of  Milwaukee  on  13  Dec,  1888.  The  de-
gree of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Bethany
college  in  1880,  and  that  of  D.  C.  L.  by  Bishop's
university  in  1886.  He  has  been  a  delegate  to  the
general  conventions  of  his  church  from  the  dio-
ceses in  which  he  has  been  located,  and  was  dean
of  Hartford  while  a  resident  of  that  city.  In  1883
he  was  sent  as  deputy  of  the  general  convocation  of
the  American  church  to  the  general  synod  of  the
Church  of  England  in  North  America,  sitting  in
Montreal.  He  has  published  occasional  sermons
and  "  Changes  in  the  Communion  Office "  (New
York,  1886).


LAKEY,  Emily  Jane,  artist,  b.  in  Quiney,
N.  Y.,  22  June,  1837.  She  is  the  daughter  of
James  Jackson,  was  educated  at  home,  and  taught
in  Tennessee  and  Ohio.  She  then  turned  her  at-
tention to  painting,  and  exhibited  her  work  first
in  Chicago,  and  in  1873  at  the  National  acad-
emy of  design.  During  1877-'8  she  studied  in  Paris
under  Emile  Van  Marcke.  Her  best-known  paint-
ings are  "  Leader  of  the  Herd  "  (1882) ;  "  An  Anx-
ious Mother  "  (1882) ;  and  "  Right  of  Way  "  (188C).
She  married  Charles  D.  Lakey  in  1864,  and  resides
in  New  York  city.

L'ARCHEVEQUE,  Jean  de  (larsh  -  vake),
French  soldier,  d.  near  Arkansas  river,  17  Aug.,
1720.  He  was  a  member  of  La  Salle's  expedition
of  1684,  and  enticed  him  into  the  ambuscade
where  he  was  murdered.  In  1699  he  was  a  soldier
in  Santa  Fe.  He  became  a  successful  trader,  and
is  doubtless  identical  with  a  "  Captain  Archibeque  "
who  was  a  member  of  the  war  councils  of  1715  and
1720.  In  the  latter  he  recommended  a  reeonnois-
sance  to  the  Arkansas  river,  on  which  he  was  killed,
with  forty-three  others,  by  Pawnee  Indians.  He
left  four  children,  and  a  family  of  Archibeques  is
still  living  in  New  Mexico.  These  facts,  save  his
connection  with  La  Salle's  murder,  were  unknown
till  1888,  when  they  were  discovered  in  making
researches  in  behalf  of  the  Hemenway  southwest-
ern archaeological  expedition.

LARRABEE,  William,  governor  of  Iowa,  b.
in  Ledyard,  Conn.,  20  Jan.,  1832. He  removed  to


692


LAWRENCE


LEONARD


Clermont,  Iowa,  in  1853,  and  engaged  in  farming,
manufacturing,  and  banking.  He  served  in  the
Iowa  state  senate  in  1868-'85,  was  chairman  of  the
committee  of  ways  and  means  for  sixteen  years,
and  since  1885  has  been  governor  of  the  state,  hav-
ing been  elected  as  a  Republican.

LAWRENCE,  Charles  Brush,  jurist,  b.  in
Vergennes,  Vt.,  17  Dec,  1820 ;  d.  in  Decatur,  Ala.,
19  April,  1883.  He  was  the  son  of  Judge  Viele
Lawrence,  of  Vermont,  and,  after  studying  for
two  years  at  Middlebury,  was  graduated  in  1841
at  Union.  He  studied  law  with  Alphonso  Taft  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  entered  on  practice  in  St.
Louis,  Mo.  Subsequently  he  removed  to  Quincy,
111.,  where  he  formed  a  partnership  with  Archibald
Williams.  In  1859  he  was  elected  judge  of  the
10th  circuit,  and  in  1864  was  chosen  to  the  su-
preme court  of  Illinois,  where  he  was  chief  justice
for  three  years.  Retiring  from  the  bench  in  1873,
he  practised  law  in  Chicago  until  his  death  and
was  president  of  the  bar.  President  Grant  made
him  a  member  of  the  Louisiana  commission,  and
the  bench  and  bar  of  Illinois  urged  his  appoint-
ment to  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  The  degree  of
LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Union  in  1876.
Chief-Justice  Fuller  said  of  him:  "Learning,  cul-
ture, and  literary  excellence  he  possessed,  united
with  a  sweetness  of  character  which  colored  all  his
utterances  and  all  his  life.  The  qualities  which
made  him  eminent  as  a  lawyer  would  have  raised
him  to  the  highest  rank  in  any  walk  of  life.  His
works  follow  him  and  will  perpetuate  his  memory,
not  as  a  ghost  to  haunt,  but  as  a  guest  to  cheer."

LE  DUC,  William  Gates,  soldier,  b.  in  Wilkes-
ville,  Gallia  co.,  Ohio,  29  March,  1823.  He  was
graduated  at  Kenyon  college  in  1848,  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1849,  and  settled  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.  He
was  active  in  inducing  emigration  to  Minnesota,
prepared  and  obtained  the  first  charter  for  a  rail-
road in  the  territory,  and  organized  the  Wabash
bridge  company  to  build  the  first  bridge  over  Mis-
sissippi river.  He  settled  in  Hastings,  Minn.,  in
1856,  and  was  the  first  in  the  territory  to  make
and  ship  spring  wheat-flour,  which  subsequently
became  one  of  the  chief  products  of  the  state.  He
entered  the  National  army  in  1861  as  a  captain,
became  lieutenant-colonel  and  chief  quartermaster,
served  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  till  the
Gettysburg  campaign,  and  subsequently  in  the
west.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  in  1865.  He  then  returned  to  Minne-
sota, engaged  in  railroad  enterprises,  and  was  ap-
fiointed  commissioner  of  agriculture  by  President
layes.  During  his  occupation  of  this  office  he
established  a  tea  farm  in  South  Carolina,  success-
fully experimented  in  producing  sugar  from  sor-
ghum canes  and  beets,  and  founded  what  has  since
been  enlarged  as  the  bureau  of  animal  industry,
and  a  division  of  forestry.

LEE,  Henry,  economist,  b.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  4
Feb.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Boston,  6  Feb.,  1867.  For  many
years  he  carried  on  a  very  extensive  trade  with  the
East  and  West  Indies,  South  America,  and  Europe,
and  became  a  collector  of  commercial  and  financial
statistics,  and  a  zealous  student  of  political  econo-
my. His  writings  were  highly  esteemed  in  Eng-
land, where  he  was  recognized  as  an  authority  by
such  economists  as  McCulloch,  Tooke,  and  Villiers.
He  arrived  at  conclusions  entirely  at  varience  with
those  advocated  by  the  supporters  of  the  so-called
American  system.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor
to  the  "  Free-Trade  Advocate,"  edited  in  Phila-
delphia by  Condv  Raguet,  and  became  widely
known  through  his  "  Boston  Report "  as  one  of  a
"Committee  of  citizens  of  Boston  and  vicinity  op-


posed to  a  further  increase  of  duties  on  importa-
tions "  (Boston,  1827).  This  valuable  work  has
passed  through  four  editions,  and  is  one  of  the  most
masterly  vindications  of  the  principles  of  free-trade
that  has  ever  appeared  in  print.  At  the  Free-trade
convention  in  Philadelphia,  30  Sept.,  1831,  he  was
associated  with  Albert  Gallatin  in  preparing  the
memorial  and  statistical  exposition  of  the  effects  of
the  tariff.  In  1832  he  was  nominated  for  vice-
president  by  South  Carolina  on  the  ticket  with
John  Floyd,  of  Virginia,  although  he  had  no  sym-
pathy with  nullification. — His  eldest  son,  Henry,
b.  in  Boston,  2  Sept.,  1817,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1836,  served  on  Gov.  John  A.  Andrew's
staff  during  the  civil  war,  and  published  a  pam-
phlet on  "  The  Militia  of  the  United  States."  He
is  senior  member  of  the  well-known  banking-house
of  Lee,  Higginson  and  Co. — Another  son,  Francis
L,  b.  in  Boston,  i0  Dec,  1823 ;  d.  near  Lake  Cham-
plain,  2  Sept.,  1886,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1843,  and  in  the  civil  war  was  colonel  of  the  44th
Massachusetts  regiment.

LEMMENS,  John  Nicholas,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Schimmert,  province  of  Limburg,  Holland,  3  June,
1850.  He  was  educated  in  Holland  and  Belgium,
ordained  to  the  priesthood  on  29  March,  1875,  and
went  to  labor  among  the  Indians  of  Vancouver
island.  He  was  made  rector  of  the  cathedral  in
Victoria  in  1882,  chosen  to  represent  the  diocese  of
Vancouver  island  at  the  third  plenary  council  of
Baltimore  held  in  1884,  and  was  consecrated  bish-
op on  5  August,  1888.

LEMMON,  John  (Jill,  botanist,  b.  in  Lima,
Mich.,  2  June,  1832.  He  served  three  years  as  a
private  in  the  4th  Michigan  cavalry,  participated
in  the  famous  experiences  of  that  regiment,  was
captured,  and  spent  six  months  in  southern  pris-
ons. He  taught  in  California,  and,  engaging  in
explorations  on  the  Pacific  coast,  has  made  many
discoveries  in  entomology  and  botany.  Since  1886
he  has  been  special  agent  of  the  California  agri-
cultural department  in  the  division  of  forestry,
and  in  1888  he  was  appointed  its  botanist.  Mr.
Lemmon  has  discovered  more  than  200  botanical
species!  He  has  published  "  Ferns  of  the  Pacific  "
(San  Francisco,  1882) ;  "  Discovery  of  the  Potato  "
(1884);  and  "Memorial  of  Ainila  Hudson  Lem-
mon "  (Oakland,  Cal.,  1885).— His  wife.  Sarah  Al-
len Plummer,  botanist,  b.  in  New  Gloucester,  Me.,
3  Sept.,  1836,  was  educated  at  the  Female  college  of
Worcester,  Mass.,  served  as  a  hospital  nurse  during
the  civil  war,  and  then  studied  at  Cooper  Union,
New  York  city.  In  1869  she  removed  to  California,
and  in  1880,  having  married  Mr.  Lemmon,  began
the  study  of  botany,  in  which  she  has  made  several
discoveries.  She  has  also  painted  in  water-colors
much  of  the  flora  of  the  Pacific  slope,  and  her  col-
lection of  more  than  eighty  field  sketches  of  flowers
took  the  first  premium  at  the  World's  exposition  in
New  Orleans  in  1884-'5.  On  her  discovery  of  a
new  genus  of  plants  in  1882,  Dr.  Asa  Gray  named
it  Plummera  floribunda.  Mrs.  Lemmon  is  the
author  of  the  papers  on  "The  Ferns  of  the  Pacific
Slope"  (1882);  "  Silk-Culture  in  California"  (1884);
and  "  Marine  Botany  "  (1886).

LEONARD,  Abiel,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Fayette.
Mo.,  26  June,  1848.  He  is  a  son  of  Judge  Abiel
Leonard,  and  great-grandson  of  Rev.  Abiel  Leon-
ard, who  was  chaplain  in  1776  to  Gen.  George  Wash-
ington. In  1870  he  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth,
and  in  1873  from  the  General  theological  seminary.
His  entire  ministry  has  been  in  the  west.  He
was  rector  of  Calvary  church  in  Sedalia,  Mo.,  for
three  years,  and  then  of  Trinity  church  in  Han-
nibal, Mo.,  for  four  years. In  1881  he  was  called


LEWIS


MAYALL


693


to  Trinity  church,  Atchison,  Kansas,  where  he  re-
mained till  1887,  when  he  was  elected  missionary
bishop  of  Utah  and  Nevada.  During  his  residence
in  Kansas  he  was  secretary  of  the  diocesan  con-
vention, delegate  to  the  General  convention,  and
for  four  years  a  member  of  the  standing  commit-
tee of  the  diocese.

LEWIS,  Abram  Herbert,  clergyman,  b.  in
Scott,  Cortland  co.,  N.  Y.,  17  Nov.,  1836.  He  was
graduated  at  Milton  college,  Wis.,  in  1861,  and  at
Alfred  university,  N.  Y.,  in  1863,  and  was  pastor  of
Seventh-day  Baptist  churches  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  in
1864-7,  and  New  York  in  1867-'8.  In  1868  he  ber
came  professor  of  church  history  and  homiletics  in
Alfred  university,  in  1869-'72  he  was  general  agent
of  the  American  Sabbath  tract  society,  and  in  1880
he  became  pastor  at  Plainfield,  N.  J.  Alfred  uni-
versity gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1881.  He
has  edited  "  The  Outlook  and  Sabbath  Quarterly  "
since  1882,  and  is  an  editorial  contributor  to  "  The
Philanthropist,"  and  author  of  various  leaflets  in
its  "Social  Purity  Series."  Dr.  Lewis  has  pub-
lished "  Sabbath  and  Sunday  "  (Alfred  Centre,  N.
Y.,  1870) ;  "  Biblical  Teachings  concerning  the
Sabbath  and  the  Sunday  "  (1884) ;  "  Critical  His-
tory of  the  Sabbath  and  the  Sunday  in  the  Chris-
tian Church  "  (2  vols.,  1886) ;  "  A  Critical  History
of  Sunday  Legislation  from  321  till  1888  A.  D."
(1888) ;  and  has  written  "  A  Biography  of  the
Puritan  Sunday."

LINCOLN,  James  Sullivan,  artist,  b.  in  Taun-
ton, Mass.,  13  May,  1811;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,
19  Jan.,  1887.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  entered
the  service  of  an  engraver  in  Providence,  and  after-
ward was  admitted  to  a  painter's  studio.  His
early  work  consisted  of  engravings,  miniatures,
and  landscapes ;  but  from  1837  he  devoted  himself
to  portrait-painting,  in  which  he  was  very  success-
ful. He  was  the  first  president  of  the  Providence
art  club.  Among  his  numerous  portraits  are
those  of  Samuel  Slater  (1836) ;  Prof.  William  H.
Goddard  (1837) ;  Levi  Lincoln,  attorney-general  of
Massachusetts  (1860),  and  his  son,  Gov.  Levi  Lin-
coln (1877);  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside  (1867);
Col.  Robert  G.  Shaw,  in  Memorial  hall,  Cambridge
(1882);  Senator  Henry  B.  Anthony  (1883);  and
fourteen  governors  of  Rhode  Island,  in  the  state-
house  at  Providence.

LINN,  William,  pioneer,  d.  near  Louisville,
Ky.,  in  March,  1781.  In  the  winter  of  1776-7,
with  George  Gibson,  he  undertook  a  voyage  in
barges  from  Pittsburg  to  New  Orleans  for  military
supplies.  He  joined  Gen.  George  Rogers  Clark's
forces  in  1778,  commanding  a  company,  and  par-
ticipating in  the  capture  of  Forts  Kaskaskia,  Ca-
hokia,  and  Vincennes.  On  the  discharge  of  some
enlisted  troops,  who  desired  to  return,  they  were
placed  in  charge  of  Col.  Linn,  whom  Gen.  Clark
instructed  to  take  command  at  the  Falls  of  Ohio,
and  Linn  at  once  began  the  construction  of  a  new
stockade  port  on  the  Kentucky  shore  at  what  is
now  the  foot  of  12th  street,  Louisville.  In  July,
1780,  Gen.  Clark  led  two  regiments  of  Kentucky
volunteers  against  Chillicothe  and  Piqua  towns,
one  in  command  of  Col.  Benjamin  Logan,  and  the
other  of  Col.  Linn.  Linn's  station  was  one  of  the
six  or  seven  on  Beargrass  creek  as  early  as  1779-
'80.  and  was  about  ten  miles  from  Louisville.  In
March,  1781,  Col.  Linn  and  three  neighbors  and
comrades  were  suddenly  slain  there  by  a  raiding
band  of  savages  from  across  the  Ohio.

LITTLEJOHN,  I)e  Witt  Clinton,  legislator,
b.  in  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  7  Feb.,  1818.  He  received
a  good  education,  entered  a  commercial  career,  and
also  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  flour. He  was


president  of  the  village  of  Oswego,  and  after  it  be-
came a  city  was  twice  elected  its  mayor.  He  has
been  frequently  a  member  of  the  general  assembly,
and  was  its  speaker  in  1853-'7.  During  the  early
part  of  the  civil  war  he  served  in  the  National
army,  and  on  13  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  In  1863-'5  he  was
a  member  of  congress,  elected  as  a  Republican.

LUDLAM,  Reuben,  physician,  b.  in  Camden,
N.  J.,  7  Oct.,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1852,  and  after  studying  in  Europe  began
practice  in  Chicago,  where  he  became  widely  known
in  the  homoeopathic  school,  particularly  as  an
ovariotomist.  He  has  been  connected  with  Hahne-
mann medical  college  and  hospital  since  its  organi-
zation in  1860,  in  which  he  assisted,  and  is  now  its
dean  and  clinical  professor  of  the  surgical  diseases
of  women.  He  was  president  of  the  American  in-
stitute of  homoeopathy  in  1870,  president  of  the
Chicago  academy  of  medicine  in  1873,  and  for  ten
years  preceding  1887  an  active  member  of  the  Il-
linois board  of  health.  Dr.  Ludlam  has  published
"  Clinical  Lectures  on  Diphtheria,*'  the  first  strict-
ly medical  book  issued  in  the  northwestern  states
(Chicago,  1863);  "Clinical  and  Didactic  Lectures
on  the  Diseases  of  Women"  (1871),  which  was
translated  into  French  by  Adrien  Delahaye  (Paris,
1879) ;  and  "  Jousset's  Clinical  Medicine,"  trans-
lated from  the  French,  with  notes  and  additions
(Chicago,  1879).


McCLELLAN,  Ely,  physician,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  23  Aug.,  1834.  He  is  the  son  of  Samuel
McClellan  (vol.  iv.,  p.  85).  He  studied  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  and  at  Williams,  and  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1856.
Dr.  McClellan  entered  the  National  army  as  a  sur-
geon in  1861,  and  has  since  remained  in  the  ser-
vice. Among  his  writings  are  "Obstetrical  Pro-
cedures among  the  Aborigines  of  North  America  "
(Louisville,  Ky.,  1873) ;  "  Fibroid  Tumors  of  the
Uterus  "  (1874) ;  "  Cholera  Hygiene  "  (1874) ;  "  Com-
mon Carriers,  or  the  Porters  of  Disease  "  (1874) ;
"  A  History  of  the  Cholera  Epidemic  of  1873  in
the  United  States  "  (Washington,  1875);  "Battey's
Operation  "  (Louisville,  1875) ;  "  A  Note  of  Warn-
ing :  Lessons  to  be  Learned  from  Cholera  Facts  of
the  Past  Year,  and  from  Recent  Cholera  Litera-
ture" (1876);  "On  the  Relation  of  Health  Boards
and  other  Sanitary  Organizations  with  Civic  Au-
thorities" (Atlanta,  Ga.,  1876);  and  "A  Review  of
Von  Pettenkofer's  Outbreak  of  Cholera  among
Convicts "'  (Louisville,  1877).

McKINLEY,  William,  legislator,  b.  in  Niles,
Trumbull  co.,  Ohio,  29  Jan.,  1844.  He  was  educated
at  Poland  (Ohio)  academy,  enlisted  in  the  23d  Ohio
volunteers  in  May,  1861,  and  rose  to  be  captain  and
brevet-major.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  began  the
study  of  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1867,  and
settled  at  Canton,  Ohio,  where  he  has  since  resided.
From  1869  till  1871  he  was  prosecuting  attorney  of
Stark  county,  and  since  October,  1877,  he  has  been
in  congress.  In  June,  1888,  being  a  delegate  to  the
Republican  national  convention  at  Chicago,  111.,
he  was  made  chairman  of  the  platform  committee,
and  is  credited  with  having  made  the  draft  of  the
resolutions  that  were  adopted.  In  congress  he  is
an  earnest  advocate  of  a  protective  tariff.

MAYALL,  Thomas  Jefferson,  inventor,  b.  in
North  Berwick,  Me.,  10  Aug.,  1826;  d.  in  Reading,
Mass.,  18  Feb.,  1888.  He  obtained  employment  in
a  paper-mill  in  Roxbury,  and  soon  began  invent-
ing, especially  making  improvements  in  machinery


694


MENARD


MITCHELL


in  the  factory,  and  attracting  the  attention  of  his
employers  by  devising  the  first  rubber  belt  that
was  ever  used  in  this  country.  This  was  followed
by  a  model  of  the  first  cylinder  printing-machine
that  was  ever  made,  from  which  has  grown  the
present  industry  of  wall-paper  printing,  and  calico
printing,  which  previous  to  that  invention  was
done  on  blocks.  The  machine  made  1,000  rolls  of
paper  a  day,  printed  in  two  colors.  His  other  in-
ventions include  a  method  of  producing  satin-
faced  paper,  a  method  of  vulcanizing  rubber
(1841),  an  automatic  battery,  a  revolving  cannon,
bomb-shells  with  sharpened  edges  to  bore  through
the  armor  of  ships,  a  coffee-hulling  machine,
which  he  introduced  into  Brazil,  and  self-acting
drawbridges  for  railroads.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  at  work  on  an  electric  elevated  rail-
road, an  electric-cable  railroad,  and  a  pneumatic
elevated  railroad.  His  revolving  cannon  was  in-
troduced in  several  countries  of  Europe.  By
means  of  machinery,  operated  by  steam,  this  gun
is  loaded  and  fired  forty  times  a  minute,  with  only
one  man  in  attendance,  the  loading,  firing,  and
swabbing  going  on  at  the  same  time.  He  took  out
200  patents  in  this  country  and  70  in  England.

MENARD,  Pierre,  lieutenant-governor  of  Illi-
nois, b.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  in  1707;  d.  in  Kaskas-
kia,  111.,  in  1845.  He  removed  to  Kaskaskia  about
1788,  and  became  a  trader  in  furs  and  pelts  with
the  Indians,  with  all  of  whom  he  sustained  friendly
relations.  He  was  a  U.  S.  district  judge  for  many
years,  a  member  of  the  territorial  legislature,  and
presiding  officer  of  the  council.  On  the  admission
of  Illinois  to  the  Union  in  1818,  he  was  chosen  its
first  lieutenant-governor.  The  state  constitution
of  that  year  provided  that  the  governor  and  lieu-
tenant-governor should  be  for  thirty  years  a  citizen
of  the  United  States,  but  Col.  Menard  having  been
naturalized  only  two  years  before,  an  article  was
added  to  the  constitution  providing  that  any  citizen
of  the  United  States  that  had  resided  in  Illinois
two  years  preceding  the  election  should  be  eligible
to  the  office  of  lieutenant-governor.  During  his
occupation  of  that  post  a  series  of  laws  were
adopted  which  have  to  a  great  extent  become  the
foundation  of  all  subsequent  legislation.  His  offi-
cial life  ended  with  his  term  in  1822,  and  he  sub-
sequently devoted  himself  to  his  private  affairs
and  to  charity.  A  statue,  the  gift  of  Charles  P.
Chouteau,  of  St.  Louis,  was  erected  to  his  memory
at  Springfield,  111.,  in  January,  1888. — His  daughter,
Berenice,  b.  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  20
Nov.,  1888,  was  the  first  white  woman  that  ever
lived  in  Kansas  City,  and  married  in  1819  Francis
P.  Chouteau.  She  was  a  devout  Roman  Catholic,
and  built  the  first  church  erected  in  Kansas  City.

MILLS,  Roger  Quarles,  congressman,  b.  in
Todd  county,  Ky.,  30  March,  1832.  He  received  a
common-school  education,  removed  to  Palestine,
Tex.,  in  1849,  and  studied  law,  supporting  himself
by  serving  as  an  assistant  in  the  post-office  and  in
the  offices  of  the  court  clerks.  In  1850  he  was
elected  engrossing  clerk  of  the  Texas  house  of  rep-
resentatives, and  in  1852  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  while  still  a  minor,  by  special  act  of  the  legis-
lature. He  settled  in  the  practice  of  his  profession
at  Corsicana,  Tex.,  in  1859  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature. In  1872  he  was  chosen  to  congress,  from
the  state  at  large,  as  a  Democrat,  and  since  that
time  he  has  been  continuously  re-elected.  In  1876
he  opposed  the  creation  of  the  electoral  commis-
sion, and  in  1887  canvassed  the  state  of  Texas
against  the  adoption  of  a  prohibition  amendment
to  its  constitution,  which  was  defeated.  In  1888
Mr.  Mills  introduced  into  the  house  of  representa-


tives the  bill  that  is  known  by  his  name,  reducing
the  duties  on  imports,  and  extending  the  free  list.
The  bill  passed  the  house  on  21  July,  1888.  Dur-
ing the  presidential  canvass  of  that  year  he  spoke
in  favor  of  the  re-election  of  Grover  Cleveland.

MILLS,  Sebastian  Bach,  pianist,  b.  at  Ciren-
cester, England,  13  March,  1839.  He  bagan  to  ap-
pear in  concerts  at  an  early  age,  and  in  1856  went
to  Germany  for  study.  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1859  and  settled  as  a  teacher  of  the  piano
in  New  York,  where  he  still  (1889)  resides.  He  has
appeared  in  concerts  in  the  United  States  and  in
Europe,  and  is  one  of  the  best  known  of  American
pianists.  Among  his  numerous  compositions  are
three  " Tarantelles "  (1863,  1865.  and  1888);  "Mur-
muring Fountain"  (1865);  "Polonaise"  (1866);
"  Fairy  Fingers  "  and  "  Recollections  of  Home  "
(1867);  "Saltarello"  (1874);  and  two  "  Etudes  de
Concert  "  (1880).

MITCHELL,  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cole-
raine,  Ireland,  3  Aug.,  1769 ;  d.  in  Ridgefield,
Conn.,  8  Aug.,  1834.  He  came  to  this  country  in
1791  and  settled  in  New  York,  where  in  1796  he  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Society  of  United  Chris-
tian Friends  professing  a  belief  in  universal  salva-
tion, of  which  organization  he  continued  as  pastor
until  his  death.  Mr.  Mitchell  attracted  large  au-
diences, and  exercised  a  wide-spread  and  perma-
nent influence.  He  is  described  as  a  benevolent,
cultivated,  and  genial  gentleman,  and  as  a  preach-
er of  remarkable  eloquence,  earnestness,  and  power.
— His  son,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  New  York  city.
24  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Morristown,  N.  J.,  6  Oct.,  1886,
was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1820,  standing  first
in  his  class,  and  after  studying  law  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1823,  and  became  counsellor  in  chancery
in  1827.  In  1849  he  was  elected  a  justice  of  the
supreme  court  of  New  York,  which  post  he  held
until  1858.  Under  the  provisions  of  the  law  then
existing,  he  became  a  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals
in  1856,  and  in  1857  presiding  justice  of  the  su-
preme court.  On  retiring  from  the  supreme  court,
Judge  Mitchell  did  not  retire  from  the  bench,  but
by  the  action  of  the  courts,  and  of  the  bar,  and  of
suitors,  in  referring  to  him  cases  for  hearing  and  de-
cision, as  a  referee,  he  held  his  court  regularly
from  day  to  day,  and  his  calendar,  like  that  of  other
courts,  was  always  full.  His  reported  opinions
are  marked  by  breadth  and  force  of  reasoning  and
large  learning,  which  gave  them  permanent  value.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by
Columbia  in  1863,  and  he  was  one  of  the  vice-presi-
dents of  the  Association  of  the  bar  of  New  York.
Judge  Mitchell  published  an  edition  of  "  Black-
stone's  Commentaries  "  with  reference  to  American
cases  (New  York,  1841).  See  sketch  by  Benjamin
D.  Silliinan  (printed  privatelv,  New  York,  1887).

MITCHELL,  John  Grant,  soldier,  b.in  Piqua,
Ohio,  6  Nov.,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at  Kenyon
college  in  1859,  was  chosen  1st  lieutenant  in  the  3d
Ohio  volunteers  in  1861,  and  became  colonel  of  the
113th  Ohio,  in  March,  1863.  He  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  12  Jan.,  1865,
and  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers,  to  date
from  13  March,  for  special  gallantry  in  the  battle
of  Bentonville.  N.  C.  17  March,  1865.  Gen.  Mit-
chell resigned  on  3  July.  1865,  and  entered  on  the
practice  of  law  in  Columbus,  Ohio.

MITCHELL,  Lucy  Myers,  archaeologist,  b.  in
Oroomiah,  Persia,  in  1845 ;  d.  in  Berlin,  Germany,
10  March,  1888.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Rev.
Austin  II.  Wright,  a  missionary  to  the  Nestorians.
She  was  educated  at  Mount  Holvoke  seminary,
Mass.,  married  Samuel  S.  Mitchell,  of  New  Jersey,
in  1867,  and  passed  most  of  her  subsequent  life


MOLLY


PEA BODY


695


abroad.  Her  interest  in  classical  archaeology  be-
gan in  Leipsic  in  1872,  where  she  collected  material
for  her  "  History  of  Ancient  Sculpture "  (New
York,  1883),  in  recognition  of  whose  merits  she
was  elected  in  1884  a  member  of  the  Imperial
archaeological  institute  of  Germany,  sharing  this
distinction  with  only  one  other  woman.  She  was
preparing  a  work  on  Greek  vases  and  Greek:  paint-
ings, but  died  before  its  completion.

MOLLY,  Captain,  b.  about  1756;  d.  near  West
Point,  N.  Y.,  about  1789.  She  was  the  wife  of  a
cannonier,  and  was  at  Fort  Clintonwhen.it  was
captured  by  the  British  in  October,  1777.  As  the
enemy  scaled  the  parapet,  her  husband  dropped
his  port-fire  and  fled,  but  Molly  caught  it  up  and
discharged  the  last  gun  fired  by  the  Americans  on
that  occasion.  She  was  also  conspicuous  at  the
battle  of  Monmouth,  28  June,  1778,  where  she
carried  water  from  a  neighboring  spring  to  her
husband  while  he  was  serving  a  gun.  A  shot
killed  him  at  his  post,  and  Molly  seized  the  ram-
mer and  filled  his  place  at  the  gun.  After  the
battle,  covered  with  dirt  and  blood,  she  was  pre-
sented by  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene  to  Washing-
ton, who  commended  her  bravery  and  made  her  a
sergeant.  On  his  recommendation,  her  name  was
placed  upon  the  list  of  half-pay  officers  for  life.
She  continued  with  the  army,  and  after  the  war
resided  at  Buttermilk  Falls,  N.  Y.  Mrs.  Alex-
ander Hamilton  describes  her  as  "a  stout,  red-
haired,  freckle-faced  young  Irish  woman,  with  a
handsome,,  piercing  eye."  She  was  a  favorite  with
the  army,  and  generally  wore  an  artilleryman's
coat  over  her  dress,  and  a  cocked  hat.  She  has
been  erroneously  called  Moll  Pitcher.

MONETTE,  John  Wesley,  author,  b.  in  Ohio,
3  April,  1803 ;  d.  in  Madison  parish,  La.,  1  March,
1851.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Kentucky  medical
college  in  1822.  Dr.  Monette  was  mayor  of  Wash-
ington, Miss.,  and  a  member  of  the  legislature.  He
was  the  author  of  a  "  History  of  the  Discovery  and
Settlement  of  the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi "  (2  vols.,
New  York,  1846),  and  left  in  manuscript  a  work  on
the  "  Rivers  of  the  Southwest."

MOORE,  Edward  Charles,  silversmith,  b.  in
New  York  city,  30  Aug.,  1827.  He  learned  the
trade  of  silversmithing  from  his  father,  John  C.
Moore,  succeeded  to  the  business  in  1854,  and  in
1867  transferred  his  silver  works  to  Tiffany  and
Co.,  of  which  he  has  since  had  charge.  Being  a
practical  workman  the  application  of  steam,  the
introduction  of  machinery,  such  as  the  steam
trip-hammer,  the  polishing  and  drawing  of  wire,
and  the  use  of  gas  for  soldering  and  melting  in
his  business,  have  largely  been  the  result  of  his
influence.  The  tea  services  that  he  made  for  Mrs.
Mary  J.  Morgan  and  for  Prince  Demidoff  are  re-
garded as  among  the  finest  examples  of  repoussee
silver- ware  that  were  ever  made.  Through  his  work,
more  than  anything  else,  American  silver  has  been
raised  to  its  present  high  standard,  and  at  the
World's  fair,  held  in  Paris  in  1867,  he  received  a
personal  gold  medal  for  his  efforts.  His  study  of
leather  and  its  application  to  the  arts  has  resulted
in  this  country's  obtaining  the  first  rank  for  fine
leather-work.  He  has  given  attention  to  antique,
Persian,  Arabic,  Roman,  and  other  glass,  and  to
Japanese  arts  in  their  higher  branches.  Mr.  Moore's
library  and  collections  are  among  the  most  com-
plete in  his  specialties  in  the  United  States.


O'CONOR,  John  Francis  Xavier,  clergyman,
b.  in  New  York  city,  1  Aug.,  1852.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  College  of  St.  Francis  Xavier  in  1872,


and  became  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  the
same  year.  He  went  to  Europe  to  finish  his  studies
in  1874,  and  returned  in  1879  to  assume  the  duties
of  professor  successively  in  West  Park  college.
Georgetown  university,  and  Boston  college.  Father
O'Conor  delivered  lectures  on  cuneiform  Assyrian
in  Boston  before  any  school  of  that  language  had
been  established  in  the  United  States.  In  1884  he
secured  a  cast  of  the  cuneiform  Babylonian  cylin-
der of  Nebuchadnezzar  in  the  New  York  museum,
and  a  year  later  he  published  a  work  containing  a
fac- simile  of  the  cylinder,  its  history,  and  the
cuneiform  text,  with  a  transcription  and  a  transla-
tion (1885).  He  has  also  published  "  Something  to
Read "  (Georgetown,  1880) :  "Lyric  and  Dramatic
Poetry"  (Boston,  1883);  "Reading  and  the  Mind"
(Woodstock.  1884;  enlarged  ed.,  1885);  "Garruc-
ci's  History  of  Christian  Art"  (1886);  "Visits  to
Holy  Places,"  continued  in  the  series  of  the  "  Mes-
senger of  the  Sacred  Heart  "(Philadelphia,  1885-'8);
and  "The  Practice  of  Humility,"  from  the  Italian
of  Leo  XIII.  (New  York, "


PABLOS,  Jnan,  Spanish  printer,  lived  in  the
16th  century.  When  the  first  viceroy  of  Mexico,
Antonio  de  Mendoza,  was  appointed  in  1534,  he
carried  with  him  a  printing  press  and  outfit,  pro-
vided by  the  famous  court  printer,  Juan  Crom-
berger,  of  Seville,  and  this  outfit  was  in  charge  of
Juan  Pablos,  who  for  many  years  superintended
the  viceregal  printing-shop,  although  in  the  title-
page  of  the  earlier  books  that  were  printed  in
Mexico,  sometimes  the  name  of  Cromberger  ap-
pears. The  first  book  printed  in  the  New  World
was  a  translation  into  Spanish  of  the  Latin  text  of
Ambrosio  Camaldulense's  "  Escala  espiritual  para
llegar  al  cielo,  de  San  Juan  Climaco,"  or  "  Spiritual
Ladder  to  ascend  into  Heaven,"  which  bore  the
imprint  of  Juan  Pablos,  Mexico,  1535.  Of  this
work  no  authentic  copy  is  in  existence.  The  earli-
est Mexican  book  that  is  known  to  exist  is  a
copy  of  Motolinia's  "  Doctrina  Cristiana  en  lengua
Mexicana,"  printed  in  Mexico,  1544,  but  bearing
the  imprint  of  Juan  Cromberger.  It  is  in  the  pro-
vincial library  of  Toledo.

PEABODY,  Charles  Augustus,  jurist,  b.  in
Sandwich,  N.  II.,  10  July,  1814.  He  was  educated
privately,  studied  law  in  Baltimore,  Md..  and  at
Harvard  law-school.  He  settled  in  New  York  city
in  1839,  and  has  since  resided  there.  He  was  a
member  of  the  convention  that  organized  the  Re-
publican party  in  his  state  in  1855,  was  chosen  a
justice  of  the  supreme  court  in  the  same  year,
served  till  the  end  of  1857,  and  in  1858  became
commissioner  of  quarantine.  In  1862  he  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Lincoln  judge  of  the  U.  S.
Provisional  court  of  Louisiana,  holding  office  till
1865,  "  with  authority  to  hear,  try.  and  determine
all  causes,  civil  and  criminal,  including  causes  in
law,  equity,  revenue,  and  admiralty,  .  .  .  his  judg-
ment to  be  final  and  conclusive."  He  was  also
sole  judge  of  another  court  of  unlimited  criminal
jurisdiction  during  a  part  of  that  time.  In  1863
he  became  chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of
Louisiana,  and  in  1865  he  was  appointed  U.  S.
attorney  for  the  eastern  district  of  Louisiana,  but
declined  that  post,  and  resumed  practice  in  New
York  city.  Judge  Peabody  is  one  of  the  vice-
presidents  of  the  Association  for  the  reform  and
codification  of  the  laws  of  nations,  and  has  usually
attended  its  meetings  in  Europe.  He  was  appoint-
ed by  the  U.  S.  government  in  1885  a  delegate  in
its  behalf  to  the  International  congress  of  commer-
cial law  convoked  by  the  king  of  the  Belgians,  that


696


PEACOCK


POTTS


met  in  Antwerp,  and  held  a  similar  appointment
from  the  New  York  state  chamber  of  commerce.

PEACOCK,  Thomas  Brower,  poet,  b.  in  Cam-
bridge, Ohio,  16  April,  1852.  He  was  educated  in
Zanesville,  Ohio,  and  for  about  ten  years  was  asso-
ciate editor  of  the  Topeka,  Kan.,  "  Democrat."
He  has  made  and  patented  several  inventions,  the
most  important  of  which  is  a  fire-escape  specially
adapted  to  large  hotels.  He  has  published  "  Poems  "
(Kansas  City,  1872);  "The  Vendetta,  and  other
Poems  "  (Topeka,  1876) ;  "  The  Rhyme  of  the  Bor-
der War"  (New  York,  1880);  and  "Poems  of  the
Plains  and  Songs  of  the  Solitudes "  (1888).  The
last  volume  reached  a  3d  edition  in  a  year,  and  is
being  translated  into  German  by  Karl  Knortz.

PECK,  Clarissa  C,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Mara-
thon, Cortland  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1817 ;  d.  in  Chicago,
111.,  22  Dec,  1884.  Her  maiden  name  was  Brink.
She  married  Philander  Peck  in  1837  and  removed  to
Little  Rock,  111.,  in  the  same  year,  to  White  Water,
Wis.,  in  1841,  and  to  Chicago  in  1851.  Mrs.  Peck  was
left  with  a  large  fortune,  and  bequeathed  $65,000
to  various  religious  and  charitable  institutions,  and
the  residue  of  her  estate,  about  $535,000,  to  found
the  Chicago  home  for  incurables.

PENROSE,  William  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in
Madison  Barracks,  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  10
March,  1832.  His  father,  Capt.  James  W.  Pen-
rose, was  an  officer  of  the  regular  army.  The  son
took  an  irregular  two-years  course  in  Dickinson
college  and  became  a  civil  and  mechanical  engi-
neer. In  April,  1861,  he  was  appointed  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  3d  U.  S.  infantry,  and,  after  his  pro-
motion to  1st  lieutenant  in  May,  served  with  the
Army  of  the  Potomac  till  the  close  of  the  civil
war.  He  became  colonel  of  the  15th  New  Jersey
regiment  in  April,  1863,  and  thereafter  had  com-
mand of  Philip  Kearny's  1st  New  Jersey  brigade,
in  the  Sixth  corps.  At  times  he  had  charge  of  a  di-
vision, and  on  27  June,  1865,  he  was  commissioned
a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  During  the  war
he  won  the  brevets  in  the  regular  army,  including
that  of  brigadier-general.  He  has  since  had  com-
mand of  various  posts,  and  on  31  May,  1883,  he
became  major  of  the  12th  infantry,  and  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  16th  Infantry  on  22  Aug.,  1888.
Gen.  Penrose  has  invented  several  mechanical  de-
vices and  a  set  of  infantry  equipments  which  was
recommended  by  a  board  of  officers.

PHELPS,  George  May,  inventor,  b.  in  Water-
vliet,  N.  Y.,  19  March,  1820 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
18  May,  1888.  He  early  found  employment  in  the
shop  of  his  uncle,  Jonas  H.  Phelps,  a  maker  of  sur-
veying and  astronomical  instruments  in  Troy.  In
1850  he  had  established  himself  in  business,  mak-
ing various  kinds  of  light  machinery,  and  models.
Soon  afterward  Mr.  Phelps  was  chosen  to  manu-
facture the  type-printing  telegraph  of  Royal  E.
House;  and  when,  a  few  years  later,  the  American
telegraph  company  was  formed  to  operate the

Erinting  system  of  David  E.  Hughes,  Mr.  Phelps
ecame  the  superintendent  of  its  factory.  Several
important  modifications  of  this  machine  were  de-
vised by  him,  and  by  gradual  adaptation  it  be-
came the  well-known  "  combination  printer."  His
most  valuable  invention  was  the  motor-printer,
which  is  now  in  use  on  the  lines  of  the  Western
union  telegraph  company.  The  machinery  and
apparatus  made  by  Mr.  Phelps  were  noticeable  for
symmetry  and  gracefulness,  expressing  an  innate
sense  of  fitness  and  proportion,  which  was  the
most  striking  characteristic  of  his  talent  as  an  in-
ventor and  constructor.

PHILLIPS,  George  Searle,  English  author,
b.  in  Northamptonshire,  England,  in 1818. He


was  educated  at  Trinity  college,  Cambridge,  came
to  this  country,  and  was  connected  with  the  New
York  press.  He  returned  to  England  about  1845,
edited  the  Leeds  "  Times,"  became  principal  of  the
People's  college,  Huddersfield,  Yorkshire,  in  1846,
and  in  1854  was  lecturer  to  the  Yorkshire  union  of
mechanics'  institutes  and  literary  societies.  He
has  been  an  inmate  of  an  insane  asylum  in  New
Jersey  since  1873.  Mr.  Phillips  wrote  generally
under  the  pen-name  of  "January  Searle,"  and
among  other  works  published  "  Chapters  in  the
History  of  a  Life  "  (1849) ;  "  Life  of  Ebenezer  Elli-
ott" (i850);  "Memoirs  of  William  Wordsworth"
(1852);  "The  Gypsies  of  the  Dane's  Dike"  (1855);
and  "  Chicago  and  her  Churches  "  (Chicago,  1868).
His  pamphlet  on  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  was  warm-
ly commended  by  Theodore  Parker.

PIERCE,  Winslow  Smith,  pioneer,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  3  May,  1819 :  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y„  29
July,  1888.  He  was  educated  at  Dartmouth  and
the  Harvard  medical  school,  settled  in  Illinois,  and
was  a  professor  in  Rock  Island  medical  college  for
several  years.  He  removed  to  California  in  1849,
and  was  state  comptroller  in  1849-'53.  Dr.  Pierce
was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  first  line  of
steamships  between  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and
San  Francisco.  He  declined  the  nomination  of
the  Democratic  party  for  U.  S.  senator  in  Cali-
fornia, settled  in  Indiana  in  1860,  devoted  him-
self largely  to  the  coal  and  iron  industries,  and
laid  out  and  at  one  time  owned  a  large  part  of  In-
dianapolis. He  left  in  manuscript  a  complete  col-
lection of  material  for  a  book  entitled  "  Reminis-
cences of  Public  Men  from  1828  till  1888."  Both
his  wives  were  sisters  of  Thomas  A.  Hendricks.

PINSONNEAULT,  Peter  Adolphus,  Cana-
dian R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  in  1815 ;
d.  in  Canada  in  1883.  He  studied  in  the  College  of
Montreal  with  the  intention  of  becoming  a  lawyer,
but,  resolving  to  become  a  priest,  went  to  Paris,
studied  theology  in  the  College  of  St.  Sulpice,  en-
tered the  Sulpitian  order,  and  was  ordained  in  1840.
He  exercised  his  ministry  in  Montreal,  on  his  re-
turn, until  1856,  when  he  was  consecrated  bishop
of  the  newly  erected  diocese  of  London,  Ont.  He
removed  to  Sandwich  in  1859,  and  obtained  the
alteration  of  the  name  of  the  diocese  to  Sandwich.
He  resigned  in  1867,  and  lived  principally  in
Montreal,  where  he  rendered  great  services  to  the
bishop.  He  published  a  work  in  favor  of  the  in-
fallibility of  the  pope  (1870).

POTTER,  Joseph  Adams,  soldier,  b.  in  Potter's
Hollow,  N.  Y.,  12  June,  1816;  d.  in  Painesville,
Ohio,  21  April,  1888.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  service  as
a  civil  engineer  in  1835  and  was  engaged  in  build-
ing public  works  and  making  surveys  of  the  great
lakes  until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  In  1861
he  was  ordered  to  Detroit,  and  was  appointed,  on  27
Sept.,  1st  lieutenant  in  the  15th  U.  S.  infantry.
He  was  soon  transferred  to  the  quartermaster's
department,  with  the  rank  of  captain,  and  sent  to
Illinois,  where  he  was  engaged  in  fitting  out  troops
and  in  building  Camp  Douglass  at  Chicago  and
Camp  Butler  at  Springfield.  He  disbursed  millions
of  dollars,  purchasing  large  amounts  of  supplies
and  great  numbers  of  cavalry  horses.  Subsequently
he  had  charge  of  the  quatermaster's  departments
at  various  posts  until  1874,  when  he  became  chief
quartermaster  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  with
headquarters  at  New  Orleans.  On  21  April,  1879,
he  was  retired.  He  received  the  brevets  from
major  to  brigadier-general  in  the  U.  S.  army  on
13  March,  1865.

POTTS,  Henjamin  Franklin,  soldier,  b.  in
Carroll  county,  Ohio,  29  Jan.,  1836;  d.  in Helena,


POWDERLY


REICH


697


Montana,  17  June,  1887.  He  was  educated  at  West-
minster college,  New  Wilmington,  Pa.,  and  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1859.  He  became  captain  in  the
42d  Ohio  regiment  in  1861,  served  in  the  Shenan-
doah valley,  was  commissioned  colonel  in  1862,
participated  in  the  Vicksburg  campaign,  and  was
then  promoted  to  the  command  of  a  brigade  and
served  under  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman.  On  5
Jan.,  1865,  he  became  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers. He  then  returned  to  the  practice  of  law,
was  elected  state  senator  of  Ohio,  and  was  governor
of  Montana  in  1870-'83.  He  was  in  the  legislature
in  1884,  after  which  he  occupied  no  public  office.

POWDERLY,  Terence  Vincent,  general  mas-
ter-workman of  the  Knights  of  labor,  b.  in  Carbon-
dale,  Pa.,  22  Jan.,  1849,  of  Irish  Catholic  parents,
who  had  come  to  the  United  States  in  1826.  His
father  was  a  day  laborer,  and  Terence  was  the
eleventh  child.  He  attended  the  public  schools
from  his  seventh  to  his  thirteenth  year.  Then  he
began  keeping  a  switch  for  the  Delaware  and
Hudson  canal  company,  and  in  1866  he  was  em-
ployed as  an  apprentice  in  the  machine-shops  of
that  company.  In  1869  he  went  to  Scranton,  Pa.,
which  has  since  been  his  home.  There  he  obtained
work  in  the  shops  of  the  Delaware,  Lackawanna,
and  Western  railroad  company,  and  at  night  stud-
ied drawing  and  mechanical  engineering.  In  1871
he  joined  the  Machinists'  and  blacksmiths'  union,
of  which  he  soon  became  president.  His  interest
in  industrial  affairs  has  been  the  guiding  prin-
ciple of  his  life.  In  1874  Mr.  Powderly  was  initi-
ated into  the  Knights  of  labor  (an  order  founded
in  1869  in  Philadelphia  by  Uriah  S.  Stevens,  of
Cape  May  county,  N.  J.)  and  became  a  member  of
Assembly  No.  88.  During  the  panic  of  1873  he
lost  his  work  at  Scranton,  and  went  to  Oil  City,  Pa.,
whence  he  went,  in  1874,  as  a  delegate  to  the  Na-
tional convention  of  the  Machinists'  and  black-
smiths' union  in  Louisville.  This  was  his  first
national  appearance  as  an  advocate  of  organized
labor.  He  finally  succeeded  in  getting  this  union
to  disband  and  join  the  Knights  of  labor  as  Assem-
bly No.  222.  In  1877  he  assisted  in  organizing  in
Lackawanna  county,  Pa.,  a  district  assembly  of
Knights  of  labor,  of  which  he  became  and  was
district  secretary  until  1886.  In  the  great  strikes
of  1877  about  5,000  laborers,  mostly  of  the  Knights
of  labor  of  that  district,  were  discharged,  and  emi-
grated to  various  parts  of  the  west.  In  their  new
homes  they  established  new  assemblies  of  the
Knights  of  labor,  and  to  this  Mr.  Powderly  largely
attributes  the  spread  and  growth  of  the  order.  He
and  other  leaders  held  the  first  general  assembly
of  the  order  at  Reading,  Pa.,  in  1878,  and  at  the
next  session,  held  in  St.  Louis  in  1879,  he  was
elected  to  the  second  office,  grand  worthy  foreman.
At  the  third  convention,  held  in  Chicago  in  Sep-
tember, 1879,  Mr.  Powderly  was  elected  general
master-workman,  and  he  has  since,  despite  bitter
opposition,  been  eight  times  re-elected  to  that
office,  which  he  now  holds.  In  April,  1878,  by  the
labor  vote,  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Scranton,  Pa.,
and  he  was  several  times  re-elected  as  a  Democrat
to  that  office.  He  helped  to  establish  the  "  Labor
Advocate"  at  Sc*ranton  in  1877.  Mr.  Powderly
writes  regularly  for  the  organ  of  the  Knights  of
labor,  the  "Journal  of  United  Labor,"  and  has
written  on  "  The  Army  of  the  Unemployed  "  and
kindred  topics  for  periodicals.  When  "the  Irish
land  league  movement  was  organized  in  this  coun-
try Mr.  Powderly  was  made  its  second  vice-presi-
dent. He  went  as  chairman  of  the  Pennsylvania
delegation  to  the  Irish  land  league  convention  of
1883,  and  called  that  convention  to  order. At


present  he  is  engaged  on  a  "  History  of  the  Origin
and  Principles  of  the  Knights  of  Labor."

PULESTON,  Sir  John  Henry,  banker,  b.  in
the  vale  of  Cluyd,  Wales,  in  1830.  He  was  edu-
cated at  King's  college,  London,  where  he  studied
medicine.  This  profession  he  soon  abandoned,  and
came  to  the  United  States.  He  settled  in  Lucerne
county,  Pa.,  and  published  a  paper  in  Pittston,
which  proving  unsuccessful,  he  founded  one  in
Phcenixville.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  made
chief  of  the  Pennsylvania  agency  established  in
Washington  by  Gov.  Andrew  G.  Curtin.  He  dis-
charged the  duties  of  this  office  for  some  time,  but
resigned  to  take  charge  of  claims  offered  to  him
under  the  government.  Subsequently  he  estab-
lished himself  in  New  York  city  in  the  banking-
firm  of  Puleston,  Raymond  and  Co.,  and  later  re-
turned to  London  as  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Jay
Cooke,  McCulloch  and  Co.  He  was  elected  to  par-
liament from  Devonport  in  1874,  and  by  re-elec-
tions has  since  retained  that  seat.  In  1887  he  was
knighted  for  his  long  and  faithful  services  in  par-
liament. At  present  he  is  a  member  of  the  bank-
ing-firm of  Puleston  and  Brown.

PURDUE,  John,  philanthropist,  b.  near  Shep-
ardsburg,  Pa.,  C  Oct.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Lafayette,  Ind.,
12  Sept.,  1876.  In  his  early  youth  he  emigrated  to
Ohio  with  his  parents.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  taught  for  a  time,  became  a  dry-
goods  merchant,  settled  in  Lafayette,  Ind.,  in
1839,  and  accumulated  a  fortune,  also  engaging  in
manufacturing.  Mr.  Purdue  was  owner  of  the
Lafayette  "Journal,"  and  in  1866  was  an  unsuc-
cessful independent  candidate  for  congress.  In
1869  he  founded  Purdue  university  in  his  adopted
town,  giving  $150,000  toward  its  endowment.


RAMBAUT,  Mary  Lncinda  Bonney,  edu-
cator, b.  in  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  8  June,  1816.  She
founded,  with  Harriette  A.  Dillaye,  the  Chestnut
street  seminary  for  young  ladies,  in  Philadelphia,
in  1850,  and  conducted  it  until  1883,  when  it  was
removed  to  Ogontz,  near  Philadelphia,  where  she
continued  it  for  five  years.  In  1888  she  married
the  Rev.  Thomas  Rambaut,  and  resides  in  Hamil-
ton, N.  Y.  She  originated  the  Woman's  national
Indian  association  in  1879,  and  was  its  president
until  1884,  when  she  became  honorary  president.

REED,  Caroline  Gallup,  educator,  b.  in  Berne,
N.  Y,  5  Aug.,  1821.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Al-
bert Gallup,  treasurer  of  Albany  county,  and  was
educated  at  St.  Peter's  school  and  the  Female
academy  in  Albany.  In  1851  she  married  the
Rev.  Sylvanus  Reed,  and  in  1864. established  a
school  for  young  ladies  in  New  York  city,  which
she  still  continues.  In  1883  this  very  successful
school  was  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  New
York  state  as  Reed  college,  so  that  the  perpetu-
ity of  the  establishment  might  be  assured.  Mrs.
Reed  was  elected  a  member  of  the  American  geo-
graphical society  in  1860,  of  the  American  associa-
tion for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  of  the
New  York  genealogical  and  biographical  society
in  1882.  She  has  published  various  papers  and
has  issued  regularly  "  circulars  of  information  "
upon  subjects  of  educational  interest.

REICH,  Jacques,  artist,  b.  in  Hungary,  10
Aug.,  1852.  He  was  a  pupil  of  William  Adolphe
Bouguereau  and  Robert  Fleury,  studied  art  in
Budapest,  and  in  1873  came  to  the  United  States,
where  he  continued  his  studies  at  the  Academy  of
fine  arts  in  Philadelphia.  He  has  devoted  most  of
his  time  to  drawing  in  black  and  white,  and  has
executed  numerous  portraits  in  charcoal. In  1879


698


ROBERTS


SALOMON


he  went  to  Paris  for  the  purpose  of  continuing  his
studies,  and  remained  under  the  instruction  of  the
above-mentioned  masters  for  a  year.  Returning
to  Philadelphia,  he  turned  his  attention  to  draw-
ing in  pen  and  ink  for  illustrating  books,  and  to
etching.  In  1885  he  came  to  New  York  and  made
all  the  pen-and-ink  portraits  for  Scribner"s  "  Cyclo-
paedia of  Painters  and  Paintings,"  as  well  as  nu-
merous others  for  periodicals.  He  drew  the  por-
traits for  Appletons'  "Annual  Cyclopaedia"  for
1886,  1887,  and  1888.  Early  in  June,  1886,  he  be-
gan to  execute  the  sixteen  hundred  portraits  for
this  work,  to  which  task  he  gave  almost  exclusive
attention  till  it  was  completed  in  December.  1888.

ROBERTS,  George  Brooke,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Montgomery  county,  Pa.,  15  Jan.,  1833.  He
was  graduated  at  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute
in  1849,  and  was  an  assistant  there  in  mathematics
and  geodesy  in  1 850—'  1 .  He  entered  the  Pennsyl-
vania railroad  service  as  rodman  in  1851.  in  1852
became  assistant  engineer  of  the  Philadelphia  and
Erie  railroad,  and  for  the  next  ten  years  was
steadily  engaged  in  the  location  and  construction
of  various  roads,  returning  to  the  Pennsylvania
railroad  in  1862,  as  assistant  to  the  president.  He
was  made  fourth  vice-president  in  1869,  then  sec-
ond vice-president,  in  1874  first  vice-president,  and
upon  the  death  of  Col.  Thomas  A.  Scott,  in  May,
1880,  he  became  president  of  the  companv.

ROBERTS,  George  Litch,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  30  Dec,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  university,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1859,
and  began  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  the  office
of  Benjamin  R.  Curtis.  He  has  taken  a  prominent
part  in  the  Bell  telephone  cases,  and  is  one  of  the
foremost  patent  lawyers  in  the  United  States.

ROBINSON,  James  Sidney,  soldier,  b.  in
Franklin  township,  Richland  co.,  Ohio,  14  Oct.,
1827.  He  was  educated  in  the  common  schools,
edited  a  newspaper  in  Kenton,  Ohio,  and  was  clerk
of  the  Ohio  legislature  in  1856-'7.  He  entered  the
National  army  in  1861  as  lieutenant  in  the  4th  Ohio
regiment,  became  major  of  the  82d  Ohio  infantry,
and  rose  to  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  12  Jan.,
1865.  He  was  brevetted  major-general  of  volun-
teers, 13  March,  1865.  He  became  commissioner  of
railroads  and  telegraphs  in  Ohio  in  1879,  was  a
member  of  congress  in  1881— '5,  having  been  chosen
as  a  Republican,  and  since  1884  has  been  secretary
of  state  of  Ohio.  He  was  chairman  of  the  Ohio
Republican  executive  committee  in  1877-'9.

ROCKWOOi),  George  Gardner,  photogra-
pher, b.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  12  April,  1832..  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Balston  Spa  institute,  became  a  reporter
on  the  Troy  daily  "  Times,"  and  at  twenty  years
of  age  was  managing  editor  of  the  Troy  daily
"  Post."  He  l>ecame  interested  in  photography  in
1855,  was  the  first  to  make  the  carte  de  visit  e.
photograph  in  this  country,  introduced  many  of
the  chief  inventions  in  the  art,  and  constantly
contributed  to  the  press  both  upon  scientific  and
technical  subjects.  Mr.  Rockwood  is  the  author
of  the  scientific  hoax,  "  Brain  Pictures,"  which  ap-
peared in  a  New  York  paper  in  1887.

ROGERS,  Moses,  pioneer  steam  navigator,  b.
in  New  London,  Conn.,  in  September,  1780;  d.
in  Cheraw,  S.  C,  15  Sept.,  1822.  He  was  asso-
ciated with  Robert  Fulton  in  his  experiments,  in
1808  commanded  the  '•Clermont,"  and  in  June,
ISO!),  with  Robert  L.  Stevens,  had  charge  of  the
"  Phoenix"  in  her  voyage  from  New  York  to  Phila-
delphia, which  was  the  first  trip  that  was  ever  made
on  the.  ocean  by  a  steam  vessel.  Subsequently  he
commanded  the  first  steamer  that  went  from
Charleston to  Savannah. In 1818  he  was  em-


ployed by  Scarborough  and  Isaacs  to  purchase
a  hull  in  which  he  was  to  have  built  an  engine  in
order  to  make  a  trial-trip  across  the  Atlantic.
This  vessel  was  christened  "  Savannah,"  and  he  was
made  her  captain  and  engineer.  She  left  Savan-
nah, Ga.,  on  28  March,  1819,  and  went  by  way  of
New  York  to  Liverpool,  where  she  arrived  on  18
June,  thus  being  the  first  steam  vessel  to  cross  the
ocean.  After  his  return  Capt.  Rogers  built  and
commanded  the  •'  Pee  Dee."  plying  between  George-
town, S.  C,  and  Cheraw,  S.  O,  until  his  death.

RYAN,  William  Thomas  Carroll,  Canadian
author,  b.  in  Toronto,  Upper  Canada,  3  Feb.,  1839.
He  was  educated  in  St.  Michael's  college,  Toronto,
served  as  a  volunteer  in  the  Crimean  war  when
little  more  than  a  boy,  was  afterward  in  an  Eng-
lish regiment,  travelled  extensively,  and  then  be-
came a  journalist.  He  has  written  "  Oscar,  and
other  Poems  "  (Hamilton.  Ont.,  1857) :  "  Songs  of
a  Wanderer  "  (Ottawa,  1867) ;  "  Description  of  the
Route  of  the  Canadian  Pacific  "  (1876) ;  and  "  Pict-
ure Poems"  (1884). — His  wife,  Mary  Ann  Mac-
Ivor,  is  the  author  of  "  Poems  "  (Ottawa,  1870).


SALOMON,  Lonis  Etienne  Felicity,  presi-
dent of  Hayti,  b.  in  Aux .  Cayes  in  1820 ;  d.  in
Paris,  France,  19  Oct.,  1888.  He  was  of  pure
African  parent-


&*.h


Q-Jz^kvz^?


age,  but  of  a
wealthy  family,
and  received  an
excellent  educa-
tion. In  1838
he  entered  the
public  service,
and  in  1843
joined  the  revo-
lution against
Boyer.  He  rose
to  the  grade  of
colonel  in  the
army,  and  in
1848  became
minister  of  fi-
nance, foreign
relations,  in-
struction, and
justice.  After
the  proclama-
tion of  the  em-
pire he  was  created  Duke  de  St.  Louis  du  Sud.  and
he  became  general-in-chief  in  1855.  On  the  fall  of
Soulouque  in  1859,  Salomon  went  to  Fiance  and
later  to  St.  Thomas,  whence  he  participated  in  the
revolutionary  attempt  of  1862,  and  was  sentenced
to  death  in  his  absence.  In  1867  he  was  appointed
by  Salnave  minister  to  England,  France,  and  Spain,
but  President  Nissage  Saget  dismissed  him  in  1870,
forbidding  his  return  to  Hayti,  and  in  1873  he  was
again  condemned  to  death  in  his  absence  as  an  in-
stigator of  the  rebellion  of  Gonaives.  He  returned
in  1876,  and  was  again  exiled  in  March  1878,  but
in  1879  went  again  to  Hayti,  and  was  elected  presi-
dent on  23  Oct.,  being  chosen  again  in  1886  for
another  term  of  seven  years.  Although  he  was
practically  a  dictator,  his  administration  was  bene-
ficial to  the  country.  Honest  management  of  the
finances  was  introduced,  and  the  public  credit  was
raised  in  such  manner  that  the  revenue  increased
and  the  balance  due  to  the  French  government
since  1825  was  paid.  A  national  exhibition  was
held  in  1881,  the  country  joined  the  Postal  Union,
and  government  bonds  were  steadily  redeemed  from
the  augmented  revenue. Revolutionary  attempts


SCOTT


SULLIVAN


699


increased  after  his  re-election,  and  the  harsh  meas-
ures that  he  employed  to  crush  them,  added  to  the
general  dissatisfaction,  culminated  in  an  insurrec-
tion on  4  Aug.,  1888.  Salomon  was  besieged  in  his
palace  by  the  rebellious  garrison,  and  on  10  Aug.
took  refuge  on  board  a  British  man-of-war.  Thence
he  went  to  Santiago  de  Cuba,  and  by  way  of  New
York  to  Paris.  He  was  a  fine-looking  man,  six  feet
four  inches  tall,  with  jet-black  skin  and  white  hair.
SCOTT,  William  Lawrence,  congressman,  b.
in  Washington,  D.  C,  2  July,  1828.  He  is  the
grandson  of  Gustavus  Scott  (vol.  v.,  p.  436).  After
receiving  a  common-school  education  he  became  a
page  in  the  U.  S.  house  of  representatives.  He
settled  in  Erie,  Pa.,  in  1848,  as  a  clerk  in  the  ship-
ping business,  and  in  1850  entered  business  for
himself  as  a  coal  and  shipping  merchant.  He  sub-
sequently became  largely  interested  in  iron  manu-
facturing, coal-mining,  and  the  construction  and
operation  of  railroads.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Democratic  national  conventions  in  1868  and  in
1880,  was  elected  mayor  of  Erie  in  1866  and  1871,
and  was  a  member  of  the  National  Democratic  com-
mittee in  1876-'88.  By  a  union  of  Democrats  and
independent  Republicans  he  was  chosen  to  con-
gress an  independent  Democrat  in  1884,  where  he
was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  ways  and
means,  and  has  since  served  by  re-election.

SCOTTOW,  Joshua,  colonist,  b.  in  England  in
1615 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  20  Jan.,  1698.  He  emi-
grated to  Massachusetts  with  his  family  in  1634,
became  a  captain  of  militia,  and  was  the  confiden-
tial agent  of  La  Tour  in  his  negotiations  with  the
colonial  government  in  1654-'7.  His  daughter,
Elizabeth,  married  Thomas  Savage,  the  ancestor  of
James  Savage  the  antiquarian.  He  published  M  Old
Men's  Fears  for  their  Own  Declensions,"  a  vigor-
ously written  presentation  of  the  supposed  degen-
eracy of  the  author's  times  (Boston,  1691 ;  reprinted
1749),  and  a  "  Narrative  of  the  Planting  of  Massa-
chusetts Colony  "  (1694).

SHERRED,  Jacob,  donor,  b.  in  Germany,  23
Jan.,  1756 ;  d.  in  New  York  city.  30  March,  1821.
He  was  a  glazier  and  painter,  and  had  an  exten-
sive business  in  New  York  city.  Sherred  was  a
vestryman  of  Trinity  church,  and  a  tablet  to  his
memory  has  been  placed  in  its  monument-room.
When  it  was  proposed  to  remove  the  General
theological  seminary  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church  to  New  Jersey,  he  was  induced  by  his  wife
to  leave  to  it  $60,000,  provided  it  should  locate  per-
manently in  New  York.  Through  his  efforts  and
those  of  others  St.  Philip's  Protestant  Episcopal
church  was  built  as  a  place  of  worship  for  colored
people,  and  he  contributed  generously  toward  its

support. He  also
Wfcfv.*  left  a  large  sum  to

%ZlJj3i  the  orphan  asylum

-«.  in  New  York  city.
In  1883  the  first  of
the  new  buildings
erected  on  Cheshire
square  for  the  The-
ological seminary
was  named  Sherred
hall  (see  vignette).
The  other  build-
ings of  more  recent
erection  are  Pin-
tard  hall,  named
after  John  Pintard,
and  Dehon  hall,  so
called  in  honor  of
the  bishop  of  South  Carolina,  through  whose  ef-
forts the  seminary  was  established.


STARLING,  Lyne,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Meck-
lenburg county,  Va,,  27  Dec,  1784;  d.  in  Colum-
bus, Ohio,  21  Nov.,  1848.  He  removed  to  Ohio  in
early  life,  was  a  founder  of  Columbus,  and  acquir-
ing large  wealth,  devoted  much  of  it  to  benevolent
objects.  He  left  a  sum  to  establish  in  Columbus
the  Starling  medical  college  and  hospital.

STEARNS,  Joseph  Barker,  electrical  engineer,
b.  in  Weld,  Me.,  28  Feb.,  1831.  He  received  a  com-
mon-school education,  and  worked  on  a  farm,  but
became  a  telegraph-operator,  and  in  1855-'67  was
superintendent  of  the  Boston  fire-alarm  telegraph
company.  During  this  time  he  made  many  inven-
tions that  were  of  value  in  developing  the  fire-
alarm  telegraph  as  it  is  now  used  in  the  United
States.  In  1868  he  invented  and  patented  the
duplex  system  of  telegraphy,  which  is  now  used
throughout  the  world,  and  for  which  he  obtained
royalties  from  the  British,  French,  Italian,  Rus-
sian, Spanish,  and  Indian  governments,  and  from
the  several  submarine  cable  companies.  In  1879-'80
he  was  employed  as  engineer  by  the  Mexican  tele-
graph company  in  making,  laying,  and  putting
into  operation  the  cables  of  that  company  be-
tween Galveston,  Tex.,  and  Vera  Cruz,  Mexico,
and  in  1881  he  performed  a  similar  service  for  the
Central  and  South  American  telegraph  company,
whose  cables  extend  from  the  Isthmus  of  Tehuan-
tepec  in  Mexico  to  Callao,  Peru,  in  all  between
4,000  and  5,000  miles.  This  work  he  completed  in
1882,  and  he  has  for  some  years  resided  in  Cam-
den, Me.,  where  his  residence  contains  a  library
of  10,000  volumes,  and  his  collection  of  Chiriqui
pottery,  which  has  been  on  exhibition  at  the  Smith-
sonian institution  in  Washington,  D.  C. ;  and  his
collection  of  carved  ivories  are  now  on  exhibition
at  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art  in  New  York
city.  The  latter  is  said  to  be  the  largest  collection
of  the  kind  ever  made  in  any  country.

STEUART,  George  H.,  soldier,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  24  Aug.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1848,  became  2d  lieuten-
ant in  the  2d  dragoons,  11  Nov.,  1849,  1st  lieuten-
ant in  the  1st  cavalry,  3  March,  1855,  and  captain,

20  Dec,  1855.  He  resigned  in  April,  1861,  and  on
16  June,  1861,  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  1st  Maryland  (Confederate)  regiment. On

21  July,  1861,  he  was  promoted  its  colonel,  and  on
18  March,  1862,  he  became  brigadier-general.  In
Stonewall  Jackson's  advance  on  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.
Banks,  in  May,  1862,  he  led  the  cavalry,  and  he
afterward- had  charge  of  an  infantry  brigade.  He
was  badly  wounded  at  Cross  Keys,  8  June,  1862,
.and  his  brigade  suffered  severely  in  the  attack  on
Culp's  Hill,  at  Gettysburg.  He  defended  the
"  bloody  angle "  at  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness
against  Hancock's  corps,  and  was  taken  prisoner,
but  exchanged  in  the  winter  of  1864-'5.  Since  the
war  he  has  resided  in  Baltimore.

STURGIS,  Russell,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  3  Aug.,  1831.  His  father  was  a  member  of
the  firm  of  Russell  and  Co.,  Canton.  The  son  was
educated  at  Harvard,  engaged  in  the  China  trade,
and  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Canton,  but  returned  to
Boston,  and  became  a  merchant  in  that  city.  In
1862-3  he  served  as  captain  and  major  in  the  45th
Massachusetts  regiment.  He  has  been  actively  as-
sociated with  the  Young  men's  Christian  associa-
'  tion  since  1858,  as  president  of  the  Boston  associa-
tion, chairman  of  the  state  committee,  and  member
of  the  international  committee,  and  he  has  pub-
lished numerous  religious  tracts.

SULLIVAN,  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.  near  Wa-
ter ville.  Me.,  9  Aug.,  1847.  His  parents  were  na-
tives of  Ireland. He  acquired  reputation  as  an


700


TAPPAN


WILLIAMSON


orator  in  Michigan  before  he  became  of  age.  He
afterward  removed  to  Chicago,  and  in  1876  shot
and  killed  Francis  Hanford,  the  author  of  an
anonymous  letter  calumniating  Mr.  Sullivan's  wife,
which  had  been  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  common
council.  The  shooting  took  place  at  an  interview
that  Sullivan  sought  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining
a  retraction,  at  which  not  only  he  was  assaulted  by
Hanford  and  one  of  the  latter's  friends,  but  his
wife  was  also  struck  by  Hanford  when  she,  by
chance  seeing  an  altercation,  sought  appealingly
to  stop  it.  Sullivan  was  tried  and  acquitted.  He
was  then  admitted  to  the  bar  and  took  an  honor-
able place  in  his  profession.  In  1883  he  was  chosen
first  president  of  the  Irish  national  league  of  Ameri-
ca, whose  object  is  to  promote  home  rule  in  Ireland.
This  place  he  resigned  in  1884,  and  now  devotes  his
entire  time  to  his  profession. — His  wife,  Margaret
Frances  (Buchanan),  has  been  a  leading  writer
for  newspapers,  and  is  a  contributor  to  magazines.
Mrs.  Sullivan  is  literary  and  art  editor  of  the
Chicago  '"Tribune"  and  an  editorial  contributor
to  the  press  of  New  York.  She  is  author  of  "  Ire-
land of  To-Day"  (Philadelphia,  1881),  and  co-
author with  Mary  E.  Blake  of  "Mexico — Pictur-
esque, Political,  and  Progressive  "  (Boston,  1888).


TAPPAN,  Eli  Todd,  educator,  b.  in  Steuben-
ville,  Ohio,  30  April,  1824.  He  was  educated  by
private  tutors  and  at  St.  Mary's  college,  Baltimore,
Md.,  engaged  in  journalism,  studied  and  practised
law,  and  afterward  taught.  In  1844-'5  he  was
mayor  of  Steubenville,  and  he  was  superintendent
of  the  public  schools  there  in  1858-'9.  He  was
professor  of  mathematics  in  the  University  of  Ohio,
Athens,  in  1859-'60,  and  again  in  1865-'8,  and
from  1868  till  1875  was  president  of  Kenyon  col-
lege, Gambier,  Ohio,  where  he  was  professor  of
mathematics  from  1875  till  1887.  In  that  year
he  was  appointed  state  commissioner  of  common
schools  of  Ohio,  which  post  he  now  holds.  Mr.
Tappan  has  published  a  "  Treatise  on  Plane  and
Solid  Geometry  "  (Cincinnati,  1867) ;  "  A  Treatise
on  Geometry  and  Trigonometry  "  (1868) ;  "  Notes
and  Exercises  on  Surveying  for  the  Use  of  Stu-
dents in  Kenyon  College  (Mt.  Vernon,  1881) ;
and  "  Elements  of  Geometry"  (New  York,  1885).

THORNTON,  Jessy  Quinn,  jurist,  b.  near  Point
Pleasant,  Mason  co.,  W.  Va.,  24  Aug.,  1810 ;  d.  in
Salem,  Ore.,  5  Feb.,  1888.  In  his  infancy  his  par-
ents removed  to  Champaign  county.  Ohio.  The  son
studied  three  years  in  London,  read  law  in  Staun-
ton, Va.,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1833.  He
afterward  attended  law  lectures  at  the  University  of
Virginia,  in  1835  he  opened  an  office  in  Palmyra,
Mo.,  in  1836  edited  a  paper  in  the  interest  of  Mar-
tin Van  Buren,  and  in  1841  removed  to  Quincy,  111.
In  1846  he  emigrated  to  Oregon,  and  early  in  1847
was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  provisional  gov-
ernment. In  the  autumn  of  the  same  year  he
resigned  and  went  to  Washington,  where  he  exerted
his  influence  in  forwarding  the  organization  of  the
territorial  government,  and  in  incorporating  the
principal  of  the  "  Wilmot  proviso"  in  the  act  that
prohibited  the  extension  of  slavery  into  the  terri-
tory. He  was  the  author  of  the  provision  in  the
statutes  at  large  that  gives  to  the  cause  of  public
education  the  16th  and  36th  sections  of  public
lands  in  each  township.  In  1864-'5  he  served  in
the  legislature.  At  the  time  of  the  murder  of  Elijah
P.  Lovejoy,  at  Alton,  111.,  in  1837,  he  commented
freely  on  "the  occurrence  in  his  paper,  and  a  pro-
slavery  mob  surrounded  his  building,  but,  after
threatening  death  to  the  first  man  that  should  enter


/SM&y


the  office  unbidden,  he  made  a  speech  announcing
his  position  on  the  slavery  question  and  defending
the  right  of  free  speech  so  clearly  as  to  mollify  his
hearers.  He  published  "  Oregon  and  California  in
1848  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1849),  and  "  History  of  the
Provisional  Government  of  Oregon  "  in  the  "  Pro-
ceedings of  the  Oregon  Pioneer  Association  "  for
1875  and  in  the  "  History  of  the  Willamette  Valley."
TRACY,  Benjamin  Franklin,  cabinet  officer,
b.  in  Owego,  N.  Y.,  26  April,  1830.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Owego  academy,  and  at  the  age  of
twenty-one  years  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  his
native  place.  In  1853  and  1856  he  was  elected
district  attorney  of  Tioga
county.  In  1862  he  Was  a
me.mber  of  the  committee
appointed  by  Gov.  Edwin
D.  Morgan  to  organize  re-
cruiting for  the  U.  S.  army,
and  later  was  made  colonel
of  the  109th  New  York  regi-
ment. He  took  part  in  the
battles  of  the  Wilderness
and  Spottsylvania,  soon
after  which  failing  health
compelled  his  return  home;
but  he  again  went  to  the
front  as  colonel  of  the  127th
regiment  of  colored  troops.
Later  he  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  rendezvous
and  prison-camp  at  Elmira,
N.  Y.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  was  made  brevet  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers, and  settled  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  On  1  Oct.,
1866,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  the
eastern  district  of  New  York,  to  which  office  he  was
reappointed  on  23  Jan.,  1871,  serving  till  1873.
After  returning  to  the  practice  of  law,  Gen.  Tracy
was  retained  as  counsel  for  Henry  Ward  Beecher  in
the  Tilton-Beecher  case.  On  8  Dec,  1881,  to  fill  a
vacancy,  he  was  appointed  associate  judge  of  the
court  of  appeals,  holding  this  place  until  January,
1883.  In  September,  1882,  he  was  nominated  for
supreme  court  judge  by  the  Republicans,  but  was
defeated  on  a  party  vote.  On  5  March,  1889,  he  was
appointed  by  President  Harrison  secretary  of  the
navy,  was  confirmed  on  the  same  day  by  the  senate,
and  immediately  entered  on  the  duties  of  the  office.


WILLIAMSON,  Isaiah  Yansant,  philanthro-
pist, b.  in  Fallsington,  Pa.,  3  Feb.,  1803;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7  March,  1889.  He  was  a  farm-
er's son,  and  entered  a  country  store  at  an  early
age.  Before  he  attained  his  majority  he  went  to
Philadelphia,  and  there  engaged  in  various  enter-
prises, showing  great  business  ability.  He  became
a  partner  in  the  firm  of  Williamson,  Burroughs,
and  Co.,  in  the  wholesale  dry-goods  trade,  and  ac-
quired a  fortune.  Mr.  Williamson  invested  his
money  in  coal  and  iron  lands,  and  became  one  of
the  largest  holders  of  Pennsylvania  railroad  stock,
and  in  the  Cambria  Iron  Works.  Believing  that  the
degeneracy  of  mechanical  excellence  among  Ameri-
can artisans  was  due  to  the  passing  away  of  the  ap-
prentice system,  he  determined  to  found  an  institu-
tion where  boys  could  be  taught  carpentry,  black-
smithing,  printing,  and  other  mechanical  work.
For  this  purpose  in  December,  1888,  he  placed
$5,000,000  as  a  minimum  amount  in  the  hands  of
seven  trustees  to  establish  a  free  school  of  mechani-
cal trades.  Mr.  Williamson's  fortune  was  esti-
mated at  $15,000,000.  He  never  married,  and  lived
obscurely  and  almost  penuriously  for  many  years.


INDEX.


The  Roman  numerals  indicate  the  volume ;  the  Arabic,  the  page ;  the  words  in  Italic,  the  article.
In  case  the  entire  page  is  occupied  by  one  article,  the  volume  and  page  alone  are  indicated.  Names
that  form  titles  or  sub-titles  of  articles  are  not  indexed  here,  except  as  they  occur  in  other  articles.


ABANCEY

Abancey,  battle  of,  II,  169,  Diaz,  R.

Abare  bebe,  the,  III,  183,  Hermstcedt.

Abbadie,  Armand  M.,  I.  2,  Abbadie,  A.  T.

Abbot,  Miss  A.  W.,  H,  492,  Folsom,  S.  S.

Abbot,  Daniel,  II,  519,  Fox,  C.  J.

Abbott,  Elizabeth,  I,  679,  Cogswell,  J.

Abbott,  George  J.,  II,  478,  Flandrau.

Abbott,  Rev.  Jacob,  I,  6,  Abbott,  G.  D.

Abbott,  Rev.  Joseph,  I,  6,  Abbott,  J.  J.  C.

Abbott,  J.  G.,  II,  555,  Frost,  R.  8.

Abbott  institute,  the,  I,  6,  Abbott,  G.  D.

Abdy,  Edward  S.,  I,  603,  Child,  D.  L.

Abdy,  Matthew,  V,  449,  Seccomb,  John.

Abenaki  Indians,  enmity  of,  to  the  English,  V,  184,  Rasle  ;
missions  to,  184  ;  VI,  285,  Vetromile.

Abercorn,  Duke  of.  in,  615.  Lansdowne.

Abercrombie,  Gen.  Sir  Ralph,  III,  306,  Hugues  ;  512,  Kempt.

Aberdeen,  Lord,  VI,  413,  414.

Abernethy.  Dr.  John,  pupils  of,  I,  582,  Chapman,  N.  ;  II,
128,  Delafteld,  E.  :  242,  Dudley,  B.  W.  ;  407,  Fargues  ;
523,  Francis,  J.  W.  ;  V,  671,  Stevens,  A.  H.;  VI,  639,
Yates W.

Abert,  John,  I,  8,  Abert,  J.  J.

Abingdon,  Md.,  college  at,  I,  109,  Asbury.

Ab-Ku-Kil-Chel,  I,  597,  Chel-Ab-Ku-Kil.

Abolition,  movement  for,  in  the  Spanish  colonies,  first  so-
ciety in  Spain,  in,  582,  Labra  ;  gradualism,  II,  610,  Gar-
rison, W.  L.  ;  early  advocacy  of,  III,  664,  Lee,  B.  H.  ;
V,  387,  Sandiford,  B.  ;  the  Biglow  papers,  IV,  40,  41.
See  Abolitionists.

Abolitionists,  societies  of.  violence  toward,  I,  27  ;  99,  Ar-
thur ;  136.  Bailey,  G. ;  217  ;  234,  Benezet ;  267-268,  Birney  ;
396,  Brown  ;  404  ;  460,  Burns,  Anthony  ;  455,  Burleigh  ;
503  ;  577  ;  639,  Clay,  C.  M.  ;  675,  Coffin,  L.;  711,  Conway  ;
758,  Cox,  H.  ;  H,  568,  Gage,  F.  D.  ;  606,  Garner,  P.  M.  ;
609,  Garrett,  T.  ;  611,  Garrison  ;  613-614,  Gastine  ;  616,
Gates,  S.  M. ;  618,  Gay,  S.  H.  ;  642,  Giddings,  J.  B.  ;  768,
Grimke,  8.  M.;  Ill,  261,  Hopper  ;  334,  Hutchinson,  Jesse  ;
410  :  412  ;  513,  Kendall,  A.  ;  643,  Lay  ;  650,  Leavitt ;  687,
Le  Moyne,  F.  J.  ;  IV,  27,  Loring.  E.  G. ;  34,  35,  Love  joy  ;
54,  Lundy,  B.  ;  136,  McKim,  J.  M.  ;  273,  May,  8.  J.  ;  441,
Mott,  J.  and  L.  ;  634,  Palfrey,  J.  G.  ;  655  ;  760,  761  ;  V,

137,  Purvis,  B.  ;  180,  Bankin,  J.  ;  206,  Redpath ;  329,
Boss,  James  ;  423,  Schoelcher  ;  532,  Simmons,  G.  F.  ;  583-
584,  Smith,  G.  ;  603,  Sojourner  ;  607,  Sonthonax  ;  635.
Spooner,  L. ;  649,  Stanton,  H.  B. ;  659,  Steel ;  683,  Stewart,
Alvan  ;  714  ;  733,  Sturge  ;  745-748  ;  VI,  13,  Swisshelm  ;  32,
Tappan,  A.  ;  89,  Thompson,  Edwin  ;  90,  Thompson,  G.  ;

138,  Torrey,  C.  T. ;  155-156,  Treadwell,  S.  B. ;  425,  Weld  ;
493,  Whittier;  518,  Willey,  A.;  548,  Wilson,  H;  621,
Wright,  E. ;  700,  Thornton  ;  Fanny  Wright  societies,
622,  Wright,  F.  See  Abolition,  Anti-Slavery,  Slavery,
Underground  Railroad.

Aboriginal  literature,  I,  378,  Brinton.

Abravenel,  Leon,  II,  594,  Garcilaso.

Abreu,  Diego  de,  II,  165,  Diaz  Melgarejo  ;  202,  Dorantes  ;
III,  354,  Irala.

Abreu,  Capt.  Manuel,  V,  463,  Serna.

Academy,  the  first,  in  New  England,  H,  254,  Dummer.

Academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  American,  IV,  630,  Paine,
B.  T.  ;  gift' to,  V,  346.

Academy  of  design,  founder  of  the,  II,  259,  Dunlap,  W.

Academy  of  fine  arts,  the  national,  VI,  169,  Trumbull,  John.

Academy  of  fine  arts,  New  York,  III,  745,  Livingston,  B.  B.

Acadia,  I,  583,  Charnise  ;  LI,  177,  Diereville  ;  III,  583,  La
Come  ;  grants  of,  IV,  374,  Monts ;  732,  Perrin,  E.  P.  ;
missions  in,  IV,  294,  Memberton  ;  claims  to,  171,  Ma-
dockawando  ;  VI,  142,  Tour ;  struggles  for,  III,  597,  La
Loutre  ;  V,  368,  St.  Castin  ;  capture,  by  the  British,  738,
Subercase  ;  VI,  284,  Vetch  ;  responsibility  for  removal
of  the  people  of,  568,  Winslow,  John.

Acapulco,  hurricane  at,  1, 124,  Aganza  ;  burning,  560,  Cav-
endish ;  siege,  IV,  392,  Morelos.

Accordeon,  improvements  in,  I,  686,  Coleman,  O.  M.

Accum,  F.  C,  H,  67,  Dana,  J.  F.

Acha,  Gen.,  IV,  291,  Melgarejo.

Achaan,  Gen.,  II,  622,  Geffrard.

Achaguas,  battle  at,  I,  305.


AGAWAM

Achenbach,  Andreas,  pupils  of,  VI,  20,  Tait,  J.  R.;  496,
Whittredge.

Acid,  formed  by  electric  sparks,  V,  120,  Priestley.

Acla,  town  of,  rounded,  IV,  697,  Pedrarias.

Acland,  John  Dyke,  I,  9,  Acland,  C.  H.  C.  F.

Aculhuas,  the,  VI,  635,  Xolotl. See  Texcoco.

Acomas,  tribe  of  the,  II,  373,  Espejo,  A.

Acomas,  city  of  the,  II,  398,  Fabert.

Acomenticus  river,  settlements  on,  II,  688,  Gorges,  R.

Aconcagua  valley,  battle  in,  I,  734,  Copahue.

Acoustics,  researches  in,  IV,  274,  Mayer,  A.  M.

A.  C.  Q.  W.,  pen-name,  VI,  388,  Waterston.

Across  the  Chasm,  anonymous  novel,  IV,  175,  Magruder,  J.

Actors,  I,  473,  Burton ;  peculiarity  common  in,  472,  Burton,
W.  E. ;  first  appearance  of,  in  Boston,  IV,  630,  Paine,  R.
T. ;  home  for  aged,  II,  505,  Forrest,  E.

Acts  of  Pilate,  the,  III,  306,  Huidekoper,  F.

Acultzingo,  battle  at,  IV,  26,  Lorencez.

Adair,  James.  IV,  275,  Mayes.  •

Adams,  destruction  of  the  corvette,  VI,  314,  Wadsworth.

Adams  family,  homes  of,  illustrations,  I,  15,  26.

Adams  and  Liberty,  song,  III,  225,  Hodgkinson,  J.;  IV,
630-631,  Paine,  R.  T.

Adams,  Miss,  I,  182,  Barrymore.

Adams,  Gen.  Daniel,  trial  of,  VI,  642,  Yerger.

Adams,  Henry,  I,  15,  Adams,  John.

Adams,  John,  I,  29.

Adams,  J.  C,  III,  6,  Grow.

Adams,  Joseph,  I,  29.

Adams,  J.  Q.,  quoted,  II,  344  ;  V,  340,  Royall,  A.

Adams,  Louisa  C,  I,  27.

Adams,  Phineas,  II,  386,  Everett.

Adams,  Sarah  Abigail,  V,  246,  Richmond,  S.  A.  A.

Adams,  Rev.  S.  W.,  HI,  515,  Kendrick,  N.

Adams,  Rev.  William,  I,  14,  Adams,  Eliphalet.

Adams  nervine  asylum,  the,  I,  32,  Adams,  S.

Adding-machine,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  402,  Webb,  C.  H.

Address  to  the  people  of  Great  Britain,  III,  408,  Jays.

Addums,  Mozis,  pseudonym,  I,  135,  Bagby.

Adelbert  college,  gift  to,  V,  699,  Stone,  A.

Adelina,  empress  of  Hayti,  V,  612,  Soulouque.

Adirondack  region,  the,  III,  152,  Headley,  J.  T.

Adirondacks,  explorations  in  the,  I,  699,  Colvin.

Admiral,  first,  in  U.  S.  navy,  II,  419,  Farragut.

Admiral  of  New  England,  V,  571.

Admiral  Duff,  privateer,  destroyed,  V,  104,  Preble,  E. ;  VI,
527 Williams  J  F

Advance,  voyage  of,'  HI,  493,  Kane,  E.  K. ;  HI,  132,  133,
Hayes,  I.  I.

Adventists,  IV,  330,  Miller,  W.

Adventure,  voyage  of  the,  I,  715.

Adventure,  the  galley,  III,  531,  Kidd.

Adzar,  Bishop,  II,  363,  Eric.

Aeronauts,  II,  198,  Donaldson,  W.H.:  269,  Durant,  C.  S.;
ID,  23,  Haddock,  J. ;  424,  Jeffries,  John  ;  545,  King,  S.
A.;  mi.  La  Mountain  ;  IV,  39,  Lowe,  T.  S.  C;  682,  Paul-
lin  ;  VI,  581,  Wise,  J.

Aerphone,  the,  II,  304,  Edison.

Afghans,  mission  to,  IV,  2,  Loewenthal.

Africa,  exploration  of,  I,  221,  Beechey  ;  I,  222,  Behaim  ;  II,
241,  Du  Chaillu  ;  II,  516,  Fouville  ;  IV,  8,  9,  Long,  C.  C;
V,  645-646,  Stanley  ;  VI,  222,  Vaillant ;  320,  Waldeck ;
capture  of  English  settlements  in,  HI,  633,  Lauzun  ;  Por-
tuguese possessions  in.  V,  362,  Sa,  S.  C.  de  ;  missions  to,
Ul,  647,  Leacock  ;  VI,  555,  Wilson.  J.  Leighton.

African  colonization,  I,  207-268,  548,  Cary,  L.  ;  II.  460,  Fin-
ley,  B.  ;  IV,  106,  McDonouqh  ;  plan  for,  II,  455  ;  Garri-
son's opposition  to,  611 ;  coiony  on  the  island  of  Bulama,
IV,  365,  Montefiore.

African  M.  E.  church,  the,  founded,  VI,  262,  Varrick  ;  so-
cieties of,  356,  Ward,  T.

African  Observer,  magazine,  in,  703.  Lewis,  Enoch.

African  Roscius,  sobriquet,  I,  44,  Aldridge.

Agaces,  tribe  of,  I,  490,  Cabeza.

Agassiz,  Elizabeth  C,  I,  34.

Agassiz  association,  the,  I,  151,  Ballard,  H.  H.

Agate,  pen-name,  V,  217,  Reid,  Whitelaw.

Agawam,  Mass.,  founded,  V,  144,  Pynchon.


702


AGNEW


ALLEN


Agnew,  Adeline,  I,  293,  Blennerhassett.

Aguew,  John  H.,  V,  401,  Sartain,  J.

Agnew,  Mary,  VI,  40,  Taylor,  B.

Agnew,  Mary  Nash,  II,  192,  Dodge,  G.  H.

Ago,  Felix,  pen-name,  III,  29,  Haldemun.

Agrieola,  pseudonym,  II,  332,  Elliott,  W.  :  IV,  512,  Nicho-
las, P.  N. ;  VI,  647,  Young,  John.

Agricultor.  the,  journal,  II,  593,  Garcia-Reyes.

Agricultural  bureau,  establishment  of  a,  IV,  506.  Newton.  I.

Agricultural  journals,  first,  in  America,  V,  545,  Skinner,
J.  S.  ;  in  New  York,  614,  Southwick.

Agricultural  machines,  inventors  of,  I,  450,  Burden  ;  II,
377,  Esterly. See  Harvesters,  Ploughs,  etc.

Agricultural  schools,  project  for,  IV,  147,  Maclure.

Agricultural  societies  founded,  VI,  391,  Watson,  E.

Agriculture,  experiments  in,  V,  692,  Stockbridge.

Agriculturist  and  Industrial  Magazine,  the,  II,  384,  Evans,
IVilliam.

Agua  de  Verrugas  bridge,  the,  III,  628,  Latrobe,  C.  H.

Aguado,  IV,  187,  Manicaotex.

Agueynaba,  cacique,  V,  376,  Salazar,  D.  de.

Aguiel,  Mrs.,  II,  487,  Flower,  G.

Aguila,  Count  del,  VI,  60,  Tello.

Aguilera,  Lues  de,  I,  603,  Chiguaihue  ;  III,  199,  Higuaihui.

Agustin  I.,  of  Mexico,  III,  368.

Ah-Kin-Chi,  I,  602,  Chi-Ah-Kin.

Ahualulco,  battle  of,  iv,  339,  Miramon.

Aiken,  Mary  E.,  I,  386,  Brooks.  J.  G.

Aimwell,  Walter,  pen-name,  V,  535,  Simonds.

Ainmtiller,  Chevalier,  IV,  483.  Neal,  D.  D.

Air-compressor,  inventor  of  an,  VI,  591,  Wood,  D.  V.

Air-currents,  theories  of,  VI,  581,  Wise,  J.

Air-engines,  experiment  with,  III,  559,  Kitching,  J.  B.

Aireskoi,  god  of  the  Mohawks,  V,  16,  Pierron.

Air-pumps,  inventors  of,  V,  124,  Prince,  J.  ;  V,  317,  Rood,
Ogden  N.

Air-ship,  plan  for  an.  VI,  581,  Wise,  J.

Airy,  Sir  G.  B.,  IV,  430,  Morton,  H.

Aix  roads,  engagement  in,  II,  587,  Gambier.

Akenside,  Mark.  IV,  349,  Mitchill.

Akers,  Paul,  quoted,  I,  400,  Brown,  H.  B.

Ako,  Michael,  II,  619,  Gay,  P.  du.

Alabama,  colonized,  III,  339,  Iberville  ;  asylum  for  political
exiles  in,  III,  597,  Lallemand  ;  676,  Lefebvre  :  Indian
warfare  in,  376 ;  R.  C.  institutions  in,  V,  82,  Portier  ;
152,  Quintan,  J.;  iron-factories  in,  VI,  193,  Tyler,  D.;
suspension  of  clergy  in,  543,  Wilmer,  R.  H.

Alabama,  the,  captures  by— loss  of— claims  on  account  of,

V,  460,  Semmes,  R.  ;  I,  418,  Bruce,  F.  W.  A.  ;  II,  385,
Evarts,  W.  M.;  464,  Fish,  H;  VI,  569,  Winslow,  J.  A.;
rejected  treaty,  III,  447,  Johnson,  Reverdy  ;  British  com-
missioners on.  IV,  103  ;  settlement,  II,  720.

Alabaster,  Dr.  W.,  VI,  572,  Winthrop.

Alacci,  II,  628,  Geraldini.

Alamance  creek,  defeat  of  the  Regulators  on,  LU,  329,
Husbands.

Alamo,  battle  of  the,  LI,  13,  Crockett ;  IH,  274,  Houston,
S.  ;  V,  393,  Santa-Anna  ;  VI,  155,  Travis,  W.  B.  ;  illus-
tration, 155.

Alarconcillo,  Judge,  II,  374,  Espinosa,  G.

Alaska,  placed  on  the  map  before  its  discovery,  IV,  498,
Neuville,  P.  B.  ;  Russian  colony  in,  I,  161,  Baranoff ;

VI,  618,  Wrangell;  exploration  of,  145,  Baker,  M.\  IV,
284,  Meares  :  V,  433,  Schwa  tka  ;  purchase  of,  II,  520,  Fox,
G.  V.;  V,  336,  472,  478,  Rousseau  ;  education  in.  III.  391,
Jackson,  S.:  missions  in,  IV,  114,  McFarland,  A.  R.;  V,
453,  Seghers.

Alatorre,  Gen.,  II,  370,  Escobedo,  M.

Albania,  name  given  to  northern  New  York,  IV,  518,  Nicoll,
Sir  R.

Albany,  VI,  250,  Van  Rensselaer ;  controversy,  253,  Van
Rensselaer,  H.  ;  land  near,  obtained  from  the  Indians,
II,  136,  Dellius  ;  Indian  invasion  of,  III.  681,  Leister  ;
first  mayor  of,  V,  430,  Schuyler,  P.  ;  Schuyler  house  at,
illustration,  433  ;  medical  college  at,  IV,  200,  March,  A.  ;
normal  school.  623,  Page,  D.  P.  ;  capitol  at,  II,  31fi,  Eid-
litz,  L.  ;  V,  241,  Richardson,  H.  H.;  VI,  681,  Fuller,  T.;
view  of  the  capitol,  115  ;  gift  to  state  library  at,  V,  638,
Sprague.  W.  B.\  proposed  university  at,  I,  91,  Armsby  ;
All-Saints''  church  in,  illustration,  VI,  682.

Albany  congress,  the,  III,  332.

Albany  plan  for  Federal  union,  the,  I,  762,  Coxe,  T.  ;  H,
528,  529.

Albany  regency,  the,  I,  494,  Cogger ;  553.  Cassidv  :  II,  21,
Croswell,  #.  :  184  ;  IV,  208,  Marcy,  W.  L.  ;  VI,  233.

Albemarle,  Duke  of.  IV,  764,  Phips.

Albemarle,  Earl  of,  III,  523,  Keppel.

Albemarle  colony,  insurrection  in,  II,  28,  Culpeper.  J.

Albemarle,  the  ram,  II,  425,  Febiger,  J.  C.  ;  defeat  of,  V,
302,  Roe.  F.  A.;  destruction  of,  II.  40,  Cushing,  W.  B.

Albemarle  "sound,  explored,  I,  166,  Barlow,  A.

Alberdi.  Juan  B.,  VI,  457,  Wheelwright,  W.

Albert,  Charles  d\  V,  232,  Ribaut.

Albert  Nyanza,  the,  V,  646.  Stanley.

Albertite,  kerosene  from,  II,  220,  Downer.

Albion,  or  New  Albion,  111.,  founded,  II,  487,  Flower,  G.

Albion,  wreck  of  the,  II.  464,  Fisher,  A.  M.

Albion  college,  Mich.,  V,  19,  Pitcher;  gift  to,  113,  Pres-
ton, D.


Albrights,  the,  I,  39.

Albuquerque,  surname  taken  by  the  family  of,  IV,  199,
Muranluio.

Albuquerque,  Brites  de,  II.  237,  Duarte  Coelho.

Albuquerque,  Gen.  Matias  de,  II,  163,  Dias,  H.

Alcala,  Duke  of,  II,  360,  Euriquez,  P.

Alcalde,  office  of,  II,  6^0,  Geary.

Alcatraz  island,  Cal.,  fortifications  at,  II.  328,  Elliot,  G.  H.

Alcott,  Pen,  pen-name,  VI,  141,  Totten,  C.  A.  L.

Alcotts,  home  of  the.  illustration,  I,  40.

Aldea,  Rodriguez,  IV,  567,  O' Biggins.

Alden,  Henry  W.,  I,  43,  Alden,  T.

Alderete,  III,  300,  Huelva.

Alderete,  Geronimo  de,  HI,  295,  Huden.

Aldine,  the,  periodical,  V,  697,  Stoddard,  R.  H.

Aldrichs,  Jacob,  III,  214,  Hinoyossa.

Alejambe,  III,  436,  Jogues.

Alert,  capture  by  the,  II,  56,  Dale,  R.

Alert,  the  surrender  of,  V,  73,  Porter,  D.

Alert,  school  on  the  receiving-ship,  II.  414.

Alert,  the  arctic  voyage  of  the,  IV,  478,  Nares  ;  return  of,
to  England,  I,  105.

Alexander  I,  of  Russia,  H,  372,  Esmenard  ;  IH,  314,  Hum-
phreys, S.

Alexander  II.,  of  Russia.  II,  520,  Fox,  G.  V.

Alexander,  Cosmo,  V,  728,  Stuart,  Gilbert.

Alexander,  James,  II,  245,  Duer,  W.

Alexander,  Mary,  III,  741,  Livingston,  P.  V.  B.

Alexander,  Henry  Carrington,  I,  46,  Alexander,  J.  A.

Alexander,  Sarah,  IH,  741,  Livingston,  P.

Alexander,  Sarah,  IV,  734,  Perry,  C.  R.

Alexander,  Susan,  V,  449,  Seddon,  J.  A.

Alexander,  William,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archibald.

Alexandre,  Monsieur,  ventriloquist,  VI,  264,  Vattemare.

Alexandria,  Egypt,  claims  in,  -for  damages,  II.  409,  Far-
man  ;  massacre  at — burning  of,  IV,  9,  Long,  C.  C. ;  bom-
bardment of,  IV,  515,  Nicholson,  J.  W.  A.

Alexandria,  Va..  Christ  church  at,  Washington's  head-
quarters at,  II,  402  ;  view  of  Christ  church,  V,  171;
Braddock's  headquarters  at,  illustration,  I,  347 ;  retro-
cession of,  to  Virginia,  HI,  323,  Hunter,  R.  M.  T. ;  capitu-
lation of,  II,  686,  Gordon,  Sir  J.  A.  ;  incident  at,  II.  335,
Ellsicorth,  E.  E.

Alexandria  seminary,  gift  to,  VI,  590,  Wolfe.

Alfaro,  Gen.,  VI,  272,  Veintimilla.

Alfieri,  H,  270,  Dvrao.

Alfinger,  Ambrosius  von,  V,  633.  Spire.

Alfonso  II.,  of  Spain,  quoted,  I,  698.

Alfred,  John,  VI,  164,  Trowbridge,  E.

Alfred,  capture  of  the,  HI,  214,  Hinman.

Alfred  observatory,  V,  310,  Rogers,  W.  A.

Algebra,  discovery  in,  IH,  90,  Harriot.

Alger,  Francis,  III,  384,  Jackson,  C.  T.

Algeria,  Spanish  expedition  against,  I,  750,  Cortes ;  pay-
ment of  tribute  to,  140,  Bainbridge  :  III,  375  ;  American
captives  at,  I,  167,  Barlow,  J.  :  war  with,  141,  Bain-
bridge ;  II,  121  ;  French  campaigns  in,  I,  637,  Clausel ;
III,  497,  Kearny,  P.

Algic  society,  the,  V,  425,  Schoolcraft,  H.  R.

Alica,  Mex.,  the  tiger  of,  sobriquet,  IV,  30,  Losada,  M.

Alice  and  Ruth,  anonymous  book,  H,  183,  Dix,  D.  L.

Alida,  pen-name,  HI,  585,  Ladd,  C.

Alien,  right  of  an,  to  sue  a  state,  V,  177.  Randolph,  E.

Alien  and  sedition  laws,  the,  I,  23  ;  HI,  175,  420  ;  pardon  of
prisoners  under,  421  ;  IV,  169,  170  ;  V,  178,  Randolph,  J.  ;
121,  Priestley.

Aliste,  Count  Alba  de,  HI,  570,  Koenig.  J.  R.  :  IV,  47,  Loza-
no,  F.  R.

Allaire,  James  P..  II,  122,  De  Coudres  ;  III,  113,  Haswell.

Allaire.  John,  V,  268.  Roach,  J.

Allan,  John,  V,  44.  Poe.

Allan,  William.  IV.  106,  McDonough.

Allan,  Sir  W.,  V,  261,  Ritchie,  A.  H.

Allatoona,  defence  of,  I,  747,  Corse,  J.  M.  ;  works  at,  V.
305,  Rogers,  G.  C.

Alldred,  Frederic,  pen-name,  V,  203,  Reddall.

Alleghanies,  the,  early  journeys  across  the,  HI,  653,
Lederer.

Allegheny  City,  gift  to,  I,  529,  Carnegie.

Alleghany  college,  founded,  I,  43,  Alden,  T.  ;  gift  to,  HI,
518,  Kennedy,  J.  C.  G.

Allegiance,  perpetual,  treaty  of  1870,  I,  277.

Allemand,  Capt.  Georges,  V,  245,  Richery.

Allen,  Miss,  III,  274,  Houston.

Allen,  Rev.  Bennet.  II,  262,  Dulany,  L.

Allen,  Chester  G.,  VI,  402,  Webb,  G.  J.

Allen,  Rx v.  D.  H.,  I,  217,  Beecher,  L.

Allen,  Elizabeth,  VI,  219,  Usher,  J.

Allen,  Ethan,  anecdote  of,  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  Aaron.

Allen,  Rev.  Ethan,  HI,  71,  Hanaford.

Allen,  Rev.  James,  IV,  617,  Oxenbridge.

Allen,  John,  VI.  112.  Ticknor,  W.  D.

Allen,  Lewis  F.,  I,  651,  Cleveland,  G.

Allen,  Mary  Penn,  in,  744,  Livingston,  H.  W.

Allen,  Col.  Nathaniel,  VI,  108,  Thurman.

Allen,  Samuel  C,  I.  51.  Allen,  E.  H.

Allen.  William  F..  II,  632,  Gerry,  E.  T.

Allenites,  I,  53.  Allen,  H.

Allen  university,  founded,  II,  170,  Dickerson,  W.  F.


ALLIANCE


ANARCHISTS


708


Alliance,  O.,  V,  276,  Roberts,  S.  W.

Alliance,  conspiracy  on  board  the,  III,  588  ;  captures  by,
I,  180,  Barry,  J.  ;  III,  468.

Allibone,  Francis,  I,  670,  Cochran,  John.

Alligator,  the,  captures  by,  V,  694,  Stockton,  R.  F.  ;  attack
on,  I,  284,  Blake,  G.  S.

Allin,  Daniel,  II,  37,  Curtis,  A.  A.

Allinson,  EdwarcLP.,  IV,  408,  Morrey.

Allison,  Edward  P.,  IV,  719,  Penrose,  B.

All  Religions  and  Religious  Ceremonies,  anonymous  book,
V,  270,  Robbins,  T.

Allston,  Washington,  quoted,  V,  729.

Allummapees,  chief,  V,  402,  Sasoonan.

Allyn,  Col.  John,  VI.  23,  Talcott,  J.  and  S.

Allyne,  Joseph,  IV,  606.

Alma  college,  founded,  I,  528,  Carman,  A.

Almanacs,  II,  220,  Downes ;  Poor  Richard's,  II,  528 ;
first  used  in  advertising,  III,  414,  Jayne  ;  comic  and
illustrated,  HI,  696,  Leslie,  F.  ;  V,  485,  Shaw,  H.  W.  ;
first,  in  the  colonies,  IV,  703,  Peirce,  W.

Almanack  de  Gotha,  the,  IV,  157,  McPherson,  E.

Almaden  mine  case,  the,  V,  178,  Randolph,  E.

Almansa,  M.  E.  de,  VI,  128,  Toledo,  F.

Almy,  Anna,  III,  426,  Jenkins,  A.  A.

Alonso,  Gen.  M.  R.,  IV,  20,  Lopez.

Alpha,  pen-name,  IV,  767,  Picken.

Alphabet  blocks,  patent  for.  VI,  487,  Whitney,  A.  D.  T.

Alphonso  VI.,  king,  V,  362,  Sd,  S.  C.  de.

Alsina,  Valentin,  IV,  350,  Mitre.

Alsop,  Mary,  III,  542-543,  King.

Alston,  Joseph,  I,  468,  Burr,  T.

Altenburg  theological  seminary,  VI,  343.  Walther.

AJton,  111.,  mob  violence  at,  IV,  34,  Lovejoy,  E.  P.

Aluminium,  production  of,  method  invented,  IV,  70,
Mabery.

Alvear,  Gen.  Carlos  M.,  Ill,  186,  Herrena,  N.  ;  V,  266,
Rivera.

Alvarado,  Gomez  de,  III,  343,  Illatopa.

Alvarez,  Catherine,  IV,  643,  Paraguassii

Alvares,  Diego,  II,  270,  Duras.

Alwato  language,  the,  I,  76,  Andrews,  S.  P.

Amat,  Gen.  Manuel,  IV,  197,  Manso  ;  573,  Olivares  ;  VI,
136,  Toro  Zam.br ano.

Amateur,  An,  pseudonym,  I,  761,  Cox,  W.

Amayes,  the,  tribe,  II,  373,  Espejo,  A.  ;  398,  Fabert.

Amazon  river,  the  discovery  of,  II,  165,  Diaz  de  Pineda  ;
V,  36,  Pizarro,  G. ;  name  of,  IV,  588,  Orellana  ;  missions
in  the  valley  of,  celebrated  map  of,  II,  155,  Detre  ;  553,
Fritz ;  first  description  of.  III,  344,  lmhoffer ;  explora-
tion of,  1, 10,  AcuHa,C;  II,  360.  Epiphane  ;  439,  Ferreira  ;
516,  Fouville  ;  III,  184,  Herndon,  W.  Le  ;  IV,  448,  Mou-
raille  ;  VI,  176,  Tucker,  J.  R.  ;  opened  to  all  nations,  IV,
699,  Pedro  II.

Amazon  valley,  fossils  discovered  in,  IV,  582,  Oort ;  595,
Orton,  J.

Amazons,  a  corps  of,  IV,  21,  Lopez,  F.  S. ;  tribe  of,  588,
Orellana.

Ambler,  Dr.,  IT,  137,  De  Long.

Ambler,  Mary  Willis,  IV,  222.

Ambrister,  II,  568,  Gadsden,  Jas.  ;  execution  of,  III,  378  ;
V,  48,  Poindexter.

Ambrotypes,  invention  of,  II,  49,  Cutting,  J.  A.

Ambulance,  invention  of  an.  Ill,  91,  Harris,  E.

Amelia,  pen-name,  VI,  423,  Welby.

Amelia  island,  engagement  at,  II,  326,  Ellery,  F. ;  IV,  258,
Mathews,  G.

America,  theory  regarding,  before  the  discovery,  VI,  286,
Vicente  ;  discovery  of,  prophesiad  in  Yucatan,  I,  603,
Chilam  Baldm  ;  a  supposed  discoverer,  I.  222,  Behaim  ;
discoveries  of,  before  Columbus,  I,  367,  Brendon  ;  III,
300,  Huelva  ;  V,  159-160.  Rafn  :  578,  Smith,  J.  T.  ;  sup-
posed, VI,  16,  Szkolny ;  106,  Thorvald  ;  101-102,  Thor-
finn  ;  203,  Tyrker  ;  261,  Varnhagen  :  VI,  659,  Zeno  ;  676,
Cousin  ;  discovery  of,  by  Columbus,  I,  697  ;  a  companion
of  Columbus,  V,  29,  Pinzon.  M.  A.  ;  papers  said  to  have
been  left  with  Columbus,  385,  Sanchez,  A.  ;  discovery  of
the  continent  of,  I,  63,  Amerigo.

American,  An,  signature,  I,  345,  Brackenridge,  H.  M.  ;  III.
59  ;  IV,  415,  Morris,  G.  ;  V,  122,  Prime,  B.  Y.  ;  VI,  391,
Watson,  E.

Americana,  collections  of,  I,  167,  Barlow,  G.  L.  M.;  369,
Brevoort,  J.  C;  377,  Brinley,  G.;  396,  Brown,  J.  C;  411,
Brown,  Thomas ;  567,  Chambers,  W.\  II,  115,  Deane,  C;
499,  Force,  P.  ;  III,  28,  Hakluyt ;  365,  Ixelin  ;  V,  237,
Rich,  O.;  collectors  of ,  676,  Stevens,  H.;  I,  396,  Brown,
J.  C. ;  colonial  history  of,  burned  by  the  executioner,  V.
194.  Raynal ;  MSS.  of  history  destroyed,  III,  333,  Hutch-
inson, T.  ;  I,  485,  Byinqton  :-504,  Calhoun,  S.  H.  ;  II,  342,
Emerson,  J.  S.  ;  468.  Fisk,  P.  and  F.  ;  500,  Ford,  J.  E. ;
707,  Grant ;  III,  12,  Gulick,  P.  J.

American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  IV,  574,  Oliver,
A.  ;  gift  to.  II,  687,  Gore.  C.

American  Addijon,  the.  Ill,  549,  Kinqsley,  J.  L.

American  bank-note  company,  II,  678.  Goodall.

American  board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions
formed,  V,  2ar>,  Rice,  L.  :  gifts  to,  I,  327,  Boudinot  ;  V,
211,  Reed,  W.  ;  VI,  372,  Washburn,  W.  B.  :  missions  of,
III,  12,  Gulick,  P.  J.;  V,  63,  Pond,  S.  W.  ;  253,  Riqgs.  E.\
254,  Riggs,  S.  R.  ;  624,  Spaulding,  L.\  VI,  340, Walsh,


J.  J.  ;  351,  Ward,  F.  de.  W.  :  369,  Washburn,  G. ;  485,
Wliitman,  M.  See  Congregational  church,  missions
op,  and  Presbyterian  church,  missions  of.

American  Cnurch  Monthly,  the,  III,  298,  Hudson,  H.  N.

American  Church  Review,  V,  243,  Richardson,  N.  S.

American  citizens,  seizure  of,  I,  408,  Brown,  J.  P. ;  HI,  350,
Ingraham.  D.  N.

American  college  in  Rome,  the,  IV,  89,  McCloskey,  W.  G.

American  colonization  society,  U,  460,  Finley,  R.  and  R.  S.

American  Cousin,  the,  controversy  over,  V,  530,  Silsbee.
J.S.

American  Eclectic,  the,  IV,  740,  Peters.

American  Engineer,  the.  III,  235.  Holley,  A.  L.

American  Entomologist,  the,  V,  255,  Riley,  C.  V.  ;  VI,  339,
Walsh,  B.  D.

American  ethnological  society,  II,  579,  Gallatin.

American  Historical  Record,  the,  IV,  31,  Lossing.

American  Howard,  the,  II,  301,  Eddy,  T.

American  Journal  of  Mathematics,  the,  VI,  15,  Sylvester,
J.J.

American  Journal  of  Medical  Sciences,  III,  146,  Hays,  I.

American  Journal  of  Science,  V,  528-529.

American  Jurist,  the,  journal,  IV,  763.  Phillips,  Willard.

American  Law  Review,  the,  V,  452,  Sedgwick,  A.  G.

American  Loyalist,  the,  IV,  195,  Mansfield,  J.  B.

American  Magazine,  I,  350,  Bradford,  A.  S. ;  II.  516,  Fowle,
D.;  IV,  511,  Nichola  ;  VI,  417,  Webster,  N.

American  Magazine  of  Useful  and  Entertaining  Knowl-
edge, HI,  316,  Hunt,  F.  ;  V,  521,  Sibley,  J.  L.

American  Mechanic,  the,  V,  79,  Porter,  R.

American  Med.  and  Phil.  Register,  the,  H,  523,  Francis,
J.  W.

American  Medical  Monthly,  II,  483,  Flint,  Austin.

American  Mercuiy,  the,  I,  166,  Barlow,  J.

American  missionary  association,  VI.  33,  Tappan,  L.;
gifts  to,  372,  Washburn,  W.  B. ;  684,  Hand.

American  Monthly  Magazine,  the,  III,  180.  Herbert ;  228.
Hoffman,  C.  F. ;"  IV,  122,  McHenry  ;  VI,  540.

American  Monthly  Review,  the,  VI,  515,  Willard,  Sidney.

American  Museum,  the,  I,  524.

American  museum  of  natural  history,  gift  to,  IV,  765,
Phoenix.

American  Naturalist,  the,  HI,  335,  Hyatt  ;  IV,  422,  Morse,
E.  S.  ;  V,  139,  Putnam,  F.  W.

American  Odd-Fellow,  the,  IV,  593.  Orr,  J.  W.

American  party,  the,  founder  of,  III,  701,  Levin.

American  periodical,  first,  reprinted  in  England,  I,  417,
Brownson,  O.  A.

American  philosophical  society,  the.  II,  528  ;  IV.  574,  Oli-
ver A.  ;  673,  Patterson,  R.  M.  ;  V,  263  ;  350,  Rush,  B.

American  Prodigy,  the,  sobriquet,  HI,  686,  Le  Moine.

American  professor,  the,  II,  429,  Felton.

American  Quarterly  Register,  the,  V,  726,  Stryker,  James.

American  Register,  the,  I,  397,  Brown,  C.  B.  ;  506,  Cullen-
der, J.  T.  :  II,  384,  Evans,  T.  W.  '

American  Review  of  History  and  Politics,  the,  VI,  340,
Walsh,  R.

American  Sappho,  the,  IV,  430,  Morton,  S.  W.  A.

American  Ship,  the,  newspaper,  II,  766,  Griffiths,  J.  W.

American  society  of  church  history,  the,  V,  416,  Schaff.

American  system,  the,  I,  499,  501.

American  Turtle,  the,  I,  474,  Bushnell,  D.

Americanus,  pen-name,  H.  380,  Evans,  C.  ;  IH,  711,  Lie-
ber,  F.

American  Whig  Review,  the,  I,  696.  Colton,  G.  H.

Ames,  Burrett.  I,  691,  Collins.  G.  C.

Ames,  David,  VI.  428,  Wells,  D.  A.

Ames,  Dr.  W.,  III.  251,  Hooker,  T.

Amherst,  N.  Y.,  Greeley's  birthplace  at,  illustration,  H,  734.

Amherstburg,  attack  on,  IV,  73,  McArthur,  D.

Amherst  college,  I,  625,  Clark,  D.  A.;  Ill,  216,  Hitchcock,
E. ;  gifts  to,  219,  Hitchcock,  S.  A. ;  IV,  305,  Merrick,  J.  L.  ;
662,  Parsons.  D.;  V,  211,  Reed,  W.:  494,  Shepard,  C.  U.;
VI.  179,  Tvfts,  Q.\  221,  Vaill ;  541,  Williston,  S.;  565,
Winkley  ;  founded,  417,  Webster,  N.\  illustration,  V,  657.

Amherst  system  of  college  government,  the,  V,  453,  Seelye,
J.  H.

Amis  des  noirs,  Les,  club,  V,  737,  Suard.

Amistad  captives,  the,  case  of,  I,  150,  Baldwin,  R.  S.',  616,
Cinque  ;  II,  642,  Giddings,  I.  R.

Ammonia,  discovery  of,  V,  120,  Priestley.

Amnesty  bill,  I,  277  ;  H,  721  ;  proclamation,  717.

Amoenites  Graphical,  magazine,  H,  661,  Girardin.

Amphibious  regiment,  the,  II,  666,  Glover,  John.

Amphitrite,  the,  I,  210,  Beaumarchais.

Amputation,  method  of,  II,  499,  Forbes,  S.  F.

Amyrault,  Moses,  IV,  712.

Anabouillo,  battle  of,  IV,  487,  Negreiros.

Anaesthesia,  principle  of,  IV,  9,  Long,  C.  W. ;  invention  of
inhaler  for,  II,  149,  De  Rosset.

Anaesthetics,  first  use  of.  in  surgery,  I,  696,  Colton,  G.  Q. ;
VI,  430,  Wells,  H. See  Ether.

Anagauga,  destruction  of,  I,  480,  Butler,  W.

Anagnos,  Michael,  III,  284,  Howe,  J.  R.

Anahuac,  invasion  of,  VI,  635,  Xolotl.

Analectic  Magazine,  the,  ni,  361.

Anaquito,  battle  of,  IV,  546,  Nuiiez-Vela.

Anarchiad,  the,  III,  256,  Hopkins,  L.;  313,  Humphreys,  D.

Anarchists,  the  Chicago,  V,  632,  Spies.


704


ANATOMY


ARANCARA


Anatomy,  first  lectures  on,  m,  323,  Hunter,  W. ;  424,  Jef-
fries, J. :  V,  512.  Stiippen,  W. ;  the  doctor's  mob,  V,  84,
Post,  W. ;  original  researches  in,  V,  (533,  Spitzka  :  VI,
506,  Wilder,  B.  G.\  583.  Wistar,  C.\  632.

Ance,  the,  mission  at,  I,  160.  Baraga.

Ancestral  tablets,  VI,  487,  Whitmore.

Ancient  and  honorable  artillery  company,  the,  III,  498,
Keayne  ;  V,  450,  Sedgwick,  R.  '

Ancient  Brethren's  church,  the,  IV,  453,  Muenster.

Ancient  Order  of  Hibernians,  the,  IV,  494,  Nesbitt.

Ancient  Order  of  United  Workmen,  the,  VI,  211,  Upchurch.

Ancora,  Peter,  IV,  483,  Neagle  ;  V,  725,  Strother.

Anderssen,  Adolph,  IV,  407,  Morphy.

Anderson,  Evelina,  I,  71,  Anderson,  W.

Anderson,  Hugh.  VI.  20,  Tailfer.

Anderson,  John,  I,  36,  Agassiz.

Anderson,  John,  V,  308-309,  Rogers,  M.  C.

Anderson,  John,  assumed  name.  I,  71,  Andre".

Anderson,  Naomi,  IV,  179,  Makemie.

Anderson ville  prison,  VI,  334,  Wallace,  L.\  responsibility
for  the  abuses  at,  1,  277.

Andes,  railroad  across  the,  IV,  287,  Meiggs.

Andes,  Count  de  los,  V,  463,  Serna.

Andover,  settlement  and  name  of,  IV,  600,  Osgood,  S.

Andover  Review,  the,  V,  600,  Smyth,  E.  C.

Andover  theological  seminary,  purchase  of  land  for,  VI,
599,  Woodbridge,  J.;  establishment  of,  V,  639,  Spring,
S. ;  IV,  424,  Morse,  J. ;  762,  Phillips,  P.  F. ;  gifts  to,  I,  5,
Abbot,  S. ;  186,  Bartlett,  W. ;  674,  Codman  ;  679,  Cogs-
well, J.;  H,  419,  Farrar,  S.:  HI,  219,  Hitchcock,  S.  A.;
IV,  533,  Norris,  J.;  763,  Phillips,  William  ;  V,  211,  Reed,
W.;  VI,  565,  Winkley.

Andre,  John,  capture  of,  IV,  681,  Paulding,  J.  ;  medal
awarded  for  the  capture,  illustration,  VI,  257  ;  proposal
to  exchange  for  Arnold,  IV,  561,  Ogden,  A.;  V,  278,  Rob-
ertson, J.  ;  burial  of,  gifts  from  his  friends,  H,  138,
Demarest,  J.  ;  discussion  of  his  sentence,  I,  258,  Bid-
die,  C.  J. ;  subject  of  a  poem  by,  III,  283.  Howe,  R. ;  his
Cow  Chase,  V,  268,  Rivington  ;  quoted,  127.  Proctor,  T. ;
VI,  399.

Andre.,  anonymous  drama,  V,  562,  Smith,  E.  H.

Andrea  Doria,  the,  I,  256,  Biddle,  N.

Andrew,  John,  VI,  21,  Talbot,  J.

Andrew,  John  A., 'quoted,  II,  612,  Garrison.

Andrews,  Isaac,  VI,  609,  Woolman.

Androboros,  anonymous  farce,  IH,  323,  Hunter,  Robert.

Anemometer,  invention  of  a,  V,  530,  Silliman,  J.  M. ;  a
self -registering,  I,  676,  Coffin,  J.  H.

Anfriso,  pen-name.  IV,  482,  Navnrrete,  M.  M.

Angel,  Mr.,  II,  647,  Gilbert,  W.  B.

Angela,  Mother,  II,  650,  Gillespie,  E.  M.

Angel  Gabriel,  the,  ship,  I,  678,  Cogsioell,  J.

Angel  Gabriel  riots,  the,  V,  569,  Smith,  Jesse  C.

Angelos  family,  II,  358,  English,  T.  D.

Anglesea,  Marchioness  of,  HI,  541,  King,  J.  P.

Anglican  church,  missions  of,  in,  502,  Keith,  G. ;  VI,  21,
Talbot,  J.  ;  clandestine  consecration  of  a  bishop  for
America,  21,  Talbot,  J.  See  Protestant  Episcopal
Church.

Anglo-American  Magazine,  IV,  117,  Macgeorge.

Ango,  Jean,  IV,  658,  Parmentier,  J.  ;  VI,  282,  Verrazano.

Angol,  battles  near,  H,  32,  Curanteo  ;  HI,  199,  Higuaihue  ;
capture  of,  II,  25,  Cudeguala.

Anguita,  battle  at,  I,  333,  Boves.

Angulo,  Jose  and  Vicente,  V,  135,  Pumacahua.

Angustura,  passage  of,  III,  352.  Inhauma.

Anhydrous  nitric  acid,  discovered,  V.  370,  Sainte-  Claire,
H  E.

Anian,  fabulous  strait  and  city  of,  III,  306,  Hiihne  ;  H,  575,
Gali  ;  VI,  226,  Valerianos  ;  665,  Zuiiiga,  G.

Animal  heat,  researches  on,  I,  416,  Brown-Sequard  ;  H,
220,  Dowler.

Animal  industry,  bureau  of,  VI,  692,  Lc  Due.

Animals,  extinct,  new  species  of,  IV,  218,  Marsh,  O.  C.

Animals,  societies  for  prevention  of  cruelty  to,  I,  244,
Bergh  ;  HI,  541,  King,  L.  W.  ;  bequests  to,  I,  244,  312,
Bonard.

Animikite.  discovery  of,  VI,  629,  Wurtz.

Aniversario,  the  manifesto,  V,  154,  Quintana  Roo.

Annapolis,  settlement  of,  V,  704,  Stone,  W.  ;  engagement
at,  I,  622,  Claiborne  ;  library  at,  362  ;  naval  academy  at,
428,  Buchanan,  F.  ;  midshipmen's  monument  at,  illus-
tration, V,  518.

Annapolis. See  Port  Royal.

Annapolis  convention,  the,  IV,  166, 167.

Ann  Arbor,  history,  seminary  at,  founded,  1. 13,  Adams,
C.K.

Anneau,  Father,  VI,  277,  Verandrye.

Annisquam,  laboratory  at,  HI.  335,  Hyatt.

Ann  the  Word,  HI,  656,  Lee,  Ann.

Annual  of  Scientific  Discovery,  the,  VI,  429,  Wells,  D.  A.

Annuities,  inventor  of  Tontine  system,  VI,  132,  Tonty.

Anselmus,  pen-name,  II,  249,  Duffleld,  S.  W.

Anson,  Admiral  George,  II,  567,  Gadsden  ;  V,  37,  Pizarro,
J.  A.

Anson,  Tex.,  ni,  463,  Jones,  Anson.

Antarctic  ocean,  exploration  in  the,  1, 715;  VI,  332,  Walker,
W.  M.;  509,  Wilkes,  C.

Antequera  (Oajaca),  II,  135,  Delgadillo.


Anthology  club,  the.  I,  576,  Channing  ;  Ti.,  70,  Dana,  R.  H.  ;
386,  Everett ;  596,  Gardiner,  J.  S.  J.  ;  VI,  178,  Tudor.

Anthony,  Daniel,  I,  82,  Anthony,  S.  B.

Anthony,  Hezekiah,  H,  288,  Eames,  J.  A.

Anthony,  John,  I,  81,  Anthony,  H.  B.

Anthracene,  VI,  361,  Warren,  C.  M.

Anthracite  coal,  first  use  of,  VI,  437,  Wemwag;  602,  Wood-
house.

Anthropology,  studies  in,  H,  207,  Dorsey,  J.  O.;  IV,  403,
Morgan,  L.  H. See  Ethnology.

Anthropology,  discovery  bearing  on,  V.  144,  Puysegur.

Anti-Catholic  riots.  III.  519,  Kenrick,  F.  P.

Anticosti,  island  of,  IH.  461,  Jolliet.

Anties,  the  party  called,  I,  242.

Antietam,  battle  of.  I,  463  :  II,  210.  Doubleday,  A.  ;  765,
Griffin  ;  HI,  250,  670  ;  IV,  83  ;  140,  McLaws  ;  IV,  280  ;  476,
Nagle  ;  V,  87,  Potter,  R.  B.  ;  727,  Stuart,  J.  E.  B.  ;  VI,
202,  Tyndale.

Anti-Federalists,  the,  HI,  149,  Hazard,  J.  J.

Antigua,  I,  147,  Balboa.

Antilles,  settlement  of  the,  II.  275,  Dutertre  ;  French  colo-
nies in,  262,  Duparquet ;  353,  Enambuc.

Antillon,  Gen.,  HI,  341,  Iglesias,  J.  M.

Anti-Masonic  excitement,  the.  I,  27  ;  HI,  51,  Hallett,  B.  F.;
in,  236,  Holley,  M.;  IV,  404,  Morgan,  W. ;  V,  470,  Seward,
W.  H.  ;  628,  Spencer,  J.  C.

Antimony,  investigation  of,  I,  721 ,  Cooke,  J.  P.

Antinomian  controversy,  the,  VI,  16,  Symmes,  Z.

Antinomians,  HI,  331,  Hutchinson,  Anne  ;  VI,  573  ;  book
on  the,  425,  Welde.

Antioch  college,  IV,  191,  Mann,  H

Anti-poverty  society,  the,  IV,  119,  McGlynn.

Antiquarian,  the,  magazine,  I,  107,  Arthur,  W.

Anti-renters,  the,  H,  463,  Fish,  H.;  VI,  252,  Van  Rens-
selaer. S.

Anti-slavery  cause,  the,  I,  268  ;  378,  Brisbane,  Brisbin  ;  455,
Burleigh  ;  first  book  of  the,  604,  Child,  L.  M.  ;  mob  vio-
lence, 672,  Codding,  I.  ;  II,  611  ;  HI,  446,  Johnson,  O.  ;
236,  Holley,  M.  ;  first  paper  and  lectures  of,  IV,  54,
Lundy,  B. ;  328,  Miller,  J.  P. ;  beginning  of  the  struggle.
669,  Pastorius  ;  party,  VI,  516,  Willcox,  A.  O.  See  Abo-
litionists and  Slavery.

Anti-Slavery  Baptists,  the,  I,  628,  Clark,  John.

Anti-Slavery  Quarterly,  the,  VI.  621.  Wright,  E.

Anti-Slavery  Standard,  the,  II,  619,  Gay,  S.  H.  ;  TV,  40  ;  V,
20,  Pillsbury,  P.

Anton,  Andrews,  H,  321,  Eliot,  C.

Antoine,  Pere,  I,  83,  Antonio.

Antonides,  Rev.  Vincentius,  I,  221.  Beekman,  G.

Anzures  Pedro,  HI,  354,  Irala.

Aondechete,  V,  160,  Ragueneau.

Apaches,  the  hostilities  of,  II,  15,  Crook ;  629,  Geronimo  ;
TV,  27,  Lonng,  F.  W.  ;  323,  Miles,  N.  A. ;  the  Mescalero,
HI,  495,  Kautz,  A.  V.

Apartado,  Marquis  of,  II,  399,  Fagoaga.

Apes,  William.  V,  601,  Snelling,  W.  J.

A.  P.  L.  Parin  Papers,  the,  H,  423.  Faxon.

Apodaca.  Ruiz  de,  HI,  368  ;  10,  Guerrero,  V.

Apollo,  the  so-called  statues  of,  VI,  322,  Waldstein.

Apostle  of  Brazil,  the,  I,  68,  Avchieta.

Apostle  of  California,  the,  V,  381.  Salvatierra.

Apostle  of  Methodism,  the,  III,  663,  Lee,  J.

Apostle  of  Newfoundland,  the,  rv,  558,  CDonnel,  J.  L.

Apostle  of  Nova  Scotia,  the.  I,  754,  Coughlan.

Apostle  of  Oregon,  the,  I,  288,  Blanchet,  F.  R.

Apostle  to  the  Germans,  the,  HI,  12,  Guldin.

Appalachian  mountains,  exploration  of,  HI,  653,  Lederer  ;
V,  635,  Spotswood.

Appalachicola  river,  fort  on  the,  blown  up,  HI,  378  ;  mas-
sacre on,  by  Indians,  ibid.

Appleton,  Daniel,  I,  84,  Appleton.  D.

Appleton,  Edward  D.,  I,  84,  Appleton,  D.

Appleton.  Frances,  IV,  13.

Appleton,  John,  I,  85,  Appleton,  J.  J.

Appleton,  John,  V,  345,  Rumford.

Appleton,  John  Adams,  I,  84,  Appleton,  D.

Appleton,  Nathan,  IV,  13.

Appleton,  Capt.  Samuel,  IV,  403,  Morgan.  M.

Appleton,  W.  H.,  I,  84,  Appleton,  D.

Appleton,  W.  W.,  I,  84,  Appleton,  D.

Appomattox,  surrender  at,  II,  716,  717  ;  scene  of,  illustra-
tion, 710  ;  II.  392,  Ewell.  R.  S.;  Ill,  673,  725.

Apprentices,  school  for,  HI,  226,  Hoe,  R.  M.

Apthorne,  Rev.  East,  IV,  275,  Mayhew,  J.

Apthorp,  Frances  W.,  VI,  267,  Vaughan.  C.

Apthorp,  Sarah  W.,  rv\  430,  Morton,  S.  W.  A.

Apurimac  river,  IV,  178,  Maita  Capac.

Aqueduct,  the  Vento,  I,  39,  Albear.

Aqueducts,  cast-iron,  II,  563.

Aquidneck,  island  of,  I,  634,  Clarke,  John  ;  673.  Codding-
ton ;  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  Anne ;  Indian  deed  of,  IV,
313,  Miantonomo  ;  VI,  532.

Arabi  Bey,  insurrection  of,  rv,  9,  Long,  C.  C.

Arago,  Francois,  H,  693,  Gould,  B.  A. ;  quoted,  II,  375,  Espy.

Aragon,  Sancho  de,  IH.  408,  Jaureybo  I.

Araugua,  battle  at.  I,  304.

Arama,  Col.,  IV,  207,  Mariilo.

Arana,  Barros,  IV,  573,  Olivares.

Arancara,  Mex.,  founded,  H,  52,  Dacian.


ARANDA


ASPINWALL


705


Aranda,  Count,  IV,  569,  Olavide.

Araucania  and  Patagonia,  king  of,  IV,  587,  Orilie.

Araucanians,  the,  resistance  of,  to  the  Spaniards,  I,  119,
Aurelio  ;  495,  Calafquin  ;  599,  Caupolican  ;  603,  Chi-
quaihue ;  683,  Colour ;  693,  Collipulle,  Colocolo  ;  734,
Copahue  ;  II,  34,  Cudequala  ;  25,  Cuenecura  ;  26,  Cui-
entur,  Cuillemachu,  Cuillavilu  ;  32,  Curanteo  ;  III,  9,
Guanoalca  ;  10,  Guenucalquin  ;  199,  Higuaihue  ;  295,
linden,  Huelen  ;  300,  Huepon  ;  633,  Lnutaro  ;  730,  Lin-
coyan  ;  IV,  47,  Loyola  ;  a  heroine  of  the,  II,  31,  Cunequeo;
poem  on  the  war  with,  362,  Ercilla.

Arauco,  capture  of,  II,  24,  Cudequala.

Arbadaos,  tribe  of  the,  I,  490,  Cabeza.

Arbella,  the  ship,  VI,  573.

Arbeiter-Zeitung,  the,  V,  632,  Spies.

Arbitration,  substitution  of,  for  war,  II,  448,  Field,  D.  D. ;
III,  412,  413  ;  V,  603,  Snyder,  S.

Arboriculture,  IV,  314,  Michaux.

Arbre  Croche,  1. 160.  Baraga.

Arbuthnot,  Alexander,  capture  of,  II,  568,  Gadsden,  James  ;
execution  of,  III,  378  ;  V,  48,  Poindexter.

Arbuthnot,  Dr.  John.  I,  86,  Arbuthnot,  M.

Arcadia  Mexicana,  the,  IV,  552,  Ochoa.

Arcadians,  academy  of,  in  Brazil,  II,  585,  Gama,  J.  B.  da.

Arch,  John.  I,  397,  Brown,  D.

Archaeology,  collection  of  objects  of,  I,  5,  Abbott,  C.  C.  ;
595,  Chavero ;  American,  II,  39,  Gushing,  F.  H.  ;  95,
Davis,  E.  H;  665,  Gliddon  ;  III,  145,  Hayhes,  H.  W.;  V,
139,  Putnam,  F.  W.  ;  185,  Rau ;  226,  Reynolds,  E.  R.  ;
641,  Squier,  E.  G.;  discoveries,  VI,  315,  Wagner,  M.  F.;
320,  Waldeck;  322,  Waldstein;  expedition  to  Asia  Minor,
390,  Wolfe,  C.L.;  632  ;  to  Central  America,  074,  Charnay.

Archambault,  Cyrille,  II,  250,  Duhamel.

Archdale,  Thomas,  I,  87,  Archdale,  J.

Archer,  Mai.  J.,  I,  87,  Archer,  Wr  S.

Archibald,  Samuel  and  James,  I,  87,  Archibald,  Sir  A.  G.

Archibeque,  Capt.,  VI,  691,  Le  Archeveque.

Archipelago  of  St.  Lazarus,  the,  II,  559,  Fuentes,  B.

Architecture,  I,  444,  Bulflnch,  C.  ;  II,  316,  Ki  tlitz  ;  654,
Gilman  ;  III.  277.  Howard,  J.  G.\  507,  Kellum  ;  513,  Ken-
dall, E.  H. ;  627,  Latrobe,  B.  H. ;  IV,  136,  McKim,  C.  F.  ;
V,  223,  Renwick,  J. ;  241-242,  Richardson,  H.  H. ;  333,
Rotch,  A. ;  530,  Silloway ;  540,  Sims,  H.  A.  and  J.  P. ;
719,  Strickland,  W. ;  VI,  213,  Upjohn  :  229,  Van  Brunt,
H.;  341,  Walter,  T.  U.\  358,  Ware,  W.  R.;  501,  Wight,
P.  B. ;  515,  Willard,  Solomon ;  584,  Withers,  F.  C. ;  681,
Fuller,  T. ;  682,  Gibson.

Arco  do  bego,  II,  434,  Fernandes  Pinheiro.

Arco- Verde  Mornbixaba,  cacique,  IV,  198,  Maranhdo.

Arctic,  loss  of  the,  I,  691,  Collins,  E.  K.  ;  II,  112,  Day,  M.  ;
V,  210,  Reed,  H

Arctic  exploration,  I,  105  ;  128,  Back ;  221,  Beechey  ;  223,
Belanger,  Belcher  ;  230,  Bellot ;  356,  Brainard.  D.  L.  ;
428,  Buchan  ;  484,  Button ;  466,  Bylot ;  II,  72,  Danen-
hower  ;  103,  Davis,  J.  ;  125,  De  Haven  ;  136,  De  Long  ;
534-535,  Franklin,  Sir  J.  ;  648,  Gilder,  W.  H.  ;  741,  Gree-
ly  ;  III,  1,  Grinnell,  H.  ;  37-58,  Hall,  C.  F.  ;  106,  Hart-
stene  ;  132,  Hayes,  1. 1.  ;  492,  Kane,  E.  K  ;  504,  Kellett ;
538,  Kislingbury  ;  752,  Lockwood,  J.  B.  ;  TV,  87,  McClin-
tock,  F.  L.  ;  90,  McClure,  Sir  R.  ;  210,  Markham,  C.  R.  ;
293,  Melville,  G.  W. ;  478,  Nares  ;  522,  Nindemann  ;  598,
Osborn,  S.  ;  602.  Ostaade  ;  626,  Pages  ;  661,  Parru,  Sir
W.  E.  ;  683,  Pavy  ;  684,  Payer  ;  V,  21,  Pirn  ;  70.  Poret ;
158,  Rae,  J.  ;  242,  Richardson,  Sir  J.  ;  297,  Rodgers  ;  330,
Ross,  Sir  J.  ;  420,  Schley,  W.  S. ;  433,  Schwatka  ;  434,
Scoresby ;  537,  Simpson,  T.  ;  544,  Skene,  A.  M.  ;  VI,  217,
Urfe,  G.  J. ;  sledge  travelling,  IV,  87,  McClintock,  F.  L. ;
farthest  point  reached,  III,  752,  Lockwood,  J.  B.  ;  high-
est latitude  reached  by  a  sailing-vessel,  III,  493,  Kane,  E.
'  K.  ;  110°  west  first  reached,  IV,  661,  Parry,  Sir  W.  E.  ;
voyages,  VI,  618,  Wrangell ;  644,  Young,  Allen  W. ;  652,
Yver  de  Chazelles.

Arctic  overshoes,  invention  of,  IV,  220,  Marshall,  E.  P.

Arcturus,  pen-name,  III,  585,  Ladd,  C.

Arcturus,  the,  periodical,  II,  278,  Duyckinck  ;  IV,  258,
Mathews,  Cornelius.

Ardinburgh,  Col.  Charles,  V,  603,  Sojourner  Truth.

Ardt,  Ferdinand  von,  V,  224,  Reuling.

Arecibo,  battle  at,  I,  746,  Correa,  A.

Areitos,  author  of.  I,  67,  Anacaona.

Arequipa,  city  of,  founded,  IV,  178,  Maita  Capac ;  attack
on,  I,  492.  Cdceres,  A.  A.  ;  capture  of,  II,  320,  Elias.

Arey,  H.  W.,  II,  661,  Girard,  S.

Arey,  Oliver,  I,  88,  Arey,  H.  E.

Argelander,  F.  W.  A.,  II,  693,  Gould,  B.  A.

Argentine  Republic,  the,  wars  and  revolutions  in,  II,  206,
Dorrego  ;  373,  Espejo,  J. ;  550,  Frias,  Felix  ;  690,  Gorriti  ;
in,  634,  Lavalle  ;  597,  La  Madrid  :  IV,  21,  Lopez,  E.  ;
349-.350,  Mitre  ;  687,  Paz,  J.  M.  ;  V,  83.  Posadas ;  155,
Quiroga,  J.  F. ',  316.  Rondeau ;  362,  Saavedra,  C.  ;  VI,
17,  Taboada  ;  early  history  of,  III,  19,  Guzman,  R.  D.  de  ;
improvements  in,  255,  Hopkins  :  political  dissensions  in,
345,  Indarte ;  exploration  of,  IV,  625,  Page,  T.  J.  ;  plan
for  a  monarchy,  V,  265,  Rivadavia  ;  tyrannical  dictator-
ship in,  320-321,  Rosas ;  its  victims,  321  ;  education  in,
observatory,  400,  Sarmiento,  D.  F.  ;  first  historian  of,
421,  Schmidel  ;  loan  for.  VI.  258,  Varela,  M.  ;  war  in,  for
independence,  English  invasion,  III,  623,  Las  Heras  ;  V,
132,  Pueyeredon  ;  320,  Rosas.

w vol.  ti. — 45


Argros  da  Lei,  Brazilian  journal  founded,  IV,  296,  Mendes,

Manoel  Odorico.
Argiielles,  extradition  case  of,  II.  252,  Dulce.
Argus,  the  brig,  III.  309.  Hull,  I. ;  destruction  of  English

vessels  by,  capture  of,  701,  Levy.
Argyll,'  Duke  of,  anecdote  concerning  a  young  American,

IV,  45.  Lowndes.  William  J.;  29,  Lome,  Marquis  of;
II,  366,  Erskine,  Frances.

Arias.  Luis,  II,  436,  Fernandez,  J.

Ariel,  the,  journal,  IV,  412.  Morris,  E.

Ariosto,  pseudonym,  VI,  208,  Undnue.

Arispe,  Ramon,  II,  399,  Fagoaga.

Aristidean,  The,  magazine,  II,  358,  English,  T.  D.

Aristides,  pen-name,  VI,  249.  Van  Ness,  W.  P.

Aristook  war,  the,  I,  565,  Chamberlain,  J.  L.

Arithmeter,  invention  of  the,  VI,  622,  Wright,  E.

Ariza,  Marquis  of,  IV,  633,  Palafox.

Arizona,  supposed  diamond-fields  in,  n,  351,  Emmons,  S.
F.  ;  Jesuit  missions  in.  III,  577,  Kiihn  ;  Indian  murders
in,  IV,  27,  Loring,  F.  W.  ;  early  history  of,  594,  Ortega,
J.  ;  organized  as  a  territory,  Vv9  ;  R.C.  institutions  in.

V,  379,  Salpointe.

Ark,  the,  and  the  dove,  I,  506,  Calvert.  L.

Arkansas,  contested  election  in,  I,  196,  Baxter,  E.;  387,
Brooks,  Joseph  ;  IV,  509,  Neicton,  R.  C.  ;  hot  springs  of,
II,  153,  De  Soto  ;  finances  of,  IV,  33,  Loughborough  ;
question  of  slavery  in,  V.  278,  Robertson,  G.

Arkansas,  the  ram,  V,  75,  Porter,  W.  D.

Arkansas  post,  capture  of,  V,  75  ;  I,  449,  Burbridge,  S.  G.

Arkwright,  Richard,  V,  547,  Slater.

Arlington  House,  illustration,  II,  45.

Armada,  the  Spanish,  II,  224,  Drake.  Sir  F. ;  V,  163.

Armagh,  Stuart,  archbishop  of,  IV,  716,  Penn,  G.

Armand,  Count,  assumed  name,  V,  334,  Rouarie.

Armendariz,  IV,  194,  Mauosalva*.

Armenia,  first  newspaper  in  the  language  of,  I,  236,  Benja-
min, N. ;  mission  in,  II,  279,  Dwight,  H.  G.  O.

Arminan,  Gen.,  IV,  335,  Mina.

Armistead,  Marv,  VI,  193,  Tyler,  J.

Armistead,  W.,  IV,  4,  Logan,  James.

Arms,  Rev.  Mr.,  I,  665,  Coan,  T.

Armstrong,  Andrew  C,  V,  443,  Scribner.

Armstrong,  Rev.  George.  V,  508,  Sherwood,  J.  M.

Army,  the  U.  S.,  after  the  Revolution,  VI,  679,  Doughty.

Army  medical  museum,  the,  I,  171,  Barnes,  J.  K.  ;  VI,  96,
Thomson,  W.

Army  of  the  Andes,  the.  V,  392.  San  Martin,  J.  de.

Army -signals,  system  of,  IV,  473,  Myer.

Arnold,  Benedict,  plan  to  capture,  I,  568,  Champe  ;  charge
of  arson  against,  III,  80,  Hardy,  E.  ;  headquarters  of.
illustration,  I,  95.

Arnold,  Catherine  R.,  VI,  520,  Williams,  C.  R.

Arnold,  Edwin,  I,  578,  Channing,  W.  H.

Arnold,  Elizabeth,  V,  44,  Poe.

Arnold,  Franz,  III,  710.

Arnold.  Dr.  G.  W.,  I,  96,  Arnold,  I.  N.

Arnold,  Matthew,  quoted,  II,  348.

Arnold,  Oliver,  VI,  520,  Williams,  C.  R.

Arnold,  Dr.  Thomas,  II,  604.

Arnold,  William,  I,  93,  Arnold,  B.

Arnot,  assumed  name,  I,  467.

Arnot-Ogden  hospital,  Elmira,  TV,  562,  Ogden,  W.  B.

Arouet,  pen-name,  in,  585,  Ladd,  J.  B.

Around  the  World,  anonymous  book.  DTI,  177,  Henshaw,
Joshua  Sidney.

Arp,  Bill,  pen-name,  V,  558.  Smith.  C.  H.

Arr,  E.  H.,  pen-name,  V,  313,  Rollins,  E.  C.

Arrezures,  case  of.  II,  168.

Arria,  pen-name,  V,  132,  Pugh,  E.  L.

Arriaga,  Antonio,  I,  705,  Condorcanqui.

Arrington,  Archibald,  I,  98,  Arrington,  A.  W.

Arriola,  Fortunato,  pupil  of,  V,  326,  Rosenthal,  T.  E.

Arrow-heads,  process  of  making.  II,  39,  Cushing,  F.  H.

Artaud,  Prof.,  I,  154,  Bancroft,  G.

Art  collections,  III,  405,  Jarves  ;  VI,  3-12,  Walters.

Arte  de  furtar,  supposed  author  of,  VI,  290,  Vieiria,  A.

Arthur  Carryl,  anonymous  book,  IV,  597,  Osborn,  L.

Arthur,  Mrs.  C.  A..  III.  184.  Herndon,  W.  L.

Arthur,  Rev.  William.  IV,  87,  McClintock,  J.

Art  Journal,  the,  VI,  391,  Watson,  Henry  Cood.

Arundel,  Anne,  I,  154,  Calvert,  Cecil.

Arundel,  Lord,  I.  538,  Carroll,  J.

Asapista,  chief,  III,  618,  La  Ribourde.

Asbury  university,  V,  251,  Ridpath.

Ascham,  Roger,  II,  387.

Asgell,  Capt.,  VI,  603,  Woodhull,  J.

Ashburnham,  Mass.,  gift  to,  II,  40,  Cushing.  T.  P.

Ashburton  treaty,  the,  I,  110,  Ashburton  ;  VI,  413,  414.

Ashford,  Baron,  IV,  152,  MacNab.

Ashland,  I,  642.

Ashley,  Jonathan,  I,  733,  Cooper,  W.

Ashley,  Timothy,  IV.  597,  Osborn,  Selleck.

Ashurst,  Sir  Henry,  IV,  254,  Mather.  I.

Asia,  exploration  of  the  coast  of,  in,  616,  La  Pirouse.

Asia  Minor,  mineral  resources  of,  V,  573,  Smith,  J.  L.

Asken,  J.  A.,  HI,  437.

Asphalt  pavement,  invention  of  the  American.  I,  122,  Ave-
rell,  W.  W.;  VI,  361,  Warren,  C.  M.

Aspinwall,  burning  of,  I,  655.


706


AS-SE-HE-HO-LAR


AZTEC


As-se-he-tao-lar,  IV,  599,  Osceola.

Assheton,  Ralph,  VI,  396,  Watts,  E.

Assinais  Indians,  the,  III,  482,  Jucherau.

Associated  press,  the  consolidated,  V,  596,  Smith,  W.  H.

Associate  Reformed  church,  the,  founded,  IV,  845,  Mason,
John  :  III,  632,  Laurie,  J. ;  mission  of,  III,  164,  Hender-
son, M.

Association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  the,  V,  139,
Putnam,  F.  W.  ;  204,  Redfield,  W.  C.  ;  307,  Rogers,  W.
B. ;  528,  gift  to,  VI,  90,  Thompson,  E.

Association  of  American  geologists,  VI,  256,  Vanuxem.

Associators.  the,  IV,  525,  Nixon,  J.  ;  V,  574,  Smith,  J.  B.

Assos  expedition,  the,  II,  178,  Diller.

Assyriology,  III,  210,  Hilprecht ; VI,  695,  O'Conor.

Asteroids,  zodiacs  of,  computed,  III,  292,  Hubbard,  J.  S.  ;
discoveries  of,  IV,  741,  Peters,  C.  H.  F. :  VI,  189,  Tut-
tle,  H.  P. ;  392,  Watson,  J.  C.

Astor  expedition,  the,  II,  522,  Franchere.

Astoria,  story  of,  1, 112,  Astor  ;  II,  522,  Franchere  ;  surren-
der of,  IV,  133,  Mackenzie,  D.  ;  journey  from,  V,  732,
Stuart,  R.

Astoria,  L.  I.,  Isabella  home  at,  IV,  608,  Ottendorfer,  A.

Astor  library,  the,  I,  679,  Cogswell,  J.  G.  ;  illustration,  I,
112;  gifts  to,  113.

Astor  place  riots,  the,  n,  273,  Duryee,  A.  ;  505,  Forrest,
E. ;  HI,  45,  Hall,  W.  ;  485,  Judson,  E.  Z.  C.  ;  VI,  26,
Tallmadge,  F.  A.

Astrologer,  the  New  England,  VI,  179,  Tully,  J.

Astrologers,  predictions  of,  HI,  37,  Ixtlilxochitl  II.

Astrology,  IV,  496,  Netzahualpilli.

Astronomical  instruments,  improvements  in,  II,  653,  Gil-
liss  ;  III,  83,  Harkness,  W.  ;  271,  Hough,  G.  W.  ;  IV,
341,  Mitchel,  O.  M.  ;  V,  356-357,  Rutherfurd,  L.  M.  ;  VI,
11,  Swift,  L.

Astronomical  lantern,  a,  I,  634,  Clarke,  J.  F.

Astronomical  observatory  of  Bogota,  IV,  472,  Mutis.

Astronomy,  discoveries,  observations,  photography,  etc.,
I,  585,  Chase,  P.  E.  :  755,  Covarrubias  ;  II,  585,  Gama,
A.  L.  de.:  693,  Gould,  B.  A.;  III.  37,  Hall,  A.:  204,  Hill,
G.  W.;  232,  Holden ;  292-293,  Hubbard,  J.  S.;  611,  Lang-
ley  ;  IV,  18,  Loomis,  E. ;  47,  Lozano,  F.  R. ;  342,  Mitchel,
O.  M.  ;  347,  Mitchell,  M.  ;  503,  Newcomb  ;  701,  Peirce  ;
741,  Peters,  C.  F.  H;  V,  4,  Pickering,  E.  C. ;  127,  Proctor,
R.  A.;  263,  310-311,  Rogers,  W.  A.  ;  £56-357,  Rutherfurd,
L.  M.;  366,  Safford,  T.  H  ;  447,  Searle,  G.  M.  and  A.  ;
666,  Smith,  G.  W.;  VI,  11,  Swift,  L.\  125,  Todd,  D.  P.;
189,  Tuttle,  H.  P.;  206,  Ulloa,  A.de;  274,  Velasquez  Car-
denas ;  331,  Walker,  S.  C. ;  392,  Watson,  J.  C. ;  462.  Whip-
ple, J.  A.;  565,  Winlock  ;  575.  Winthrop,J.;  619,  Wright,
A.  W.;  646,  Young,  C.  A.;  672,  Brooks ;  679,  Elkin  ;  first
practical  work  in  IT.  S.,  II,  653,  Gilliss.

Asuncion,  founded,  I,  123,  Ayolas  ;  settlement  of,  IV,  437,
Mosquera,  R.  G. ;  taken  by  allies,  IV,  21,  Lopez,  F.  S. ;
chart  of,  III,  330,  Huss.

Atahualpa,  the  inca,  II,  152,  De  Soto ;  cause  of  the  exe-
cution of,  II,  427,  Felipe  ;  portraits  of,  IV,  385,  ilfora,  D.

Ataianta,  capture  of  the.  I,  180.  Barry,  J.

Atchison,  college  founded  in,  IV,  318,  Miege.

Atequiza,  battle  at,  IV,  339,  Miramon.

Athenaeum  Shaw,  sobriquet,  V.  487,  Shaw,  W.  S.

Athens.  American  school  at,  IH,  204,  Hill,  F.  M. ;  gifts  to,
VI,  590,  Wolfe.

Athens,  Ga.,  gift  of  land  for,  IV,  324,  Milledge,  J.

Athens  of  America,  the,  Netzahualcoyotl.

Atheos,  anonymous  book,  n,  556,  Frothingham,  W.

Atherton,  Israel,  HI,  110,  Haskell,  A.

Atherton  gag,  the.  I,  114,  Atherton,  C.  G.

Atkins,  Dudley.  VI.  202,  Tyng.

Atkinson,  Charles  F.,  IV,  27,  Loring,  F.  W.

Atkinson,  Rev.  Dr.,  H.  185,  Dixon,  Alexander.

Atkinson,  Theodore,  VI,  435,  Wentworth,  F.  D.

Atkinson.  N.  H.,  gift  to,  VI,  179,  Tufts,  Q.

Atlanta,  Sherman's  movement  on.  IT,  714  ;  destruction  of
railroads,  III,  535,  Kilpatrick  :  battle  at,  247,  Hood.  J.
B. ;  IV,  6,  Loqan,  W.  A. ;  V,  504,  Sherman  ;  influence  of
Its  capture.  III,  723.

Atlanta,  capture  of  the.  II,  266,  Du  Pont ;  V,  297.

Atlantic,  wreck  of  the,  I,  93,  Armstrong.  W.  J.

Atlantic  City,  Mercer  home  at.  IV.  300,  Mercer,  A.  J.

Atlantic  coast,  survey  of  the,  I,  297.  Blunt,  E.  and  G.  W.

Atlantic  insurance  company,  the,  HI,  472,  Jones.  W.  R.

Atlantic  Journal  and  Friend  of  Kowledge,  the,  V,  159,  Ra-
flnesque.

Atlantic  Magazine,  the,  V,  389,  Sands.  R.  C.

Atlantic  Monthly,  the,  II.  346  ;  451,  Fields.  J.  T;  III,  240,
Holmes,  O.  W. ;  286  ;  IV,  41  ;  VI,  210,  Underwood,  F.  H. ;
493,  Whittier.

Atlantic  telegraph,  the, project  of,  company  organized,  II,
448,  Field,  Cyrus  W. :  first  cable.  449 ;  second  and  third
cables,  449 ;  view  of  the  Great  Eastern,  449 ;  first  sug-
gestion of,  route  indicated.  IV,  265  ;  III.  602,  Lampson.

Atlantis,  m,  190,  Hervas  ;  II,  201,  Donnelly,  I.

Atlas,  the,  IH,  187,  Herrick,  A.

Atlee,  Capt.,  Ill,  357,  Irvine,  James.

Atlee,  Col.  W.  P.,  I,  115,  Atlee,  J.  L. ;  IV,  661,  Parry,  C.

Atlixco.  Duke  of,  V,  401,  Sarmiento.

atmospheric  changes,  inventor  of  recorder  for,  V,  676,  Ste-
wns.  E.

Atmospheric  physics,  I,  295,  Blodget,  L.


Atomic  weights,  investigations  on,  I,  633,  Clarke,  F.  W. ;

IV,  183,  Mallet.
Atoms,  theory  of,  VI,  459,  Whelpley,  J.  D.
Atrato  expedition,  the,  II,  3,  Craven,  T.  A.  M.
Atterley,  Joseph,  pen-name,  VI,  175,  Tucker,  G.
Attic  Nights,  periodical,  VI,  460,  Whipple,  E.  P.
Atticus,  pen-name,  IV,  382,  Moore,  M.
Attiwandaronks,  the,  Vl,  140,  Totiri.
Atwood,  Chief-Justice,  I,  198,  Bayard,  N.
Atzcapotzalco,  empire  of,  VI.  635,  Xolotl.
Auburn,  Seward  house  at,  illustration,  V,  472.
Auburn  theological  seminary,  IV,  24,  Lord,  E. ;  gifts  to,

IV,  398,  Morgan,  E.  B.  ;  V,  272,  Robert,  C.  R.  ;  VI,  32,

Tappan,  A.
Auckland,  Lord,  II,  302,  Eden,  W.
Auditor,  great  third,  III,  25,  Hagner,  P.
Augui6,  Madame,  U,  624,  Genest.
Augusta,  Ga.,  sieges  of,  during  the  Revolutionary  war,

I,  511,  Campbell,  Sir  A. ;  414,  Browne,  T. ;  III,  667,  Lee  ;

IV,  768,  Pickens,  A.  ;  seizure  of  arsenal  at.  in  1861, 1,  408,
Brown,  J.  E.;  Confederate  powder- works  at,  V,  161,
Rains,  G.  W.

Augusta,  Me.,  gift  to,  VI,  676.  Corey.

Augustana  college.  III,  111.  Hasselguist.

Augustine,  Saint,- II,  627-628.  Geraidini.

Augustines,  the,  II,  573-574,  Galberry  ;  missions  of,  IV,  405,

Moriarty  ;  V,  24,  Pineda.
Aulne,  Baron  d\  VI,  183,  Turgot,  A.K.J.
Aunt  Alice,  pen-name,  11,  727,  Graves,  A.  C.
Aunt  Fanny,  pen-name,  1, 179,  Barrow,  F.  E. ;  n,  568,  Gage,

F.D.
Aunt  Kitty,  pen-name,  IV,  124,  Mcintosh,  M.  J.
Auriesville,  III,  435,  Jogues.

Aurora  Borealis  of  1780,  the,  H,  681,  Goodrich,  E.
Austin,  George  L.,  IV,  762,  Phillips,  Wendell.
Austin,  Loring  H.,  VI,  668,  Austin,  J.  G.
Austin,  Moses,  I,  121,  Austin,  S.  F.
Austin,  Miss.,  burned.  II,  327,  Ellet,  A.  W.
Australia,  exploration  of,  I,  715 ;  II,  63,  Dampier ; 534,

Franklin,  Sir  J.
Austria,  burning  of  the,  II,  317,  Eisfcld.
Austria,  Archduchess  of,  II,  526,  Franco,  F.  de  M. ; TV.

698,  Pedro  I.
Auto  da  f6  in  Mexico,  an,  VI,  137,  Torres  y  Rueda.
Autographic  recording  testing-machine,  inventor  of  a,  VI,

110,  Thurston.
Autographs,  collection  of,  V,  638,  Sprague,  W.  B.  ;  coun-
terfeited, 639,  Spring,  R.
Automaton  Minstrel  and  Bird,  I,  686,  Coleman,  O.  M.
Auton,  C,  pen-name,  III,  262,  Hoppin,  A.
Aux  Canardo,  engagement  at,  I.  551,  Cass,  L.
Aux  Cayes,  taken  by  buccaneers,  HI,  343,  Illigen.
Avache,  island  of,  III,  631,  Laurent.
Avahi,  battle  of,  IV,  499,  Neves.
Avalon,  I.  153,  Baltimore  ;  620,  Claiborne.
Avavares,  tribe  of  the,  I,  490,  Cabeza.
Averell,  Ebenezer,  I,  121,  Averell,  W.  W.
Avery,  Rev.  Joseph,  II,  465,  Fisher,  Jonathan.
Averysboro',  fight  at,  II.  715  :  V,  505.
Avila,  Gonzalez  de,  IV,  570,  Olid.
Avon,  manor  of,  Md.,  V,  704,  Stone,  W.
Avonia,  Kan.,  Ill,  467,  Jones,  J.  Mather.
Awakening,  the  great,  II,  310,  312.
Axacan,  country  of,  V,  455,  Segura.
Axayacatl,  King,  VI,  123,  Tizoc.
Axtell,  William.  H,  145,  De  Peyster,  F.
Ayacucho,  battle  of,  I,  306  ;  739,  Cordova,  J.  M. ;  IV,  330,

Miller,  W. ;  V,  463,  Serna  ;  739,  Sucre,  A.  J.
Ayacucho,  the  hussar  of,  HI,  184,  Herran,  P.  A.
Ayen,  Duke  d\  III,  586,  Lafayette.
Ayers,  Miss,  II,  221,  Downing,  Col.
Aylett,  Miss,  HI,  665,  Lee,  R.  H.
Aylett,  William,  I,  361,  Braxton.
Aymard,  Col.,  IV,  291,  Mejia.
Aymard,  Gustave,  pen-name,  n,  659,  Gioux.
Ayolas,  Juan  de,  II,  515,  Foucher.
Ayrshire,  wreck  of  the,  H,  524,  Francis,  J.
Ayutla,  plan  of,  I,  62,  Alvarez,  J.  ;  II,  124,  Degollado.
Azcapotzalco,  kings  of,  I,  606,  Chimalpopoca.
Azilia,  margravate  of,  IV,  372,  Montgomery,  R.
Azores,  the,  famines  in,  II,  51,  Dabney,  C.  W. ;  naval  battle

near,  761,  Grenville,  R.
Aztec  calendar-stone,  the,  II,  585,  Gama,  A.  L.  de.
Aztec  club,  the,  VI,  146,  Tower,  Z.  B.
Aztec  kingdom,  consolidation  of  the,  I,  9,  Acamapictli.
Aztec  language,  the,  I,  360,  Brasseur ;  first  preaching  in,

II,  558,  Fuensalida  :  works  in,  IV,  352.  Molina,  A.  de ;
decipherment  of  MSS.  and  inscriptions,  II,  398,  Fabregat :

V.  520,  Sibiel  ;  VI,  6115,  Xolotl.

Aztecs,  the,  VI,  63,  Tenoch  :  75,  Thiband  ;  kings  of,  I,  606,
Chimalpopoca;  III.  307.  Huitzilihuitl :  first  emperor  of,
372,  Izcohuatl ;  compared  with  the  Toltecs,  300,  Huemat-
zin  ;  treatment  of,  183.  Hernandez,  V. ;  relics  of,  I,  595,
Chavero ;  antiquities  and  hieroglyphs,  III,  342.  Ignacio,
Igolino  ;  destruction  of  antiquities  of.  IV,  634,  Palafox  :
teaching  of  a  priest  of,  III,  307,  Huitzilihuitzin  :  work
on,  V,  368,  Sahagun  ;  chronicle  of  the,  VI,  655,  Zapata-
Mudoza.

Aztec  Virgil,  the.  H,  28,  Cultzhayotl.


B


BARILLI


707


B,  pen-name,  VI,  353,  Ward.  N.

Babbat,  Elizabeth,  III,  146,  Haynes,  L.

Babbitt  metal,  I,  125,  Babbitt,  I. ;  II,  187,  Dixon,  Joseph.

Babcock,  Alpheus,  I,  602,  Chickering,  Jonas.

Babcock,  Chief -Justice,  I,  125,  Babcock,  H.

Babylonia,  exploring  expedition  to,  VI,  356,  Ward,  W.  H.

Baccalaos,  IV,  646,  Parent,  P.

Bacchus,  island  of,  I,  543,  Cartier,  J.

Bache,  Paul,  III,  737,  Lis2>enard.

Bache,  Sarah,  V,  463,  Sergeant,  T.

Bache,  Miss,  III,  109,  Harwood,  J.  E.

Bachelor's  Elysium  of  Irving,  the,  III,  511,  Kemble,  G.

Backus  Island,  I,  292,  Blennerhassett.

Bacon,  Edmund,  III.  423.

Bacon,  W.  R.,  Ill,  440,  Johnson,  Mary.

Bacon's  rebellion,  1, 131,  Bacon,  N. ;  II,  234,  Drummond,  W.

Bacot,  T.  W.,  Ill,  301,  Huger,  A.

Bacteria,  cause  of  disease  in  plants,  I,  469,  Burrill.

Badajos,  Gonzalo  de,  treasure  lost  by,  II,  374,  Espinosa,  G.

Bad  Axe  river,  engagements  on,  I,  115,  Atkinson,  H.\  273,

Black  Hawk  ;  VI,  53.
Bad  Boy's  Diary,  the,  anonymous  book,  VI,  287,  Victor,

Metta  V.
Baden,  revolution  in,  V,  524  ;  725,  Struve.
Badger,  Ruth,  I,  680,  Cogswell,  T.
Badfllo,  Pedro,  V,  290,  Robledo.
Bad  Lands,  the,  III,  131,  Hayden,  F.  V.;  skirmish  in,  V,

743,  Sully,  A.
Baffin,  arctic  voyages  of  the,  V,  434,  Scoresby.
Bagioli,  Antonio,  V,  523,  Sickles.
Bahadoor,  Jung,  IV,  572,  Oliphant.
Bahama  islands,  the,  governor  of,  II,  132  ;  capture  of,  654,

Gillon  :  expedition  to.  III,  254,  Hopkins,  Esek ;  slaves

taken  from,  IV,  567,  Ojedo.
Bahia,  founded,  V,  616,  Souza,  T.  de  ;  taken  by  the  Dutch,

IV,  480,  Nassau-Siegen  ;  IV,  487,  Negreiros  ;  recaptured,

IV,  621,  Padilha  ;  V,  362,  Sa,  S.  C.  de  ;  IV,  418,  Moura  ;

IV,  531,  Nores  ;  evacuated  by  the  Portuguese,  IV,  698,
Pedro  I.

Bail,  Louis,  IV,  20,  Loop,  J.  S.

Bailey,  Abigail,  IV,  396.

Bailey,  Ezra,  II,  665,  Gleim,  C.

Bailly,  Leon,  pupil  of,  VI,  114,  Tiffany,  L.  C.

Baily,  Edward  H.,  Ill,  302,  Hughes,  B.

Bainbridge,  Sir  Arthur,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,  W.

Baird,  Matthew,  II,  696,  Gould,  W.

Baird,  Thomas,  VI,  669.  Baird,  H.  S.

Baisch,  Hermann,  pupil  of,  VI,  20,  Tait,  J.  B.

Baker,  Conrad,  III,  166,  Hendricks,  T.  A.

Baker,  Francis,  VI,  669,  Baker,  W.

Baker,  Isaac  D.,  V,  443,  Scribner.

Baker,  Laura  E.,  IV,  60,  Lyman,  L.  E.  B.

Baker,  Thomas,  II,  380,  Evans,  D.  R.

Bakewell,  Lucy,  I,  117,  Audubon.

Balaklava,  charge  at,  II.  260,  Dunn,  A.  R.

Balance,  the  Hudson,  II,  21,  Croswell,  H.

Balcarce,  Gen.,  IV,  21,  Lopez,  E. ;  57,  Luzuriaga  ;  V,  320,
Rosas.

Balch,  Rev.  T.,  II,  47,  Cutler,  M.

Baleh,  W.  R.,  II,  605,  Garfield.

Bald  Eagle  of  Westchester,  the  sobriquet,  in,  330,  Husted.

Baldwin,  Christopher  C,  V,  345,  Ruggles,  T.

Baldwin,  George  R.,  VI,  617,  Worthen.

Baldwin,  Simeon,  1, 149,  Baldwin,  R.  S. ;  V,  528,  Silliman,  B.

Baldwin,  Robert,  II,  320,  Elgin.

Baldwin  Blues,  the,  II,  196,  Doles.

Baldv  Smith,  sobriquet,  V,  596,  Smith,  W.  F.

Baliol,  John,  V,  438,  Scott,  R.

Ball,  Mary,  VI,  373.

Ball,  Thomas,  group  by,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archer.

Ballevian,  Jose,  II,  551,  Frias,  T.

Ballinger,  Joseph,  I,  691,  Collins,  E.  B.

Balloon,  use  of  the,  in  war,  V,  303,  Roebling,  W.  A.

Ballooning. See  aeronauts.

Balloon  Tytler,  sobriquet,  VI,  204,  Tytler.

Ballot  reform,  demand  for,  V.  233,  Rice,  A.  T.

Ballots,  law  on.  sealed,  VI,  325,  Walker,  A.

Ballou,  Rev.  Maturin,  I,  152,  Ballou,  H.

Ballou,  Eliza,  II.  599,  Garfield.

Ball's  Bluff,  battle  of,  II,  171,  Dickinson,  Anna  E.  ;  383,
Evans.  N.  G.  ;  V,  700,  Stone,  C.  P.

Balmaine,  Rev.  Alexander,  IV,  282,  Meade,  W.

Baltimore,  defence  of,  in  1814,  IH,  529,  Key,  F.  S.  ;  V,  297  ;
VI,  415,  Webster,  J.  A.  ;  riots  of  1812,  in,  III.  44,  Hall,  J.
E.  ;  76,  Hanson,  A.  C.  ;  667,  Lee  H.  ;  attack  on  the
Federal  Republican  office,  76,  Hanson,  A.  C.  ;  732,  Ling-
am  ;  mob  in.  V,  588,  Smith,  S.  ;  riots  of  1861  in,  IV,  420,
Morris,  W.  W.  ;  I,  73,  Andrew  ;  VI,  389,  Watson,  B.  F.  ;
I,  312,  Bond,  H.  L.  ;  occupied,  477  ;  cathedral  of,  IV,  204,
Marechal ;  gifts  to,  106,  McDonogh  ;  III,  256,  Hopkins,
Johns  ;  insane  asylum  in,  V,  497,  Sheppard,  M.  ;  the
Peabody  institute,  HI,  517,  Kennedy,  J.  P.  ;  TV,  688,  Pea-
body,  G.  ;  the  Kelso  orphan  homes  in,  HI,  509,  Kelso,  T. ;

V,  201,  Ready  ;  public  library  founded  in,  illustration,
102  ;  R.  C.  institutions  in,  HI,  519,  Kenrick,  F.  P.  ;  rv,
338,  Moranville  ;  gifts  to  charities  of,— Thomas  Wilson
sanitarium,  VI,  557.

Baltimore  academy  of  medicine,  the,  IV,  161,  McSherry,  R.
Baltimore  heater,  the,  III,  627,  Latrobe,  J.  H.  B.


Balum-Votan,  VI,  308,  Votdn.

Bancker,  Gerrit,  II,  539,  Freeman,  B.

Banco  Largo,  battle  at,  HI,  356,  Iribarren.

Bancroft,  A.  L.,  I,  156,  Bancroft,  H  H.

Bancroft,  George,  quoted,  V,  55  ;  controversy  with,  209,
Reed,  J.  ;  210,  W.B.

Bancroft,  Silas  A.,  VI.  178,  Tuckerman.  S.  P.

Banda  Oriental,  the,  III,  186,  herrera,  N.  ;  653,  Lecor  ;  IV,
698,  Pedro  I.

Banderas,  II,  164,  Diaz.  C.  A.

Bangor,  Me.,  gift  to,  III,  189,  Hersey,  S.  F.

Bangor  theological  seminary,  gifts  to,  HI,  638,  Lawrence,
A.;  VI,  565,  Winkley.

Bangs,  Lemuel,  IV,  113,  McElrath.

Banker,  Evart,  II,  136,  Dellius.

Bank-bills,  method  of  printing,  in  colors,  H,  187,  Dixon,
Joseph.

Bank  fight,  the,  I,  430.

Bank-note  company,  the  American,  II.  617,  Gavit.

Bank-note"  plates,  transfer  machine  for,  I,  301,  Bogard-
us,  J.

Bank-note  engraving,  inventions  for,  II.  268,  Durand,  C.

Bankrupt  laws,  III,  426,  Jenckes  ;  VI,  331.

Banks  :  the  United  States,  war  upon,  repeal  of  its  char-
ter, etc.,  I,  257,  265,  500,  501  ;  II,  58,  Dallas  ;  III,  375,  381  ;
contest  of  |Clay  and  Jackson,  its  abolition,  382  ;  results,
383  ;  492,  Kane,  J.  K.  ;  IV,  189,  Mann  ;  events  leading  to
the  repeal  of  its  charter,  244,  Mason,  Jeremiah  ;  V,  51  ;
resolution  of  censure,  and  expunging  resolution,  267,
Rives,  W.  C.  :  470,  Seward,  W.  H.  ;  VI,  29  ;  193,  Tyler,
J.  ;  195,  196,  232  ;  national,  II,  454  ;  organization  of,  IV,
98,  McCulloch,  H.  ;  national,  VI,  407  ;  of  America,  the,
230  ;  of  California,  the,  IV,  332,  Mills,  D.  O.  ;  V,  164,  Ral-
ston, W.  C.  ;  of  England  founded,  IV,  670,  Paterson,
W.  ;  of  Nevada,  the,  127,  Mackay,  J.  W.  ;  of  North
America,  the,  416,  Morris,  R.  ;  VI,  130,  Tompkins ;  of
Pennsylvania,  the,  rv,  409  ;  Morris,  C.  ;  wild-cat,  256,
Mather,  S.  H.;  first,  chartered,  VI,  539,  Willing.

Banks,  Sir  Joseph,  I,  715  ;  IH,  655,  Ledyard,  J.  ;  V,  434,
Scoresby.

Baptism,  celebrated  debates  on,  IV.  395,  Morgan,  A. ;  V,
236,  Rice,  N.  L.  ;  VI,  337,  Waller,  J.  L.

Baptist  homes,  the  Philadelphia  and  Germantown,  IV,  544,
Nugent,  G.

Baptist  Memorial,  the,  magazine,  founded,  1, 126,  Babcock,
Rufus.

Baptist  Missionary  Magazine,  founded,  I,  150,  Baldwin,  T.

Baptists,  first,  in  the  colonies.  III,  563,  Knollys  :  first  church
of,  in  America,  VI,  118,  Tillinghast,  P.  ;  in  Rhode  Island,
I,  395  ;  IV,  192,  Manning,  James.

Baptists,  persecution  of,  in  New  Hampshire.  V,  442,  Scre-
ven,  W. ;  first  church  of,  in  Charleston,  442 ;  treatment
of,  in  Massachusetts  colony,  IV,  474,  Myles,  J.  ;  741,  Pe-
ters, H.  ;  II,  103  ;  history  of,  307,  Edwards,  M.  :  first
seminary  of,  I,  584,  Chase,  I.  ;  II,  293,  Eaton,  I.  ;  VI,  531,
Williams,  Roger  ;  gifts  to  charities  of,  I,  670,  Coburn,  A. ;
683,  Colby,  G.  ;  II,  22,  Crozer ;  IV,  738,  Perry,  Eli ;  544,
Nugent,  G. ;  pioneers  among  the,  I,  766,  Craig.  L. ;  VI,
337,  Waller,  J.  ;  in  Virginia,  IV,  226,  Marshall,  W.  ;
Campbellite  schism,  see  Campbellites  ;  exclusion  of
open  communionists,  V,  573,  Smith,  J.  H.  ;  missions  of,
I,  663,  Clough,  J.  E.  ;  299,  Boardman,  G.  D.  ;  II,  115,
Dean,  W.  ;  HI,  469.  Jones,  J.  T.  :  483,  Judson  ;  538.  Kin-
caid,  E. ;  565,  Knowlton,  M.  J. :  IV,  155,  Macomber  ;  240,
Mason,  F.  ;  696.  Peck,  J.  M.  ;  V,  169,  Rand,  S.  T.  ;  235,
Rice,  L. ;  518,  Shuck  ;  544-545,  Skinnei;  E. ;  VI,  45,  Taylor,
J.  ;  302,  Vinton,  J.  H. ;  II.  428,  Feller ;  famous  debate
on  principles  of,  VI,  502,  Wightman,  V. ;  old  Albemarle
church,  605,  Woods,  W.

Baptists,  German  Seventh-Day,  I,  223,  Beissel.

Baquedano,  Gen.,  Ill,  735,  Lira.

Baraya,  Gen.,  V,  396,  Santander.

Barat.  Madame,  II,  242,  Duchesne.

Barbadoes,  results  of  abolition  in,  III,  212,  Hincks,  F. ;  ad-
ventures in,  711,  Ligon.

Barbary  powers,  the,  defeat  of,  H.  121  ;  difficulty  with,  V,
105,  Preble,  E.

Barbauld,  Anna  Letitia.  VI,  389,  Watkinson.

Barber,  Catherine  W.,  VI,  147,  Towles.

Barber,  John,  V,  614,  Southwick.

Barberigo,  Agostino,  I,  698.

Barbizan,  M.,  Ill,  320,  Hunt,  W.  M.

Barbosa,  Francisco  V.,  IV,  644,  Paranagud.

Barbour,  Col.  Thomas.  I,  162,  Barbour,  J.

Barboza,  Mrs.  M.  H.  G.,  II,  606,  Garnet.

Barca,  Count  of,  I,  124,  Azevedo,  A.  A.

Barcelona,  battle  at,  I,  304  ;  capture  of,  305 ;  H,  542,
Freites.

Barclay,  Anthony,  VI,  505,  Wilde,  R.  H.

Barclay,  Rev.  H.,  I,  163,  Barclay,  T.

Barclay,  James,  IV,  2!K),  Menken.

Barclay,  Rev.  J.  T.,  Ill,  450,  Johnson,  S.  B.

Barclay,  Rev.  Thomas,  III,  737,  Lispenard.

Barclay,  Rev.  Thomas,  IV,  58,  Lydius,  J.

Barclays,  one  of  the,  pen-name,  IV,  608,  Otis,  E.  H.

Barculo,  Seward,  II,  114,  Dean,  G.

Bard,  Susan,  IV,  709,  Pendleton,  N.

Barentson,  HI,  297.

Barilli,  Signora,  IV,  674,  Patti,  C.


708


BARING


BEJUCO


Baring,  Alexander,  I,  109,  Ashburton.

Baring,  Sir  Francis,  I,  109,  Ashburton.

Baring,  Henry,  I,  264,  Bingham,  W.

Barker,  Elizabeth,  IV,  742.  Peters,  E. ;  VI,  560,  Winslow,  E.

Barker,  George.  I,  244,  Berg.

Barker,  Col.  Joseph,  II,  568,  Gage.

Barker,  Lieut.,  V,  127,  Proctor,  T.

Barkly,  Sir  H.,  III.  474,  Jordon.

Bark-peelers,  the,  IV,  97,  McCullagh.

Barksted,  Col.,  II.  222,  Downing,  Sir  G.

Barnard.  Rev.  C.  F..  I,  167,  Barnard,  C.

Barnard,  G.  G.,  VI,  115.

Barnard,  Pierre,  V,  245,  Richings,  C.  M.

Barnave,  M.,  Ill,  405,  Jarric.

Barn-buiUiing.  improvement  in,  IV,  157,  MacPherson,  D.  M.

Barnburners,  I,  484,  Butts  ;  VI,  232-233.

Barnes,  Charles  M. ,  III,  522,  Kent,  James.

Barnes,  David,  II,  396,  Eytinge.

Barnes,  Earl,  V.  493.  Sheldon,  M.  D.

Barnes,  John,  III,  22,  Hackett,  J.  H.

Barnes,  Mary,  I,  708,  Connor,  E.  S.

Barnes,  Mrs.  Mary  T.,  II,  422,  Fauntleroy.

Barnes,  Robert  O.,  VI,  243,  Vanderpoel,  A.  P.

Barneveld  islands,  discovery  of,  III,  684,  Le  Maire.

Barney,  Nathaniel,  II,  514.  Foster,  S.  S.

Barnsley  mine  disaster,  poem  on  the,  IV,  59,  Lyle,  W.

Barnuevo,  Maldonado,  VI,  60.  Tejeda.

Baroa,  capture  of.  II,  25,  Cueneciira.

Baron,  the,  Huron  chief.  III,  572,  Kondearonk.

Baronet,  first  native,  of  America,  IV,  721,  Pepperrell.

Baronetcies,  American,  I,  48,  Alexander,  W.

Baron  de  Kalb,  the  iron-clad,  VI,  328,  Walker,  J.  G.

Barouco,  cacique  of,  II,  359,  Enrique.

Barquisemeto,  engagement  at,  I,  304.

Barr,  confederation  of,  V,  133,  Pulaski,  K.

Barr,  Robert,  I,  174,  Barr.

Barr,  Robert  and  Alexander,  IV,  592,  Orr,  H.

Barranca,  Jos6  S.,  IV,  576,  OUantai.

Barranca  Seca,  battle  at,  IV,  215,  Mdrquez,  L.

Barre,  John  de  la,  I,  620.

Barre,  Mass.,  change  of  name  of,  IH,  333.

Barrel  Mirabeau,  IV,  338,  Mirabeau.

Barren  Hill,  Lafayette  surprised  at,  HI,  587  ;  H,  708,  Grant,
James.

Barrens,  seminary  of  the,  IV.  486,  Neckere.

Barreto,  Isabel,  IV,  295,  Mendana.

Barrett,  Giles  Leonard,  I,  175,  Barrett,  G.  H.

Barrett,  Jackson.  VI.  287,  Victor,  F.  A.

Barrett,  Joseph  H.,  HI,  727,  Lincoln,  A.

Barrett,  Walter,  pen-name,  V,  442,  Scoville.

Barrie  Herald,  the,  IV.  677,  Patton,  J.

Barrier  forts  in  China,  the,  II,  496,  Foote,  A.  H.

Barriga,  Juan  Gonzalez,  V,  400,  Sarmiento  de  Sotomayor.

Barringer,  Victor  C,  I,  5,  Abbott,  B.  V.

Barrington,  Lord,  III,  658.

Barrington,  R.  I.,  IV,  474,  Myles,  J.

Barrow  strait,  explored,  IV,  661,  Parry,  Sir  W.  E.

Barry,  David,  VI,  206,  Ulloa,  A.  de.

Barry,  Capt.  Thomas  F..  V,  433,  Schwatka.

Barstow,  Elizabeth,  V.  697,  Stoddard,  E.  B.

Barstow,  Marguerite,  IV,  33,  Loud.

Barth,  Ferdinand,  pupil  of,  VI,  206.  Uhle.

Barth,  Count  Joseph  de,  VI,  319,  Walbach.

Barth,  Louis  A.  and  John  de,  VI,  319,  Walbach.

Barthelemy,  the  poet.  V,  611.

Bartholdi  statue,  speech  at  the  unveiling  of,  n,  145,  Depew.

Bartlett,  D.  W..  Ill,  727,  Lincoln,  A.

Bartlett,  Ellis,  I,  186,  Bartlett,  W.  L.  A.

Bartlett.  Richard,  I,  281,  Blair,  H.  W.

Bartolini.  Lorenzo,  pupil  of,  V,  309,  Rogers,  Randolph.

Barton,  tragedian,  II,  41,  Cushman.

Barton,  Capt.  Stephen,  I,  187,  Barton,  C.

Bartram  homestead,  the,  illustration,  1, 189.

Barye,  Antoine  Louis,  works  by,  VI,  342,  Walters.

Barye,  M.,  Ill,  511,  Kemeys.

Bases  organicas,  the,  IV.  386,  Morales,  J.  B.

Baskervill,  Dr.  W.  M.,  HI,  100,  Harrison,  J.  A.

Basque,  Le,  IV,  315,  Michel,  J.  L.

Bass.  Lyman  K.,  I,  651,  Cleveland,  G.

Basse,  Jeremiah,  III,  62,  Hamilton,  A.  and  John.

Basse  Terre,  capture  of,  in,  305,  Hugues.

Batavia,  N.  Y.,  located,  II,  328,  Ellicott,  J.

Bateman,  H.  L.,  I,  192,  Bateman,  K.  J.

Bateman.  Virginia  F.,  I,  192,  Bateman,  K.  J.

Bateman's  cottage.  Newport,  II,  597,  Gardner,  C.

Bates,  Hervey,  I.  192,  Bates,  C.  F.

Bates  college,  gift  to.  II.  490,  Fogg.

Bathori,  Sigismund,  V,  570.

Bathometer,  inventor  of  the,  IV,  729,  Perkins,  Jacob.

Bathyometer,  invention  of  the,  IV,  428,  Morse,  S.  E.

Baton  Rouge,  taken,  II,  584,  Gdlvez,  B.  ;  surrender  of  ar-
senal at,  III,  110,  Haskin,  J.  A. ;  attack  upon,  VI,  534,
William*,  T.

Batteries,  invention  of  plans  for,  VI,  120,  Timby.

Battery,  the,  New  York  city,  III,  681,  I^eisler.

Battle  above  the  clouds,  the,  III,  251,  Hooker.  J.

Battle  island,  Indian  engagement  at,  II,  5,  Crawford,  W.

Battle  of  Dorking,  the,  I.  599.  Chesney.

Battle  of  the  kegs,  the,  HI,  260,  Hopkinson,  F.


Batture  Sainte  Marie,  controversy  over,  HI,  743.

Baudelaire,  Charles,  V,  46.

Baudin,  Capt.,  HI,  654,  Ledru,  A.  P.

Baudin,  Admiral  C.,  V,  158,  Radiguet.

Baudouin,  Pierre,  I,  335,  Boicdoin.

Bavaria,  governmental  crisis  in,  IV,  368,  Montez  ;  reforms
made  in,  V,  346  ;  gifts  to  school  of,  VI,  294,  Vttlard.

Baxter,  Mr.,  IH,  170,  Henry,  A.

Baxter,  Richard,  his  "  call,"  H,  323.

Bayamo,  burning  of,  I.  561,  Cespedes.

Bayard,  Harriet  E.,  VI,  252,  Van  Rensselaer,  S.

Bayard,  Judith,  I,  197,  Bayard,  J.

Bayard,  Judith,  V,  736.  Stuyvesant,  J.  B.

Bayard,  Margaret,  V,  574,  Smith,  M.  B.

Bayard,  Samuel,  I,  197,  Bayard,  J.

Bayard,  Samuel,  II,  481,  Fletcher,  B.

Bayard,  Samuel  J.,  I,  196,  Bayard,  G.  D.

Bayard  of  the  Revolution,  the.  III,  631,  Laurens,  J.

Bayley,  Elizabeth  A.,  V,  465,  Seton,  E.  A.

Baylies,  William.  I,  423.

Baylor,  Walker,  I,  201,  Baylor.  R.  E.  B.

Bayly,  Bishop,  his  Practice  of  Piety,  U,  323.

Bayne,  Dr.,  II,  251,  Duhamel,  W.

Bay  of  Buen  Succeso,  IV,  529,  Nodal.

Bay  of  Fundy,  engagement  in  the.  III,  339,  Iberville.

Bayonet  fastening,  inventor  of  a,  IV,  576,  Oliver,  P.  A.

Bay  Psalm-Book,  the,  n,  323  ;  VI,  425,  Welde. .

Bazaine,  Marshal,  charge  against,  of  treachery,  II,  168.

Bazin,  Rev.  Theodore,  II,  580,  Gallitzin.

Beach,  John,  I,  202,  Beach,  A.

Beall,  Edgar  C,  III,  348,  Ingersoll,  R.  G.

Beanes,  Dr.  W.,  Ill,  529,  Key,  F.  S.

Bean,  Pole,  sobriquet,  III,  466,  Jones,  J.  C.

Bean's  Station,  battle  of,  II,  441,  Ferrero.

Beard,  Isabel,  V,  538,  Simpson,  G.  S.

Beard,  Sir  James,  I,  206,  Beard,  J.  H.

Beard,  Maj.,  hanging  of,  IV,  62,  Lynch,  C.

Beardsley,  Fredericka,  VI,  683,  Gilchrist.

Bear  Flag  revolt,  the,  I,  87,  Arce,  F.  ;  IV,  221,  Marshall,
James  Wilson.

Beas,  Admiral  Antonio,  V,  82,  Portocarrero.

Beatriz,  Dona,  the,  H,  25,  Cueva.

Beatriz,  Princess,  of  Peru,  V.  36,  Pizarro,  F.

Beattie,  James,  III,  78,  Hardie,  J.

Beatty,  Rev.  C,  I,  208,  Beatty,  E.

Beauchamp,  trial  of,  III,  228.  Hoffman,  C.  F.

Beaufort,  Canada,  battles  at,  lit,  481,  Jucherau.

Beaufort,  N.  C,  surrender  of,  I,  463.

Beaufort,  S.  C,  fort  on  the  site  of,  V,  232,  Ribaut ;  found-
ed, II,  2,  Craven,  C.

Beauharnais  family,  the,  III,  475,  Josephine.

Beauharnais,  Eugene,  IV,  171,  Maelzl.

Beaumarchais,  his  Marriage  of  Figaro,  III,  419.

Beaumont,  Elie  de,  IH,  384,  385,  Jackson,  C.  T.  ;  V,  370,
Sainte-Claire.

Beau  Hickman,  sobriquet,  III,  195,  Hickman.

Beaujeu.  HI,  622.

Beau  Neill,  sobriquet,  IV,  488,  Neill,  T.  H.

Beauport,  Quebec,  asylum  at,  founded,  II,  212,  Douglas,  J.

Beau  Trumps,  original  of,  III,  691,  Leonard,  D.

Beauty  and  Booty,  countersign,  V,  48,  Poindvxter.

Beauty  of  Holiness,  the,  magazine,  II,  548,  French,  M.

Beauvallon,  case  of,  III.  583.  Lacour.

Beauvoir,  estate  of,  H,  102,  Davis,  J.  ;  207,  Dorscy,  S.  A.

Beaver  Dam,  capture  at,  V,  498.

Beccaria,  Abb6,  III,  550,  Kinnersley.

Bechamel,  Francois,  II,  767,  Grillet.

Beck,  Caleb,  I,  212,  Beck,  T.  R.

Beckamville,  engagement  at,  IV,  90,  McClure,  J.

Becker,  Jacob,  IV,  354,  Momberger.

Becker,  Mr.,  V,  184,  Rapp.

Beck  with,  N.  M.,  I,  214,  Becknith,  J.  C.

Bedel,  Gen.  Moody,  I,  214,  Bedel,  J.

Bedel.  Sarah,  I.  731.

Bedell,  Rev.  Gregory.  II,  340,  Ely,  E.  S.

Bedford,  Duke  of,  V,  851,  Russell,  A.  G.

Bedford,  fight  of  the,  II.  534,  Franklin,  Sir  J.

Bedford  House,  the,  illustration,  III,  410.

Bedini,  Archbishop,  III,  305,  Hughes,  J.

Bedlow,  Catharine,  II,  17,  Crosby,  E.

Bed  low's  Island,  purchase  of,  1, 164,  Bard  ;  statue  on,  I,
182,  Bartholdi.

Beebe,  Lieut.,  II,  741,  Greely.

Beecher,  David,  I,  216,  Beecher,  L.

Beecher,  Isabella,  III,  249,  Hooker,  I.  B.

Beechey,  Sir  W..  I,  221,  Hm-hey.  F.  W.

Bee-hive,  invention  of  a.  IH,  612,  Ixingstroth.

Bee-hive,  the  Vermont,  VI,  420,  Weeks,  J.  M.

Beekman,  rebellion  of.  II.  542,  Freire  de  Andrado.

Beekman,  Margaret,  III,  744,  Livingston,  R.  R.

Beekman,  Maria,  V,  736,  Stuyvesant,  N,  W.

Beekman,  William,  I.  221.  Beekman.  J.  W.

Beer,  first,  made  in  United  States,  IH,  533,  Kieft.

Beers,  Isaac,  V,  15,  Pierrcpont,  H.

Behagues,  Count  de,  V,  292,  Rochambeau,  Donatien.

Behnes,  w.,  III.  iii>.  Bbwfc&t*,  B.  W.

Retiring  strait,  its  existence  inferred,  n,  575,  Gali.

Beirut,  plundered  by  Bedouins,  II.  678.  Goodell.

Bejuco,  bridge  made  of  the  vine,  IV,  178,  Maita  Capac


BELAIR


BILLOPP  HOUSE


709


Belair,  plantation  of,  IV,  564,  Ogle.  B.

Belcher.  Andrew,  I,  223,  Belcher,  J.

Belcher,  J.  B.,  Ill,  177,  Henshaw,  J.  S.

Belcour,  character  of,  II,  284,  Dwyer.

Belem,  ethnographic  museum  at,  II,  541,  Freire  de  An-

drada.
Belfrage,  Rev.  H..  IV.  767,  Picken.
Belgrano,  Gen.,  Ill,  584,  Lacunza.  M.
Belisarius,  alleged  descendants  of,  VI,  433,  Welser.
Bell,  Sir  C,  II,  484,  Flint,  A.
Bell,  John,  I,  227,  Bell,  S.
Bell,  Joshua  F.,  II.  272,  Durham,  M.  J.
Bellavista,  city  of,  founded,  IV,  196,  Manso  de  Velasco.
Bellavista,  battle  of,  II,  588,  Gana.
Belleau,  Sir  Narcisse  F.,  IV,  103.
Belief onte,  Pa.,  I,  237,  Benner.
Bellefonte  fencibles,  the,  I,  211,  Beaver.
Belleville,  N.  J.,  copper-mines,  III,  264,  Hornblower,  J.
Bellevue  hospital,  gifts  to,  I,  529,  Carnegie  ;  given  to,  IV,

213,  Marquand,  H.  G.  ;  reforms  in,  VI,  595,  Wood.  J.  R.
Bellevue  medical  college,  IV,  443,  Mott,  A.  B.  ; V,  411,

Sayre,  L.  A.  ;  VI,  42,  Taylor,  I.  E.  ;  founded,  595,  Wood,

J.  R.
Bellewood  college,  Ky.,  II,  466,  Fisher,  M.  M.
Bellona,  the  capture  of,  III,  217,  Hood,  S.
Bells,  casting  of,  II.  122,  De  Condres.
Bellville,  Dr.  Nicholas.  II,  395,  Ewing,  W.  B.
Belmont,  estate  of,  Pa.,  IV,  744,  Peters,  R.
Belmont,  school  at,  III,  99,  Harrison,  Gessner.
Belmont,  Mo.,  engagement  at,  II,  710  ;  IV,  5,  Logan,  J.  A.;

V.  57,  Polk,  L.
Beloit  college,  in,  520,  Kent,  A.;  TV,  30,  Loss  ;  gift  to,  V,

319,  Root,  D.
Belphegor,  character  of,  II,  178,  Dillon,  C.
Belpre,  O.,  settlement  of,  I,  348,  Bradford,  R.
Beltran,  Father  B.,  II,  373,  Espejo,  A.
Beltrani,  Count,  quoted,  I,  492,  Cabrera,  M.
Belvedere,  residence  of,  Md.,  illustration,  III,  277.
Belzu,  Manuel  I.,  IV,  291,  Melgarejo  ;  VI,  272, Velasco,

Jose.
Bembridge,  Henry,  V,  743,  Sully,  T.
Bemiss,  Dr.  John,  I.  232,  Bemiss,  S.  M.
Bemiss  Heights,  battle  of.  III,  728. See  Saratoga.
Benai  Berith.  order  of,  IV,  704,  Peixotto.
Benavente,  Toribio  de,  IV,  440,  Motolinia.
Benavides,  Gen.,  II.  541,  Freire,  R.;  V,  121,  Prieto.
Benbow,  Admiral,  II,  240,  Ducasse  ;  494,  Fonvielle.
Benedictines,  the,  III,  685,  Lemcke  ;  the.  first  in  the  U.  S.,

IV,  553,  O  Connor,  M.  ;  missions  of,  IV,  238,  Marty ;  es-
tablishment of  abbeys,  VI,  559,  Wimmer.
Benedictine  nuns,  convent  of,  II,  459,  Fink,  M.
Benecke,  Prof.,  I,  154,  Bancroft,  G.
Bendant,  M.,  V,  598,  Smithson.
Benjamin,  Joseph,  II,  176,  Dickson,  T.
Benjamin,  Mary,  IV,  438,  Motley.
Behicia,  college  at,  I,  364,  Breck,  J.  L.
Ben.  Ezra,  Juan  Josaphat,  pen-name,  IH,  584,  Lacunza,  M.
Bennet,  Dr.  David,  IV,  764,  Phips,  S.
Bennet,  Phineas,  I,  237,  Bennet,  O.
Bennett,  Belva  A.,  Ill,  751,  Lockwood,  B.  A.  B.
Bennett,  Edmund  H,  III,  153,  Heard.
Bennet,  William,  VI,  545,  Wilmshurst.
Bennett  island,  discovered,  II,  137,  De  Long.
Bennington,  Vt.,  name  of,  VI,  435,  Wentworth,  B.;  V,  287,

Robinson,  8. ;  gift  to,  IV,  648,  Park,  T.  W. ;  battle  of,  II,

537,  Eraser,  S.;  V,  372,  St.  Luc;  V,  652-653,  Stark,  J.;

monument  ilustration,  653.
Bennoch,  Francis,  III,  129.
Benseki,  Col.,  Ill,  368.

Bensley,  anonymous  book.  I,  448,  Bunce,  O.  B.
Benson,  Carl,  I,  379,  Bristed,  C.  A.
Benson,  Judge,  H,  475,  Fitzpatrick,  B.
Bent,  Capt.  Charles.  V,  18,  Pike,  A.
Bent,  Lieut.  Silas,  II,  667,  Glynn.
Bentham,  Jeremy,  IV,  484,  Neal,  J.
Bentham,  philosophy  of,  II,  344.
Bentheim,  Count  de,  II,  428,  Felix.
Bentivoglio,  Countess,  IV,  317,  Middleton,  A.
Benton,  Calvin,  I,  240,  Benton,  J.  G.
Benton,  Col.  Jesse,  I,  241,  Benton,  T.
Benton,  Jessie,  II.  545,  548,  Fremont.
Benton.  Lot,  I,  216,  Beecher.
Benton,  Sarah,  III,  393.  Jacob,  R.  T.
Bentontown,  Tenn.,  I,  241.
Bentonville,  battle  of,  H,  424,  Fearing,  B.  D. ;  715  ;  HI,

459 ;  V,  505.
Beresford,  Gen.,  occupies  Montevideo,  rv,  267,  Mawe,  John;

his  capitulation,  VI,  480,  Whitelocke.
Beresford,  Sir  W.,  V,  132,  Pueyrredon.
Bergen,  Hans  Hansen,  V,  183,  Rapaelje.
Bergen-op-Zoom,  capture  of,  IV,  143,  MacLean,  F.
Beringer.  Oscar,  II,  664,  Gleason.
Beriot,  Charles  Auguste  de,  IV,  181,  Malibran.
Berkley,  Helen,  pen-name,  IV,  450,  Mowatt.
Berkeley,  Sir  Maurice,  I.  247,  Berkeley,  Sir  W.
Berkeley,  Norborne,  I,  324,  Botetourt.
Berkeley,  California.  I,  246.  Berkeley,  G.
Berkeley  Divinity  school,  VI,  527.  Williams.  J.
Berkshire  medical  institute,  I,  605.  Childs,  H.  H.


Bermejo  river,  exploration  of  the,  I,  89,  Arias,  F.  G.

Bermuda  Hundred,  battle  at,  IV,  231,  Martin,  J.  G.

Bermudas,  the,  discovery  of,  I,  247,  Bermudez  ;  proposed
college  in,  I,  245,  Berkeley  ;  V,  598,  Smybert.

Bernard,  Claude,  retires  from  professorsnip,  I,  416,  Brown-
Sequard  ;  pupil  of,  II,  484,  Flint,  A.

Bernard,  Susan  A.,  IV,  104,  Maodonald,  S.  A.

Bernard,  Thomas  J.,  IV,  104,  Macdonald,  S.  A.

Bernoullis,  the,  II,  150,  Des  Barreo.

Berrien,  Maj.  John,  I,  249,  Berrien,  J.  M.

Berriozabal,  F.,  II,  369.  Escobedo.

Berry,  Abner,  John,  I,  250,  Berry,  N.  S.

Berry,  Lewis,  VI,  465,  Whitcher.

Berthold,  Ernest,  pen-name,  V,  285,  Robinson,  Therese.

Berthoud,  Ferdinand,  II,  482,  Fleurien.

Bertie,  Peregrine,  V,  569,  Smith,  John.

Bertrend,  Louis,  III,  6a5,  Laval,  F.  X.

Berwald,  Franz,  IV,  522,  Nilsson.

Bessemer  process,  the,  improvements  for,  III,  318,  Hunt,
Robert  W.

Bessemer  steel-works,  IH,  236,  Holley,  A.  L. ;  patents  for
improvements  in  the  process,  ibid.

Bessemer,  Sir  H,  alleged  inventor  of  his  process,  III,  509,
Kelly,  W.

Best,  William  T.,  pupil  of,  VI,  482,  Whiting,  G.  E.

Bethany  college,  W.  Va..  II.  600.

Bethencourt,  Juan,  I,  252,  Bethencourt,  P.

Bethesda,  Ga.,  Ill,  21,  Habersham,  James.

Bethlehem,  Pa.,  hospital  established  at.  n,  379,  Ettwein,
John  ;  difficulties  of  settlers,  V,  621,  Spangenberg,  Au-
gustus Gottlieb  ;  founded,  IV,  524,  Nitschmann,  David  ;
university  and  church  founded  at,  IV,  620,  Packer,
Asa.

Bethlehemites,  order  of  the,  I,  252,  Bethencourt.

Bethune,  Angus,  I,  253,  Bethune,  J.

Bethune,  Divie,  I,  252,  Bethune,  G.  W.

Bethune,  Isabella  G.,  II,  248,  Duffleld.

Bethune,  Jessie  G.,  IV,  77,  McCartee,  J.  G.

Bethune,  Thomas  G.,  VI,  129,  Tom.

Betisoque,  e.  gagement  at,  I,  304.

Beulah,  Penn.,  V,  229,  Rhees,  M.  J.

Beverly,  Peter,  I,  645,  Clayton,  J.

Beverly,  Maj.  Robert,  I,  254,  Beverly,  R.  ;  n,  235,  Drum-
mond,  W.  ;  474,  Fitzhugh,  W.

Beverstone  castle,  I,  247,  Berkeley,  J.

Beverwyck,  village  of,  VI,  250,  Van  Rensselaer.

Bewick  company,  the,  III,  316,  Hunt,  F.

Bezena,  Barbalho,  VI,  286,  Viale.

Bezoar-stones,  IV,  601,  Osma-Jaraycejo.

Bhaquiere,  John,  Lord  de,  II,  118,  De  Bhaquie're.

Biasson,  Jean.  II,  154,  Dessalines  ;  VI,  144,  Toiissaint,  D.  F.

Bibb,  Capt.  W.,  I,  254,  Bibb,  W.  W.

Bibb,  cruise  of  the,  I,  35.

Bible,  the,  discovery  of  a  MS.,  Ill,  39,  Hall.  I.  H  ;  first,
printed  in  America,  I,  38,  Aitken  :  II,  323  ;  the  Indian,
822  ;  first  German,  printed  in  America,  V,  616-617,  Sower,
C.  ;  King  James's  version,  III,  246,  Homer,  J.  ;  in  the
schools,  219,  Hoadley,  G.  ;  publication  of,  79,  80,  Har-
ding, J.  and  W.  W.  ;  revision  of  the  English,  I,  589,  Chase,
T.  ;  761,  Coxe,  A.  C.  ;  III,  22,  Hackett,  H.  B.  ;  81,  Hare,
G.  E.  ;  514,  Kendrick,  A.  C.  ;  575,  Krauth  ;  657,  Lee,
Alfred  ;  IV,  141,  Maclay,  A.  ;  263.  Maturin,  E.  ;  600,
Osgood,  H.  ;  619,  Packard,  J.  ;  V,  248,  Riddle,  M.  B.  ;
416,  Schaff ;  VI,  369,  Washburn,  E.  A.  ;  Woolsey,  T.  D.

Bibles,  collection  of.  Ill,  689,  Lenox,  J.

Bible  society,  first,  in  America,  IV,  275,  Mayer,  P.  F.  ;  V,
164,  Ralston,  R.

Bible  society,  the  American,  gifts  to,  I,  327,  Boudinot ;  II,
291,  Eastburn,  M.  ;  VI,  565,  Winkley  ;  formation  of  the,
rv,  333,  Mills,  S.  J.

Biblical  Repertory  and  Princeton  Review,  HI,  223,  Hodge,
Charles.

Biblical  Repository,  the,  V,  284.  Robinson,  E.

Bibliography,  I,  679,  Cogswell,  J.  G.  ;  V,  676,  Stevens,  H.

Bibliotheca  Sacra,  the,  IV,  647,  Park,  E.  A.  ;  V,  284,  Rob-
inson, E.

Bicycles,  improvements  in,  V,  67,  Pope,  A.  A.

Biddle,  Clement  C,  VI,  670,  Biddle,  C.

Biedura,  Liuys  Hernandez  de,  II,  153,  De  Soto.

Biencourt,  V,  94,  Poutrincourt.

Bienio,  El,  I,  39,  Alcantara.

Biernatzki,  IV,  217,  Marsh,  C.  C.

Big  Bear,  Chief,  VI,  519,  Williams,  A.  T.  H.

Big  Bethel,  battle  of,  II,  733,  Greble,  J.  T. ;  IH,  203,  Hill,  D.
H. :  IV,  175,  Magruder.

Big  Black  river  bridge,  battle  at,  II,  712.

Big  Buckeye,  the,  sobriquet,  V.  640,  Sproat.

Bigelow,  Horatio  N.,  Ill,  219,  Hoadley,  J.  C.

Bigelow,  Tyler,  I,  603,  Child,  D.  L.

Big  Hole  Pass,  engagement  at,  II,  635,  Gibbon,  J.

Biglow,  Hosea,  IV,  40,  41.

Big  Sam,  sobriquet,  II,  56.  Dale,  S.

Big  Thunder,  sobriquet,  VI,  592,  Wood,  E.  B.

Billerica,  Mass.,  gift  to,  VI,  23,  Talbot.

Billiard-balls,  composition,  III,  336,  Hyatt,  J.  W.

Billiard-players,  II,  181,  Dion  ;  IV,  750.  Phelan,  M.

Billings,  Frederick,  I,  246  ;  TV,  217,  Marsh,  G.  P.

Billings,  Josh,  pen-name,  V,  485,  Shaiv,  H.  W.

Billopp  House,  the,  illustration,  I,  263.


710


BILOXI


BOLIVIA


Biloxi.  settlement  at,  I,  259,  Bienville  :  IV,  525,  Nivelles.
Bimetalism,  III,  205,  Hill,  N.  P. ;  confidential  mission,  VI,

326,  Walker,  G.
Bimini,  island  of,  V,  62,  Ponce  de  Leon.
Binders,  grain,  invention  of,  III,  460,  Johnston,  S. ;  IV,  95,

McCormick,  C.  H.
Bingley,  Lord,  I,  452,  Burgoyne.
Binon,  M.,  II,  756,  Greenough.
Binnacle  illuminator,  the,  invention  of,  III,  707,  Lewis,

Winslow.
Biobio,  battle  at.  I,  694,  Colocolo  ;  III,  199,  Higuaihue.
Biology,  researches  in,  III,  680,  Leidy  ;  IV,  230,  Martin,  H.

N. ;  337,  Minot,  C.  S.
Birch,  Harvey,  in  The  Spy,  original  of,  n,  18,  Crosby,  E.
Birchard,  Sardis,  III,  136.
Birks,  Elizabeth,  I,  488,  Cabell.
Birmingham,  Eng.,  riot  in,  V,  121,  Priestley.
Biron,  Due  de,  III,  633,  Lauzun.
Bisbee,  Rev.  John,  III,  390,  Jackson,  M.  B.
Bishop,  Rev.  Artemas,  II,  343,  Emerson,  J.  S.
Bishop,  Sir  Edward,  VI.  463,  Whistler,  J.
Bishop,  Sir  Henry,  II.  647,  Gilbert,  W.  B.
Bishop.  Mary  R„  I.  463.
Bishops,  clandestine  consecration  of.  for  America,  VI,  21,

Talbot,  J.  ;  first  consecrated  in  the  U.  S.,  I,  619,  Claggett ;

first  appointed  to  U.  S.,  Ill,  481,  Juarez,  Juan  ;  suspen-
sion of,  IV,  581,  Onderdonk,  B.  T.;  succession  of  Ameri-
can, V,  445^146,  Seabury.
Bishop,  church  without  a,  controversy  on,  VI,  315,  Wain-

wright.
Bishop's  college,  Canada.  IV,  448,  Mountain,  G.  J.
Bishop's  wood,  the,  II,  435,  Fernandes-Sardinha.
Bison,  first  account  of  the,  I,  745.
Bissot,  Clara  F.,  Ill,  461,  Jolliet.
Bissot,  Frangois,  VI,  298,  Vincennes.
Bizarre,  the  Randolph  residence,  V,  178.
Bjarnar.  VI,  101,  Thorfinn.
Bjiirck,  Rev.  Eric  T.,  Vl,  208,  Unander.
Black,  G.,  V,  323.  Rosebrugh.
Black,  James  and  Henry,  I,  272,  Black,  J.  S.
Black  boys,  the,  V,  568,  Smith,  J.
Blackbeard,  sobriquet,  II,  301,  Eden,  C.
Blackburn,  Rev.  F.,  Ill,  237,  Hollis,  T.
Blackburne,  Mr.,  IV,  133,  Mackenzie,  G.  H.
Blackburn's  Ford,  engagement  at,  IV,  110.
Black  code,  the,  H,  567,  Gabaret ;  587,  Gamboa.
Black  David,  sobriquet,  II,  502,  Forman,  D.
Black  Dick,  sobriquet,  III,  280,  Howe,  R.
Black  Dome,  N.  C,  Mitchell's  grave  on,  illustration,  IV,

343,  Mitchell,  E.
Blackflsh,  chief.  I,  315,  Boone.

Black  Goronwy  of  Anglesea,  IV,  614,  Owen,  Goronwy.
Black  Hills,  the,  H,  44.

Black  Hawk  purchase,  the,  II,  764,  Grimes,  J.  W.
Black  Hawk  war,  the,  I,  273,  Black  Hawk  ;  II,  193,  Dodge,

H;  m,  716;  VI,  52,  53.
Black  Jack,  I,  406.

Blacklock,  Thomas,  I,  253,  Beveridge.
Black  Mingo  river,  the,  engagement  at,  IV.  208.
Black  Rock,  N.  Y.,  expedition  against,  II.  234,  Drummond,

Sir  G.  ;  703,  Graham,  J.  H.  ;  HI,  548,  King,  W.  ;  V,  78,

Porter,  P.  B. ;  678,  Stevens,  T.  H.
Blacksmith,  the  learned,  I,  469,  Burritt.
Black  Snake,  sobriquet,  VI,  400,  Wayne,  A.
Blackstock  Hill,  S.  C,  engagement  at,  V,  752 ;  VI,  35,

Tarleton.
Blackstone,  Sir  William,  I,  423  :  influence  of  the  study  of,

in,  416  ;  IV,  255  ;  V,  120,  Priestley.
Black  Swan,  the,  sobriquet,  n,  755,  Greenfield.
Black  Watch,  the,  IVV 151,  MacNab.
Blackwater.  engagement  on  the,  V,  69,  Pope,  J.
Blackwell,  Henry  B.,  V.  703,  Stone,  L.
Blackwell,  Gov.  John,  in,  748,  749,  Lloyd,  D.  and  T.
Blackwell,  Capt.  John.  IV,  210,  Markham.  W.
Blackwell,  Samuel  C,  I,  274,  Blackwell,  A.  L.  B.
Bladensburg,  Md.,  engagement  at,  I,  672,  Cockburn,  G. ;

II,  382,  Evans,  Sir  G. :  V,  332,  Ross.
Blaine,  Ephraim  L.,  I,  275,  Blaine,  J.  G.
Blaine,  J.  G.,  his  oration  on  Garfield,  II,  604.
Blair,  Elizabeth,  V,  585,  Smith,  Robert.
Blair,  Mary,  V,  233,  Rice,  David.
Blair,  of  Balthayrock,  II,  432,  Ferguson,  A.  J.
Blair's  plantation,  engagement  at,  V,  457,  Selfridge.
Blaisel,  Marquis  de,  I,  264,  Bingham,  W.
Blake,  Admiral,  I,  284.  Blake,  Joseph.
Blake,  Daniel  S.,  VI,  225,  Vale,  E.
Blake,  E.  V.,  Ill,  38.  Hall,  C.  F.
Blake,  Francis,  I.  284,  Blake,  G.  S.
Blakeney.  Gen.,  Ill,  119.  Haviland,  W.
Blanchard,  Elizabeth,  in.  55,  Hamblin,  T.  S.
Blanchard,  Jonathan,  V,  236,  Rice,  N.  L.
Blanchard,  Susan,  II,  318,  Elder,  S.  B.
Blanco,  Gen.,  VI,  297,  Villeraye.
Bland,  Frances,  VI,  175,  Tucker.  St.  G.
Bland.  Theodorick,  I,  486,  Byrd,  W.
Blasphemy,  trial  for,  III,  501,  Kneeland,  A.
Blathwayt,  William,  VI,  237,  Van  Cortlandt,  S.
Blavatsky,  Gen.  N.  V..  I,  290,  Blavatsky,  H.  P.
Bleaching,  American  system,  II,  67,  Dana,  Samuel  Luther.


Bleckley,  L.  E.,  U,  4.  Crawford,  M.  J.

Bledsoe,  Isaac,  V,  279,  Robertson,  J.

Bledsoe,  Jesse,  I,  201,  Baylor,  R.  E.  B.

Bleecker,  Eve,  V,  128,  P>-ovoost.

Bleecker,  Mary,  V,  478,  Seymour,  H.

Bleecker,  Rutgers,  II,  243,  Dudley,  B.

Blenkensoff,  Catherine,  II,  379.  Euphemia.

Blenkinsop,  George,  V,  67.  Pope,  F.  L.

Blennerhassett,  home  of,  illustration,  I,  292.

Blessing,  Abraham,  II,  390.  Eyster.

Blessington,  Countess  of.  VI,  545,  Wilmshurst.

Blifil  and  Black  George,  I.  26  ;  III,  379.

Blind,  the,  education  of,  II,  579,  Gallaudet,  E.  M. ;  UI.  283,
Howe,  S.  G.  and  J.  R.\  first  attempt  to  instruct— alpha-
bet, maps,  and  books  for,  V,  351-352,  Russ,  J.  D. ;  Nesmith
fund  for,  IV,  495,  Nesmith,  J. ;  Perkins  institution  for,
731,  Perkins,  T.  H.\  writing-case  for,  described,  V,  111.

Blind  minister,  the,  VI,  599,  Woodbridge,  T.

Blind  preacher,  the,  IV,  321,  Milburn.

Blind  preacher,  the,  VI,  309,  Waddel.

Blind  singer,  the,  V,  486,  Shaw,  O.

Bliss,  Rev.  Asher,  I,  294,  Bliss,  P.  C.

Bliss,  Rev.  Daniel,  II,  343,  Emerson,  R.  W.

Bliss,  George,  VI,  429,  Wells,  D.  A.

Bliss,  Capt.  John,  I,  294,  Bliss,  W.  W.  S.

Bliss,  Judge  Philemon,  IV,  662,  Parsons,  C.  C.

Bliss,  Sylvester,  IV,  330,  Miller,  W.

Blitz,  Jennie,  VI,  257,  Van  Zandt.

Blockade-runners,  capture  of,  I,  139,  Bailey ;  IV,  77,  Mc-
Cann  :  fired  upon,  HI.  324,  Hunter,  W.

Bloede,  Dr.  G.,  I,  295,  Bloede,  M.

Blood,  discoveries  concerning  the,  I,  416,  Brown-Sequurd.

Blood  letter,  the,  I,  574,  Chandler,  Z.

Bloody  angle,  the.  III,  73.

Bloody  Bridge,  fight  of,  V,  64,  Pontiac.

Bloody  Run,  engagement  at,  II,  61 ,  Dalzell,  J.

Bloody  Tennent  of  Persecution,  the,  anonymous  book,  VI,
532,  Williams,  R.

Bloomer,  Amelia,  II,  625.  Genin.

Bloomer,  Dexter  C.  I.  296.  Bloomer,  A.  J.

Bloomfield-Moore,  Clara,  IV,  879,  Moore,  C.  I.

Bloomingdale,  II,  132,  De  Lancey,  O.

Blooming  Gap,  engagement  at,  III,  604,  Lander,  F.  W.

Blotter,  Samuel,  pen-name,  II,  195,  Doe,  C.  H.

Blount.  Jacob,  I,  296,  Blount,  W.

Blowers,  Rev.  T.  I,  297,  Blowers.  S.  S.

Blow-pipe,  oxyhydrogen.  Ill,  81,  Hare,  R.

Blue  Book,  the,  II,  499,  Force,  P.

Blue  Earth  river,  the,  III,  698,  Le  Sueur.

Blue-glass  theory,  the,  V,  40.  Pleasanton,  A.  J.

Blue  Hen's  Chicken,  the,  VI,  298,  Vincent,  Francis.

Blue  Jacket,  pseudonym,  II,  53,  Dahlgren.

Blue  Jeans  Williams,  sobriquet,  VI,  523,  Williams,  J.  D.

Blue  laws,  the,  story  of,  IV,  742,  Peters,  S.

Blue  Licks,  battle  of  the,  I,  315,  Boone  ;  II,  662,  Girty  ;  IV,
2,  Logan,  B. ;  VI,  126,  Todd,  J.

Blue  Mountain  Valley,  capture  of  the  ship,  IV,  561,  Ogden,
Aaron.

Blue  Water,  battle  of,  V,  257,  Van  Vliet.

Bluff,  Harrv,  pen-name,  IV,  265.

Bluff  ton  movement,  the.  IV,  768,  Pickens,  F.  W.

Blum,  Robert,  II,  553,  Frcebel.

Blume  family,  the,  I,  80,  Antes.

Blumenbach,  Prof.,  I,  154,  Bancroft,  G.

Blumenthal,  Carolus  E..  rv,  87,  McClintock,  J.

Blunders  of  a  Bashful  Man,  anonymous  book,  VI,  287,  Vic-
tor, M.  V.

Blythe,  Samuel,  grave  of,  illustration,  I,  471.

Boats,  invention  for  raising  or  lowering,  II,  563  ;  for  sub-
marine navigation,  563  ;  for  stemming  rapids,  V,  347,
Rumsey,  J. ;  for  detaching,  VI,  598.  Wood,  W.  M.

Bobadella,  Count  of,  II,  542,  Freire  de  Andrado.

Bochsa,  R.  N.  C,  I,  269,  270.  Bishop.

Bockholtz-Falconi,  Mme.,  II,  403,  Fairlamb.

Body  of  Liberties,  the,  VI,  353,  Ward.  X

Boehm,  Jacob,  I,  300,  Boehm,  H. ;  III,  509,  Kelpius  ;  IV,
743,  Peters,  R.

Boehm,  Martin,  I,  300.  Boehm,  H.

Boel,  Rev.  Henricus,  II,  237,  Du  Bois,  G.

Bogaert,  Theunis  Gysbert,  V,  183,  Rapaelje.

Bogart.  Rev.  David  S.,  I,  302.  Bogart,  E.

Bogle,  Paul,  II,  686,  Gordon,  G.  W.

Bogota,  scientific  institutions  at.  IV,  472.  Mutis ;  college  in,
727,  Pirez,  S.:  riot  in,  VI,  137,  Torres,  J.  M.

Bogran,  Gen.,  V..  609.  Soto.

Bohemia  Manor.  III.  188,  Herrman,  A.

Boiling  water.  III.  657,  Lee,  C.

Boisbriand,  Dugue  de,  VI,  143,  Tour,  L.  B.

Boisduval.  M.,  Ill,  652.  Le  Conte,  J.  E.

Boisfontaine,  Baron.  II,  572,  Gaines,  Myra  C.

Boisgirais,  M.,  VI,  306,  Volney.

Bold  bean-hiller,  the,  sobriquet,  H,  273,  Durkee.

Bolingbroke,  Lord,  II,  254,  Dummer,  J.

Bolivar,  engagement  at,  I,  363,  Brayman.

Bolivia,  separated  from  Buenos  Ayres.  I,  306  ;  formation
of.  into  a  state,  V,  739,  Sucre.  A.  J.;  insurrection  in,  IV,
459.  Mnilecas  ;  Indian  rebellion  in,  V,  455,  Segurola  ;
revolutions  in,  VI,  272,  Velaso,  Jost, ;  war  for  indejH'tid-
ence,  confederation  with  Peru,  dictator  of,  reforms  in,


BOLLAN


BOTHERATION


711


V,  395,  Santa  Cruz,  A.  ;  III,  714,  Linares ;  IV,  291-292,
Melgarejo  ;  386,  Morales  ;  war  of,  with  Cuili ;  despotism
in,  VI,  637,  Yanez. See  Chili.

Bollan,  William,  tract  attributed  to,  VI,  269,  Vaughan.

Bolles.  A.  S.,  IV,  417.  Morris,  R.

Bolles,  Mary  L.,  I,  358,  Branch,  M.  L.  B.

Bolmar,  Anthony,  V,  458,  Sellers,  C. '

Bolometer,  invention  of  the,  III,  611,  Langley.

Bolton,  Charles  Knovvles,  I,  309,  Bolton,  S.  K.

Bolton,  Nathaniel.  I,  309.  Bolton,  S.  T.

Bolton,  Maj.,  V,  252,  Riel.

Bomba,  fight  at,  II,  295,  Eaton,  W.

Bomfin,  Marquis  de,  IV,  310,  Mesquita,  J.  F.  de.

Bombshell,  the,  capture  of,  II,  425,  Febiger,  J.  C.

Bonanza  mines,  the,  IV,  127,  Mackay,  J.  W.  ;  551,  O'Brien,
W.  S.;  II,  400,  Fair.

Bonaparte,  Prince  Canino,  1, 118.

Bonaparte,  Le,  I,  409,  Brown,  Moses.

Bonaparte,  Joseph,  III,  589  ;  proclamations  of,  in  Mexico,
748,  Lizana.

Bonaparte,  Lucien,  I,  309,  Bonaparte.

Bonaparte,  Napoleon,  II,  250,  Dugommier.  See  Napoleon
I.

Bonaparte,  Pauline,  III,  651,  Leclerc,  V.  E.

Bond,  Alvin,  II,  468,  Fish,  P.

Bond,  Dr.  Phineas,  V,  250,  Ridgely,  C.

Bonds,  U.  S.,  I,  104  ;  of  1864.  II,  444,  Fessenden,  W.  P.;
charge  of  robbery  of,  etc.,  488,  Floyd,  J.  B.

Bones,  reproduction  of,  VI,  595,  Wood,  J.  R.

Bonheur,  Stella,  II.  365,  Errani.

Bon  Homme  Richard,  the,  II,  56,  Dale,  R.  ;  III,  468.

Bonn,  conference  at,  V,  416,  Schaff.

Bonnat,  Leon,  pupils  of,  I,  677,  Coffin,  W.  A.  ;  11,359,  Enne-
king  ;  III.  487,  Julio  ;  683,  Leland,  H.  ;  735,  Lippincott,
W.  H.  ;  IV,  691,  Pearce,  C.  S.  ;  V,  361,  Ryder,  P.  P.  ;  403,
Satterlee,  W.  ;  564,  Smith,  F.  H.  ;  VI,  185,  Turner,  C.  Y.  ;
301,  Vinton,  F.  P.  ;  420,  Weeks,  E.  L.  ;  501,  Wight,  M.  ;
662  ;  Zogbaum.

Bonne  Citoyenne,  the,  III,  640,  Lawrence,  J.

Bonner,  (J.  W.,  Ill,  734,  Linton.

Bonner,  Sherwood,  pen-name,  IV,  111,  McDowell,  K.  S.

Bonney,  Catherine  V.  R.,  VI,  253,  Van  Rensselaer,  S.

Bonney,  Mary  L.,  VI,  697,  Rarnbaut.

Bonpland,  Aime,  IV,  455,  Muhlenberg,  G.  H.  E.

Bonsai,  William  C,  VI,  626,  Wright,  R.  M.

Bonsilate,  III,  .336,  Hyatt,  J.  W.

Book-binding,  invention  of  tools,  I,  149,  Baldwin,  M.  W.

Book-cases,  revolving,  invention  of,  III,  442,  Johnson,  F.  C.

Book-keeping  method,  invention  of  a,  I,  316,  Booth,  B.

Book  of  Life,  the,  V,  603,  Sojourner  Truth.

Book  of  Mormon,  the,  V,  575,  Smith,  Joseph  :  624,  Spauld-
ing,  S.  ;  translations  of,  VI,  46,  Taylor,  John.

Book-plate,  Bishop  Provoost's,  illustration,  V,  130.

Books,  antiquarian,  II,  698,  Gowans  ;  collection  of  naval,
V,  105,  Preble, G. H.  ; first,  printed in  America,  II,
113,  Daye ;  323  ;  IV,  297,  Mendoza  ;  VI,  664,  Zumarra-
gua  ;  695,  Pablos ; first, printed  in New  England,  425,
Welde  ; rare,  II,  323,  324,  331,  Elliott,  John  ;  III,  340.
Ietersdorf ; 351,  Ingraham,  E. D.  ; 351,  Engulf: 402,
Jansen,  R.  ;  IV,  256,  Mather,  C.  ; .352,  Molina,  A.  de
525,  Nivert ;  568,  Ojeda,  D.  de  ;  704,  Pellepart ;  726,  Pere
ira,  N.  M.  ;  732,  Perrein  ;  741,  Peters.  H.  :  691,  Peale,  T
R.  ;  V,  144,  Pynchon  ;  189,  Razvle,  F.  ;  310,  Rogers,  R.
314,  Romans  ;  363,  Saavedra  Guzman  ;  collections  of
364,  Sabin,  J.  ;  647,  Stansbury,  P.  ;  666,  Stephens,  W.
692,  Stobo  ;  737,  Suarez,  L.  ;  VI,  114,  Tilden  ;  137,  Torres
Rubio  ;  290,  Vieira,  A.  ;  394,  Watteau  ;  404,  Webb,  T.  S.
533,  Williams,  R. ;  660,  Zenon  ;  635,  Ximenes  ;  suppressed
in London,  502,  Wikoff ; anonymous Sunday-school,
IV,  618,  Packard,  F.  A.

Boone,  George,  I,  315,  Boone,  D.

Boone  and  Crockett  club,  the,  V,  318,  Roosevelt,  T.

Boone  brothers,  trial  of  the.  Ill,  146,  Haynes,  L.

Boonesborough,  Indian  attack  on,  I,  315,  Boone.

Boonesboro',  fight  at,  III,  204,  Hill,  D.  H;  670.

Boonton,  benevolent  institutions,  IV,  24,  Lord,  J.  C.

Boot,  Adrian,  II,  437.  Fernandez  de  Cordova.

Boot  and  shoe  nailing  machine,  inventor  of  a,  V,  288,  Rob-
inson, S.  W.

Booth,  John,  I,  320,  Booth,  M.  L.

Booth,  Richard,  I,  317,  Booth,  J.  B.

Booth,  Sherman  M.,  IV,  627,  Paine,  B.  ;  VI,  30.

Bopp,  Franz,  pupils  of,  V,  377,  Salisbury  ;  VI,  490,  Whit-
ney, W.  D.

Boradel,  Margaret,  V,  495,  Shepard,  T.

Bordman,  William.  IV,  608,  Otis.  E.  H.

Borinquen,  island  of,  V,  61,  Ponce  de  Leon.

Borke,  Baron  von,  V.  251,  Riedesel.

Born,  Prof.,  I,  34.

Borneo,  American  rajah  of,  VI,  139,  Torrey,  J.  W.

Bornet,  Edouard,  II,  409,  Farlow.

Bornoel,  III,  384,  Jackson,  C.  L.

Borrowe,  Dr.,  II,  128,  Delafield,  E.

Boscawen,  Admiral,  quoted,  II,  376,  Estaing.

Boscawen,  pen-name,  II,  754,  Greene,  N.

Bosen,  Col.  de,  V,  133,  Pulaski.

Bossuet,  prediction  by,  III,  686,  Le  Moine  ;  quoted,  714,
U Incarnation.

Bossuet  of  the  American  church,  the,  IV,  723,  Perche.


Boston,  Eng.,  tablet  in  church  of,  I,  753,  Cotton,  J.

Boston,  Mass.,  founded,  VI,  573  ;  first  settler  in,  I,  274,
Blackstone  ;  sale  of  site  of,  274 ;  settlement  of,  III,  443,
Johnson,  I.;  grant  of  land  in,  IV,  267,  Maverick,  S.;  first
church  in,  VI,  553,  Wilson,  J.;  Hutchinson  riot  in,  III,
333,  Hutchinson,  T. ;  pre-Revolutionary  excitement  in,  I,
248,  Bernard  (see  Boston  Port  Bill)  ;  suggested  destruc-
tion of,  III,  72,  Hancock,  J.  ;  Hancock  house  in,  illustra-
tion, 72  ;  artillery  for  the  siege  of,  566  ;  gift  of  supplies
to,  V,  140 ;  evacuated  by  the  British,  VI,  376  ;  heresy
trial  in,  II,  690,  Gorton  ;  excitement  in,  over  a  heretical
book,  V,  144,  Pynchon  ;  first  ship  built  in,  II,  727,  Graves,
T.  ;  first  mayor  of,  IV,  759,  Phillips.  John  ;  first  savings-
bank  in,  V,  405,  Savage,  J.  ;  first  brick  block  in.  VI,  268,
Vaughan,  C.  ;  riot  in,  II,  324,  Eliot,  S.  A.  ;  proslavery
mob  in,  VI,  90,  Thompson,  G.  ;  back  bay  improvement,
city-hall,  II,  654,  Oilman,  A.  ;  reforms  in,  V,  152 ;  gifts
to  charities  of,  347,  Rumford,  S.  ;  466,  Sever ;  Roman
Catholic  institutions  in,  IV,  114,  McElroy,  J.  ;  260,  Matig-
non  ;  first  brick  church  in,  V,  511,  Shippen  ;  Old  South
church,  124,  Prince,  T.  ;  King's  chapel,  IV,  474,  Myles,S.;
Trinity  church,  founded,  V,  118,  Price,  Roger ;  Christ
church,  organized,  IV,  474,  Myles,  S.  ;  Columbian  muse-
um, V,  24,  Pine  ;  record  commission,  the,  VI,  487,  Whit-
more  ;  Ancient  and  honorable  artillery  company,  V,  67,
Poore  ;  children's  hospital  in,  HI,  639,  Lawrence,  W.  R. ;
Franklin's  birthplace  at,  illustration,  H,  531  ;  soldiers'
and  sailors'  monument,  illustration,  IV.  334  ;  monument
to  the  discovery  of  ether  as  an  anaesthetic,  IV,  434  ;  the
old  Province  House,  illustration,  V,  100  ;  Trinity  church
in,  illustration,  V,  242  ;  old  building  of,  illustration,  VI,
112 ;  state-house,  illustration,  VI,  369  ;  statue  of  Leir
Erikson  in,  illustration,  VI,  487;  statue  in  museum  of,  571,
Winslow W.  C.

Boston,  the  frigate,  captures  by,  III,  738,  Little,  G.  :  VI,
174,  Tucker,  Samuel  ;  the,  IV,  189,  Manley,  J.  ;  wreck  of
the,  VI,  61,  Temple,  W.  G.

Boston  academy  of  music,  established,  IV,  247,  Mason,  L.

Boston  anthology  society. See  Anthology  Club.

Boston  atheneaum,  gifts  to  the,  I,  383,  Bromjield  ;  IV,  731,
Perkins,  T.  H.  ;  V.  487,  Shaw,  W.  S.

Boston  Bard,  the.  signature.  I,  676,  Coffin,  R.  S.

Boston  conservatory  of  music,  VI,  144,  Tourgee,  E.

Boston  farm-school,  gift  to,  IV,  61,  Lyman.  T.

Boston  harbor,  blockade  of,  I,  141  ;  naval  engagement  off,
III,  527,  Kersaint :  cleared  of  British  vessels,  III,  728.

Boston  ian  society,  the.  VI,  487,  Whitmore.

Boston  Latin-school,  the,  II,  693,  Gould,  B.  A.  ;  III,  498,
Keayne  ;  IV,  35,  Lovell,  John.

Boston  libraries,  gifts  to,  I,  194,  Bates,  J.  ;  II.  411,  Farn-
ham,  L.  ;  IV,  656,  Parker,  Theodore  ;  VI,  111,  Ticknor,
G. ;  view  of  the  public,  IV,  136.

Boston  Luminary,  the,  magazine,  rV,  324,  Millard,  D.

Boston  massacre,  the,  1, 16  ;  116,  Attucks  ;  II,  68,  Dana,  R. ;
III,  71,  Hancock,  J.  ;  333,  Hutchinson,  T.  ;  trial  of  Capt.
Preston,  IV,  65,  Lynde,  B.  ;  V,  151,  Quincy,  J.  ;  anniver-
sary speech,  1775,  VI,  365,  Warren,  Joseph.

Boston  Monthly  Magazine,  the,  IH.  560,  Knapp,  S.  L.

Boston  physical  training-school,  III,  702,  Lewis,  D.

Boston  port  bill.  the.  1, 592.  Chatham  ;  II,  530  ;  HI,  408,  Jay  ;
petition  on,  630,  Laurens.

Boston  Quarterly  Review,  the,  I,  417,  Brownson,  O.  A.

Boston  society  of  natural  history,  I,  264,  Binney,  A.  ;  II,
695,  Gould,  A.  A.

Boston  tea-party,  the,  I,  30  ;  II,  302,  Edes,  B.  ;  III,  190,
Hewes,  G.  R.  T.  ;  IV,  122,  Machin  ;  271,  Maxwell,  T.  ;
272,  May,  J.  ;  293,  Melville,  H.  ;  V.  86,  Pitts,  Lendall ;
151,  Quincy,  J.  ;  637,  Sprague,  C.  ;  670,  Stevens,  E.  ;  710,
Story,  J.  ;  Franklin's  advice  to  pay  for  the  tea,  II,  530  ;
last  survivor  of,  III,  552,  Kinnison  ;  The  Squabble  of  the
Sea  Nymphs,  VI,  364,  Wan-en,  M.

Boston  theological  seminary,  gift  to,  I,  618,  Claflin.  L.

Bostwick,  Arthur,  I,  323,  Bostwick,  D.

Boswell,  Sir  Alexander,  V,  730,  Stuart,  James.

Botanical  Magazine,  the,  VI,  357,  Warder,  J.  A.

Botany,  investigations  in,  collections,  and  discoveries,  I,
189,  Bartram  ;  645,  Clayton,  J.  ;  II,  159,  Dewey,  C.  ;  196,
Dombey ;  211,  Douglas,  D.  ;  268,  Durand,  E.  ;  356,  En-
gelmann,  G.  ;  594,  Garden  ;  618,  Gat/,  C.  ;  669.  Godin  des
Odonais ;  728,  Gray,  Asa  ;  HI,  267,  Hosack.  D.  ;  271,
Houghton  ;  24,  Haenke  ;  327,  Huon  ;  342,  Igolino  ;  396,
Jacquin  ;  400,  James,  T.  P.  ;  506,  Kellogg,  A.  ;  558,  Kirt-
land  ;  569,  Koehler,  A.  D.  ;  581,  Labat,  J.  B.  ;  616,  Lap-
ham,  I.  A.  ;  652,  Le  Conte ;  697,  Lesquereur :  IV,  1,
Loefling ;  15,  Longinos ;  220,  Marshall,  H.  :  286,  Mee-
han  ;  314,  Michaux  ;  321,  Milbert ;  350,  Mocino  :  374,
Montrueil  ;  455,  Muhlenberg,  G.  H.  E.  ;  472,  Mutts  ;
547,  Nuttall,  T.  ;  635,  Palisot ;  662,  Parsons,  H.  B.  ;  V,
43,  Plumier  ;  137,  Pursh  ;  147,  Quasdanovich  ;  149,  Ques-
nel,  157,  Raddi  ;  159,  Raffeneau,  Rafinesque ;  187,  Ra-
venel,  H.  W.  ;  311-312,  Rolander ;  327,  Ross,  A.  M.  ;  371,
Saint  Hilaire  ;  402,  Sartwell ;  424,  Schomburgk  ;  434,
Schweinitz,  L.  D.  ;  615,  Soutman  ;  735,  Sturm  ;  742,  Sul-
livant ;  VI,  5,  Swarlz,  O.  ;  75,  Thibaudin  ;  76,  Thiery  ;
138-139,  Torrey,  J.  :  144,  Toussaint,  D.  G.  ;  275,  Velloso  ;
338,  Wallerton  ;  338,  Wallis,  G.  ;  .351.  Ward,  L.  F.  ;  393,
Watson,  S.:  590,  Wolte,  F.\  591.  Wood,  A.;  692,  Lemmon.

Botheration  primus,  sobriquet,  IV,  521,  Niles,  TV. ;  secundus,
.Niles,  S.


712


BOTSFORD


BRICE


Botsford,  Amos.  I,  324,  Botsford,  W.

Bottesini,  Signor,  I,  548,  Cary,  A.  L.

Boty,  Iver,  111,  297.

Bouagnat,  lord  of,  I,  493,  Cadillac.

Boudet,  Gen.,  II,  154,  Dessalines.

Boudinot,  Annis,  V,  G94,  Stockton.  A.

Boudinot,  Klia.s.  Cherokee  chief,  V,  327,  Boudinot,  E. ;  V,

249,  Ridge.
Bouguer,  M.,  II,  6G9,  Godin,  L.
Bouguereau,  W.  A.,  pupils  of,  II,  380,  Evans,  D.  S.;  597,

Gardner,  E.  J. ;  VI.  452.  Wheeler.  D. :  697,  Reich.
Boulanger,  G.  R  C.  pupils  of,  V,  38,  Piatt,  C.  A.;  VI,  87,

Thompson,  A.;  191,  Twachtman.
Boulle,  Helen.  I,  569,  Champlain.
Boulogne,  battle  at,  III,  5*4,  Lacrosse.
Boulton.  Elizabeth,  I,  508,  Cameron,  J.  H.
Bound,  Mary  F.,  II,  469,  Fiske,  John.
Boundaries,  dispute  concerning  the,  between  Great  Britain

and  U.  S.,  1, 155  ;  V,  271,  Roberdeau,  I.  (see  Oregon)  ;  the

Mexican,  I,  177 ;  184,  Bartlett,  J.  R. ;  between  states,  III,

425,  Jenckes,  Joseph  ;  surveys,  II,  704,  Graham,  J.  1).
Bound  Brook,  N.  J.,  Ill,  728,  Lincoln,  B.
Bounties,  to  volunteer  soldiers,  II,  601.
Bounty -lands,  in  the  Mississippi  valley,  II,  359,  Enos.
Bourassa,  Charlotte  A.,  Ill,  611,  Langbade.
Bourbons,  alleged  heir  of  the,  VI,  524,  Williams,  E.
Bourbourg,  Brasseur  de,  III,  300,  Huematzin.
Bourdon,  Sieur,  III,  435,  Jogues.

Bourne,  Shearjashub,  Ezra,  and  Joseph,  I,  331,  Bourne,  R.
Bourne,  Robert,  I.  330.  Bourne,  N.
Bousfleld,  Thomas,  V,  129.
Boutain,  Cant.,  Ill,  270,  Houdetol.
Bouterone,  Mile.,  II,  590,  Garakonthie.
Bouvier,  Dr.,  I,  394,  Brown,  Buckminster.
Bouvier,  Hannah  M.,  IV,  745,  Peterson,  H.  M.  B.
Bowditch,  W.  I.,  IV,  489,  Nell.
Bowdoin,  Elizabeth,  V,  34,  Pitts,  James.
Bowdoin  college,  gifts  to,  I,  32,  Adams,  Seth ;  335,  Bow-
doin, J.;  Ill,  125  ;  IV,  11,  12 ;  VI,  565,  Winkley  ;  605.
Bowen,  Daniel,  IV,  289,  Meigs,  J.;  V,  24,  Pine.
Bowery  House,  the,  V,  737,  Stuyvesant,  P.  G.
Bowery  theatre,  the,  IH,  55,  Hamblin,  T.  S.
Bowie-knives,  I,  338,  Bowie,  J.
Bowman,  Capt.,  IV,  109,  McDowell,  G.  G.
Bownjan,  Col.  John,  IV,  2,  Logan,  B.
Bowman,  Capt.  S.,  I,  339,  Bowman,  A.  H.
Boxer,  the,  fight  of,  with  the  Enterprise,  I,  471,  Burrows,

W. ;  IV,  75,  McCall,  E.  R.
Boyaca,  battle  at,  I,  305 ;  IV,  194,  Manrique  ;  V,  396,  San-

iander.
Boyer,  Alexis,  pupil  of,  V,  671,  Stevens,  A.  H.
Boyescu,  Baron  de.  IV,  646.  Parepa.
Boyle,  Dr.  James,  V,  273,  Roberts,  S.
Boylston,  Peter,  I,  15,  Adams,  John.
Boylston,  Susanna,  I,  15,  Adams,  John.
Boy  merchants,  the,  III,  508,  Kelly,  W.
Boynton,  W.,  Ill,  284.  Howe,  T.  O.
Boy  preacher,  the,  III,  516,  Kennedy,  C.
Boy  preacher,  V,  610,  Soule,  J.
Boz,  the  original,  II,  170,  Dickens,  A.  N.
Brace,  John,  V,  714.

Brace,  Ned,  original  of,  I,  131,  Bacon,  Edmund.
Bracebridge,  Mr.,  Ill,  204.  Hill,  F.  M.
Brachiopods,  classification  of,  IV,  422,  Morse,  E.  S.
Bracito  river,  engagement  at  the,  II,  200,  Doniphan.
Braddock's  expedition,  Washington's  escape  at,  I,  767,

Craik;  711,  Contrecceur :  II,  569,  Goge.  T.;  difficulty  of

getting  colonial  support  for,  529  ;  VI,  375.
Braddock's  headquarters,  illustration,  I,  347.
Bradford,  Jerusha,  II,  618,  Gay,  E.
Bradford,  John,  burning  of,  IV,  251,  Mather,  R.
Bradford,  Rev.  J.  M.,  I.  348,  Bradford.  A.  W.
Bradford,  Lydia,  I,  680,  Cogswell,  M.  F.
Bradford,  Maj.,  II,  506,  Forrest,  N.  B.
Bradford  club,  the,  IV,  430,  Morton,  Jackson.
Bradford  House,  at  Plymouth,  illustration,  I,  349.
Bradie,  David,  IV,  342,*  Mitchell,  D.  B.
Bradley,  Alice,  III.  117,  Haven,  A.  B.flV,  484,  Neal,  J.  C.
Bradley,  Cornelia  H.,  V,  240,  Richards,  C.  H.
Bradley,  Emily.  Ill,  117,  Haven,  A.  B.
Bradley,  Francis,  I,  352,  Bradley,  J.  P.
Bradley,  T.  B.  M.,  II,  8,  Creswell,  Julia.
Brady,  John  R„  I,  102.
Brady,  Judge  T.  S.,  I,  a54,  Brady,  J.  T.
Brag,  Sir  Jack,  sobriquet.  I,  453,  Burgoyne.
Braganzas,  the,  III,  406,  Jarvis,  W.
Braidwood,  Thomas,  II,  579,  Gallaudet,  T.  H.
Brain-picture  hoax,  the,  VI.  698,  Rockwood.
Brains,  weight  of,  III.  562,  Knight.  E.  H.
Braintree,  grant  of  land  in,  IV,  267,  Maverick,  S.\  Merry

Mount,  IV, 433,  Morton,  T.;  history  of,  IV.  521,  Miles,  S. ;

V,  150,  Quincy,  E. ;  Quincy  house  at,  illustration,  151  ;

gift  of  academy  and  library  to,  VI,  73,  Thayer,  S.
Bra 1 1 lali.  Joseph,  II,  563.
Branch,  Rev.  J.  O.,  Ill,  179,  Hentz,  C.  T.
Branch,  John  S.,  I,  358,  Branch,  M.  L.  B.
Brandicourt,  Gen.,  VI,  144,  Toussaiiit.


Brandon  seminary,  I,  703,  Conant,  J.
Brandreth,  Dr.  W.,  I,  358,  Brandreth,


U.


Brandywine,  battle  of  the,  1, 744  ;  II,  119,  Deborre  ;  cannon
captured  at,  139,  Denting,  W.  ;  206,  Duportail ;  751  ;  mis-
take concerning,  751  J  III,  587  ;  IV,  221,  Marshall,  T.  ;  V,
133,  Pulaski ;  671,  Stevens,  E.  :  VI,  398,  Wayne.

Branford,  Conn.,  V,  17,  Pierson,  A.

Brant,  Molly,  III,  452.

Brasilly,  dye-woods,  IV,  481,  Navailles.

Bratton,  William,  I,  361,  Bratton  :  IV,  90,  McClure,  J.

Brattonville,  engagement  at,  IV,  90,  McClure,  J.

Braun,  Alexander,  H,  356,  Engelmann,  G.

Braun,  Prof.,  I,  34.

Bravos  de  Paez,  HI,  356,  Iribarren.

Bray,  Rev.  T.,  I.  216,  Beecher.

Brazil,  discovery  of,  I,  492,  Cabral ;  V,  29,  Pinzon,  V.  Y. ;
exploration  of,  I,  211,  Beaurepaire-Rohan  ;  294,  Bliss.  P.
C.  ;  H,  164,  Diaz,  C.  A.  ;  165,  Diaz  de  Pineda  ;  439,  Fer-
reira  ;  481,  Fletcher,  J.  C.  ;  516,  Fouville  ;  542,  Freire  de
Andrado  ;  597,  Gardner,  G.;  111,340,  Iff;  582.  Lacerda  ;
612,  Langsdorff ;  685,  Leme  ;  713,  Lima,  M.  ;  IV,  498,
Neu-  Wied  ;  520,  Nieuwhof ;  scientific  exploration  in,  204,
Marggraf :  237,  Martins ;  settlement  of,  II,  237,  Duarte
Coelho  ;  671,  Gaes ;  III,  615,  Lava  ;  V,  615-616,  Souza  ;
sale  of,  by  the  natives,  claim  to  the  sites  of  cities  in,  III,
686.  Lemos  :  colonization  of  Indians  in,  troubles  about,
264,  Home  ;  cannibal  tribes  of,  U,  451,  Figueira  ;  435,
Fernandes  -  Sardinha ;  conquest  of  native  tribes  in,
French  invasion,  capture  of  French  colonies,  IV,  198-199.
Maranhao  ;  Huguenot  colony  in.  III,  694,  Lery,  J.  de  ;
VI,  295,  Villegaignon  ;  contests  of  French.  Portuguese,
and  Dutch  in,  H,  163,  Dias,  H.  ;  434,  Fernandes,  C.  ;  III,
159,  Hein  :  183,  Hermstaedt ;  IV,  297,  Meu  de  Sua  ;  480,
Nassau-Siegen  ;  487,  Negreiros  ;  V,  362,  Sa,  E.  de  ;  VI,
290,  Vieira,  J.  F.  ;  insurrections  and  revolutions  in,  II,
426-427,  Feijo  ;  494,  Fonseca  Lima  ;  525,  Franco  ;  526,
Franco  de  Sa  ;  HI,  714.  Lima,  L.  A. ;  IV,  235,  Martinet ;  V,
377,  Saldanha  ;  war  of,  with  Argentine  Republic,  II,  125,
DeKay,  G.  C.  ;  wars  of,  with  Uruguay,  the  Argentine
Republic,  and  Paraguay,  IH,  352,  Inhauma  ;  714,  Lima  ;
IV,  498,  Neves  ;  war  against  the  Spaniards,  H,  542,  Freire
de  Andrado  ;  IV,  705,  Pelotas :  commercial  crisis  in,  II,
506,  Furtado,  F.  J.  ;  movement  for  emancipation,  strug-
gle tor  independence,  566,  Furtado  de  Mendoca  ;  inde-
pendence of,  declared,  IV,  725,  Pereira,  J.  C.  ;  war  for  in-
dependence in,  IH,  430,  Jequitinhonha  ;  654,  Ledo  ;  emi-
gration of  the  royal  family  to,  constitution  secured  to,
departure  of  the  king,  attempt  to  recall  the  prince,  inde-
pendence of,  declared,  first  emperor,  insurrections,  new
constitution,  revolution  in  Pernambuco,  IV,  698 ;  Pedro
I.,  debt  to  Portugal,  abdication  of  the  throne,  proclama-
tion of  the  majority  of  Pedro  II.,  IV.  572,  Olinda  :  699  ;
plot  for  securing  constitutional  government  in.  III,  713,
Lima,  Jose  and  Francisco  ;  debt  of,  English  claims  dis-
allowed, 736,  Lisboa,  J.  A.  ;  decree  opening  the  ports  of,
to  all  nations,  independence  of,  736,  Lisboa.  J.  da  Silva  ;
navy  of,  II,  164,  Dias  Vieira  ;  slave-hunting  in.  III,  403,
Jaray  ;  journals  of,  anti-slavery  society,  revolutionary
party.  682,  Leite  ;  emancipation  in,  II,  526,  Franco,  B.  de
S.  ;  improvements  in,  III.  636,  Lavradio  ;  provinces  of
Maranhao  and  Para.  II,  541,  Freire  de  Andradu  :  dis-
coveries in,  I,  107,  Arzao  ;  mines  of  Paracatu,  II,  542,
Andradu  ;  mines  discovered  in,  imprisonment  of  the
discoverer,  IV,  405,  Moribecha  ;  gold-mines  of,  III,  200,
Hilbernaz  :  YI.  437,  Wernicke  ;  search  for  emerald-mines
of,  VI,  286,  Viale  :  discovery  of  salt-mines,  IV.  524,  Niilo  ;
search  for  the  Mountain  of  Wealth  in,  VI,  305,  Vixnie  ;
flora  of,  V,  370-371,  Saint  Hilaire ;  first  sugar-mill  in,
615,  Souza  ;  hereditary  captaincies  in,  615-616,  Souza,  M.
P.  and  T.  ;  first  bishop  of,  II,  435,  Fernandes-Sardinha  ;
first  mission  in.  IV,  544,  Nunes  ;  missions  to,  II,  552
Fritz  ;  IV,  213,  Marques  Perdiqao  ;  Jesuits  in,  1, 124,  Aze,
vedo,  I.,  and  Azpilcueta  ;  R.  C.  institutions  founded  in,
III,  709,  Libramento  ;  the  apostle  of,  I,  68,  Anchieta  ;
college  in,  68  :  Indian  college  in,  III,  685.  Leme ;  first
academy  and  printing-office  in,  II,  542,  Freire  de  Andra-
da  ;  first  public  school  in,  III,  89,  Harrah  ;  academy  of
medicine  of,  IV,  290,  Meirelles  ;  Dutch  expedition  to,  VI,
517.  Willekens  ;  French,  651,  Ysambert,  G.

Brazilian  Humboldt,  the,  II,  440,  Ferreira,  A.  R.

Brazil  litteraria,  magazine,  IV,  170,  Magalhaens,  D.  J.  G.

Bread  father,  the,  V,  617,  Sower,  C.

Breadwinners,  the,  anonymous  novel.  III,  131,  Hay,  J.

Breckinridge,  John,  1,  366,  Breckinridge,  J.  C.

Breed's  hill,  V,  109

Bremer,  Fredrika,  II,  221,  Dowtting,  A.  J.  ;  IV,  220,  Mar-
shall, A.

Breno,  Randolph  of,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W.

Brent,  Gov.,  V,  119,  Price,  S.

Brenchley,  Mr.,  V,  220,  Remy.

Breshwood,  Capt..  II,  184.

Brest,  observatory  founded  at,  V,  116,  Privalaye.

Bretigny,  Poncetdc,  III,  300,  Huet ;  IV,  310,  Mesnard.

Brett,  Arabella,  III,  225,  Hodgkinson,  A.

Brewer,  David,  V,  141,  Putnam,  R.

Brewster,  Osmyn,  II,  12,  Crocker,  U.

Brewton,  Rebecca,  II,  571,  Gaillard,  P.  C.\  IV,  445,  Motte,

Briancourt,  Gen.,  IV,  269.
Briand,  Bishop.  II.  371,  Esglis.
Brice,  Gen.,  V,  378,  Salnave.


BRIDE


BUCCANEERS


713


Bride  of  Fort  Edward,  the,  I,  130,  Bacon,  D.

Bridge,  S.  J.,  Ill,  107,  Harvard.

Bridgeport,  Conn.,  I,  173,  Bamum,  P.  T.;  machine-works
at,  HI,  279,  Howe,  E.

Bridgport,  Hugh,  III,  118.  119,  Haviland,  J.

Bridges,  V,  597,  Smith,  W.  Sooy  ;  at  St.  Louis,  II,  887,
Eads  ;  first  wire  suspension,  32(5,  Ellet :  Niagara  suspen-
sion, 326,  Ellet ;  invention  of  a  truss,  IV,  10,  Long,  S.  H. ;
invention  of  an  iron,  631,  Paine,  TV,  suspension,  V,  303,
Roebling ;  cantilever,  559,  Smith,  C.  S. ;  iron,  VI,  462,
Whipple,  S.;  longest  span  in,  437,  Wernuag ;  one  made
of  vine,  IV,  178,  Malta  Capac  ;  important,  VI,  554,  Wil-
son, J.  M.

Bridgewater,  Duke  of,  II,  563.

Bridge  water,  Mass.,  Ill,  647,  Leach.  G.

Bridgewater,  battle  of. See  Lundy's  Lake.

Bridport,  Hugh,  IV,  506,  Newsam.

Bridport,  Lord,  VI,  382.

Brief  Creek,  engagement  at,  I,  110,  Ashe,  J.;  V,  116,  Pre-
vost,  A.

Brigham,  Dexter.  Ill,  85,  Harnden.

Bright,  John,  quoted,  II,  449,  Field,  C.  W. ;  IV,  760.

Brillante,  Le.  I,  409,  Brown,  Moses.

Brirnfield,  Mass.,  free  high-school  and  church  of,  gifts  to,
III,  219,  Hitchcock,  S.  A.

Brink,  Clarissa  C,  VI,  696,  Peck.

Brinton,  Elizabeth,  IV,  79,  McClellan.

Brion,  Admiral,  I,  304.

Brisbane.  Albert,  II,  736.

Briscoe,  Frank,  IV,  122,  Mcllhenney.

Briscoe,  Nathaniel,  II,  295,  Eaton,  N.

Brissot,  M.,  quoted,  IV,  320,  Mifflin.

Brissotins,  the,  I,  379,  Brissot.

Bristol,  Earl  of,  I,  682,  Colburn,  Z.

Bristol,  bombardment  of.  I.  351,  Bradford,  W.

Bristol,  the,  at  Charleston,  IV,  446,  Moultrie.

Bristow  Station,  engagement  at,  III,  202,  Hill,  A.  P.;  V,
207,  Reed,  H.  B.

Brittan,  Belle,  pen-name,  II,  560,  Fuller,  H.

Britannicus,  pen-name,  IV,  147,  McLeod,  M.

Britton,  Winchester,  V,  481,  Slianks.

Britts,  James  B.,  II,  286,  Dyer,  M.

Britton,  John,  I,  175,  Barre,  J.

British  America,  exploration  of,  II,  534,  Franklin,  Sir  J. ;
III,  154,  Hearne  ;  616,  La  Perouse,  Mackenzie,  Sir  A.;  V,
67,  Pope,  F.  L.  ;  inscribed  stone  found  in,  VI,  277,  Ve-
randrye  ;  pretended  discovery  in,  292,  Vignan.

British  North  American  colonies,  union  of,  II,  583,  Gait,  A.
TV.  IV,  103;  116,  McGee.

British  American,  A,  pen-name,  IV,  242,  Mason,  T.

British  American  Magazine,  the,  I,  11,  Adam,  G.  M.

British  Columbia,  II,  122,  De  Cosmos ;  discontent  in,  247,
Dufferin  :  foundation  of  British  claim  to,  IV,  284,  Meares;
R.  C.  institutions  in,  V,  128,  Provencher.

British  gum,  IV,  738,  Perry,  W.

British  museum,  beginning  of  the,  V,  550,  Sloane,  Sir  H.;
shells  presented  to,  I,  532,  Carpenter,  P.  P. ;  Americana
of,  V,  676,  Stevens,  H.

Brixen,  battle  of,  II.  253,  Dumas.

Broad  river,  S.  C,  engagement  on  the,  V,  752.

Broad  Seal  war,  the,  IV,  717,  Pennington,  W.;  Ill,  27,
Haines.

Broadway  railroad  charter,  the,  I,  707,  Conkling,  R.;  V,
482,  Sharp.  J.

Broadway  tabernacle,  the,  III,  31,  Hale,  D. ;  II,  462,  Finney.

Brock,  R.  A.,  MS.  in  possession  of,  I,  48(5,  Byrd,  W.

Brock,  Sallie  A.,  V,  148,  Putnam,  S.  A.  B.

Brock's  monument,  I,  381,  Brock.

Brodersen,  Bishop.  Ill,  576,  Krogstrupp.

Brodhead,  Rev.  Dr.,  II.  160,  DeWitt,  T.

Broglie,  Marshal,  III,  490,  Kalb.

Brome,  Lord,  I,  743,  Cornwallis.

Bromfield,  Maj.,  HI.  654-655,  Ledyard,  W.

Bronck,  Jonas,  VI,  239,  Van  Curler.

Bronson,  Enos,  III,  79,  Harding,  J.

Bronson,  Rev.  Sherlock  A.,  V,  508,  Sherman.

Bronson,  W.  W.,  Ill,  200,  Hildebum,  C.  S.  R.

BrontotheridBB,  the,  IV,  218,  Marsh,  O.  C.

Bronze  casting,  first,  in  America,  I,  400,  Brown,  H.  K. ;  HI,
261,  Hoppin,  T.  F.

Brook,  Elizabeth.  I,  536,  Carroll.

Brooke,  Charles  W.,  V,  189,  Rawle,  W.  B.

Brooke,  Elizabeth.  IV,  151,  MacNab.

Brooke,  John,  I,  384,  Brooke,  F.  J.

Brooke,  Robert,  I,  640,  Clay.  H.

Brooke-Rawle,  W.,  V,  189,  Rawle.

Brook  Farm  community,  the,  II,  35,  Curtis,  G.  W.\  64,
Dana  ;  279,  Dwight,J.  S.;  651,  Fuller,  S.  Af. ;  754,  Greene,
W.  B.;  HI.  126,  128 ;  156,  Hecker,  I.  T.;  IV,  655  ;  V,  259,
Emerson,  II,  345.

Brookhaven,  VI,  602,  Woodhull,  R.

Brooklyn,  Conn.,  V.  139,  Putnam,  I.

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  purchase  of  the  site  of,  V,  15,  Pierrepont.
H.;  settlers  of,  HI,  444,  Johnson,  J.  B.;  improvements
in.  442,  Johnson,  E.  M. ;  V,  16,  Pierrepont,  H.  E. ;  Atlan-
tic docks  at,  717,  Stranahan  ;  hospital,  founding  of,  IV,
245,  Mason,  T.  L.\  Methodist  hospital  of,  gift  to,  V,  461,
Seney.  G.  I. ;  R.  C.  institutions  founded  in,  II,  537,  Fran-
8ioli  ;  industrial  institute  in,  V,  101,  Pratt,  C;  Livingston


house  in,  illustration,  HI,  742 ;  east  district  of,  VI,  602,
Woodhull,  M.

Brooklyn  academy  of  design,  III,  103,  Hart,  W.

Brooklyn  Faust  club,  III,  99,  Harrison,  Gabriel.

Brooklyn  Magazine,  the,  IV,  394,  Morford.

Brooklyn  tabernacle,  VI,  27,  Talmage.

Brooks,  Charlotte  G.,  II,  387.

Brooks,  Chatty,  pen-name,  V,  233,  Rice,  R.

Brooks,  Rev.  Edward,  I.  389,  Brooks,  P.  C.

Brooks,  Judge  G.  W.,  Ill,  526,  Kerr,  J.

Brosius,  Rev.  Felix,  II,  580,  Gallitzin.

Brother  Azarias.  pen-name,  IV,  457,  Mullany.  P.  F.

Brotherhood  of  the  coast,  the,  II,  85,  David,  E.

Brotherhood  of  the  new  life,  the,  III,  94,  Harris,  T.  L.\
IV,  572,  Oliphant,  L.

Brotherhood  of  the  union,  the,  II,  485,  Florence,  T.  B. ;  III,
734,  Lippard.

Brother  Jonathan,  origin  of  the  name,  VI,  168,  Trumbull,
Jonathan.

Brother  Jonathan,  wreck  of  the,  VI,  623,  Wright,  G.

Brougham,  Lord,  III,  173,  Henry,  P.;  quoted,  VI,  382.

Brouillon,  De,  III,  595,  La  Hontan.

Brown,  Abel,  IH,  388,  Jackson,  J.  C.

Brown,  Catherine  Swan,  V,  624,  Spear,  C.

Brown,  Daniel,  II,  380,  Evans,  D.  R.

Brown,  Daniel,  IH,  448,  Johnson,  S.

Brown,  Elizabeth  C,  I,  337,  Bowers,  E.  C.

Brown,  Emma  E.,  Ill,  241,  Holmes,  O.  W.

Brown,  Ford  Madox,  III,  624,  Lathrop,  F.

Brown,  Dr.  Francis,  III,  218,  Hitchcock,  R.  D.

Brown,  George,  II,  320,  Elgin.

Brown,  James,  I,  412,  Brown,  W.

Brown,  John,  Emerson  on,  II,  346.

Brown,  Matthew,  III,  423.

Brown,  Moses.  I,  60,  Almv  \  III,  426,  Jenkins,  A.  A.

Brown,  Nicholas,  I,  395,  396  ;  II,  525,  Francis,  J.  B.

Brown,  Obadiah,  III,  426,  Jenkins,  A.  A.

Brown,  Peter,  I.  404,  Brown,  J.

Brown,  Rawdon.  I,  491,  Cabot.

Brown,  Smith.  V,  547,  Slater.

Brown,  Thomas  M.,  IH,  166,  Hendricks,  T.  A.

Brown,  Vandyke,  pen-name,  1,  359,  Brannan,  W.  P. ;  717,
Cook,  M.

Brown.  William,  I,  409,  Brown,  M.

Browne,  Anne,  VI,  572,  Winihrop.

Browne,  Dunn,  pen-name,  II,  468,  Fisk,  S.

Browne,  Junius  Henri,  V,  241,  Richardson,  A.  D.

Browne,  Rev.  J.  W.,  I,  413,  Browne,  S.  J.

Browne,  Sir  Thomas,  II,  456.

Browne,  William  Goldsmith,  I,  413,  Brown,  F.  F.

Brownell.  Frank  E.,  II,  335,  Ellsworth,  E.  E.

Browning,  Elizabeth  B.,  Ill,  245,  Home.

Browning.  Robert,  original  of  a  poem  of,  in,  246,  Home.

Brownlow,  Dr.  C,  III,  156,  Hecker.  I.  T.

Brown's  ferry,  movement  at,  V,  595-596,  Smith,  W.  F.

Brownson,  Sarah,  VI,  63,  Tenney.  S.  B.

Brownson,  Sarah  M.,  II,  581.  Gallitzin.

Brownston,  battle  of.  V.  126,  Proctor,  H.  A.

Brown  university,  founding  of,  first  student,  TV,  192,  Man-
ning, James ;  V,  310,  Rogers,  W.  ;  gifts  to,  I,  396,  683,
Colby,  G.  ;  II.  307,  Edwards,  M.  ;  gifts  to,  339,  Elton.  R.  ■
748,  Greene,  A.G.;  IV,  59,  Lyman,  D.  W.  ;  311,  Metcalf,
T. ;  VI,  215,  Upton,  J.  ;  548,  Wilson,  G.  F.  ;  604,  Woods,
A.  ;  reorganization  of,  VI,  397,  Wayland,  F.  ;  illustra-
tion, I,  395.

Bruce,  David,  I,  418,  Bruce,  G.

Bruce,  Dr.  William,  I.  418,  Bruce,  A.

Brucite,  I,  418,  Bruce,  A.

Brudenell,  Chaplain,  I,  9,  Acland,  Lady  Harriet ;  TT,  537,
Fraser,  S.  ;  IV,  97,  McCrea.

Bruin,  Capt.  Peter  B..  V.  81,  Porter  field,  R.

Brunn,  Kristofer,  III,  402.  Janson,  K.

Brunnholtz.  Rev.  Peter,  IV,  453,  Muhlenberg.

Briinnow,  Francis,  I,  2,  Abbe  ;  VI,  454,  Wheeler,  O.  B.

Brunton,  John,  IV.  309,  Merry.

Brunton,  Louisa,  IV.  309,  Merry.

Brush,  Mrs.,  I,  581,  Chaplin,  C.

Brush,  Piatt.  V,  156,  Quitman,  J.  A.

Brush  college,  IV,  321,  Milburn.

Brushes,  invention  for  making,  I,  511,  Campbell,  Andrew

Brutus,  pen-name,  I,  64,  -Ames,  F.  ;  V,  539,  Simpson,  S.

Bryan,  John  Randolph,  V,  178,  Randolph,  J.

Bryan,  Morgan.  IV,  767,  Piatt.  S.  M.  B.

Bryant,  Ichabod,  I,  422,  Bryant.  W.  C.

Bryant,  Peter,  I,  422.  Bryant,  W.  C.

Bryant,  Philip,  I,  422,  Bryant,  W.  C.

Bryant,  Samuel,  II,  225,  Drake,  S.

Bryant,  Stephen,  I.  422.  Bryant,  W.  C.

Bryant,  W.  C,  V,  205.  Red  Jacket.

Bryant's  residences,  illustrations,  I,  424,  426.

Bryant's  station,  Ky.,  siege  of,  II.  662,  Girty.

Bryology,  III,  697,  Lesquereux  ;  V,  742,  Sullivant.

Buccaneer,  a  woman,  III,  365.  Irwing.

Buccaneers,  depredations  of,  II,  85,  David,  E.  ;  705,  Grand-
mont ;  III.  263,  Horn,  Van  ;  343,  Illigen  ;  441,  Johnson,
Daniel ;  591,  Lafitte  ;  631,  Laurent  ;  679,  Legrand  ;  TV,
37,  Low,  E.  :  46,  Lowther  :  56,  Lussan  ;  309,  Mery ;  363,
Montauband.  Montbars  :  315,  Michel,  J.  L  ;  399,  Mor-
gan, Sir  H.  ;  477,  Narbonne,  C.  H.  ;  481,  Nau  ;  death  of.


714


BUCHAN


CABASSON


in  chains,  by  yellow  fever,  573,  Olive  ;  depredations  of,
733,  Perrot,  P.  ;  V,  14,  Pierre  ;  24,  Pinel ;  49,  Pointis  ;
history  of,  419,  Schimmelin  ;  depredations  of,  609,  Sou-
bin  ;  VI,  39,  Tavernier ;  254,  Van  Satlee  ;  297,  Vin  ;  314,
Wafer ;  642,  You.

Buchan,  Earl,  gift  to  Washington,  V,  277,  Robertson,  A.

Buchanan,  Grace,  V,  672,  Stevens,  J.  G.

Buchanan,  James,  residence  of,  at  Wheatland,  I,  432.

Buchanan,  Margaret  F.,  VI,  700,  Sullivan.

Buchanan,  Mary,  V,  391,  Sanford,  N.

Buchard,  H.,  II,  541.  Freire,  R.

Buchez,  M.,  II,  55,  Dain.

Bucke,  Rev.  Horatio  W.,  I,  437,  Bucke,  R.  M.

Buckinghamshire,  Earl  of,  III,  220,  Hobart,  A.  C.

Buckminster,  Thomas,  I,  440,  Buckminster,  J.

Bucks  county  rebellion,  II,  551,  Fries.

Buck-shot  war,  the,  II,  521,  Fraley ;  III,  492,  Kane,  J.  K;
IV,  719,  Penrose,  C.  B. ;  V,  734,  Sturgeon.

Bucktails,  the,  UI,  493,  Kane,  T.  L.\  VI,  230.

Budd,  Thomas,  III,  429,  Jennings,  S. ;  IV,  408,  Morrey.

Buddington,  Capt.,  Ill,  106,  Hartstene.

Buddington,  S.  O.,  III.  38,  Hall,  C.  F.

Buddington,  Mrs.  Z.  B.,  Ill,  14,  Oustafson.

Buell,  Sarah  J.,  UI,  35,  Hale,  S.  J.

Buell,  William,  I,  442,  Buel,  J.  D.

Buenaventura,  founded,  I,  68,  Andagoya.

Buena  Vista,  battle  of,  II,  98,  Davis,  J. ;  V,  336,  Rousseau  ;
394,  Santa-Anna ;  VI,  54  ;  885,  Washington,  J.  M. ;  609,
Wool.

Buenos  Ayres,  province  of,  V,  302,  Rodriguez  ;  insurrection
in,  I,  107,  Artigas  :  revolution  in,  II,  206.  Dorrego  ;  war
of  independence  in,  1, 412,  Brovm,  W. ;  II,  699,  Goyeneche  ;
IV,  350,  Mitre  ;  520,  Nieto,  V.;  VI,  218,  Urquiza  ;  demand
for  reparation  from  France,  IV.  126,  Mackan ;  religious
institutions  founded  in,  II,  399,  Fahy.

Buenos  Ayres,  city  of,  newly  founded,  II,  591,  Ooray ;
founded  and  burned,  IV,  298,  Mendoza,  P.  de ;  defence
of,  II,  135,  Deliniers  ;  college  in,  V,  400,  Sarmiento,  D.  F. ;
literary  society  of,  IV,  545,  Nunez,  I. ;  museum,  I,  457,
Burmeister  ;  seminary  in,  IV,  510,  Neyra  ;  statue  of  San
Martin  in,  illustration,  V,  392.

Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  founder  of,  II,  328,  EUicott,  J.  ;  historical
society  of,  456  ;  Fillmore's  house  at,  illustration,  457 ;
first  church  in,  IV,  601.  Osgood,  T.\  R.  C.  institutions  in,
VI,  121,  Timon  ;  library,  the,  illustration,  II,  316  ;  gift  to,
667,  Gliick.

Buffalo  inedical  college,  the,  II.  483,  Flint,  Austin.

Buffalo,  first  account  of  the,  I,  745,  Coronado.

Buffalo,  the,  balloon,  HI,  546,  King,  S.  A.

Buffalo  Bill,  sobriquet,  674,  Cody.

Buffalo  creek,  meeting  with  Indians  on,  III,  728,  Lincoln,  B.

Bufflngton  island,  II,  472,  Fitch,  L.

Buffon,  II,  196.  Dombey  :  HI,  419.

Buffum,  Arnold,  I,  442,  Buffum,  E.  O.

Bugeaud,  Marshal,  III,  565,  Knowlton,  M.

Buildings,  inventions  for  fire-proof,  I,  742,  Cornell,  J.  B. ;
instrument  for  raising,  II,  52,  Daboll.

Buitron,  I.  670.  Cobos.

Bulfinch,  Dr.  Thomas,  I,  444,  Bidfinch,  C.

Bulgaria,  Turkish  barbarities  in,  IV,  1 16,  MacGahnn  ;  in-
vestigation of  Turkish  massacres  in,  V,  431,  Schuyler,  E.

Bulkeley,  John,  II,  67,  Dana,  S.

Bulkley,  William  F..  I.  618,  Claflin,  H.  B.

Bulkly,  Miss,  III,  313,  Humphreys,  D.

Bull,  the  pirate,  II,  581,  Gallop.

Bull.  Joseph,  V,  417,  Schebosh.

Bull,  Capt.  T.,  Ill,  676,  Leete.

Bullard,  Artemas,  I,  219.

Bullen,  Mary  S.  L.,  Ill,  678.  Legari.

Bullion,  Madame  de,  IV,  185,  Ma  nee.

Bull  Run,  battle  of,  I,  463 ;  II.  99 ;  536,  Franklin,  W.  B.  ;
UI,  70,  Hampton  ;  IV,  110  ;  673.  Patterson,  R.;  V,  503  ;
727,  Stuart,  J.  E.  B.;  incident  of,  VI.  311,  Wade,  B.  F;
second  battle  of,  II,  763,  Griffin  :  battle  of.  Ill,  391,  Jack-
son, T.  J. ;  second,  392 ;  497,  Kearny,  P. ;  670,  718,  719  ;
alleged  insubordination  at,  V,  76,  Porter,  F.  J.  ;  228,
Reynolds,  J.  F. ;  V,  524.

Bull's  bay.  S.  C,  expedition  to  take,  V,  502.  Sherman,  T.  W.

Bulmer,  Sir  Fenwick,  V,  377,  Sales  Laterriere.

Bulnes,  Gen.,  Ill,  342,  Iguain.

Buloz,  Louis,  signature,  rv,  589,  Orleans,  F.  F.

Bulwer.  E.  L.,  accused  of  plagiarism,  II,  403,  Fairfield,  S.  L.

Bump,  Huldah  P.,  VI,  367.  Warren,  M.

Bump,  Mercy  L.,  V,  717,  Stratton,  M.  L.  B.

Bunbury,  Sir  H.,  Ill,  657.  Lee,  C.

Bunce,  Hannah,  VI,  390,  Watson,  Ebenezer.

Buncombe,  speaking  for.  I,  448,  Buncombe.

Bunker  Hill,  battle  of,  II,  117,  Dearborn,  H.;  411,  Farn-
ham,  Ralph  ;  570,  Gage  ;  693,  Gould,  B.;  762,  Gridley,  R. ;
III,  565,  Knowlton,  f.;  IV,  88,  McClintock;  669,  Pater-
son;  V,  18,  Pigot  :  31,  Pitcairn  ;  61,  Pomerny,  ft;  652,
Stark,  J.;  140,  141  ;  109-110,  Prescott  ;  statue,  VI,  365,
Ware,  Joseph  ;  348,  Ward,  A.;  statue,  V,  109.

Bunker  Hill,  drama  of,  I,  453.  Burk.

Bunker  Hill  monument,  II,  756,  Greenough  ;  funds  raised
for,  HI,  35,  Hale,  S.  J.;  638.  Lawrence,  A.;  VI.  178,  Tu-
dor ;  illustration,  409 ;  architect  of,  515,  Willard,  Solo-
mon.

Bunker's  Hill,  near  New  York,  1, 198,  Bayard,  N.


Bunner,  H.  C,  IV,  261,  Matthews.

Bunner,  Randolph,  IH,  363,  Irving,  P.

Bunsen,  Chevalier,  I,  113,  Astor,  W.  B. ;  quoted,  156,  Ban-
croft, G.

Bunsen,  Prof.,  I,  154,  Bancroft,  G.\  H.  625,  Genth  ;  HI,
384,  Jackson,  C.  L. ;  V,  707,  Storer,  F.  H.

Buntline,  Ned,  pen-name,  III,  485.  Judson,  E.  Z.  C.

Burdett-Coutts.  Baroness,  I,  186,  Bartlett,  W.  L.  A.

Bureau,  the  magazine,  IV,  240,  Mason,  D.  H.

Bureau  system,  the,  H,  271,  Durell.

Burger,  Edward  G.,  V,  656,  Stearns,  S.  B.

Burgess,  Col.  Elisha,  V,  520,  Shute,  S.

Burgess,  Thomas,  I,  451,  Burgess,  G.

Burgoyne's  plays,  incident  connected  with  one.  I,  184,
Bartlett,  J.

Burgoyne's  surrender,  news  of,  in  parliament,  H,  531  ;
immediate  consequences  of,  531.

Burhaus,  Eliza  W.,  II.  411,  Farnham^  E.  W.

Burke,  Edmund,  I,  166,  Barlow,  J. ;  II,  130,  De  Lancey,  J. ;
HI,  417  ;  569,  Knox  ;  630,  Laurens  :  658  ;  V,  294,  Rocking-
ham ;  432 ;  his  knowledge  of  colonial  affairs,  HI,  742,
Livingston,  P.

Burke,  arrest  of,  I,  277.

Burke,  Mrs  ,  HI,  414,  Jefferson,  J.

Burleigh,  pen-name,  V,  562,  Smith,  M.  H.

Burlington,  la.,  library  of,  II,  767,  Grimes,  J.  W.

Burlington,  N.  J.,  I,  486,  Byllynge  ;  college  at,  founded,  II,
188,  Doane,  G.  W.

Burlington,  Vt..  gifts  to,  III,  278,  Howard,  J.  P.;  univer-
sity at,  illustration,  VI,  139.

Burmah,  mission  to,  III,  483-484,  Judson  ;  war  of,  with  Eng-
land, treatment  of  missionaries,  483-484.

Burne-Jones,  E.,  Ill,  624,  Lathrop,  F.

Burneston,  Anna  M.,  I,  452,  Burgoyne.

Burnet,  Bishop,  I,  457,  Burnet,  W. ;  cited,  III,  502.  Keith,  G.

Burnet,  Miss,  IV,  144,  McLean,  N.  C.

Burnett,  Edward,  IV,  41.

Burnett,  Frances  H.,  II,  652,  Gillette,  W.  H.

Burney,  Capt.  James,  VI,  283,  Verschoor.

Burnham,  George  P.,  II,  272,  Durivage.

Burnham,  Mary  H.  II.  521,  Fox,  M.  H.

Burnham  industrial  farm,  the,  V,  335,  Round.

Burns,  David,  VI.  248,  Van  Ness,  M.  B.

Burns,  Robert,  I,  37,  Ainslie  ;  IV,  66.  Lyon,  A.;  TV,  603,
Oswald,  R. ;  dedication  of  a  poem  of,  II,  145,  De  Peyster,
A.  S. ;  subjects  of  poems  by,  III,  603,  Oswald,  R. :  V,  222,
Renwick  ;  quoted,  VI,  204,  Tytler ;  poem  attributed  to,
545,  Wilson.  Alex.

Burnside,  Edghill,  I,  462,  Burnside.  A.  E.

Burnside,  James,  I,  462,  Burnside,  A.  E.

Burch,  William,  IV,  684,  Paxton,  C.

Burr,  Aaron,  original  of  a  character  in  fiction,  II,  267,  Du-
puy  ;  trial  of,  IV,  224  ;  speech  at  the  trial  of,  VI,  578,
Wirt ;  book  suppressed  by,  596,  Wood,  John.

Burr,  C.  C,  I,  455,  Burleigh.

Burr,  Frank  A.,  I,  212,  Beaver.

Burr,  Sarah,  I,  465,  Burr,  A. ;  V,  213,  Reeve,  T.

Burr,  S.  J.,  Ill,  98.

Burrows,  William,  grave  of,  illustration,  I,  471.

Burt,  Silas  W.,  I,  101.

Burton.  George,  I,  472,  Burton,  W.  E.

Bush,  Lieut.,  IV,  208.

Bushnell,  Mr.,  Ill,  132,  Hayes.  C.

Bushnell,  Judge  Charles,  VI,  529,  Williams,  M.  B.

Bushy  Run,  engagement  at,  I,  329,  Bouquet.

Business  colleges,  V,  630,  Spencer,  P.  R.

Bustamente,  Capt.,  IV,  180,  Mala-spina.

Busteed,  G.  AV.,  I,  475,  Busteed,  R.

Bute,  Marchioness  of,  V,  188,  Raivdon.

Butler,  B.  F.,  effect  of  a  book  on  the  campaigns  of,  HI,
298,  Hudson,  H.  N

Butler,  Charles,  VI,  673,  Butler,  G.  B.

Butler,  G.  II ,  II,  396,  Eytinge.

Butler,  James,  I,  482,  Butler,  W.

Butler,  Capt.  John,  I,  477,  Butler,  B.  F.

Butler,  Sir  Richard,  I,  480,  Butler,  P.

Butler,  Samuel,  I,  478,  Butler,  C.

Butler,  W.  H.  G.,  VI,  352,  Ward,  M.  F.

Butler,  statue  in,  I,  385,  Brooks,  C.  S.

Butterworth,  Josiah,  III,  484,  Judson,  A.  H.

Button-hole  machine,  invention  of,  HI,  273,  House,  J.  A.

Butts  hill,  battle  at,  V,  740.  Sullivan,  John.

Buys-Ballot's  Law.  I,  676,  Coffin  J.  H.

By'fleld,  Rev.  Richard,  I,  4a5,  Byfield,  N.

Byng,  Admiral,  execution  of,  I.  591,  Chatham  ;  in,  869,
Iturribalzaga  ;  593,  Ln  Gallissonniere.

Bvnner.  Edwin  L.,  II,  526,  Frankland.

Byrd,  John,  I,  486,  Byrd,  W.

Byrd  residence,  the.  illustration,  I,  486.

Byron,  Lord,  I,  487,  Byron,  J.  ;  I,  527,  Carlisle,  F.H.;  U,
59,  Dallas,  R.  C.  ;  IV,  653,  Parker,  Sir  P. ;  quoted,  I,  487,
Byron.

Cabala,  the.  rv,  642,  Pancoast,  S.

Cabanel,  Alexandre,  pupils  of.  I,  131,  Bacon,  H.  :  n,  28,
Crowninshield,  F.  ;  760,  Gregory,  E.  ;  III,  275,  Hoveu-
den  ;  IV,  757,  Philippoteaux  ;  VT,  351,  Ward,  E.  M.

Cabanos,  war  of,  TV,  213,  Marques  Perdigdo.

Cabasson,  M.,  HI,  15,  Guthers.


CABELL


CANADA


715


Cabell,  Joseph  C,  III,  422.

Cabell,  Nicholas,  I,  488,  Cabell,  W.

Cabell's  Dale,  I,  364,  Breckenridge.  J.

Cabinet,  the,  idea  of  resignations  by,  VI,  413.

Cable,  G.  W.,  satire  on  his  Grandissimes,  V,  335,  Rou-
auette,  A.  E.

Cable  street-railway,  first,  in  U.  S.,  II,  210,  Doubleday,  A.

Cabot,  Eliza  Lee,  II,  492,  Fallen,  E.  L.  C.

Cabot,  J.  E.,  II,  348.

Cabot,  Lydia,  IV,  654,  Parker,  T.

Cabot,  Samuel.  II.  492,  Follen,  E.  L.  C.

Cabot,  Sebastian,  besieged  by  Indians,  II,  591.  Garcia,  D.

Cabovil,  use  of  the  Indian  word,  I,  25,  Betanzos,  P.

Cabral.  Gen.,  V,  378,  Salnave.

Cabreva,  Pablo  Felix,  V,  257,  Rio,  A.

Cacamatzin,  III,  371,  Ixtlilxochitl  II. ;  IV,  496,  Netzahualr
pilli.

Caceres,  Felipe,  II,  165,  Diaz  Melgarejo.

Cachuea,  I,  612,  Christy,  G.  N.

Cacique,  capture  of  the,  II,  125,  De  Kay,  G.  C.

Cadereita,  Marquis  of,  IV,  618,  Pacheca.

Cadereita,  Mex.,  founded,  III,  690,  Leon,  Alonso  de.

Cadle,  Prior,  I,  363,  Breck.

Cadiz,  siege  of,  II,  354,  Encalada  ;  supplies  for  the  garri-
son, IV,  279,  Meade,  R.  W.

Cadwalader,  Frances,  II,  366,  Erskine.

Cadwalader,  Maria,  V,  257,  Ringgold,  S.

Cadwalader,  Gen.  Thomas,  I,  493,  Cadwalader,  G.

Caen,  Emery  de,  VI,  277,  Ventadour.

Csesarea  Caroli  island,  VI,  293,  Villalobos.

Caesars,  mysterious  city  of  the,  IV,  48,  Lozano,  P.

Caetano  L.  de  Moura,  pen-name,  IV,  20,  Lopes.

Cagigal,  I,  333,  Boves.

Cahokia,  defence  of,  I,  627.

Caillavilu,  toqui,  III,  730,  Lincoyan.

Cain  of  America,  the,  VI,  295,  Villegaignon.

Cairo,  destruction  of  the  iron-clad,  V,  457,  Selfridge.

Calcium  light,  the,  III,  81,  Hare,  R.

Calcraft,  James,  V,  425,  Schoolcraft,  L.

Calcutta  company,  the,  II,  396,  Eyzaguirre,  A.

Caldereita,  colony  of,  founded,  I,  90,  Armendariz.

Calden.  Milne,  IV,  281,  Meade,  G.  G.

Caldwell,  Capt.  Billy,  V,  403,  Sauganash.

Caldwell,  James  H.,  II,  41  Cushman.

Caldwell,  Josiah,  I,  278.

Caldwell,  Martha,  I,  498.  Calhoun.

Caldwell,  Susan  B.,  V,  383,  Samuels,  S.  B.  C.

Caldwell,  Lieut.  W.,  IV,  335,  Milton.

Caldwell,  Lieut.,  II,  184.

Caledonia,  N.  Y.,  fish-eulture  at,  II,  746,  Green,  S.

Caledonia,  capture  of  the  brig,  II,  330,  Elliott,  J.  D.

Calhoun,  James.  I,  498,  Calhoun,  J.  C.

Calhoun,  John,  III,  716.

Calhoun,  Patrick,  I,  498.  Calhoun,  J.  C.

Calhoun,  Rebecca,  I,  131,  Bacon,  J.  E.

Calhoun,  W.,  IV,  112,  McDuffie.

Calhoun  residence,  the  illustration,  I,  500.

Caliban  of  Science,  the,  sobriquet,  V,  168,  Ramsey,  A.

Calico-printing,  improvements  in,  II,  67,  Dana,  S.  L. ;  in-
vention of  tools  for,  I,  149,  Baldwin,  M.  W. ;  invention  of
processes,  V,  638,  Sprague,  W.

Calico  mining  district,  the,  VI,  387,  Waterman,  R.  W.

California,  discovery  of.  VI,  304,  Vizcaino  ;  exploration  of,
I,  492,  Cabrillo  ;  II,  440,  Ferrelo  :  546,  Fremont ;  VI,  658,
Zell ;  665,  Zuiiiga,  G.  ;  Rio  Grande  route  to,  n,  546,  Fre-
mont ;  expedition  to  locate  a  port  in,  575,  Gali  ;  coloniza-
tion of,  I,  157,  421,  Bryant,  E.;  431  ;  possession  of,  taken,
155 ;  II,  224,  Drake,  Sir  F. ;  cession  of,  V,  695,  Stockton,
R.  F.\  alcaldes  in,  I,  272.  Blackburn,  IF.;  revolt  of,  61,
Alvarado,  J.  B. ;  name  of,  III.  32,  Hale,  E.  E. ;  discovery
in,  84,  Harmand  ;  discovery  of  gold  in,  IV,  221,  Marsliall,
J.  W.:  independence  of,  221,  Marshall,  J.  W.\  view  of
Sutter's  mill,  VI,  2  ;  admission  of,  I,  459,  Burnett,  P.  H. :
503,  644;  constitution  of,  III,  49;  R.  C.  institutions  founded
in,  II,  576,  Gallagher,  H.  P.;  TV,  553,  (TConnell,  E.;  mis-
sions in,  III,  489,  Junipero  ;  IV,  748,  Peyri ;  VI,  205,
Ugarte  ;  apostle  of,  V,  381,  Salvatierra  ;  gifts  to  Jesuit
mission  in.  I,  488,  Caballero  y  Ocio  ;  educational  endow-
ments in.  III,  112,  Hastings,  S.  C:  big  trees  of,  first  de-
scribed, 506,  Kellogg,  A. ;  first  map  of,  1. 39,  Alarcon,  H. ;
designer  of  its  coat-of-arms,  IV,  66,  Lyon,  C. ;  disunion
sentiment  in.  III,  547,  King,  T.  S.

California,  Lower,  discovered,  I,  750,  Cortes.

California  column,  the,  I,  526,  Carletnn,  J.  H.

California  Diamond,  Little  Nell,  the,  II,  80,  Dauvray.

California  state  university,  I,  246.

Calistoga,  Cal.,  I,  359,  Brannan,  S.

Call,  Emily  L..  V,  67,  Pope,  E.  F.

Callao  attacked  by  the  Dutch.  II,  437,  Fernandez  de  C6r-
dova;  bombardment  of  (1866),  rV,  545,  Nunez,  C.  M.;
earthquake  at  (1687),  723,  Peralta.

Callender,  Revs.  Ellis  and  Elisha,  I,  506,  Callender,  J.

Calliope,  the  steam,  inventor  of,  V,  697,  Stoddard,  J.  C.

Callisthenes,  pen-name,  V,  151.  Quincy,  J.

Callowhill,  Hannah,  IV.  715,  Penn,H.

Calm  Observer,  pen-name,  VI,  267.

Calonne,  M.,  II,  264.

Caloric  engine,  II,  364.

Calorimotor,  the,  HI,  81,  Hare,  R.


Calpulalpan,  battle  of.  I,  670,  Cobos  ;  II,  190,  Doblado  ;  IV,
214,  Marquez  ;  339.  Miramon.

Calvary,  determination  of  the  site  of,  IV,  307.  Merrill,  S.

Calvary  Token,  the,  magazine,  IV,  172,  Majffiit.

Calvert,  Caroline,  II,  302,  Eden.

Calvinism  in  New  England,  I,  169,  Barnard,  J.;  II,  311,
Edwards,  J. ;  controversies  on,  VI,  604,  Woods.

Calvinistic  Magazine,  the,  V,  328,  Ross,  F.  A.

Cam,  Diego,  I,  222,  Behaim.

Camara,  Gen.,  IV,  21,  Lopez,  F.  S.

Camarao,  Felippe,  II,  164,  Dias,  H

Camargo,  Admiral,  III,  344,  Imecourt ;  explorations  by,
VI,  314,  Wagner,  D.  C.

Camaxtle,  god  of  the  Tlascalans,  III,  307,  Huitziton.

Cambray,  pen-name,  II,  430,  Fennell.

Cambridge,  Mass.,  IV,  13  ;  Washington  at,  VI,  376  ;  Holmes
house  at,  illustration,  III,  240  ;  Washington's  headquar-
ters at,  IV,  15,  illustration,  12  ;  Lowell  house  at,  40.

Cambridge  platform  of  discipline,  the,  IV,  252,  Mather,  R.

Cambridge  theological  school,  gifts  to,  II,  291,  Eastburn,
M.\  V.702,  Stone,  J.  K.

Camden,  battle  of,  I,  744 ;  H,  615,  663,  Gist,  M.;  752  ;  III,
491,  Kalb  ;  V,  671,  Stevens,  E.\  VI,  384,  Washington,  W.

Camel-back  locomotives,  invented,  VI,  559,  Winans,  R.

Camels,  use  of,  in  America,  VI,  400,  Wayne,  H.  C.

Cameron,  Capt.  Angus,  I,  508,  Cameron,  J.  H.

Cameron,  Kenneth,  I,  508,  Cameron,  H.

Cameron,  Leila,  pen-name,  II,  238,  Dubose.

Camillus,  pen-name,  I,  64,  Ames,  F. ;  HI,  58,  59  ;  542,  King.

Camisards,  the,  III,  656,  Lee,  Ann.

Campan,  Madame,  II,  624,  Genest.

Campani,  Marquis,  II,  759,  Gregori.

Campbell,  Allen,  I,  437,  Buckhout.

Campbell,  Sir  Archibald,  IH,  484.

Campbell,  Archibald,  IV,  221,  Marshall,  T.

Campbell,  Sir  Colin,  V,  672,  Stevens,  J.  G.

Campbell,  Donald,  pen-name,  I,  532,  Carpenter,  S.  C.

Campbell,  Col.  Duncan  G„  I,  514.  Campbell,  J.  A.

Campbell,  Elizabeth  Russell,  V,  115,  Preston,  T.  L.

Campbell,  John,  I,  730,  Cooper,  P.

Campbell,  Col.  J.  B.,  VI,  162,  Trotter,  G.

Campbell,  John  Wilson,  I,  512,  Campbell,  C.

Campbell,  Kate,  pen-name,  III,  729,  Lincoln,  J.  E.

Campbell,  Lord  Neil,  III,  62,  Hamilton,  A.

Campbell.  Margaretta  W.,  VI,  678,  Deland.

Campbell,  Sherwood,  I,  665,  Coan,  S.

Campbellites,  the,  II,  599,  Garfield  ;  V,  252,  Rigdon  ;  439,
Scott,  W.

Camp  Beulah.  II.  380,  Evans,  A.  J.

Camp  Douglas,  VI,  7,  Sweet,  B.  J.

Campeachy,  captured  by  pirates,  H,  705,  Grandmont ;  VI,
665,  Zuiiiga,  G.

Campeachy,  bay  of,  discovery  and  first  name  of,  H,  185,
Diaz  de  Solis.

Campenon,  M.,  IH,  691,  Leonard,  N.  G.

Campero,  Narciso,  II,  114,  Daza.

Camphausen,  Herr,  IV,  407,  Morrell,  I.  R.

Camp  Jackson,  Mo.,  capture  of,  IV,  68.

Camp-meeting,  the  first.  IV,  120,  McGready.

Camp-meetings,  in  England,  H,  218,  Dow,  L.

Campos,  Martinez,  V,  464,  Serrano.

Campo  Tourinho,  Leonor,  III,  686,  Lemos.

Canada,  supposed  discoverer  of,  IV,  646,  Parent,  P.  ;  its
name,  I,  544,  Cartier,  J. ;  exploration  of,  543.  Cartier  ;
H,  110,  Dawson,  S.  J.  ;  colonization  of,  I,  568-569,  Cham-
plain  ;  IV,  178.  Maisonneuve  ;  V,  281,  Roberval ;  292,
Roche,  E. ;  VI,  277,  Ventadour ;  Iroquois  raid  into,  278,
Vercheres  ;  expedition  to  conquer,  326,  Walker,  Sir  H.  ;
surrender  of — discontent  of  the  French  in— British  ad-
ministration, IV,  468,  Murray,  James ;  VI,  265,  Vau-
dreuil,  P.  F.  ;  the  French  under  the  English  in,  I,  765,
Craig,  J.  H.  ;  project  to  invade,  during  the  Revolution,
HI,  409,  587  ;  IV,  371  ;  VI,  84,  Thomas,  John  :  cession  of,
to  United  States  proposed  by  Franklin,  II,  532  ;  McLean
insurrection  in,  V,  109  ;  Prescott,  Robert ;  invasion  of,  I,
107 ;  union  of  Upper  and  Lower,  107,  Arthur,  G.  ;  inva-
sion of,  in  1814,  IV,  73,  McArthur,  D. ;  rebellion  of,  1837,
I,  523,  Cardinal ;  599,  Chenier ;  682,  Colborne  ;  II,  520,
Fox.  H.  S. ;  570,  Gagnon  ;  661.  Girouard,  J.  J  ;  668,
Goddu  :  698,  Gowan,  O.  R.  ;  763,  Gridley,  P.  ;  III,  151,
Head,  F.  B.  ;  621,  Lartigue;  IV,  26,  Lorimier ;  134-135,
Mackenzie,  W.  L. ;  152,  MacNab  ;  178,  Mailland,  J.  ;
477,  Narbonne,  P.  R.  ;  493,  Nelson,  W.  and  R.  ;  643,  Pa-
pineau  ;  V,  157,  Radcliffe  ;  313,  Rolph,  J.  ;  VI,  444,
Wetherall ;  disabilities  imposed  after  it,  III,  698,  Lesslie  ;
pardon  to  insurgents,  VI.  316,  Wait,  B.  ;  northwestern
rebellion  in,  IV,  177,  Mair,  C.  ;  318,  Middleton,  Sir  F.
D.  ;  V,  93,  Poundmaker ;  251-252,  Riel ;  428,  Schultz  ;
land  policy  of  the  French  government,  IV,  314,  Michel ;
land  company  of,  II,  583,  Gait,  J.  ;  land-tenure  in,  VI,  34,
Tarien  ;  conspiracy  in  grant  of  land  in,  I,  381,  Brock ;
Indian  titles  to  western  lands  of,  IV,  420,  Morris,  A.  ;
surrender  of  Indian  lands  in,  III,  596,  Laird  ;  finances
of,  II.  583,  Gait.  A.  T.  ;  representative  government  in,  IV,
62,  Lymburner ;  elective  chamber  in,  HI,  17,  Guy,  P.  ;
reform  party  in,  1, 149,  Baldwin,  R. ;  cabinet  crisis  in.  V,
871,  St.  Just ;  legislative  improvements  in,  IV,  131,  Mac-
kenzie, A.  ;  administration  of,  311,  Metcalfe  ;  the  two-
days'  ministry  in,  104,  Macdonald,  J.  S.  ; removal  of


716


CANADIAN


CARS


lieutenant-governors  in,  in,  610,  Langevin,  H.  L.  ;  pro-
posal to,  to  unite  with  Maryland,  I,  538  :  proposed  con-
•  quest  of,  loan  bill,  II,  614,  Gaston,  W.-\  Fenian  invasion

of,  IV.  581,  O'Neill,  J.  ;  protective  tariff  in,  103  ;  legis-
lative changes  in,  103 ;  use  of  French  in  the  legislature
of,  32,  Lotbiniere  ;  union  of  provinces,  VI,  14,  Syden-
ham ;  union  of  provinces— tariff  question,  118,  Tiltey  ;
union  of  provinces,  181 ;  annexation  of.  V,  565,  Smith,
Goldwin  ;  riots  in,  II,  319,  320,  Elgin  ;  manifesto  on
annexation  to  U.  S.,  320  ;  reforms  in,  320  ;  treaty,  320  ;
federation,  first  proposed,  V.  474,  Sewell,  J.  ;  I,  410,
Brown,  G.  ;  first  bishop  of,  III,  634,  Laval ;  R.  C.  insti-
tutions in,  VI,  340,  Walsh.  J.  ;  Catholic  festival-days  in,
IV,  310,  Messein  ;  anti-Catholic  movements  in,  V,  41,
Plessis,  J.  O.  ;  military  college  of,  III,  191,  Hewett,  E.  O.  ;
project  for  university  of,  682,  Leitch  :  art  associations
in,  IV,  234,  Martin,  T.  M. :  railways  of,  HI,  212,  Hincks,

F.  ;  clergy  reserve  act,  212,  Hincks,  F.  ;  history  of,  II,
434,  Ferland  ;  old  historical  documents,  II,  408,  Fari-
bault. G.  B. ;  reciprocity  with  U.  S.,  VI,  558,  Wiman.

Canadian  club,  the,  VI,  558,  Wiman.

Canadians,  plan  for  colony  in  Iowa,  III,  C98,  Lesslie.

Canalizo,  Gen.,  Ill,  185,  Hen-era,  J.  J.  de  ;  V,  394,  Santa-
Anna.

Canals,  II,  563  ;  engineering  of,  III,  430,  Jervis,  J.  B.  ;  ma-
chinery for  use  on,  VI,  487,  Whitney,  Asa  ;  improve-
ment in,  II,  216,  Douglass,  D.  B.  ;  projector  of  system
of,  VI,  391,  Watson,  E.  ;  the  del  Dique,  VI,  140,  Totten,

G.  M.  ;  Illinois  and  Michigan,  and  Hennepin,  I,  104  ;
Chesapeake  and  Ohio.  IV,  166 ;  Chenango,  VI,  107,
Throop,  E.  T.  ;  first  project  for  interoceanic,  III,  750,
Lobo  ;  the  Welland,  VI,  638,  Yates,  J.  B.;  Delaware,  II,
659,  Gilpin  ;  use  of  steam  on,  VI.  620,  Wright,  B.  H.

Canaseraga,  church  at,  V,  15,  Pierrepont,  W.  C.

Cancer,  alleged  cure  for,  II,  486,  Flores,  Jose.

Cancha  Rayada,  battle  of,  II.  354,  Encalada  ;  IV,  567,
G'Higgins,  B.  ;  602,  Osorio  ;  V.  392,  San  Martin,  J.  de.

Candle-machine,  invention  of  a,  yi,  172,  Tuck.

Cane-land,  the,  III,  522,  Kenton.

Canelos,  country  of  the,  II,  165,  Diaz  de  Pineda.

Cafiete,  Don  Manuel.  IV,  297,  Mendive.

Cafiete,  Marquis,  H,  164,  Diaz,  A.;  Ill,  329,  Hurtado,  G.

Canete,  founded,  III,  329,  Hurtado,  G.

Canfield,  Capt.  Augustus.  IV,  139v3fcLane,  R.  M.

Canfield,  John,  V,  627,  Spencer,  Ambrose.

Canisius  college,  II,  273,  Durthaler.

Canning,  Sir  Stratford,  V,  417,  Schauffler.

Cannon,  James,  VI,  13,  Swisshelm.

Cannon,  first  perfect  bronze,  in  U.  S.,  I,  49,  Alger,  C.  ;  in-
vention of  a  revolving,  I,  671,  Cochran,  J.  W. ;  the  Dahl-
gren,  II,  54  ;  curious  old  wrought-iron,  H,  139,  Deming,
W.  ;  a  revolutionary,  VI,  454,  Wheeler,  S. ;  Dyer  projec-
tile for,  II,  285,  Dyer,  A.  B.;  invention  of  improved,  II.
625,  Gennes;  VI,  155,  Treadwell,  D.  ;  189,  Tuttle,  H.  P.  ;

III.  397,  James.  C.  T.  ;  inventor  of  a  process  of  casting,

IV,  477,  Napione  ;  rifled,  invention  of  projectiles  for,  V,
408,  Sawijer,  S.;  rifled,  V,  701,  Stone,  E.  W.\  revolving,
VI,  691,  Mayall.

Cano,  Juan,  IV,  369.  Montezuma.

Canoe  club,  the  New  York,  I,  42,  Alden,  W.  L.  ;  IV,  538,

Norton,  C.  L.
Canoe  fight.  H,  56,  Dale,  S.
Canonchet,  IV,  756,  757.

Canonicus,  the,  I,  224,  Belknap,  G.  E.  ;  226,  Bell,  H.  H.
Canterac,  Gen.,  I,  306  ; IV.  213,  Maroto  ; 749,  Pezuela,

Joaquin  ;  V.  463,  Serna  ;  739,  Sucre,  A.  J.
Canton  river,  capture  of  forts  at,  I,  224,  Belknap,  G.  E.
Canton,  Mass.,  copper-works  at,  V,  225,  Revere,  P.
Canty  Carl,  pen-name,  V,  407,  Sawyer,  F.  W.
Caoutchouc,  introduced  in  Europe,  I,  704,  Condamine.
Cap  au  Gris,  siege  of,  IV,  675.  Pattie,  S.
Cape  Ann,  settlement  at,  11,43,  Cushman,  R.  ;  Dana  house

at,  illustration,  II,  70.
Cape  Blanco,  II,  440,  Ferrelo.

Cape  Breton  expedition,  expenses  of,  I,  308,  Bollan.
Cape  Breton,  importance  and  advantage  of,  anonymous

tract,  VI,  269,  Vaughan.
Cape  Cod.discovery  of,  VI,  106,  Thorwald  ;  named,  II,  691,

Gosnold  ;  libel  suits  at.  IV,  145,  McLean,  S.  P.
Cape  Colony,  conquest  of,  I.  765,  Craig,  J.  H.
Cape  Constitution,  III,  493,  Kane.  E.  K.
Cape  Corrientes,  named,  V,  62,  Ponce  de  Leon.
Cape  Diamond,  inscription  at,  IV,  371.
Cape  Disappointment,  IV,  162,  McTavixh.
Cape  Fear,  named,  II,  761,  Grcnrille,  R.
Cape  Francais,  Santo  Domingo,  III,  327,  Huon.
Cape  Frazier,  III,  493,  Kane.  E.  K.
Cape  Hatteras,  fight  off.  I,  357,  Brain e.
Cape  Henry  and  Cape  Charles,  named,  IV,  505,  Newport.
Cape  Horn,  first  doubled,  IU,  684,  Le  Maire  ;  islands  near,

H,  510,  Foster,  Henry.
Cape  Kjalarnes,  VI,  101,  Thorfinn  ;  106,  Thoncald.
Cape  Leogane.  city  founded  at,  III,  395,  Jacobsen,  S.
Cape  Lieber,  III,  133.  Hayes,  I.  I.

Cape  May.  N.  J.,  purchase  of  lands  in,  HI,  269,  Hosset.
Cape  Mendocino,  n.  440,  Ferrelo.
Cape  Menzies.  IV,  131,  Mackenzie,  Sir  A.
Cape  North,  difficulties  concerning,  H,  542,  Freire  de  An-

drada.


Cape  of  Good  Hope,  name  of,  H,  163,  Dias,  B.

Cape  Orford,  H,  440,  Ferrelo.

Cape  St.  Vincent,  naval  battle  off,  IH,  430,  Jervis,  Sir  J.

Cape  Santa  Maria  de  la  Consolaeion,  V,  29,  Pinzon,  V.  Y.

Cape  Town,  capture  of,  II,  338,  Elphinstone.

Cape  Victory,  IV,  173,  Magellan.

Cape  Virgins,  IV,  1?3,  Magellan.

Capital,  choice  of  a  national,  H,  631.

Capital  punishment,  question  of,  II,  358,  English,  T.  D.  ;  V,

182,  Rantoul  ;  law  on,  V,  627,  Spencer,  Ambrose.
Capitol  at  Washington,  extension  of  the,  H,  455,  456.
Capmany,  Antonio,  IV,  481,  Navailles.
Capuchins,  missions,  VI,  39,  Tauste  ;  652.  Yoes  ;  680,  Foidon.
Carabello,  H,  318,  Elcano.
Carabobo,  battle  at,  I,  305  ;  IV,  623,  Paez.
Caracas,  founded,  IV,  30,  Losada,  D.  de  ;  seminary  of,  II,

508,  Fortique  ;  university  and  museum  of,  VI,  260,  I  or-

gas,  J.  M.
Caracas,  conquest  of  the,  IV,  29-S0,  Losada,  D.  de ;  IV,

186,  Manco  Capac.
Caramari,  town  of,  IV,  567,  Ojeda.
Caramelli,  Hamet,  III.  648,  Lear.
Caramuru,  poem  of,  II,  270.  Durao.
Caramuru-Assu,  IV,  643,  Paraguassu  ;  V,  616,  Souza,  T.
Carbajal,  Gen.,  V,  290,  Robles.
Carbolic  acid,  as  a  local  anaesthetic,  first  used,  IV,  505,.

Newman,  W.  H.
Carbonari,  the,  II,  502,  Foresti.
Carburettor,  inventor  of  a,  V,  602,  Snow,  W.  D.
Cardan,  M.,  V,  724,  Strong,  T.
Cardinals,  first  American,  VI,  36,  Taschereau,  E.  A.\  IV,

88,  McCloskey.
Carding-machines,  invention,  H,  288,  Earle,  P.;  VI,  492,

Whittemore,  A.
Cardoso,  Balthazar,  pseudonym, -III,  603,  Lancastro.
Cardoso,  Gen.,  II,  164.  Dias,  H.
Cardozo,  Albert,  VI,  115.
Cards,  curious  games  of,  V,  16,  Pierron.
Card- wire,  invention  for  cutting,  I,  759,  Cox,  L.
Carey,  Henry,  I,  453,  Burgoyne.
Carey,  Martha,  II,  254,  Dumont,  J.  L.
Carey's  Swan's  Nest,  I,  484,  Button.
Caribs,  the,  V,  312,  Rollin  ;  rebellion  of,  n.  262,  Dupar-

quet ;  in,  270,  Houdetot :  books  on  their  language,  340,

letersdorf ;  account  of.  581,  La  Borde  ; apostle  to  476,

Jouffroy  ;  mission  to,  IV,  582,  One~sime.
Carini,  princes  of,  I,  358,  Branciforte.
Caris  Sima,  pen-name,  IV,  448,  Mountcastle.
Carl,  pen-name,  V,  407,  Sawyer.  F.  W.
Carleton,  pen-name,  I,  674,  Coffin  ;  498,  Caldwell,  Joseph.
Carleton,  G.  W.,  IH,  262,  Hoppin,  A.
■Carlfried,  pen-name,  VI,  564,  Wingate,  C.  F.
Carlisle,  captured,  II,  657,  Gilmor.
Carlist  war,  the,  n,  373,  Espartero  ;  IV,  116,  MacGahun  ;

end  of  (1839),  IV,  213,  Maroto.
Carlot,ta,  Empress,  IV,  270,  Charlotte.
Carlyle.  Thomas,  H,  74,  Daniel,  J.  M.;  his  letters,  quoted,

American  edition  of,  344.
Carman,  Catherine  W.,  VI,  570.  Winslow.  C.  W.  C.
Carmelites,  first  convent  of,  in  United  States,  II,  174.  Dick-
inson. Ma\-y  Clare.
Carmen  Alto,  battle  of,  II.  320,  Elias.
Carmichael,  Dr.  Edward,  VI.  23.  Talcott,  G.
Carnarvon,  Ix>rd.  I,  286.  Hlakc.  E.
Carnau,  Charles  R.,  V,  250,  Ridgely.  C.
Carnifex  Ferry,  battle  of,  V,  324.
Carolinas,  exploration  and  early  history  of  the.  IH,  643,

Lawson,  J.
Caroline,  burning  of  the,  n.  141,  Denison,  G.  T.;  763,  Grid-
ley,  P.;  Ill,  229.  Jloqan,  J.  S.
Caroline  islands,  discovery  of,  V,  198.  Read,  T;  VI,  293,

Villalobos.
Caroliniensis,  pen-name.  III,  242,  Holmes,  I.  E.
Carolus-Duran,  pupils.  I.  759,  Co.r,  K;  IV,  38,  Lou;  II*.  H.
Caromaia,  pen-name.  IV,  272,  May,C.
Caron,  Sir  Adolphe,  IV,  250,  Massue.
Caron,  P.  A..  I,  209.  Beaumarchais.
Carondelet,  Baron  de,  VI,  396,  Watts,  S.
Carondelet,  service  of  the,  VI,  324,  Walke.
Carothers,  Andrew,  VI,  395,  Watts,  D.
Carotid  arterv,  operation  on  the,  I,  680,  Cogswell,  M.  F.
Carpenter,  Alice,  I,  319.
Carpenter,  Dr.  Lant,  I,  531,  Carpenter,  P.  P.
Carpenter,  Samuel,  V,  262.  Rittenhouse.
Carpenter,  Rev.  W.,  H,  485,  Flohr.
Carpenter's  Hall,  congress  at,  VI,  376.
Carranza,  Bruno,  II,  436,  Fernandez,  P.;  HI,  434,  Jimenez.
Carrasco,  governor  of  Chili.  II.  206,  Dorrego.
Carriage,  wind-force,  III.  176,  Henry,  W.
Carrick's  Ford,  battle  at.  n.607.  Gamett,  R.  S.;  IV,  80.
Carrier,  Jean  Baptisre,  VI,  297.  Vilmot.
Carroll,  pen-name.  VI,  119.  Tillinqhast,  J.  L.
Carroll,  Maj.  Charles,  V,  293,  Rochester.
Carroll,  Daniel,  HI,  450,  Johnson.  T.
Carrollton,  view  of,  illustration.  I.  537.
Carrollton,  Pa.,  founded,  in,  685,  Lemcke.
Carron,  Abb6.  I,  420,  BruU.
Carronades.  IV.  735.
Care,  patents  for  coupling,  rv,  325,  Miller,  E. ;  inventor  of


CARSON


CHADDS


717


foot  power,  V,  408,  Sawyer.  S.;  of  bay-window,  V,  117,
Price,  B. ;  of  improvements,  VI,  315,  Wagner,  Webster.

Carson,  W.  A.,  IV,  745,  Petigru,  C.

Cartagena,  Juan  de,  IV,  173,  Magellan.

Cartagena,  sieges  and  captures  of,  I.  304,  306  ;  II,  494,  Fon-
vielle;  III,  181.  Heredia,  P.  de  ;  IV,  126,  Mackau  ;  373,
Montilla,  M. ;  IV,  405,  Morillo ;  plunder  of,  V,  49,
Pointis  ;  its  fortifications,  II,  371,  Eslaba  ;  British  re-
pulse at,  VI,  280,  Vernon,  E.\  religious  institutions  in,

III,  749,  Loayza.

Cartagena,  rescue  of  the,  III,  414,  Jeffers.

Carter,  Anne,  III,  667,  Lee,  H.

Carter,  Eliza.  I,  487,  Byrd.

Carter,  Henry,  III.  696,  Leslie,  F.

Carthy,  Daniel,  III,  661,  Lee,  Charles.

Cartridge-loading  machine  invented,  VI,  402,  Webb,  C.  H.

Cartwright,  G.,  Ill,  442,  Johnson,  E.;  IV,  267,  Maverick,  S.

Cartwright,  Sir  George,  V,  736.

Carvajal,  family  of,  V,  385,  San  Carlos.

Carvajal,  Francisco,  II,  399,  Fagoaga.

Carvajal,  G.  and  B.  Suarez  de,  IV,  546,  Nunez-Vela.

Carvell,  Capt.  H.  D.  W.,  IV,  647,  Parepa.

Carver,  John,  Esq.,  pseudonym,  II,  194,  Dodge,  N.  S.

Carvill,  Mr.,  Ill,  361.

Car-wheels,  corrugated  plate,  annealing  process  for,  VI,

488,  Whitney,  A.;  improvements,  559,  Winans,  R.
Cary,  Anne,  V,  173,  Randolph,  T.  M.
Cary.  Gyles,  IV,  659,  Parris,  S.
Cary;  Dr.  Nelson  H.<  I,  548,  Cary.  A.  L.
Cary,  Mary,  IV,  625,  Page,  Carter.
Cary,  Miss,  II,  402,  Fairfax,  T.
Cary,  Rev.  Samuel,  II,  540,  Freeman,  James.
Cary,  Thomas,  III,  337,  Ht/de,  E.
Caryl,  Rev.  Joseph,  V,  520,  Shute,  S.
Carysfort  light-house,  Fla.,  V,  647,  Stansbury,  H.
Casa  di  Miranda,  Count,  IV,  522,  Nilsson.
Casa^Maroto,  Count  of,  IV,  213,  Maroto.
Casas,  Bartolomfi  de  las,  II,  368,  Escandon.
Casca,  pen-name,  VI,  91,  Thompson,  John.
Casco,  attack  on,  I,  346,  Brackett.  A.;  Ill,  189,  Hertel.
Casey,  Samuel,  V,  267,  Rives,  J.  C.
Casey,  Col.  T.  L.,  IV,  888,  Mills,  R.
Cash-box,  invention  of  a  folding,  V,  207,  Reed,  H.
Casket,  the,  magazine,  I,  238,  Bennett,  E.
Caspipina,  pen-name,  II,  241,  Duche.
Cass,  Capt.  Jonathan,  I,  551,  Cass,  L.

Cass,  Lewis,  his  action  on  the  surrender  of  Detroit,  III,  309.
Cassidy,  John,  I,  553,  Cassidy,  W.
Cassilhas,  Count  de,  VI,  103,  Thornton,  E.
Cassilis.  Earl  of,  III,  516,  Kennedy,  A.;  VI,  395,  Watts,  J.
Cassio,  pseudonym,  II,  694.  Gould,  E.  S.
Cassius,  pseudonym,  I,  289,  Bland,  T.
Castaiiares,  Father,  IV,  48,  Lozano,  P.
Castellanos,  the  historian,  II,  426,  Federmann.
Castelli,  Gen.,  IV,  57,  Luzuriaga.
Castelli,  Juan  Jos6,  IV,  520,  Nieto,  V.
Castelnau,  Gen.,  IV.  269.

Castillo,  Severo,  II,  297,  Echenique  ;  III,  480,  Juarez,  B.  P.
Castillo,  Sebastian  del,  III,  214,  Hinojosa.
Castilla  de  Oro,  expedition  to  colonize,  IV,  697,  Pedrarias  ;

IV,  519,  Nicuesa.

Castine,  pseudonym,  I,  389,  Brooks,  N.

Castine,  Me.,  V,  368,  Saint  Castin.

Castle  Garden,  VI,  529,  Williams,  J.

Castle  Hill  estate,  the,  Va..  VI,  330,  Walker,' Thomas.

Castle  Point,  N.  J.,  I,  199.  Bayard,  W.;  illustration,  V,  674.

Castors,  the,  I,  580,  Chapleau.

Castries,  Marshal  de,  I,  555,  Castries  ;  V,  144,  Puysegur.

Castro,  Beltran  del.  Ill,  329,  Hurtado,  G.

Castro,  Gen.  Jose,  U,  546,  Fremont ;  IV,  623,  Paez.

Castro,  Lope  Garcia  de,  IV,  295,  Mendana.

Casts,  new  method  of  taking,  IV,  331-332.  Mills,  C.

Cast-steel,  invention  of  process  for,  I,  122,  Averell,  W.  W.

Catalpa  speciosa,  the,  VI,  357,  Warder,  J.  A.

Cataracts,  removal  of,  I,  680,  Cogswell,  M.  F.

Catarocony,  HI,  601,  Lamberville.

Catawba  Indians,  last  of  the,  III,  93,  Harris,  P.

Cat  island,  I,  697.

Cathcart,  Earl,  V.  44,  Plumsted,  W.

Cathcart,  Robert,  IV,  149,  McMaster,  W.

Cathedraticum,  the,  V,  136,  Purcell.

Catherine  H.,  Empress,  I,  329,  Bouille  ;  II,  69,  Dana,  F.;

Ill,  655,  Ledyard,  J.
Catherwood,  Frederick,  V,  666.  Stephens,  J.  L.
Catherwood,  James  E.,  VI,  674,  Catherwood,  M.  H.
Catholic  Cabinet,  the  magazine,  in,  520,  Kenrick.
Catholic  historical  society,  U.  S.,  V,  488,  Shea,  J.  D.  G.
Catholic  Magazine,  the,  V,  620,  Spalding,  M.  J.
Catholic  Miscellany,  II,  357.  England,  J.
Catholic  protectory.  New  York,  III,  370.  Ives,  L.  S.
Catholic  Quarterly  Review,  the.  I,  737,  Corcoran,  J.  A.
Catholic  schools.  Hi,  304,  305.
Catholic  Union,  the,  II,  114,  Dealy.
Catholic  Universe,  the,  II,  658,  Gilmovr.
Catholic  World,  the,  III,  157,  Hecker,  I.  T.
Catholics,  first  pilgrimage  of,  to  Rome  from  America,  H,

114,  Dealy ;  controversies  with,  III,  303-304,  Hughes,  J. ;

concessions  to,  II,  16,  Crooks,  A.
Cato,  pen-name,  HI,  59,  VI,  110,  Tibbits,  G.


Catskill,  the,  monitor,  I,  175,  Barrett,  E. ;  V,  298,  Rodgers,
G.  W.

Caucus,  supposed  origin  of  the  word,  I,  29.

Caughnawaga,  fight  at,  I,  523,  Cardinal ;  II,  267,  Duquet.

Caulfield,  Susan,  I,  453,  Burgoyne.

Caulkers'  club,  the,  I,  29.

Causden,  Jeremiah,  V,  210,  Reed,  P.

Caux,  Marquis  de,  IV,  675.  Pat'ti.

Cavagnal,  Chevalier  de,  VI,  265,  Vaudreuil,  P.  F.

Cavaignac,  M.,  II,  55,  Pair,

Cavalry  raids,  in  the  civil  war.  Ill,  535,  Kilpatrick.

Cave  Creek,  engagement  at,  IV,  109,  McDowell,  C.

Cavour,  II,  75,  Daniel,  J.  M.

Caxias,  Duke  of,  III,  714,  Lima.

Cayenne,  colony  on  the  island  of,  HI,  300,  Huet ;  IV,  310,
Mesnard  ;  IH.  344,  Imfreville  ;  surrender  of,  306,  Hvgues  ;
plan  for  gradual  emancipation  in,  589  ;  reforms  in,  IV,
184,  Malouet ;  299,  Mentelle  ;  retaking  of,  VI,  151,  Tracy,
Marquis  de  ;  II,  625,  Gennes.

Cayrii,  Viscount  de,  HI.  736,  Lisboa,  J.  da  Silva

Cayuga,  the,  gun-boat,  I,  139,  Bailey.

Cazimes,  III,  408,  Jaureybo  I.

C.  B.,  signature,  I,  423.

Ceballo,  manifesto  of,— its  author,  rv,  582,  Onis.

Cecil,  Judge,  V,  616,  Sowards.

Cecil,  Sir  Robert,  V,  163.

Cecil,  Md.,  HI,  188,  Herrman,  A.

Cedar  Creek,  battle  of,  11,43,  Custer ;  290,  Early,  J.  A.;
715,  Grant.

Cedarcroft,  vi  w  of,  VI,  41.

Cedar  Park,  IV,  301,  Mercer,  J.  F.

Cedarmere,  illustration,  I,  426.

Cedar  Mountain,  battle  of,  I,  159,  Banks  :  IH,  670.

Cedar  Run,  battle  at.  Ill,  392,  Jackson,  T.  J.;  V,  499,  500.

Cedars,  the,  attack  on,  I,  215,  Bedel,  T.

Cedars,  the,  HI,  180,  Herbert.

Cedar  Springs,  engagement  at,  V,  492,  Shelby.

Celluloid,  HI,  336.  Hyatt,  J.  W.

Celman,  Juarez,  HI.  356,  Irigoyen.

Cement,  hydraulic,  VI,  402,  Whitlemore.  D.  J.

Cemeteries,  national,  bill  for,  VI,  371,  Washburne,  E.  B.\
Roanoke,  n,  746,  Green,  S.  A.

Cempeola,  the  arches  of,  VI.  61,  Tembleque.

Census,  the,  III,  518,  Kennedy,  J.  C.  G.

Centennial  exposition,  the,  I,  740,  Corliss  ;  H,  521,  Fraley  ;
VI,  433.  Welsh.  J.

Centreville,  battle  at,  VI.  362,  Warren,  G.  K. ■

Central  America,  supposed  founders  of  nations  in,  HI.  299,
Huehuetemixcatl ;  early  languages  of,  I,  360,  Brasseur  ;
exploration  of,  IV,  519,  Nicuesa  ;  V,  419,  Scherzer ;  IV,
523,  Niilo,  A.;  V,  666,  Stephetis,  J.  L.;  discoveries  in,  IV,
697,  Pedrarias ;  conquest  of,  I,  61,  Alvarado,  P.  de  ;
grant  of  land  in,  IV,  567,  Ojeda  ;  cities  founded  in,  366,
Montejo  ;  697,  Pedrarias  ;  revolt  of  natives  in,  III,  688,
Lempira  ;  Great  Britain's  claims  in.  639,  Laurence,  A.;
I.  431-433  ;  wars  and  revolutions  in,  n,  378,  Estrada  ;  Til,
18,  Guzman,  J.  E.;  TV,  375,  Montufar.  See  also  under
names  of  the  various  states  ;  revolutionary  movements
in  and  attempted  union  of,  I,  177  :  confederation  of,  535,
Carrera,  R.;  IV,  389,  Morazan  ;  V,  608,  Soto,  B.  and  M.
A.;  relations  of  U.  S.  to,  II,  215  ;  proposed  union,  VI,  653,
Zaldivar,  R.;  exploration  of  ruins  in.  674,  Charnay.

Central  America,  the,  loss  of,  III,  184,  Herndon,  W.  L.

Central  and  South  American  commission,  a,  I.  103.

Central  park,  IV.  445,  Mould  ;  578,  Olmsted  ;  Belvedere  in,
illustration,  VI,  270.

Central  university.  Kv.,  gift  to,  IV,  4,  Logan,  J.  V.

Centre,  Robert,  V,  556.  Smith,  A.  C.

Centre  college,  IV,  112,  McDowell,  E.\  491,  Nelson,  S.  K.

Centurion,  the,  I,  487.  Byron.

Century  club,  the,  HI,  26,  Hoppin,  W.  J.

Century  magazine,  the.  n,  648,  Gilder,  R.  W.\  V,  443,
Scribner  ;  586,  Smith,  Roswell.

Century  White,  sobriquet,  VI,  472,  White,  J.

Cenu,  discovery  of,  I,  492,  Cdceres,  A.  de.

Ceracchi,  bust  of  Hamilton  by,  III.  56.  59.

Cerberus  of  the  Treasury,  the,  sobriquet,  il,  336,  Ells-
worth, O.

Cerebro-spinal  meningitis,  II,  371,  Eshleman.

Cerillac,  M.  de.  II.  275.  Dutertre  ;  263,  Duparquet.

Cerography.  IV,  428,  Morse,  S.  E.

Ceron,  Diego.  V,  61,  Ponce  de  Leon.

Ceron.  Juan,  V,  609.  Sotomayor,  C.

Cerralvo,  Marquis  of,  IV,  61$,  Pacheca.

Cerralvo,  Mex.,  IV.  618,  Pacheca.

Cerro  Gordo,  battle  of,  II,  28,  Cutwer  :  III.  595,  Laidley  ;
IV,  79,  McClellan  ;  V.  394.  Santa-Anna  ;  441.

Cervantes,  BartolonnS  IV,  588,  Orlando.

Cervantes,  Miguel.  VI.  65,  Terrazas.

Cesar,  Francisco,  V.  290.  Robledo.

Cesarotti,  II,  270,  Duraof

Ceutla,  battle  of.  IV,  585.  Ordaz.

Cevallos,  Gov.,  IV.  854,  Monaqas.  J.

Chabot.  Admiral  Philippe,  VI,  282.  Verrazano.

Chacabuco,  battle  of,  IV,  566,  O'Higgins,  B.;  V,  392,  San
Martin,  J.  de.

Chachayoyas.  battle  at,  II,  165,  Diaz  de  Pineda.

Chacomar,  cacique.  V,  449,  Sedeilo.

Chadd's  Ford,  defence  of,  VI,  398,  Wayne.


718


CHAFFEE


CHESTERFIELD


Chaffee.  C.  C,  V,  436.  Scott,  Bred.

Chaffee,  E.  M.,  II,  684,  Goodyear.

Chagres,  mausoleum  at.  II,  510,  Foster,  Henry.

Chagrin  creek,  the,  I,  647.  Cleaveland,  M.

Chahehiuhcuecan.  IV,  206,  Marina.

Chaille,  Gen.  Peter,  I,  563,  Chaille,  S.  E.

Chair,  invention  of  a  kind  of,  III,  194,  Heywood,  L.

Chair-cane,  machine  for  preparing,  V,  408,  Sawyer,  S.

Chalchiuhtlanetzin,  king,  III,  371,  Ixtlilcuechahua.

Chalchuapa.  I,  177.

Chalkley,  Miss,  III,  399,  James,  T.  C.

Challeuchima,  chief,  HI,  291,  Huascar.

Challenger,  exploring  expedition  of  the,  I,  34,  Agassiz,  A.;
II,  365,  Ericsson.

Challeux,  Etienne,  V.  232,  Ribaut.

Chalmers,  George,  VI,  545,  Wilson,  Adam.

Chalmers,  James  R.,  IV,  63,  Lynch,  J.  R.

Chalmers,  Thomas,  quoted,  II,  311  ;  507,  Forsyth,  John  ;
IV,  95,  McCosh  :  97,  McCullagh.

Chalmette  batteries,  the,  II.  417.

Chamaepelia  Godinse,  the,  II,  670,  Godin,  I.

Chamberlain,  Daniel,  V,  636,  Sprague.

Chamberlain,  Col.  James,  I,  565,  Chamberlain,  J.

Chamberlain,  Thomas  C,  HI,  359,  Irving,  R.  D.

Chamberlaine,  Agnes  F.,  VI,  153,  Traill.

Chamberlayne,  Maj.  W.,  VI,  383.

Chambersburg,  Pa.,  burned,  II.  290,  Early,  J.  A.;  657,  Gil-
mor.

Chamblee,  chief,  V,  484,  Shaubena.

Chameau,  wreck  of  the,  IV,  34,  Louvigny.

Chamillard,  Marquis  de,  II,  567.  Gabaret.

Champernown,  Sir  Philip,  V,  162.

Champney,  Rev.  Joseph,  VI,  515,  Willard,  Joseph.

Champolhon,  V,  474,  Seyffarth.

Champ  d'Asile,  the,  III,  <04,  Jarnac  ;  IV,  710,  Penihres.

Champion,  Aristarchus,  V,  410,  Saxton,  L.  C.

Champion  Hill,  battle  of,  II,  712  ;  III,  276,  Hovey,  A.  P.,
McPherson,  J.  B.

Champlain,  Lake. See  Lake  Champlain.

Chancellorsville,  battle  of,  III,  250  ;  392,  Jackson,  T.  J.;
671  ;  V,  523,  Sickles  J  727,  Stuart,  J.  E.  B. ;  incident  of,  I,
250,  Berry,  H.  G. ;  heroic  charge  at,  III,  500,  Keenan,  P.

Chancery,  the  court  of,  III,  521,  Kent,  J.;  VI,  345  ;  aboli-
tion of,  V,  471.

Chandler,  Joshua,  I,  573,  Chandler,  E.  B.

Chandler,  Louise,  IV,  446.  Moulton,  L.  C.

Chandler,  Mary  G.,  VI,  358,  Ware,  M.  G.

Chandler.  Peleg  W.,  IV,  73,  Andrew.

Chandler,  Thomas,  I,  573,  Chandler,  E.  M.

Chandos,  Duke  of,  III,  317,  Hunt,  I.

Chanler,  John  Armstrong,  V,  267,  Rives,  A.

Channel  transit,  plan  of,  v,  531,  Silver.

Channels,  system  for  maintaining,  III,  116,  Haupt,  L.  M.

Channing,  W.,  H,  755,  Greene,  R.

Chanticleer,  the  corvette,  n,  510,  Foster,  Henry.

ChantiUy,  battle  of.  III,  250.

Chantry,  Sir  Francis.  IV,  506,  Neivton,  G.  S.

Chapin,  Gen.  Israel,  II.  760,  Greig  ;  III,  728,  Lincoln,  B.

Chaplin,  Rev.  A.  J.,  I,  580,  Chaplin,  A.  C.

Chaplin,  Charles,  I,  581,  Chaplin,  Christine.

Chappaqua,  H,  738.

Chapter  of  liturgies,  a,  I.  143,  Baird.  C.  W.

Chapultepec,  palace  at,  n,  585,  Galvez,  B. :  castle  of,  illus-
tration, rv,  269  ;  storming  of,  III,  203,  Hill,  D.  H.;  siege
of,  458.  Johnston,  J.  E.;  536,  Kimball,  E.  A.;  IV,  28,Lor-
ing,  W.  W.;  V,  441  ;  479,  Seymour,  T.  H.

Charities,  boards  of,  II,  192,  Dodge,  G.  H. ;  202,  Doremus  ;
IV,  43,  Lowell,  J.  S. ;  VI,  177,  Tuckerman,  J.

Charities  and  correction,  national  conference  of,  VI,  563,
Wines,  F.  H.

Charity  hospital  college,  VI,  405,  Weber,  G.  C.  E.

Charles  I.,  judges  of.  II,  187,  Dixwell ;  220.  Downes  ;  222,
Downing,  Sir  G. ;  432,  Fenwick,  G. ;  672,  Goffe  ;  VI,  446.
Whalley  ;  charges  connected  with  his  execution,  IV,  741,
Peters,  H. ;  reign  of.  VI.  573.

Charles  n.,  present  to,  I,  229,  Bellinqham  ;  quoted,  247,
Berkeley;  III,  115,  Hathorne,  W.;  invited  to  Virginia,
663.  Lee.  R.\  VI,  251,  Van  Rensselaer,  N.

Charles  III.,  IV.  15,  Longinos  ;  22,  Lopez,  J.  F.

Charles  IV.,  statue  of,  III,  369,  Iturrigaray ;  illustration.
VI,  129.

Charles  V.,  I,  699,  Columbus,  F.\  749-750;  IV,  298,  Men-
doza,  P.  de  ;  II,  318,  Elcano  ;  425-426,  Federmann  ;  591,
Garces  ;  grant  by,  to  the  Welsers,  III,  335,  Hutten  ;  749,
Loayza  ;  IV.  173,  Magellan.

Charles  IX..  III.  629,  Laudonniere.

Charles,  Robert,  III,  744,  Livingston,  R.  R.

Charless,  Joseph  and  Edward.  IV,  661 ,  Parschall.

Charleston,  S.  C.  laid  out,  II,  28,  Culpeper,  J.  ;  the  pal-
metto fort  at,  attacked  during  the  Revolution,  IV,  446-
447,  Moultrie  ;  II.  266,  Du  Pont ;  III.  301,  Huger  ;  IV,
207,  Marion  ;  (lTTr^SO),  V.  357-358,  Rutledtie  ;  (1776),  IV,
653,  Parker.  Sir  P.  ;  V,  133,  Pulaski  ;  I,  86,  Arbuthnot  ;
I,  661-662,  Clinton,  H.  ;  II,  54 ;  III,  659  ;  servile  insur-
rection in,  VI,  284-285.  Vesey  ;  Democratic  convention
of  1860, 1,  182,  Barry,  W.  T.  S.  ;  siege  of.  I,  211,  Beaure-
gard ;  unsuccessful  expedition  against,  in.  321,  Hunter,
D.  ;  attack  on  the  forts  (1863),  V,  230,  Rhind  ;  bombard-
ment of,  III,  145,  Hayne,  P.  H.  ;  evacuation  of,  II,  715  ;


V,  505 :  IV,  356,  Moncrieffe  ;  fire  in.  bombardment,  IV,
64,  Lynch,  P.  N.  ;  cathedral  of  St.  Finbar,  V,  227,  Rey-
nolds, I.  A.  ;  Academy  of  fine  arts  in,  V,  49,  Poinsett;
immigrants  to,  I,  284,  Blake,  J.

Charleston  college,  S.  C,  gift  to,  IH,  265,  Hovoy,  E.

Charlestown,  Md.,  founded,  V,  197,  Read,  John.

Charlestown,  Mass.,  destruction  of  a  convent  at,  II,  431,
Fenwick,  B.  J. ;  V,  210,  Reed,  R.  T. ;  archives  of,  II.  302,
Edes,  H.  H.

Charlestown,  N.  H.,  V,  676,  Stevens,  P.

Charlotte,  Queen,  I,  11,  Adams.  Abigail.

Charlotte,  N.  C,  capture  of,  II,  90,  Davie,  W.  R.  ;  Queen's
college  at,V,  56,  Polk,  T.

Charlus,  Count  de,  I,  555,  Castries.

Charming  Molly,  capture  of  the,  I,  172,  Barney.

Charnock,  Mr.,  IV,  252,  Mather,  S.

Charter  oak,  the,  I,  77,  Andros,  E. ;  legend  of,  VI,  631,
Wyllys,  S.  ;  illustration,  631.

Charter  oak  regiment,  the,  H,  138,  Denting.

Chartist  movement,  the,  TV,  615,  Owen,  R.

Chartres,  Duke  of.  IV,  589,  Orleans,  R.  P.  L.

Chase,  Elizabeth,  I,  5,  Allen,  E.  A.

Chase,  Mr.,  pseudonym,  n,  698,  Gowans.

Chase,  Thomas,  Aquila,  and  Ithamar,  I,  585,  Chase,  S.  P.

Chase,  Thorndick,  VI,  557,  Wilson,  T.

Chase,  W.  S.,  II,  272,  Durivage.

Chasseboeuf,  Francois,  VI,  306,  Volney.

Chasseurs  Canadiens,  the,  I,  755,  Coursol ;  II,  267,  Duquet.

Chassiron,  Baron  de,  IV,  463,  Murat.

Chatham,  Lord,  II,  173,  Dickinson,  J.  ;  portrait  of,  IV,  358,
Monroe,  J.  ;  quoted,  I,  323,  Boscawen  ;  VI..376.

Chatham  street  theatre,  New  York,  II,  462,  Finney.

Chatazimo,  V,  335,  Rouquette,  A.  E.

Chateaugay,  Sieur  de,  III,  686-687,  Le  Moyne.

Chateaugay,  engagement  at,  III,  69,  Hampton.

Chatsworth,  Randolph  of,  V,  174,  Randolph.  W.

Chattanooga,  battle  of,  II,  713 :  HI,  251,  Hooker,  J.  ;  V,
595-596  ;  Smith,  W.  F.  ;  VI.  80.

Chatterbox,  the,  III,  696,  Leslie,  F.

Chaucer,  the  Ellesmere  text  of,  II,  655,  Oilman,  A.

Chauncey,  Nathaniel,  U,  284,  Dwight,  H.  E.

Chaurenet,  Regis,  I,  281,  Blair,  A.  A.

Chautauqua  circle  and  university,  VI,  299,  Vincent,  J.  H. ;
first  suggestion  of,  H,  410,  Farmer,  J.

Chautauqua  Town  and  County  club,  I,  167,  Barnard,  C.

Chauvallon,  M..  VI,  183.  Turgot,  E.  F.

Chauvelin,  M.,  Ill,  691,  Leonard,  N.  G.

Chauvin,  M.,  V,  63,  Pontgrave.

Chaves,  Diego  de,  II.  368,  Escobar,  M.  de.

Chaves,  Nufio  de,  ID,  354,  Irala.

Check-book,  the  Sprague,  V,  637,  Sprague,  C.  E.

Checkley,  Elizabeth.  I,  31.

Checklev,  Rev.  S.,  IV,  438,  Motley.

Chedotel,  Guillaume,  V,  292.  Roche,  E.

Cheese,  machinery  for  making,  rv,  157,  Macpherson,  D.  M.

Cheever,  John  H..  II,  269,  Durant,  H.  T.

Cheever,  Nathaniel,  I,  597,  Cheever,  G.  B.

Chemistrv,  investigations  and  discoveries  in,  I,  585,  Chase,
P.  E.;  Ill,  32,  Hayes,  A.  A.;  81,  Hare,  R.;  318,  Hunt,  T.
S.;  477,  Joy,  C.  A.;  570,  Koenig,  G.  A.;  384,  Jackson,  C.
L. ;  612,  Langley  ;  TV,  183,  Mallet ;  406,  Morley,  E.  W. ;
430,  Morton,  H.;  V,  120,  Priestley  ;  132,  Pugh.  Eva  ;  220,
Remsen  ;  239,  Richards,  E.  H. ;  260.  Rising,  W.  B. ;  370,
Sainte-Claire,  H.  E.;  528,  529,  530,  Silliman,  J.  M.;  573,
Smith,  J.  L. ;  598,  Smithson  ;  VI,  628,  Wurtz.

Cheney,  John,  IV,  180,  Malbone.

Cheney,  Miss,  II,  735.

Chepachet,  R.  I.,  demonstration  at,  n,  206,  Dow,  T.  W.

Cheraw,  capture  of  supplies  at,  II,  715.

Cherokees,  the,  mission  to,  I,  397,  Brown,  D. ;  in  the  Revo-
lutionary war,  V,  356,  Rutherford,  ^G.;  conflicts  with
I,  498,  Calhoun;  TL,  708,  Grant.  J.;  TV.  207,  Marion  :
768,  Pickens,  A.;  V,  279,  Robertson,  J.;  467,  Sevier,  J.;

VI,  82,  Thomas.  Isaac ;  cession  of  territory  by,  II.  665,
Glenn  ;  lands  of.  in  Georgia,  I,  645,  Clayton,  A.  S. ;  ffl,
381  ;  removal  of,  II,  501,  Foreman,  S.;  V,  249,  Ridge;
eastern  band,  lawsuit  of,  330,  Ross,  John  ;  the  Louisiana
conspiracy,  315,  Romeun,  N.;  I,  297,  Blount,  W.;  in  the
Confederate  service,  Vl.  388,  Watie  ;  head  king  of,  IV.
555.  Oconostota  ;  vice-king  of,  I,  115,  Atta-Culla-Culla  ;
cession  of  lands  of,  IV,  555,  Oconostota  ;  sibyl  of,  VI,
352,  Ward,  Nancy ;  alphabet  of,  III,  11,  Guess  ;  Scrip-
ture translation  for,  IV,  45,  Lowrey.

Cherry  valley  massacre,  the,  I,  479,  Butler,  I.;  Ill,  453,
Johnson,  Sir  J.

Chesapeake,  the,  attacked  hv  the  Leopard.  I,  25  ;  178,  Bar-
ron ;  383,  Broke  ;  II,  121  ;  HI,  310,  422,  640,  Lawrence,  J.;
I,  383,  Broke.

Chesapeake  bay.  the  British  fleet  In  (1814),  IV,  653,  Parker,
Sir  P. ;  battle  near,  in,  247.  Hood,  S.

Chesney.  Esther,  pen-name.  II,  77.  Dargan,  C.  V.

Chess,  games  of.  IV.  133.  Mackenzie,  G.  H.;  407,  Morphy;
V,  662,  Steinitz  ;  VI,  682,  Gilberg.

Chess-player.  Kempelen's  automaton,  IV,  171,  172,  Maelzl.

Cheste.  Count  of,  IV.  749,  Pezuela.  J.  M.

Chester.  Samuel,  V.  32,  Pitkin.  W.

Chester  castle,  attack  on,  I,  663.  Cluseret.

Chesterfield,  Lord,  I.  466  ;  II,  526,  Frankland.

Chesterfield  of  the  navy,  the,  III,  694,  Leroy.


CHESTER


CHROMOS


719


Chester  mills,  the,  V,  137,  Pusey.

Chestertown,  Md.,  engagement  near,  IV,  653,  Parker,  Sir  P.

Chestnut  Level,  school  at,  III,  628,  Latta,  J.

Chevalerie,  Aymer  de  la.  "VI,  35,  Tascher.

Chevalier,  Gen.,  V,  378,  Salnave.

Chevalier,  H.  E.,  pen-name,  V,  448,  Sears,  E.  I.

Cheverus,  Abbe  de,  IV,  260,  Matignon.

Cheves,  Alexander,  I,  601,  Cheves,  L.

Cheves,  Louisa  S.,  IV,  94,  McCord,  L.  S.

Chevraise,  Jacquesson  de  la,  I,  677,  Coffin,  W.  A.

Chevreul,  M.,  II,  274,  Dussance.

Chevreuse,  J.  de  la,  II,  285,  Dyer,  C.  G.

Chew,  Margaret,  III,  277,  Howard,  J.  E.
'  Chew  house,  illustration,  I,  602  ;  III,  566 ;  defence  of,  IV,
471,  Musgrave,  Sir  T.

Cheyennes,  the,  II,  44.

Chiapas,  supposed  origin  of  the  nation,  III,  299,  Huehuete-
mixcatl ;  III,  368.

Chibcha  Indians,  the,  V,  534,  Simon,  P.  A.

Chicago,  founder  of,  III,  552,  Kinzie,  J.  ;  first  white  man
on  the  site  of,  IV,  516,  Nicolet ;  first  dwelling  on  the  site
of,  IV,  214,  Marquette  ;  early  enterprises  in,  III,  292,
Hubbard,  G.  S.  ;  Indian  massacre  at,  1812,  V,  403,  Sau-
ganash ;  made  a  city,  VI,  436,  Wentworth,  J.  ;  first
mayor  of,  public  works  in,  charitable  and  educational
institutions,  IV,  562,  Ogden,  W.  B.  ;  plot  to  release  pris-
oners at,  and  burn,  VI,  91,  Thompson,  Jacob  ;  VI,  7,
Sweet,  B.  J.  ;  anarchist  riots  in,  V,  632,  /Spies  ;  conven-
tion of  1880,  the,  I,  105  ;  II,  603  ;  of  1884,  I,  105  ;  rais-
ing of  the  grade  in,  VI,  416,  Webster,  J.  D.  ;  relief
for,  and  from,  VI,  170,  Trusdell  ;  grain  business  in,
V,  347-348,  Rumsey,  J.  G.;  indebtedness  of,  IV,  693,
Pearsons,  D.  K.  ;  gifts  to  the  poor  of,  ibid.  ;  hospital
given  to,  IV,  586,  O' Regan  ;  Hahnemann  hospital  of,  V,
413,  Scammon,  J.  Y.  ;  gifts  to  charities  of,  IV,  693,  Pear-
sons, D.  K.  ;  Ottawa  memorial  in,  V,  361,  Ryerson,  M.  ;
gift  to,  VI,  371,  Washburne,  E.  B.  ;  foundling  home  in,
V,  511,  Shipman  ;  auditorium  and  hotel,  IV,  694,  Peck,
F.  W.  ;  art  collections  in,  VI,  467,  White,  Alex.  ;  expo-
sitions in,  V,  227,  Reynolds,  J.  P.  ;  Academy  of  sciences
in,  collections  of,  V,  691,  Stimpson  ;  historical  society  of,
founded,  I,  181,  Barry,  W.  ;  public  library  of,  III,  289,
Hoyne  ;  IV,  502,  Newberry,  W.  L.  ;  bequest  for  lectures
in,  V,  361,  Ryder,  W.  H.  ;  Baptist  institutions  at,  found-
ed, II,  391,  Everts,  W.  W.  ;  first  R.  C.  church  in,  V,  369,
St.  Cyr  ;  R.  C.  institutions  in,  V,  373,  St.  Palais  ;  univer-
sity at,  III,  289,  Hoyne  ;  theological  seminary  at,  IV,  140,
McLaren,  W.  E.  ;  statue  of  Gen.  Grant  for,  illustration,
II,  723,  721  ;  pioneers  of,  VI,  691,  Kinzie  ;  home  for  in-
curables in,  696,  Peck. See  also  Fort  Dearborn.

Chichemecatecuhtli,  IV,  22,  Lopez,  M.

Chichester,  Earl  of,  II,  526.  Frankland.

Chichimecas,  the,  II,  23,  Cruz,  J.  B.  V.  de  la  ;  VI,  272-273,
Velasco,  L. ;  635,  Xolotl.

Chichohocki  (Delaware)  river,  the,  H,  134.

Chickahominy,  engagement  on  the,  n,  43,  Custer  ;  bridge
over  the,  II,  236,  Duane,  J.  C.

Chickahominy  fever,  the,  III,  317,  Hunt,  J.  W.

Chickamauga,  battle  of,  I,  355,  Bragg  ;  H.  601  ;  III,  247,
Hood,  J.  B.  ;  IV,  487,  Negley :  V,  57,  Polk,  L.  ;  324,
498  ;  659,  Steedman,  J.  B.  ;  VI,  80.

Chickamauga  towns,  expeditions  to,  V,  467,  Sevier,  J.

Chickasaws,  wars  of  the,  I,  98,  Artaguette  ;  VI,  298,  Vin-
cennes.

Chico,  I,  61,  Alvarado,  J.  B.

Chicopee,  founded,  II,  280,  Dwiqht,  E.

Chicoutimi  (Saguenay)  river,  IV,  314,  Michaux.

Chief- Who-Never-Sleeps,  the,  HI,  740,  Little  Turtle.

Chihuahua,  capture  of,  II,  200,  Doniphan.

Chilabert,  Col.,  execution  of,  VI,  218,  Urquiza.

Child,  first  white,  born  in  America,  II.  77,  Dare,  V.

Child,  Rev.  Willard,  VI,  329,  Walker,  K.  K.  C.

Child,  Lydia  M.,  quatrain  by,  II,  122,  Deering.

Childe,  Ann,  V,  454,  Seguin.

Childe,  E.  Lee,  in,  674,  Lee,  R.  E.

Children,  Society  for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to,  I,  245,
Bergh  ;  institution  for  destitute,  H,  234,  Drumgoole.

Childress,  Joel,  V,  55.

Chi  Ids,  Cephas  G.,  IV.  506,  Newsam.

Childs,  William,  VI,  428,  Wells,  D.

Chiles,  Lundsford,  III,  184,  Herndon,  M.  E.

Chili,  conquest  of,  II,  177,  Diente  ;  I,  59,  Almagro  ;  war
in,  III.  299,  Huelen  ;  300,  Huepon  ;  295.  Huden  ;  633,
Lautaro  ;  730,  Lincoyan  ;  VI,  223,  Valdivia,  P.  de  ;
towns  founded  in,  223-224  ;  old  poem  on  the  conquest  of,
128;  Toledo,  F.  A.;  pillage  in,  n,  224,  Drake,  Sir  F.;
Araucanian  warfare  in,  I,  495,  Calafquin  ;  559,  Caupoli-
can,  Chiguaihue  ;  683,  Colcur  ;  693,  Collipulle,  Colocolo  ;
734,  Copahue,  Copaiio  ;  II,  24,  Cudequala ;  25,  Cuene-
cura  ;  26,  Cuientur,  Cuillamachn,  Cuillavilu  ;  31,  Cune-
ques  ;  32,  Curanteo  ;  362,  Ercilla;  III,  329,  Hurtado,  G. ;
IV,  47,  Loyola  ;  French-Araucanian  kingdom  in,  587,
Orelie  ;  treatment  of  Indians  in.  III.  748,  Lizarraga  ;  war
in,  I.  534,  Can-era ;  II,  361  ;  war  for  independence  of,
588,  Gana  ;  III,  623,  Laso,  Lastra  ;  IV,  130,  Mackenna  ;
237,  Martinez  de  Rosas  ;  566-567,  O'Higgins  ;  V,  203,  Re-
cabarren  ;  301,  Rodriguez,  M.;  union  of  provinces,  aboli-
tion of  slavery,  IV,  528,  Noboa,  M.  V. ;  war  in,  n,  573,
Gainza  ;  war  in  (1815-'18),  IV,  602,  Osorio  ;  campaign  of


the  restoration  in,  II.  373,  Espejo,  J. ;  guerilla  warfare  in,
V,  21,  Pincheira  ;  revolutions  in,  I,  534,  Carr-era  ;  H,  206,
Dorrego  ;  314,  Egana  ;  354,  Encalada  ;  396,  Ei/zaguirre,
A.;  541,  Freire,  R.;  HI,  169,  Henriquez  ;  345-346,  aboli-
tion of  slavery,  346,  Infante,  J.  M.;  revolutions  in,  IV,
206,  Marin  ;  V,  121,  Prieto  ;  VI,  288,  Vicuna,  B.  V.  M. ;
wars  with  other  states,  IV,  646,  Pareja,  A.  and  J.;  I,  279  ;

II,  727,  Grau  ;  III,  341.  Iglesias,  M.;  593-594,  Lagos  ;  626,
Latorre  ;  712,  Lillo  ;  IV,  64,  Lynch,  Patricio  ;  367.  Mon-
tero  ;  (1865),  544-545,  Nunez,  C.  M. ;  (1836),  V,  71,  Portales  ;
101,  Prado,  M.;  naval  operations  in,  II,  727,  Grau;  V,
101,  Prat;  mines  in,  H,  196,  Dombey ;  reforms,  exposi-
tion in,  366.  Errazuriz  ;  reforms  in,  university  of,  revolts
in,  IV,  374-375,  Montt ;  history  of,  352,  Molina,  J.  I.;  re-
form club  of,  I,  153,  Balmaceda  ;  navy  and  naval  opera-
tions, VI,  538,  Williams ;  612,  Wooster,  C.  W. ;  660,  Zen-
teno,  J.  I. ;  revolutions  in,  H,  114,  Daza.

Chiliasm,  HI,  509,  Kelpius.

Chilidugu  dialect,  the,  HI,  118,  Havestad.

Chilian,  city  of,  destroyed,  I,  603,  Chiguaihue ;  battle  at,

IH,  199,  Higuaihue.
Chillianvallah,  battle  of,  IV,  448,  Mountain,  A.  S.  H.
Chillicothe,  O.,  H,  461,  Finley,  S.;  Indian  fight  at,  IV,  2.

Logan,  B.
Chillicothe,  the  ram,  H,  511,  Foster,  J.  P.
Chiloe  islands,  the,  discovered,  III,  295,  Huden  ;  explored,

585,  Ladrilleros  ;  conquest  of,  II,  362,  Ercilla.
Chilton,  Mary,  I,  735,  Copley  ;  VI,  369,  Washburn,  E.
China,  supposed  route  to,  HI.  296-297,  Hudson,  H. ;  621,  La

Salle  ;  violation  of  neutrality  toward,  VI,  38,  Tattnall ;

treaties  with,  I,  77,  Angell,  J.  B. ;  434  ;  456,  Burlingame  ;

III,  496,  Kearny,  L. ;  non-molestation  granted  to  Ameri-
cans in,  IV,  77,  McCartee,  D.  B.;  first  foreign  envoy
from.  I,  456,  Burlingame  ;  the  Taeping  rebellion  in,  VI,
348,  Ward,  F.  T;  engagement  at  the  barrier  forts,  H,
358,  English.  E. ;  hospital  at  Canton,  TV,  653,  Parker,  P. ;
first  Protestant  school  in.  I,  411,  Brown,  S.  R.;  missions
to,  V,  473,  Seward,  G.  F.  ;  II,  209,  Doty,  E.  ;  VI,  534-535,
Williams,  S.  W. ;  reforms  in,  652,  Yung  Wing.

Chinantec  Indians,  the,  V,  396,  Saravia.

Chinchas  islands,  occupation  of  the,  IV,  749,  Pezet ;  coolie
insurrection  in,  V,  420,  Schley,  W.  S.

Chinese,  the,  immigration  of,  I.  103,  278  ;  IH,  140, 142  ;  first
importation  of,  as  laborers,  509,  Kelly,  W. ;  outrages  upon
the,  I,  656.

Chinese  sugar-cane,  H,  81,  Daveiss.

Chiouatenhoua,  Chief,  IV,  567,  Oionhaton.

Chipp,  C.  W.,  H,  136,  137,  De  Long ;  IV,  523,  Nindemann.

Chippewa,  battle  at,  I,  401.  Brown,  J.  ;  IV,  154,  McNiel  ;
V,  440,  Scott,  Winfield.

Chippewa  Indians,  the,  I,  364,  Breck,  J.  L.  ;  Til,  233,  Hole-
in-the-Day  ;  reservation  in  Minnesota  for,  VI,  462,  Whip-
ple, H.  B. ;  grammar  and  dictionary  of  their  language,
I.  160,  Baraga.

Chiquimula,  institute  of,  I,  178,  Barrios.

Chiricahuas,  the,  II,  629,  Geronimo.

Chivers,  Thomas  Holley,  V,  46.

Chi  Xiu,  H,  613,  Caspar.

Chlapowski,  Charles  B.,  IV,  350,  Modjeska.

Chlorine,  use  of,  as  a  disinfectant,  H,  203,  Doremus,  R.  O.

Chloroform,  discovery  of,  HI,  15,  Guthrie,  S.

Choate,  John  and  David,  I,  608,  Choate,  R.

Chocolate,  introduced  into  Europe,  I,  596,  Chavez.

Choctaws,  removal  of,  I,  485,  Byington  ;  missions  to,  II,
251,  Dukes  ;  treachery  of,  HI,  404,  Jarnac  ;  first  mission
among.  549,  Kingsbury,  Cyrus  ;  treaty  with,  education,
removal  of,  V,  31,  Pitchlynn  ;  in  the  war  of  secession,
32  ;  the,  in  the  war  of  1812,  V,  138,  Pushmatahaw.

Choes,  the,  IH,  345,  Infante,  H.

Choiseul,  Due  de,  IV,  5130,  Noirclerc.

Cholera,  theory  of,  V,  612,  Soupe*

Cholula,  founded,  V,  149.  Ouetzalc.ohuatl.

Choquehuanca,  Manuel,  V,  135,  Pumacahua.

Chosu,  the  daimio  of,  V,  131,  Pruyn,  R.  H.

Chouteau,  F.  F.,  VI,  694.  Menard,  Berenice.

Christadelphians,  the,  VI,  84,  Thomas,  John.

Christian,  Letitia,  VI,  199.

Christian  church,  the  (Methodist).  TV.  568,  O1 Kelly.

Christian  church,  the  (Baptist),  V,  700,  Stone,  B.  W.

Christianity,  taught  by  games  of  cards,  V,  16,  Pierron.

Christian  Magazine,  the,  IV,  246,  Mason,  J.  M.

Christian  monitor  society,  the,  II,  348,  Emerson,  W.

Christian  Quarterly  Spectator,  the,  H,  681,  Goodrich,  C.  A.

Christian  Review,  the,  V,  447,  Sears.  B.

Christian's  A,  B,  C,  the,  anonymous  book,  V,  135,  Pulsifer.

Christiansen,  III.  752,  Lockwood.  J.  B.

Christian  statesman,  sobriquet.  H,  543,  Frelinghuysen,  T.

Christian  Thought,  rragazine,  II,  123,  Deems.

Christie,  Daniel  M.,  Ill,  33.  Hale,  J.  P.

Christina,  Queen,  of  Spain,  H,  373,  Espartero  ;  399,
Fagnani.

Christina,  Queen,  of  Sweden,  V,  126,  Printz,  J.  ;  260,  Ris-
ing, J.  C.

Christina,  Del.,  VI.  207-208,  Unander.

Christinat,  M.,  I.  34.

Christy,  E.  Byron  and  W.  A.,  I.  612,  Christy,  G.  N.

Chromatics,  investigations  in,  V,  317,  Rood.

Chromium,  ores  of,  IV,  19,  Loomis,  S.  L.

Chromos,  first  made  in  America,  1, 160,  Banvard.


720


CHRONOGRAPH


COAL


Chronograph,  a  printing,  III,  271,  Hough,  G.  W.

Chrononnotonthologos.  sobriquet,  I.  453,  Burgoyne.

Chrysler's  Field,  battle  of,  I,  340,  Boyd,  J.  P.  ;  442,  Buell,
J.  D.;  IV,  421,  Morrison,  J.  W.;  VI,  319,  Walbach.

Chubb.  Capt.  Pascho,  IV,  171,  Madockawando.

Chubbuck.  Emily,  III.  485,  Judson,  E.  C.

Chupas,  battle  of,  I.  545,  Carvajal,  F.  ;  556,  Castro,  V.  ;
561.  Centeno  :  II,  177,  Diente  ;  III,  214.  Hinojosa.

Chuquinga,  battle  at,  II,  661,  Giron  ;  IV,  661,  Giron  ;  580,
Ondegardo.

Church,  Fidelia,  I,  665,  Coan,  T.

Church,  Jonathan  M..  I,  613,  Church,  L.  R.

Church-builder,  the,  IV,  494.  Nerinekx.

Church,  the  established  in  N.  E.,  VI,  407  ;  in  Maryland,  I,
362,  Bray.

Churches,  the  oldest  in  New  York,  IV,  758.  Philipse  ;  in
United  States,  V,  243,  Richardson  ;  oldest  Protestant  in
United  States,  illustration,  III,  291  ;  in  America,  illustra-
tion, V,  99  ;  Christ,  Philadelphia,  III,  497,  Kearsley  ;  com-
munion service  of,  II,  381,  Evans,  E.  ;  of  the  Heavenly
Rest,  New  York,  III,  287.  Hoicland,  R.  S.  ;  of  the
Strangers,  New  York,  VI,  241  ;  of  the  Holy  Communion,
New  York,  IV,  455,  Muhlenberg,  W.  A.;  American  con-
gress of,  IV,  509,  Newton,  W.  W.

Church  fathers,  the,  as  geographers,  H.  627-628.  Geraldini.

Church  Monthly,  the,  HI,  325,- Huntington.  F.  D.

Church  of  England,  the,  in  Canada,  IV,  447-448,  Moun-
tain.

Church  of  God,  the,  VI,  562,  Winebrenner.

Church  property,  controversy  on,  IH,  305,  Hughes,  J.

Churubusco,  battle  of,  I,  482,  Butler,  P.  M.;  V,  441.

Cia,  city  of,  H.  373,  Espejo,  A.;  398,  Fabert.

Cibola,  kingdom  of,  I,  490,  Cabeza  ;  city  of,  II,  398,  Fabert ;
report  of  the  wealth  of,— its  capture,  IV,  526,  Nina,  M.;
seven  cities  of,  I,  39,  Alarcon  ;  745,  Coronado ;  IV,  298,
Mendoza,  A.  de.

Cicero,  the  American,  I,  249,  Berrien.

Cicero  of  America,  the,  III,  745,  Livingston,  R.  R.

Ciceron,  Blanco,  H,  354,  Encalada.

"Cid,"  the,  II,  361.

Cider,  process  for,  V,  623,  Spaulding.  E.

Cider-tract,  the,  I,  271,  Black.  J.

Cieneguilla,  N.  M.,  battle  of,  II,  87,  Davidson,  J.  W.

Cigar-boat,  the,  I,  450,  Burden  ;  VI.  559,  Winans,  T.  D.  K.

Cinchona,  species  of,  IV,  472.  Mutis.

Cincinnati.  Society  of  the,  II,  113.  Dayton,  E.;  Ill,  705,
Leu-is,  M.\  V,  751,  Sumner,  John  :  founded,  VI,  403,
Webb,  S.  B.:  last  survivor  of  the  original,  II,  337,  Elmer,
E.;  pamphlet  oh,  I,  454,  Burke,  A.;  opposition  to,  H,
631  :  constitution  of,  drafted.  Ill,  325,  Huntington,  Jedi-
diah.

Cincinnati,  O.,  founder  of,  VI,  16,  Symmes,  J.  C;  first  name
of,  II,  457.  Filson  :  present  name  of,  V,  369,  St.  Clair  ;  in
the  civil  war,  VI,  334,  Wallace,  L. ;  mob  violence  in,  1, 268  ;
bank  fraud  in,  IV,  78,  McCarty  ;  historic  remains  found
at,  I,  636,  Clarke,  Robert ;  suspension-bridge  at,  V,  303,
Roebling  ;  literary  club,  III,  134  ;  public  library,  gift  to,

IV,  472,  Mussey;  observatory,  founded  in,  IV,  341,  Mitchel,
O.  M. ;  institutions  of  learning  in,  I,  458,  Burnet,  J. ;  1. 413.
Browne,  S.  J.;  Ill,  706,  Lewis,  S.;  1819,  V.  546,  Slack.  E.;
law-school  at,  HI,  544,  King,  E.  ;  VI,  331,  Walker,  T.  ;
medical  schools,  V,  135,  Pulte,  J.  H.  ;  IV,  422,  Morrow,
T.  V.  ;  College  of  music,  the,  IV,  513.  Nichols,  G.  W.  ;
music-hall  of,— gifts  to  religious,  charitable,  and  art  in-
stitutions of,  V,  640,  Springer,  R.  R. ;  IV,  403,  Morgan,
M.  S.  ;  VI,  440,  West,  C.  W.  ;  V,  33,  Pitman,  B.  ;  IV,  740,
Peter,  S.;  V,  651,  Starbuck  ;  V,  554,  Smead  ;  Are  depart-
ment, IV,  766,  Piatt.  J.  W.;  first  R.  C.  church  and  bishop
of,  II,  431.  Fenwick,  E.  D.;  sisterhoods  in,  IV.  740,  Peter,
S.  ;  financial  embarrassment  in  the  diocese  of,  V,  136,
Purcell ;  fort  on  the  site  of,  illustration,  VI,  679.

Cincinnati,  loss  of  the,  V,  661.  Steinbel.
Cincinnatus,  pen-name.  V,  42,  Plumer,  W.
Cinnamon-tree,  expedition  to  discover  the  country  of  the,

V,  865,  Rivera.

Cinto,  Fray,  V.  82,  Portillo.

Cipher  despatches,  the,  m.  111,  Hassard,  J.  R.  G.;  140.

Circassian,  case  of  the.  Ill,  641,  Lawrence.  W.  B.

Circular  letter,  the,  of  the  Massachusetts  assembly.  IH,
664,  Lee,  R.  H.

Circular  motion,  inventor  of  method  of  transferring,  VI,
15,  Sylvester,  J.  J.

Circumnavigation  of  the  globe,  first,  II,  318,  Elcano.

Cisneros,  Baltasar  de,  II,  135,  136.  Deliniers.

Cisneros.  Hidalgo  de,  IV,  520,  Nieto,  V.

Cissey,  Gen.  de.  V,  199,  Read,  J.  M.

Citizen,  pen-name,  V,  501,  Sherman,  R.

Citizen  of  Massachusetts,  pen-name.  IV,  42,  Lowell,  J.

City  of  Mexico,  capture  of  the,  V,  609,  Soto.

City  Point,  engagement  at,  in.  70.  Hampton.

Ciudadela,  revolution  of  the,  III.  5as,  Lnfragna.

Ciudad  Real  de  Guayra.  founded,  n.  367,  Escalera.

Ciudad,  Victoria,  engagement  at.  I.  122,  Avezzann.

Civics,  American  institute  of,  VI,  818,  Waite,  H.  R.

Civil-rights  bill,  the,  V,  749.

Civil  service,  the  :  the  spoils  system,  HI,  380  ;  Jefferson's
removals.  Ill,  421  :  appointments,  VI,  380 ;  reform  in
the,  1, 100.  101,  105,  654  ;  II,  478,  Ftanaghan,  W.;  H,  720,
Grant ;  HI,  399,  James,  T.  L. ;  HI,  486,  Jenckes ;  com-


mission on,  n.  293,  Eaton,  D.  B.\  III,  135,  136.  138,  139,
140  ;  competitive  examination  system,  140,  143,  Hayes,
R.  B. :  IV,  37,  Low,  S. ;  documents  on  cause  of  removals
called  for,  II,  305,  Edmunds.

Civil  war,  the,  in  the  United  States  predicted,  I,  407  ;  feel-
ing in  England  at  the  time  of.  13,  Adams,  C.  F.;  proposed
peace  convention,  HI,  445,  Johnson,  W.  P.:  con'erence
in  Hampton  Roads,  323.  Hunter,  R.  M.  T.  ;  seizure  of
war  material,  390,  Jackson,  M.  M. ;  mission  to  Europe,
304  ;  official  date  of  the  close  of,  438.  See  War  of  Se-
cession.

Civis,  pen-name,  II,  496,  Foote,  G.  A.

Claiborne,  engagement  at,  IV,  49,  Lucas,  T.  J.

Claremont,  estate  of,  V.  86,  Post,  A.  C.

Clarendon,  tract  called,  VI,  640,  Yeamans.

Clarendon,  Earls  of,  I,  740,  Cornbvry  ;  HI,  413,  Jay,  W.  ;
IV,  95,  McCosh  ;  V,  645,  Stanley,  F.  A.

Clarina,  Lord,  IV,  249,  Massey,  E.

Clark,  Daniel,  I.  628,  Clark,  James.

Clark,  Daniel,  II,  572,  Gaines,  Myra  C.

Clark,  Edward,  V,  542,  Singei:

Clark,  Ezekiel,  V,  118,  Price,  H.

Clark,  Richard.  I.  628,  Clark,  G.  W.

Clark,  Thomas,  I,  623,  Clark,  A.

Clark,  Col.  William,  I,  630,  Clark,  M.  H.

Clark,  William,  VI,  57,  Tecumseh.

Clarke,  Edward,  IH,  322,  Hunter,  J.  D.

Clarke,  Prof.  H.  A.,  H,  648.  Gilchrist,  W.  W.

Clarke,  Matthew  St.  Clair,  II,  499,  Force,  P.

Clarke,  Robert,  II,  645,  Gilbert,  Sir  H.

Clarke,  Sara  J.,  HI,  735,  Lippincott,  S.  J.

Clarke,  Walter,  I,  636,  Clarke,  Robert.

Clarke,  Col.  William  J.,  I,  635,  Clarke,  M.  B.

Clark's  island,  I,  631.

Clarkson,  Thomas,  reply  to,  III,  68,  Hammond,  J.  H.

Clarkson,  T.  S.,  HI,  744,  Livingston,  R.  R.

Clark  university,  Ala.,  gifts  to,  IH,  117.  Haven,  G.

Claro  river,  the,  battles  on.  III,  633,  Lautaro.

Olason,  Isaac  S.,  Ill,  239,  Holman,  J.  G.

Classen,  Ars,  III.  684,  Le  Maire  ;  V,  427,  Schouten.

Classification  bill,  the,  VI,  230.

Claudeboye,  Viscount,  II,  247,  Dufferin.

Claudia,  pseudonym,  H,  77,  Dargan,  C.  V.

Claus,  Col.  Daniel,  III,  452.

Claverack  patent,  the,  VI,  253,  Van  Rensselaer,  H.

Clavers,  Mary,  pen-name,  III,  556,  Kirkland,  C.  M.

Clavijero,  H,  28,  Cultzhayotl.

Clay,  Henry,  birthplace  of.  illustration,  I,  640 ;  tomb  of,
644  ;  quoted,  499  ;  H,  303,  Edgar,  J.  T. ;  anecdote  of,  194,
Dodge,  O.  E.;  petition  to,  V,  659,  Steel.

Clay,  William,  I,  638,  Clay.  C.  C.

Claypoole,  David  C.,  V,  92,  Poulson.

Claypoole,  James,  V,  102,  Pratt.  M.

Claypoole,  John,  I,  645,  Claypoole,  James.

Clayton,  James,  I,  646,  Clayton,  J.  M.

Clayton-Bulwer  treaty,  the,  I,  103,  279,  431  ;  448,  Bulwer  ;
646  ;  H,  215.

Cleaveland,  Kate,  pen-name,  IV,  514.  Nichols,  R.  S.  R.

Cleaveland,  Rev.  John,  I.  647,  Cleaveland,  M.

Clemenceau,  M.,  quoted,  HI,  327,  Huntington,  W.  H.

Clemm,  Virginia.  V,  45.

Clemmer,  Mary,  I,  65,  Ames,  M.  C.

Cleopatra  expedition,  the,  H,  385.  Evarts,  W.  M.

Cleopatra's  needle,  the,  II,  409,  Farman .

Clepsysaurus  Pennsylvanicus,  the.  IH,  646,  Lea,  I.

Clere,  Laurent,  II,  579,  Gallaudet,  T.  H.

Clerk,  Admiral  Jacob,  II,  437,  Fernandez  de  Cordova.

Clermont. See  Livingston  Manor.

Clermont,  the,  HI,  745,  Livingston,  R.  R. ;  illustration,  H,
563.

Clergymen,  home  for  disabled,  IV,  300,  Mercer,  A.  J.

Clergy  reserves,  IV,  419,  Morris,  W.  ;  421,  Morrison,  J.  C.

Cleveland,  Moses,  I,  657,  Cleveland,  G.

Cleveland,  Rev.  Richard  F.,  I,  651,  Cleveland,  G.

Cleveland,  William,  I,  651,  Cleveland,  G.

Cleveland,  O..  founded,  I,  647,  Cleaveland,  M.;  spelling  of
the  name,  647  ;  school  system  of,  V,  247,  Rickoff  ;  acad-
emy of  science,  the,  HI,  558,  Kirtland  ;  gifts  to  charities
of.  V.  699.  Stone,  A.;  IV,  729,  Perkins,  Jos.;  P.  O.  of,  VI,
344,  Walworth,  J.

Clifton,  Sir  Jukes  Granville,  II,  130,  De  Lancey,  J.

Clinch,  Jacob.  V,  682.

Clinton,  Catherine,  VI,  238,  Van  Cortlandt,  P.

Clinton,  Elizabeth,  VI,  26,  Talmadge,  M.  B.

Clinton,  Miss,  H,  624,  Genest.

Clinton,  William,  I,  659,  Clinton,  C.

Clinton,  Conn.,  school  at,  IV,  395,  Morgan,  C.

Clinton,  Mass.,  I,  260,  Bioelow.  E.  B.

Clinton.  N.  Y.,  founded, *II.  497,  Foote,  T.  M.

Clive,  Lord,  n,  245,  Duer,  W.

Cloberry,  William.  I,  620.

Clocks,  inventor  of  astronomical,  V,  409,  Sarton  ;  for  time-
signals,  improvements  in,  II,  693,  Qoutd.  B.  A.;  inven-
tions for,  I,  301,  Bogardus,  J.  ;  manufacture  of,  VI,  66,-
Terry,  E.  ;  86.  Thomas,  Seth.

Cloyd  Mountain,  engagement  at,  HI,  134.

Clyde,  Rev.  J.  C,  V.  321,  Rosbrngh.

Coal,  theories  of  the  origin  of,  IV,  7,  Logan,  Sir  W.  E.  ;  of
formations,  HI,  695,  Lesley  ;  study  of  flora,  697,  Lesque-


COAL-STOVE


COLUMELLA


721


reux  ;  introduction  of  anthracite,  I,  617,  Cist,  C.  ;  trans-
portation of,  IV,  620,  Packer  ;  644,  Pardee  ;  672,  Patter-
son, M.

Coal-stove,  invention  of  a,  VI.  437,  Wernwag.

Coalici6n  del  Norte,  the,  III,  597,  La  Madrid.

Coast  survey,  I,  127,  Bache,  A.  D.  ;  IU,  111,  Hassler,  F.  R.  ;
IV,  701,  Peirce  ;  702,  Peirce,  C.  S. '

Coates.  Charlotte,  V,  729.

Cobb,  John.  I,  668,  Cobb,  T.  W.

Cobbler  of  Aggawam,  the,  VI,  &53,  Ward,  N.

Cobden,  Richard,  III,  650,  Leavitt.

Coburn,  Eleazar,  I,  670,  Coburn,  A.

Cocaine,  use  of,  in  amputations,  VI,  260,  Varick,  T.  R.

Cochineal,  discovery  of  the  origin  of,  V,  43,  Plumier  ;  in-
troduction of,  into  Santo  Domingo,  VI,  76,  Thiery  ;  III,
327,  Huon.

Cochrane,  Lord,  Thomas,  IV,  698,  Pedro  I.

Cock,  Dr.  Thomas.  I,  437,  Buck,  G.

Cockloft  Hall.  IU,  511,  Kemble,  G.  ;  IV,  681,  Paulding,
James  Kirke.

Coc6m,  King.  I,  602,  Chi-ah-kin.

Coddington  House,  the,  illustration.  I,  673.

Code,  reform  of  the  criminal,  HI,  746.

Code  Noir,  the,  I,  259,  Bienville.

Codego,  HI,  181,  Heredia,  P.  de.

Codrington,  Gen.,  n,  567,  Cabaret.

Coelho,  Jorge  de  Albuquerque,  V,  28,  Pinto.  B.  T.

Coetus  and  Conferentie  parties,  HI,  708,  Leydt ;  747,  Liv-
ingston, J.  H.

Cofanis,  tribe  of  the,  missions  to,  n,  440,  441,  Ferrer,  R.

Coffee,  culture  of,  I,  535,  Carrillo  ;  in  Brazil,  IV,  239,  Mas-
carenhas  ;  hulling-machine  for,  VI,  694,  Mayall.

Coffee,  Gen.  J.,  IH,  629,  Lauderdale.

Coffeeville,  battle  at,  IV,  36,  Lovell,  M.

Coffin,  Alexander,  I,  676,  Coffin,  R.  B.

Coffin,  Rev.  Ebenezer,  I,  676,  Coffin,  R.  S.

Coffin,  George  W.,  HI,  71,  Hanaford.

Coffin,  Capt.  Thomas.  IV,  441,  Mott,  L.

Coffin,  the.  house  called,  I,  184,  Bartlett,  J.

Coggeshall,  James,  H,  736.

Coggeshall,  John,  I,  674,  Coddington.

Cogniet,  Leon,  pupils  of,  IV,  274,  Mayer,  C.  ;  IV,  487,  Neh-
lig  ;  IV,  757,  Philippoteaux.

Cogs,  machine  for  cutting.  I,  740,  Corliss.

Cogswell,  Col.  Amos,  VI,  430,  Wenhvorth,  J.

Cogswell,  Andrew  K.,  III.  556,  Kirkpatrick,  L.

Cogswell,  Elizabeth  L.,  II,  186,  Dixon,  James.

Cogswell,  Dr.  George,  I,  680,  Cogswell,  W.

Cogswell,  Jane  E.,  Ill,  556,  Kirkpatrick,  J.  B.

Cogswell,  John,  I,  678,  Cogswell,  J.

Cogswell,  John,  III,  312,  Humfrey.

Cogswell,  Joseph  G.,  Ill,  170,  Henry,  C.  S.

Cogswell,  Dr.  Nathaniel,  HI,  562,  Knight,  E.  H.

Cohen,  Minna,  III,  559,  Kleeberg.

Coinage,  comparison  of,  of  various  countries,  n,  299,  Eck-
feldt ;  act  of  1873,  HI.  730,  Linderman  ;  improvements
in  machinery,  V,  6(13,  Snowdon,  A.  L.

Coins,  first,  issued  in  the  colonies,  HI,  425,  Jenckes,  J.  ;
motto  on  U.  S.,  V,  59,  Pollock,  J.  ;  clipped,  V,  278,  Rob-
ertson, J.  :  collection  of  specimen,  IH,  730,  Linderman.

Coismont,  Marquis  de,  VI,  183,  Turgot,  E.  F.

Coke,  influence  of  the  study  of,  HI,  416.

Coke,  Nicholas,  V,  690,  Stilwell.

Cokesbury  college,  Md..  n,  171,  Dickins,  J.

Colbaith,  Jeremiah  J.,  VI,  548,  Wilson.  H.

Colborne  lodge,  IH,  278,  Howard,  J.  Q.

Colburn,  Richard  T.,  V,  241,  Richardson,  A.  D.

Colby  academy,  gift  to,  I,  689,  Colgate.

Colby  university,  I,  581,  Chaplin,  J.  ;  gifts  to,  670,  Cobum,
A.  ;  683,  Colby.  G.  ;  IV,  175,  Magoon.

Colcraft,  Henry  Rowe,  pen-name,  V,  425,  Schoolcraft,  H.  R.

Colden,  Rev.  Alexander,  I,  683,  Colden,  C.

Cold  Harbor,  battle  of,  II,  714  ;  HI,  722.

Cole,  John,  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  Anne.

Coleraine,  Lord,  HI,  75,  Hanger.

Coleridge,  S.  T.,  quoted,  I,  544,  Cartwright,  G.

Coleridge,  Sara.  H,  190,  Dobrizhoffer.

Coles,  Mary,  IV,  171,  Madison,  D.  P.

Coles,  Miriam,  HI,  93,  Harris.  M.  C.

Coleta  river,  engagement  at  the,  H,  405,  Fannin.

Colfax,  Gen.  William,  I,  687,  Colfax,  S.

Colfrecinas,  pirate  chief,  V,  551,  Sloat.

Coligny,  Admiral,  colonists  sent  out  by,  HI,  366,  Isles  ;  V,
231-232,  Ribaut.

Coligny  island,  VI,  295,  Villegaignon.

Collars,  invention  of  paper,  H,  731,  Gray,  S.  S.

Collectorship,  the  New  York,  I,  100,  101.

College  instruction,  VI,  585,  Witherspoon,  J.

College  of  All  Hallows,  Utah,  V,  413,  Scanlan.

College  of  New  Jersey,  opening  of  the,  H,  174,  Dickinson,  J.
See  Princeton.

College  of  Philadelphia,  the,  IV,  743,  Peters,  R.

College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  gifts  to,  VI,  242,  Van-
derbilt,  W.  H.

College  of  St.  Charles  Borromeo,  Can..  V,  157,  Racine.

College  of  St.  Francis  Xavier,  n,  431,  Fenwick,  E.  D.

College  of  St.  James.  Md.,  Ill,  524,  Kerfoot.

College  of  St.  Joseph,  II.  318,  Elder,  G.  A.  M.

College  of  St.  Thomas,  Villanova,  HI,  519,  Kenrick,  F.  P.

VOL  VI. 16


College  of  Salvador,  Cuba,  IV,  57,  Luz.

College  of  San  Isidro,  Costa  Rica,  HI,  434,  Jimenez.

College  of  San  Nicolas  Obispo,  Mex.,  IV,  552,  Ocampo.

College  of  San  Marcos,  Peru,  IH,  329,  Hurtado,  G.

College  of  San  Martin,  II.  360,  Enriquez,  M.

College  of  South  Carolina,  V.  114,  Preston,  W.  C.

College  of  the  city  of  New  York,  the,  in,  94,  Harris,  T.  ;
VI,  415,  Webster,  H.

College  of  the  Holy  Cross,  H,  431,  Fenwick,  B.  J.  ;  H,  473,
Fitton.

College  Puritan,  the,  sobriquet,  V,  501,  Sherman,  J.

College  society,  Western,  I,  150.  Baldwin,  T.

Collimating  sights,  patent  for,  VI,  141,  Totten,  C.  A.  L.

Collins,  John,  II,  3,  Craven,  T.  A.  M.

Collins,  John  M.,  IV,  51,  Ludlow,  J.  R.

Collins,  Rebecca,  U,  761,  Grellet.

Collinson,  Peter,  HI,  550,  Kennersley.

Colliquen,  battle  at,  H,  165,  Diaz  de  Pineda.

Collodion,  discovery  of,  11,  37,  Curtis,  Josiah.

Colloquium,  the,  I,  76,  Andrews,  S.  P.

Colmenares,  Rodrigo  de,  IV,  519,  Nicuesa.

Colola.  battle  of,  IV,  459,  Munecas.

Colombia,  republic  of,  proclaimed,  I,  305  ;  war  for  inde-
pendence in,  H,  438,  Fernandez  Madrid.  Ferndndez-
Pena  ;  IV,  354,  Monagas,  J.  ;  623,  Paez  ;  reforms  in,  V,
396.  Santander  ;  revolutions  in,  II,  675,  Gonzalez,  F.  J.  ;
HI,  16,  Gutierrez,  S. :  IV,  194,  Manrique  ;  437,  Mosquera,
T.  C.  ;  478,  Narino  ;  684,  Payan  ;  new  constitution,  cen-
tralized government,  IV,  545-546,  Nunez,  R.  ;  reforms  in,
464-465,  Murillo-Toro  ;  negotiations  with,  I,  103  ;  indem-
nity demanded  of,  IV,  424,  Morse,  I.  E.

Colonial  Advocate,  the,  mob  attack  on,  IV,  134,  Macken-
zie, W.  L.

Colonies,  the  American,  guarantees  secured  by  Ralegh
for,  V,  162  ;  proposed  alliance  between  French  and  Eng-
lish, H,  231,  Dreuillettes  ;  scheme  for  union  of  the  thir-
teen, 528  ;  129,  De  Lancey,  J.  :  IV,  514,  Nicholson,  F.  ;
HI,  332  ;  confederation  of,  V,  704,  Stone,  T.  ;  draught  of
instructions  to  Virginia  delegates  in  congress,  in,  417  ;
taxation  of,  II,  181,  Dinwiddle  ;  VI,  150,  Townsend,  C.  ;
petition  of,  to  the  king,  II.  130,  De  Lancey,  J.  ;  attempts
to  reconcile,  with  England,  HI,  280  Howe,  R.  ;  their  fu-
ture predicted,  V,  100,  Pownall ;  theatrical  perform-
ances in,  HI,  46,  Hallam  ;  model  form  of  government
for,  VI,  629,  Wyatt,  F.;  liberty  of  the  press  in,  659,-Zen-
ger.  See  Declaration  op  Independence  and  Revolu-
tionary War.

Colonization,  African,  HI,  52,  Hallock,  G.

Colonization  society,  HI,  13,  Gurley,  R.  P. ;  627,  Latrobe,
J.  H.  B.;  IV,  216,  March.  C;  282,  Meade.  W.;  333,  Mills,
S.  J. ;  V,  583,  Smith,  G. ;  VI,  510,  Wilkeson.

Colorado,  pioneer  of,  V,  538,  Simpson,  G.  S. ;  colonization
of,  I,  50!),  Cameron,  R.  A.  ;  mines  of,  III,  205,  Hill,  N.
P.;  R.  C.  institutions  in,  IV,  121,  Machebceuf.

Colorado  canon,  exploration  of  the,  V,  95,  Powell,  J.  W.

Colorado  river,  discovery  of,  I,  39,  Alarcon,  H. ;  explora-
tion of,  IV,  501,  Newberry.  J.  S.

Color-blindness,  HI,  424,  Jeffries,  B.  J.

Colossus  of  Fairmount,  the,  VI,  437,  Wernwag.

Colossus  of  Rhodes,  the,  I,  183,  Bartholdi.

Colportage,  system  of,  I,  717,  Cook,  R.  S.  ;  IV,  219,  Marsh,
Samuel.

Colton,  Walter,  I,  696,  Colton,  G.  Q.

Columbia.  S.  C,  taken  by  Sherman,  n,  715 ;  burning  of,
in,  70,  Hampton  :  gift  to,  V,  114,  Preston,  W.  C.

Columbiads,  invention  of,  I,  309,  Bomford  ;  V,  298-299,
Rodman.

Columbia  institute,  Tenn.,  IV,  604,  Otey.

Columbia  river,  discovery  of,  II,  147,  Derby,  R.\  731,  Gray,
R. ;  HI,  706,  Lewis,  M. ;  VI,  304,  Vizcaino  ;  expedition  to,
IH,  298,  Hudson,  W.  L.

Columbia  seminary,  gift  to,  IV,  305,  Merrick,  J.  L.

Columbia  college,  established,  III,  448,  Johnson,  S. ;  grant
to,  of  the  botanic  gardens,  V,  28,  Pintard  ;  charter  of,
H,  129,  De  Lancey,  J.  ;  collections  for,  HI,  411,  Jay,
James  ;  geological  cabinet  of,  IV,  501,  Newberry,  J.  S.  ;
school  of  mines  of,  H,  316,  Egleston  ;  gifts  to,  IV,  765,
Phoenix  ;  VI,  138,  Torrey,  J. ;  202,  Tyndale  ;  illustration,
1,168.

Columbian  university,  D.  C,  gifts  to,  I,  689,  Colgate ;  II,
&39,  Elton,  R.;  IH,  513,  Kendall,  A.;  V,  345,  Ruggles,  W.;
VI,  427,  Welling  ;  illustration,  428.

Columbian  illuminati,  Society  of  the,  IV,  637,  Palmer,
Elihu.

Columbian  Magazine,  the,  I,  617,  Cist,  C. ;  HI,  353,  In-
man,  J.

Columbus,  Bartholomew,  II,  166.  Diaz,  M.

Columbus,  Christopher,  ship  of,  illustration,  I,  697  ;  statue
of.  698  :  his  heresy,  H,  627-628,  Geraldini  ;  discovery  of
his  tomb,  IV,  390,  Moreau  de  Saint  Mery  ;  his  sea-jour-
nals, 482,  Navarrete,  M.  F.  de. ;  hostility  toward,  II,  494,
Fonseca,  J.  R. ;  alleged  discovery  of  America  before,
III,  300,  Huelva. See  America.

Columbus,  pseudonym.  I,  24.

Columbus,  O.,  R.  (3.  institutions  in,  V,  325,  Rosecrans,  S.
H;  VI,  395,  Watterson,  J.  A.;  medical  college  in,  699,
Starling.

Columbus  Theological  Magafzine.  the,  IV,  47,  Loy.

Columella  of  New  England,  the,  IV,  42,  Lowell,  J.


722


COLVE


CONSTITUTION


Colve,  Anthony,  II.  391.  Evertsen.

Colville,  Andrew,  V,  537,  Simpson,  Sir  G.

Comanches,  fights  with  the,  V,  340,  Royall,  W.  B.  ;  VI,
245,  Van  Dom.

Combahee,  battle  of  the,  II,  663,  Gist,  M.  ;  HI,  631,  Lau-
rens, J.

Combustion,  controversy  on,  IV.  143.  Maclean.  J.

Comedy,  beginnings  of  American,  HI,  22,  Hackett,  J.  H.

Comet,  the  sail-boat,  V,  556.  Smith,  A.  C.

Comet,  rescue  of  the  brig,  II,  673,  Goldsborough,  L.  M.

Comets,  discoveries  of,  I,  167,  Barnard,  E.  E.  ;  theory  of,

II,  73,  Danforth,  S.  ;  discoveries  of,  VI,  11,  Swift,  L.  ;
189,  Tuttle,  H.  P.;  392,  Watson,  J.  C;  672,  Brooks;
theory  of,  619,  Wright,  A.  W.

Comic  annuals,  II,  461,  Finn.

Commerce,  the  brig,  V,  256,  Riley,  J.

Commerce,  American,  during  Napoleonic  wars,  HI,  406,

Jarvis,  W.  ;  IV,  170  ;  with  India,  II,  147,  Derby,  E.  H.
Commercial  cable  company,  the,  IV,  127,  Mackay,  J.  W.
Commercon,  I,  328,  Bougainville.
Committee  of  seventy,  the,  II,  353,  Emott.
Committees  of  correspondence,  I,  30  :  first  suggestion  of,

III,  664,  Lee,  R.  H.

Commodore  of  the  lakes,  the,  IV,  502,  Newberry,  O.

Communipaw,  pen-name,  IV,  323,  Miles,  P.

Communism,  experiments  in,  IV,  615,  Owen,  R. ;  531,  A*br-
mand. See  Brook  Farm.

Companon,  Francisco,  II.  374,  Espinosa,  G.

Company  of  St.  Philip,  the,  V,  221,  Renault.

Company  of  the  twelve  seigneurs,  III,  300,  Huet.

Company  of  the  west,  the.  Ill,  637,  Law,  John.

Comparator,  the  Rogers-Bond,  V,  311,  Rogers,  W.  A.

Composer,  the  earliest  American,  I,  263,  Billings.

Compromise,  the  three-fifths.  TV,  166,  168  ;  of  1833,  the,  I,
642  ;  of  1850,  242,  243,  432,  644  ;  VI,  414.

Compromise  tariff,  the,  1, 500  ;  author  of,  III,  737,  Littell,  E.

Compton,  Bishop,  I,  281,  Blair,  James.

Compton,  Dr.,  n,  381,  Evans,  E.

Comstock,  G.  F.,  Ill,  522,  Kent,  James.

Comstock  lode,  the,  IV,  127,  Mackay,  J.  W. ;  551,  O'Brien,
W.  S. ;  VI.  680,  Flood ;  designer  of  machinery  for,  V,
436,  Scott,  I.  M. ;  tunnel  to,  VI,  2,  Sutro.

Comte,  Auguste,  I,  175,  Barreda  ;  IV,  87,  McClintock,  J. ;
quoted.  VI,  335,  Wallace,  H.  B.

Conant,  W.  C,  V.  431.  Schuyler,  M.

Concepcion,  destruction  of,  I,  495,  Calafquin ;  694,  Colo-
colo  ;  HI,  299,  Huelen  ;  rebuilt,  III,  329.  Hurtado,  G.

Conchology,  studies  and  collections  of,  n,  695,  Gould,  A.
A.;  in,  413,  Jay,  J.  C;  646,  Lea,  I.;  V,  410-411,  Say,  T.\
VI,  12,  Swift,  R.;  142,  Totten,  J.  G.;  171,  Tryon,  G.  W.

Concord,  Mass.,  founded.  I,  444,  Bulkeley,  P.;  the  British
expedition  to,  HI,  71,  Hancock,  J. ;  battle  of,  n,  98,  Davis,
J. ;  V,  258,  Ripley,  E. ;  news  of,  at  Pomfret,  V,  140  ;  old
manse  at,  illustration,  III,  127  ;  Alcott  house  at,  illustra-
tion, I,  40  ;  Emerson's  home  at,  II,  344,  illustration,  346  ;
monument  at,  344  :  school  of  philosophy  at,  347  ;  V,  384,
Sanborn,  F.  B.\  gift  to,  VI,  90,  Thompson,  E.

Concord,  N.  H.,  Rolfe  and  Rumford  asylums  in,  V,  347,
Rumford,  S.;  President  Pierce's  grave  at,  illustration,
V,  8. See  Penacook.

Concord,  voyage  of  the,  in,  684,  Le  Maire  ;  wreck  of  the,
n,  425,  Febiger,  J.  C.

Concordia,  Marquis  de  la,  I.  2,  Abascal.

Condensed  foods,  I,  321,  Borden,  G.

Condin,  Thomas,  I,  753,  Condin,  R.

Cone,  Judge,  V,  664.

Cone,  Miss,  I,  638,  Claxton,  K.

Cone-Cut  Corners,  pseudonymous  novel,  I,  5,  Abbott,  A.

Conestoga,  massacre  of  Indians  at,  IV,  716,  Penn,  J.

Confederacy,  the  frigate,  III,  409.

Confederacy  of  southern  states,  proposed  in  1788,  rv,  168.

Confederate  states  of  America,  the,  III,  717  ;  brains  of  the,
I,  235,  Benjamin,  J.  P. ;  president  of  the,  II,  99,  Davis,  J. ;
designer  of  the  first  flag  of,  HI.  585,  Ladd,  C. ;  confiscation
of  property,  I.  575,  Chandler  ;  original  scheme  of  admin-
istration, III,  323,  Hunter,  R.  M.  T.\  intended  recognition
of,  n,  417  ;  attempts  of,  to  secure  recognition,  HI,  519,
Kenner  ;  VI,  70.  fharin :  attitude  of  France  toward,
V,  549,  Slidell ;  loan  for,  ships  of  war  for,  549  ;  special
mission  from,  to  France  and  the  pope,  TV,  64,  Lynch,  P.
N. ;  supplies  for,  V,  371,  St.  John,  I.  M. ;  navy  of,  rv,  184,
Mallory,  S.  R. :  VI,  310,  Waddell,  J.  I. ;  Bibles  for  the
army  of,  III,  230,  Hoge,  M.  D. ;  commission  on  the  debt
of.  I,  340,  Boyce  ;  surrender  of  forces,  III,  189,,  Herrov, ;
I,  565,  Chamberlain,  J.  L.;  II,  99-101  ;  currency  of  the.
100 ;  fall  of,  101  ;  amnesty  to  people  of,  102;  crucial  bill
of  the.  rV,  750,  Phelan,  J.

Confederate  Notes,  anonymous  novel,  VI,  214,  Upshur,
M.  J.  S.

Confederation  of  states  C1781),  HI,  57  ;  450,  Johnson,  T.

Confessional,  decision  on  the,  III,  571,  Kohlmann.

Confession  of  faith,  the  New  England,  IV,  253.

Confessions  of  a  Poet,  anonymous  book,  IV,  597,  Osborn,

Conflance,  defeat  of  the,  IV,  107,  Macdonough.
Conflagration  of  Moscow,  the,  IV,  172,  Maelzl.
Congo,  alleged  exploration  of  the.  II.  218,  Donville.
Congo  association,  and  state,  1, 103  ;  V,  390,  Sanford,  H.  S. ;
V,  646,  Stanley.


Congregational  church,  the.  in  New  England.  VI,  407  ;  and
Calvinism,  I,  169,  Barnard,  J.  ;  charge  of  heresy  in,  VI,
491,  Whiton,  James  M.  ;  missions  or^  I,  129,  Bacon,  D.  ;
2135,  Benjamin,  N.  :  263,  Bingham,  H.  ;  293,  Bliss,  D.  ;  I,
331,  Bourne,  R.  ;  357,  Brainerd,  D.  and  J.  ;  411,  Brown  ;
485,  Byington  ;  665,  Coan,  T.  ;  718,  Cooke,  A.  S.  ;  451,
Burgess,  Ebenezer ;  504,  Calhoun.  S.  H. ;  757,  Cowles,
G.  H.  ;  H,  116,  Deane.  James  ;  342,  Emerson,  J.  S.  ;
498,  Fisk,  P.  F;  500,  Ford,  J.  E.;  707,  Grant ;  HI,  541,
King,  J.  ;  549,  Kingsbury,  Cyrus  ;  555,  Kirkland,  S. ;  IV,
59, 60,  Lyman.  D.  B.,  S.  J.,  and  H.  ;  730,  Perkins,  J.  ;  V,
17,  Pierson,  A.  ;  197,  Read.  H.;  239.  Richards,  W.\  417,
Schauffler  ;  443,  Scudder,  D.  C.  ;  444,  Scudder,  J.  and
H.  M.  ;  462,  Sergeant,  J.  :  469,  Bewail,  Jotham  ;  557,
Smith,  Azariah  ;  561,  Smith,  Eli  ;  698,  Stoddard,  D.  21  ;
VI,  61,  Temple,  D.\  109,  Tliurston,  A.  ;  245,  Van  Dyke,  C.

V.  A.  ;  248,  Van  Lennep  ;  441,  West,  S.:  II,  193.  Dodge,
J.  H;  321.  Eliot,  John  ;  678.  Goodell  ;  III,  123.  Hairley,
G.;  VI,  570,  Winslow,  M.\  620,  Wright,  A.;  scheme  for
government  of  churches,  581,  Wise,  J.

Congregational  Home,  gift  to.  HI,  219,  Hitchcock,  S.  A.
Congregationalism,  in  New  England.  VI,  574.
Congregational  Quarterly,  the,  V,  154,  Quint.
Congress,  the  colonial,  I,  30  ;  H, 129,  De  Lancey,  J.  ;  H,
528  :  III,  332  :  IV,  663,  Parsons,  S.  H.  :  V,  357,  Rutledge  ;

VI.  376  ;  the  U.  S.,  general  ticket  system,— division  into
districts,  V,  663  -664.  Stephens ;  grant  of  5-per-cent.  im-
post to,  III,  542,  King,  Rufus ;  first  president  of,  V,  175,
Randolph,  P.  ;  freedom  of  the  floor,  VI,  90,  Thompson,
E.  ;  of  1839,  TL,  605,  Garland,  H.  A.  ;  struggle  in  the  45th,

II,  602  ;  assaults  in,  I,  389.  Brooks,  P.  S.  ;  V,  336,  Rous-
seau ;  pay  of  members  of,  VI,  107,  Throop,  E.  T. ;  194  ;
455,  Wheeler,  W.  A.

Congress,  the,  I,  428,  Buchanan,  F.  ;  Ti,  365,  Ericsson  ;

Argentine  squadron  taken  by,  VI,  307,  Voorhees,  P.  F.
Congress  of  American  physicians  and  surgeons,  the,  IV,

250,  Mastin.
Congress's  Own,  corps,  III,  30,  Hale,  N.
Conjuring,  tricks  of,  TV,  641,  Palmer,  W.  H.
Connecticut,  expedition  to  take  possession  of.  V,  379,  Sal-

tonstall ;  claims  to,  VI,  255,  Van  Twiller  ;  first  house  in,

255,  Van  Tiviller ;  566,  Winslow,  E. ;  Andros's  claim  in,

III,  676,  Leete  ;  French  invasion  of,  IV,  373,  Montigny,
J.  B.  T.  ;  destruction  of  towns  in,  VI,  171,  Tryon,  W.  ;
Dutch  settlement  in,  VI,  239,  Van  Curler,  J.  ;  petition
for  annexation  to  New  York,  V,  378,  Salisbury,  S.  ;
union  of,  VI,  156,  Treat,  R. ;  controversy  with  New  York,
156,  Treat,  R.;  charter  of,  156,  Treat,  R.;  574  ;  constitu-
tion of,  rv,  52,  Ludlow  ;  the  blue  laws  of.  rv,  742,  Peters,
S.  ;  scheme  to  make  war  on  the  Dutch,  IV,  52,  Ludlow  ;
conflict  of  English  and  Dutch  colonists,  VI,  566,  Winslow,
E;  monument  to  colonists  of,  23,  Talcott,  J.  ;  first  law-
yer in,  IV,  52,  Ludlow  ;  revivalists  driven  from,  III,  637,
Law  Jonathan  ;  first  printing-press  in,  V,  380,  Salton-
stall,  G.;  abolition  of  slavery,  school  system  founded,  581,
Smith,  Nathaniel ;  constitution  of,  1818,  582,  Smith,  Na-
than ;  school  fund  of,  HI,  208,  Hillhouse,  J.  ;  gift  to
schools  of,  HI,  254,  Hopkins,  Edward ;  legislative
changes  in,  III,  432,  Jewell,  M.  ;  historical  society  of,  TV,
621,  Niles,  J.  M.  ;  gifts  to,  V,  270.  Robbins,  T.  ;  VI,  389,
Watkinson  :  retreat  for  the  insane,  V,  466,  Sever  ;  R.  C.
institutions  in,  HI,  166,  Hendricken  ;  new  constitution  of,
HI,  485,  Judson,  A.  T.

Connecticut,  captures  by  the,  I,  59,  Almy.

Connecticut  Evangelical  Magazine,  the,  rV,  333,  Mills,  S.
J. ;  V,  723,  Strong,  Nathan.

Connecticut  farms,  burned,  H  751.

Connecticut  Magazine,  the,  IV,  289,  Meigs,  J.

Connecticut  river,  the,  discovery  of,  I,  295,  Block ;  first
brick  house  in  the  valley  of,  illustration,  V,  145.

Connecticut  rangers,  the,  HI,  30,  Hale,  N.

Connelly,  J.  F.,  IV,  3,  Logan,  C.

Connolly,  Thomas  P.,  II,  450,  Field,  N.

Conquistador,  El,  II,  412,  Farragut.

Conrad,  John,  V,  539.  Simpson,  S.

Conscience  Whigs,  the,  V,  747.

Considerant,  Victor,  H,  55,  Dain  ;  TV,  531,  Normand.

Conspiracy  of  Pontiac,  the,  V,  64,  Pontiac.

Conspiracy  trials,  IV,  271,  Maxwell,  H.

Constable,  James  M.,  I,  93,  Arnold,  A.

Constable,  William,  lands  of,  V,  15,  Pierrepont,  H.

Constantia,  pen-name,  FV,  469,  Murray,  J.  S.

Constantinople,  mission  in,  HI,  65,  66,  Hamlin,  C;  gifts  to
college  in,  V,  272,  Robert,  C.  R.

Constellation,  the  frigate,  appropriation  for  finishing,  HI,
375  ;  capture  by,  I,  22  ;  VI,  170,  Truxtun.

Constituent,  A,  pen-name,  II,  649,  Giles,  W.  B.

Constitution,  the  U.  S.,  first  movement  toward,  VI,  417,
Webster,  N.;  framing  of  the,  IH,  615,  Lansing,  J.;  TV,
670,  Paterson,  W.;  V.  176.  Randolph,  E;  I,  480,  Butler,
P. ;  II.  52,  Dacres  ;  533  ;  V,  22.  Pinckney,  C.  C. ;  23,  Pinek-
ney,  C. :  358,  Rutledge,  J.;  IH,  410  ;  V,  501,  Sherman,  R.;
opposition  to  the  adoption  of,  H,  631  ;  III,  684,  Leland ;
665,  Lee,  R.  H.\  TV,  44.  Loumdes,  R.\  155,  Macon  J  238,
Martin,  L. ;  242,  Mason,  G. ;  VI,  582,  Wimer.  H. :  Hamil-
ton's plan  for,  IH.  57 ;  change  in  text  of,  II.  336,  Ells-
worth, O.;  the  Virginia  plan,  IV.  167, 168  ;  representation
of  slave  population,  168  ;  adoption  of,  III,  729,  Lincoln,  B. ;

IV,  121,  McHenry  ;  VI,  379  ;  ratification  of,  by  states,  1, 81 ;


CONSTITUTION


COTTON-GIN


723


HI,  149,  Hazard,  J.  J. ;  IV,  168,  222-233,  226.  358-359  ;  V,
617-618,  Spaight ;  Calhoun  on,  I,  503  :  John  Randolph  on,
V,  178  ;  original  intent  of,  VI,  410,  411  ;  compact  theory
of,  I,  500  ;  IV,  170  ;  repudiation  of,  II,  611, 618.  Gay,  8.  H ;
opposition  of  Abolitionists  to,  IV,  761  ;  Crittenden-Mont-
gomery amendment,  IV,  372,  Montgomery,  W. ;  Article
VI.,  V,  176,  Randolph,  E.;  first  ten  amendments.  Ill,  665,
Lee,  R.  H ;  IV,  168  ;  eleventh  amendment,  V,  177  :  thir-
teenth, in,  438,  720 ;  fourteenth,  439  ;  fifteenth,  II,  719  ;
proposed  amendments,  V,  51  ;  VI,  379.

Constitution,  the  frigate,  appropriation  for  finishing,  III,
375  ;  capture  of  the  Java,  1, 141  ;  fight  with  the  Guerriere,
III,  310,  311  ;  named  Old  Ironsides,  311  ;  prize-money  of
the  crew,  311  ;  III,  65,  Hamilton,  P.;  211,  Hincks,  E.  W.\
proposal  to  break  up,  240,  Holmes,  O.  W. ;  capture  of  the
Cyane  and  the  Levant  by,  V,  684,  Stewart,  C. ;  view  of,
684  ;  history  of,  VI,  553,  Wilson,  J.  G.

Constitutional  law,  opinions  on,  IV,  224.

Constitutional  society,  the,  I,  166,  Barlow,  J.

Constitutional  union  party,  the,  I,  227,  Bell,  J.  ;  HI,  275,
Houston,  S.  ;  717.

Constitutions,  the  Federal  and  state,  in,  174.

Consular  service,  scheme  for  reorganizing  the,  I,  103.

Contarini,  I,  491,  Cabot.

Contentious  man,  the,  I,  669,  Cobbett,  W.

Contest  in  America  between  Great  Britain  and  France,
the,  anonymous  book,  IV,  343,  Mitchell,  J.

Continent,  the,  magazine,  IV,  538,  Norton,  C.  L. ;  VI,  144,
Tourgee.

Continental  Monthly,  the,  I,  717,  Cook,  M.  E.  D.  W. ;  II,  657,
Gilmore,  J.  R. ;  683,  Leland,  C.  G. ;  V,  650,  Stanton,  F.  P.

Contoocookville,  founder  of,  IV,  728,  Perkins,  G.  H.

Contrabands,  I,  478,  Butler,  B.  F.;  HI,  719  ;  VI,  28,  Tall-
madge,  G.

Contract-laborers,  importation  of,  forbidden,  I,  103.

Contreras,  Pedro  de  Moya,  II,  575,  Gali.

Contreras,  capture  of,  V,  441  ;  IV,  28,  Loring,  W.  W.

Contreras,  the,  VI,  224,  Valdivieso,  A.

Convent,  a  Dunker,  I,  223.  Beissel.

Conventicle  act,  trials  under  the,  rv,  713.

Conversations  about  Common  Things,  anonymous  book,
H,  183,  Dix,  D.  L.

Convict  labor,  I.  652 :  in  the  south,  I,  490,  Cable  ;  first  ad-
vocacy of,  II,  117,  Dearborn,  B.

Convicts,  law  for  returning,  I,  103.

Conway,  Nelly,  IV,  165.

Conway  cabal,  the,  I,  94  ;  712,  Conway,  T.  ;  H,  615,  Gates,
H.  ;  630,  Gerry  ;  751 ;  IU,  587  ;  discovery  of,  VI,  511,
Wilkinson.

Conwell,  Russell  H.,  Ill,  143,  Hayes,  R.  B.

Cony,  Nathaniel,  VI,  675,  Cony,  D.

Conyngham,  J.  N.,  Ill,  446,  Johnson,  O.  F.

Cook,  execution  of,  I,  407.

Cook,  Gen.  Francis,  III,  254,  Hopkins,  Esek.

Cook,  Capt.,  II,  150,  Des  Barres  ;  IV,  565,  Oglethorpe.

Cook,  John  E.,  VI,  307.  Voorhees,  D.  W.

Cook,  Rev.  Theodore  D.,  I,  717,  Cook,  M.

Cook,  Gen.  William,  I,  717,  Cook,  M.  E.  D.  W.

Cooke,  Flora,  V,  727,  Stuart,  J.  E.  B.

Cooke,  G.  F.,  monument  to.  illustration,  I,  719.

Cooke,  George  Willis,  II,  348.

Cooke,  R.  H.,  I,  722,  Cook,  R.  T.

Cooke,  William  D.,  VI,  508,  Wiley,  C.  H.

Cooley,  James  E.,  Ill,  146,  Haynes,  L.

Coolidge,  Austin  J.,  IV,  195,  Mansfield,  J.  B.

Coolidge,  Joseph,  V,  174,  Randolph,  G.  W.

Coolidge,  Susan,  pen-name.  VI,  611,  Woolsey,  S.  C.

Coolie-trade,  breaking  up  of  the,  V,  562-563,  Smith,  E  P.

Coon  speech,  I,  658,  Clingman;  noted  story,  V,  438,  Scott,  M.

Cooper,  Sir  Astley,  pupils  of,  II,  128,  Delafield,  E.  ;  242,
Dudley,  B.  W.  ;  IV,  411,  Mott,  V.  ;  IV  471,  Mussey,  R.  D.  ;
V,  377,  Sales  Laterriere  ;  V,  671,  Stevens,  A.  H.  ;  VL  314,
Wagner,  J.

Cooper,  Augusta,  I.  380,  Bristol,  A.  G.

Cooper,  Ebenezer,  II.  227,  Dutton,  H.  W.

Cooper,  James,  II.  115,  Dean.  Julia.

Cooper,  J.  F.,  book  attributed  to,  V,  451,  Sedgwick,  C.  M.\
The  Pilot,  III,  468.

Cooper,  John,  IV,  194,  Manning,  W.

Cooper,  William,  I,  725,  Cooper,  J.  F.

Cooper,  W.  F.,  IV,  288,  Meigs.

Co-operative  dress  association,  n,  450,  Field,  K.

Cooperstown,  I.  205,  Beall,  S.  W.  ;  founded,  725.

Cooper  Union,  I,  731.

Cooper-shop  hospital,  the,  IV,  485,  Nebinger.

Coosaw,  capture  of  batteries  on  the,  V,  672,  Stevens,  I.  I.

Coosa whatchie,  battle  at  the.  III,  631,  Laurens,  J.

Coote,  Baron.  I,  229,  Bellomont.

Coote,  Mr.,  HI,  297.

Cope,  Caleb,  I,  734.  Cope,  T.  P.

Cope,  Gilbert,  U.  566,  Futhey,  J.  S.

Copeland,  execution  of,  I,  407.

Cepeland,  B.  F.,  Ill,  532,  Kidder,  F.

Copenhagen,  expedition  against,  I,  558,  Cathcart  ;  bom-
bardment of,  II.  586,  Gambier.

Copley,  John  S.,  subject  of  a  picture  by,  VI,  390,  Watson,

Copley,  Thomas,  II.  466.  Fisher,  P.
Coporo,  battle  at,  in,  368.


Copper  cents,  first  made,  I,  670.  Cochran,  James.
Coppermine  river,  the,  explored,  II,  534,  Franklin,  Sir  J.  ;

III,  154,  Hearne.

Copper-mines,  the  Lake  Superior.  I,  34  ;  in.  170,  Henry,
A.  ;  330,  Hussey  ;  discovery  of.  698,  Le  Sueur.

Copper  strip,  the  continuous,  I.  380,  Brittan.

Coppin,  Sarah,  I,  354,  Brady,  J.  T.

Coppoc,  execution  of,  I,  407.

Copp's  Hill  buryingground.  the  Mather  tomb  in,  rv,  255.

Coppuek,  Amelia  B,  VI,  423,  Welby,  A.  B.  C.

Copying,  instrument  for,  n,  335,  Ellsworth,  E.  W.

Copyright,  movement  for  international,  V,  404,  Saunders,
F.  ;  suit  on,  VI,  451,  Wheaton,  H.  ;  benefits  of,  secured
to  authors,  643,  Youmans,  E.  L.

Coquebert,  Felix,  I,  453,  Burk.

Coquette,  the,  original  of  character  in,  I,  440,  Buckminster.

Coquibacoa,  country  of.  IV,  567,  Ojeda.

Coquin,  king  of,  m,  688,  Lempira.

Cora,  capture  of  the,  n,  18,  Crosby,  P.

Cora  and  the  Doctor,  anonymous  book,  I,  143,  Baker.

Corbet.  Miles,  n,  222,  Downing,  Sir  G.

Corbin,  Elizabeth,  I,  361.  Braxton.

Corbin,  Miss,  in.  664,  Lee,  R.

Corcoran,  Michael,  III,  536,  Kimball,  E.  A.

Corcoran,  Thomas,  I,  737,  Corcoran,  W.  W.

Corcoran  gallery  of  art,  the,  illustration,  I,  737.

Cordes,  Esther,  IV,  207,  Marion.

Cordier,  Charles,  II,  368,  Escandon.

Cordoba,  observatory  at,  II,  693,  Gould,  B.  A.

Cordova,  Francisco  Hernandez  de,  IV,  697-698,  Pedrarias.

Cordova,  Gen.  Luis,  II.  360,  Erauzo.

Corea,  Abbe,  V,  173,  Randolph,  T.  M.

Corea,  intercourse  with,  1, 103.

Corinne,  pen-name,  II,  54,  Dahlgren,  M.  V.

Corinth,  Miss.,  importance  of,  III,  455  ;  battle  and  evacua-
tion of,  I,  211,  Beauregard  ;  U,  711  ;  HI,  50  ;  V,  324,  503 :
V,  645,  Stanley,  D.  S.

Corinth,  isthmus  of,  colony  in,  HI,  283,  Howe,  S.  G.

Corinth,  poem  entitled,  III,  473,  Jordan,  C.  J.  M.

Corlear,  Indian  use  of  the  word,  VI,  239,  Van  Curler.

Corlear's  lake,  VI,  239,  Van  Curler.

Cormier,  Francis,  I,  740,  Cormier,  C.

Corn-cob  capitals,  illustration.  HI,  627.

Cornell  university,  first  professor  in,  n,  381,  Evans.  E.  W.\
469,  Fiske,  D.  W. ;  gifts  to,  IV,  120,  McGraw  ;  V,  367,  Sage,
H.  W. ;  522,  Sibley,  H ;  VI, 468,  White,  A.D.:  670,  Barnes  ;
mineral  collection  of,  V,  529  ;  illustration,  I.  741.

Corn  island,  I,  626,  Clark,  G.  R.

Corn-laws,  the  English,  HI,  650,  Leavitt.

Cornu,  Sebastian,  IV,  520,  Niemeyer,  J.  H.

Cornubia,  capture  of  the,  rv,  674,  Patterson,  T.  H.

Cornwaleys,  Sir  Charles,  I,  743,  Cornwaleys,  T.

Cornwall,  Conn.,  mission  school  at,  IV,  549,  Obookiah.

Cornwallis,  Edward,  II,  614,  Gates.

Cornwallis,  William  and  Frederick,  I,  743,  Cornwallis,  C.

Corporal's  guard,  the,  VI.  198.

Coronado,  Carolina,  IV.  738,  Perry,  H.  J.

Coronado,  Dr.,  I,  556,  Castro,  J.

Coronado,  F.  V.  de,  cross  planted  by,  II,  398,  Fabert.

Corot,  J.  B.  C,  pupil  of,  VI,  76,  Thorn,  J.  C.

Corral,  Gen.  Ponciano,  VI.  331-332,  Walker,  W.

Correa.  Diego  Alvarez,  IV,  643,  Paraguassu.

Correa,  Duarte,  V,  362,  Sa,  S.  C.  de.

Correa,  Diego,  pupil  of,  III.  338,  Ibarra,  J.

Correa  de  Saa,  Victoria,  HI,  403,  Jaray.

Correlation  of  forces,  theory  of,  V,  346.

Corrugated  metal,  use  of,  for  vessels,  H,  524,  Francis,  J.

Corsi,  Giovanni,  I,  548,  Cary,  A.  L.

Cortes,  Luis,  rv,  722.  Peralta,  G.

Cortes,  Martin,  I,  648,  CorUs,  H.

Corvisart,  I,  314,  Bonpland.

Coruna,  Count  of,  IV,  451,  Moya.

Corunna.  storming  of,  II,  127,  Delafield,  John.

Corwin,  Matthias,  I,  751,  Corwin,  T.

Corwine,  H.  W.,  IH,  134.

Cos,  buccaneer,  H,  437,  Ferndndez  de  Piedrahita.

Cosmosphere,  invention  of  a,  n,  88.  Davidson,  R.

Costa  Rica,  interoceanic  railway,  III,  9,  Guardia  ;  revolu-
tions in,  9,  Guardia  ;  434,  Jimenez.

Costello,  I,  277.

Cotagaita.  battle  at,  rV,  520.  Nieto,  V.

Cottingham,  Lewis  N.,  pupil  of,  VI,  269,  Vaux.

Cotopaxi,  eruption  of,  V,  347,  Rumiilagui.

Cotton,  Edward  R.,  rV,  155,  Macon.

Cotton,  Maria,  rv,  254,  Mather,  I.

Cotton,  Roland,  I,  752,  Cotton,  J.

Cotton,  King,  in,  68,  Hammond,  J.  H.

Cotton,  beginning  of  the  industry,  I,  762,  Coxe.  T.\  first
raised  in  Georgia,  III,  21,  Habersham.  James  ;  machines
for  cultivating,  II,  617,  Gatling  ;  manufacture  introduced
into  America,  V,  547,  Slater;  HI,  389.  Jackson,  P.  T.;

IV,  42,  Lowell,  F.  C. ;  duty  on  fabrics,  42,  Lowell,  F.  C. ;
machinery  for,  IV,  746,  Pettee,  O.;  culture  of,  in  the
French  Antilles,  V.  370,  Sainte-Croix,  Louis.

Cotton-bales,  inventor  of  tie  for,  V,  650,  Stanton,  H.  T.
Cotton-bales,  protection  by,  V,  517,  Shreve,  H.  M.
Cotton-gin,  the,  invention  of, — theft  of, — infringements  of

patent,  VI,  488,  Whitney,  E.;  improvements  in,  rv,  16,

Longstreet,  W. ;  H,  622,  Gedney.


724


COTTON-SPINNING


CUMMINGS


Cotton-spinning,  ring-flier  for.  1, 301,  Bogardus,  J.

Cotton-waste,  use  of,  in  paper,  II,  11,  Crocker,  A.

Cotton  Whigs.  V,  747.

Cottrill,  Eunice,  IV,  757,  Philip.

Coulon  de  Villiers,  battle  at.  II.  267,  Duquesne,  Marquis.

Coult,  Dr.,  assumed  name,  I,  694,  Colt,  S.

Counter-irritation,  theory  of,  I,  701,  Comegys.

Countess,  the  first  American,  V,  347,  Rumford,  S.

Country  Gentleman,  the,  VI,  173.  Tvcker,  L.

Countryman,  A.  pen-name.  I,  660.  Clinton ,  De  W.

Courts,  new  system  of  procedure  in  civil  and  criminal
cases,  II,  447,  Field,  D.  D.

Coureurs  de  bois,  II,  253,  Du  Lhut.

Cousin,  Victor,  II,  387  ;  alleged  discovery  by,  V,  29,  Pin-
zon,  M.  A.

Cousin  Alice,  pen-name.  Ill,  117,  Haven,  A.  B.

Coutinho,  Pereira,  IV,  643,  Paraguassu.

Couture,  Thomas,  pupils  of,  I.  320,  Boott ;  II,  22,  Crownin-
shield,  F;  316,  Ehninger  ;  HI.  320,  Hunt,  W.  M.\  IV,  15,
Longfellow,  E.  W.;  19,  Loop,H.  A.:  272,  May,  E.  H;  407,
Morrell,  I.  R.  ;  503,  Newell,  H.  ;  VI,  642,  Yewell ;  673,
Butler  ;  678,  Dewing,  M.  R.

Covenant,  the,  magazine,  V,  250,  Ridgely,  J.  L.

Covenhoven,  John,"  V,  693.  Stockton,  R.

Coventry,  John,  pen-name,  IV,  639,  Palmer,  J.  W.

Covert.  Bernard,  II,  194,  Dodge,  O.  E.

Covington,  theological  seminary  at,  IV,  696,  Peck.  J.  M.

Cowan's  Ford,  battle  of,  n,  89,  Davidson,  W. ;  701,  Gra-
ham, O.

Cowboys,  the,  II,  132.

Cowdery,  Oliver,  V,  253,  Rigdon  ;  575,  Smith,  Joseph  ;  VI,
486,  Whitmer.

Co  wen,  John,  VI,  676.  Cowen,  E.

Cowen,  Sidney,  in,  205,  Hill.  N.

Cow-Killer,  the,  sobriquet,  V,  205,  Red-Jacket.

Cowpens,  battle  of  the,  I,  744 ;  II,  752  ;  III,  277,  Howard,
J.  E.  ■  IV,  397  ;  VI,  35,  Tarleton  ;  384,  Washington.  W.

Cowper,  William,  memorial  to,  I,  605,  Childs,  G.  W. ;  sub-
ject of  poem  by,  V,  458,  Selkirk,  A.

Cox,  Alfred  C,  IV.  25,  Txrrd,  S.

Cox,  J.  Bellargee,  IV,  122,  McHenry.  M.

Cox,  Sir  Michael,  I,  758.  Cox,  H.  H.

Cox.  Robert,  I,  757,  Cox,  H.

Coxe,  H.  C,  I.  525,  Carleton,  H.

Coya.  princess  of,  IV,  47,  Loyola  ;  siege  of,  I,  683,  Colcur.

Coytmore,  Catherine,  II,  727,  Graves,  T.

Craftsman,  the,  magazine.  III,  457,  Johnston.  G.

Craddock,  Chas.  Egbert,  pen-name,  IV,  464,  Murfree,  M.  N.

Cradle  of  American  liberty,  the,  II,  405,  Faneuil.

Craig,  Rev.  Mr.,  HI,  665,  Lee,  F.  L.

Craigenputtock,  II,  344.

Craigie  House,  history  of,  IV.  13,  15  :  illustration,  12.

Cramer,  Julian,  pen-name,  I,  600,  Chester,  J.  L.

Cranch,  Richard,  I,  767,  Cranch,  W.

Crane,  Caroline.  IV,  217,  Marsh,  C.  C.

Crane,  Gen.  William,  II,  2,  Crane.  W.  M.

Craniology,  museum  of,  IV,  432,  Morton,  S.  G.

Craven,  Countess  of,  IV,  309,  Merry.

Craven,  Tunis,  II.  2,  Craven.  T.  T.

Crawford,  Emmet,  II,  275,  Dutchy.

Crawford,  F.  M. ,  original  of  a  character  of,  VI.  354,  Ward,  S.

Crawford,  James,  V,  117,  Price,  B.

Crawford,  Louisa,  VI.  67,  Terry.  L.

Crawford,  Capt.  M.,  II,  196.  Do'lph,  J.  N.

Crawford.  Marshall  J.,  II.  507,  Forsyth,  John.

Crawford,  Mr..  III.  373.  Jackson,  Andrew.

Crawford.  T.  M..  HI,  692,  Leonowens.

Crawfordsville.  Ind.,  H.  261.  Dunn,  Williamson.

Crean,  He  rietta  A.,  I,  238,  Bennett,  J.  G.

Creator  of  Fire,  IV,  643,  Paraguassu.

Crecencio,  F.,  II,  362,  Erauzo.

Credit  Mobilier,  the.  I,  66,  Ames,  O.  ;  197,  Bayard.  J.  A.  ;
386.  Brooks,  J. :  688,  Colfax  ;  Garfield's  connection  with,
H,  602-603  ;  IV,  672,  Patterson,  J.  W. ;  726,  Pereiri.

Cree  Indians,  the,  V.  93,  Poundmaker  ;  662,  Steinhauer.

Creedmore,  shooting  contest  at,  n,  55,  Dakin.

Creeks,  the,  I,  338,  Bowles,  W.  A.  ;  design  to  make  inde-
pendent, 632,  Clarke.  E. :  queen  of  the,  323,  Bosomworth  ;
war  with,  H,  487,  Floyd,  J.;  negotiations  with,  III,  121,
Hawkins,  B.  ;  massacre  by— war  with,  376  ;  in  the  Revo-
lution and  after,  IV.  118,  McGillivray ;  treaty  for  the
sale  of  lands— dissensions  among,  125,  Mcintosh,  W.\
war  with,  505.  Newnan  ;  V,  279,  Robertson,  J.  ;  440.
Scott,  W.  ;  1793,  467.  Sevier,  J.  ;  VI,  59,  Tecumseh  ;  their
lands  in  Georgia,  163,  Troup,  G.  M. ;  in  the  Revolution-
ary war,  399  ;  in  the  war  of  1812,  401,  Weathersford  ;
rising  of,  620,  Wright,  B.  ;  treaty  signed  by,  518,  Wil-
lett,  M.

Creighton  college.  Neb.,  rv,  554.  O'Connor.  J.

Cremation,  first,  in  America,  III,  631.  Laurens,  H.

Crematory,  first,  in  America,  IH.  678.  Le  Moyne,  F.  J.

Cremorne  mission,  the.  IV,  74,  McAuley.

Creole,  the  slave-ship,  n.  642,  Giddings,  J.  R. ;  V,  746.

Cresap,  Thomas.  U,  7,  Cresap,  M.

Crescent  City,  the  steamship,  case  of,  HI,  636,  Imw,  G.

Crescent  City  White  League,  the,  IV,  560.  Ogden,  F.  N.

T>espo,  Joaquin,  in,  19,  Guzman- Blanco.

Crestline.  O.,  V.  276,  Roberts,  S.  W.

Cretans,  struggle  of,  HI,  283,  Howe,  S.  G.


Crillon,  Count  Paul,  pseudonym,  1, 188.  Barton,W.  P.  C.

Crime,  society  for  the  prevention  of,  II,  17,  Crosby,  H.

Crimean  war.  enlistments  for.  in  U.  S.,  I,  767.  Crampton  ;
V,  9  ;  defence  of  Ears.  VI.  535.  Williams,  W.  F.

Cristo,  Col..  H,  370,  Escobedo,  M.

Critcher,  Thomas,  V,  293,  Rochester.

Crittenden,  Col.,  IV,  22,  Lopez,  N.

Crinkle,  Nym,  pen-name,  VI.  452.  WJieeler,  A.  C.

Croaker  papers,  the,  I,  658,  Clinch.  C.  P.:  H,  160,  De  Witt,
S.;  224,  Drake.  J.  R.;  Ill,  47,  Hnlleck ;  IV,  349,  Mitch  ill ;
character  in,  VI,  622,  Wright,  F.

Crocker,  Sarah,  I,  712,  Conway,  S.  C.

Crockett's  Van  Buren,  author  of,  I.  645,  Clayton,  A.  S.

Croghau,  Maj.  William,  II.  13,  Croghan,  G.

Croissant  Rouge,  medal  of  the,  IV,  444,  Mott,  T.  P.

Croix,  Col.  Peter,  HI,  487,  Jumel.

Cromberger.  Juan,  VI.  664,  Zumarraga  :  695,  Pablos.

Cromwell,  Oliver,  II,  526,  Frankland  ;  569.  Gage  ;  HI,  248,
Hooke  :  interference  of,  in  Maryland,  I,  622,  Claiborne  ;
descendant  of,  I.  476,  Butler.

Cromwell,  Richard.  II,  182,  Disbroice.

Crookes,  Prof.  W.,  m,  246,  Home.

Crooks,  Ramsay.  IH,  488.  Juneau.

Croom,  Emily.  I,  228,  Bellamy,  E.  W.

Crosby,  John  F..  IH.  441,  Johnson,  David.

Crosby,  Judge  Joseph,  II,  17,  Crosby,  Ebenezer.

Cross  Keys.  HI,  392,  Jackson,  T.  J.

Crossweeksung,  N.  J..  I,  357,  Brainerd.

Croton  water-works,  H,  3,  Craven,  A.  W.  ;  216,  Douglas,
David  Bates.

Crow,  John,  V,  32,  Pitkin,  W.

Crowe,  George,  I,  192,  Bateman,  K.  J.

Crowfield.  Christopher,  pen-name.  V,  715.

Crow  Indians,  mulatto  chief  of  the,  I,  214,  Beckwourth.

Crown,  the,  British  privateer,  VI,  174,  Tvcker,  Samuel.

Crown  Point,  I,  51,  52,  Allen.  Ethan  ;  209,  Beauharnais,
C. ;  452,  Burgoyne  ;  VI.  360.  Warner,  Seth  ;  V,  66,  Poor,  E.

Crow's  Nest,  residence.  II,  75,  Daniel,  P.  V.

Crow  Wing,  I,  363,  Breck.

Crozer  seminary,  founded,  n,  22,  Crozer.

Crozier,  Maj.  L.  N.  F.,  V.  252,  Riel.

Crucible,  invention  of  a.  II,  187,  Dixon.  Joseph.

Cruelty,  prevention  of,  IV,  444,  Mott,  W.  F.  See  Animals
and  Children.

Cruger,  Mrs.  Douglas,  II,  707,  Grant.  Anne.

Cruger,  Nicholas,  IH,  56,  Hamilton,  A.

Cruikshank,  George,  H,  692.  Gough.

Cruising  convention,  the,  VI,  413.

Crusader,  the,  magazine,  U,  548,  French,  L.  V.

Cryptography,  V,  45.

Crystal  Palace,  the,  IH,  119,  Hawkins,  B.  W.;  H,  155,  Det-
niold.

Crystalina,  anonymous  poem,  IH,  86,  Harney,  J.  M.

Ouadras,  Joaquin,  II,  679.  Goodman,  W.

Cuauhtemotzin,  statue  of.  illustration,  II,  24.

Cuautla,  defence  of,  IV,  250,  Matamoros  ;  392.  Morelos.

Cuba,  conquest  of,  HI,  115,  Hatuey  ;  towns  founded,  VI,
273,  Velasquez  ;  colonization  of,  I,  748,  Cortes  ;  cities
founded  in,  V,  70,  Porcallo  :  165.  Ramirez,  A.;  taken
possession  of,  by  Spain.  II,  457,  Fimes ;  invasion  of,  I,
704,  Concha ;  government  of,  VI,  211,  Vnzaga ;  insur-
rections in,  I.  36,  Agramonte  and  Agiiero  ;  561,  Oetpii
des  ;  H,  252.  Dulce  :  seizure  of  the  Virginius,  721  :  insur-
rections. UI,  226,  Hoff  ;  474,  Jordan,  T. :  IV.  500.  LTGaban ;
V,  148,  Quesada,  M. ;  end  of  the  civil  war  in,  IV,  237,  Mar-
tinez-Campos ;  origin  of  its  commercial  progress,  I.  86,
Aranpo  y  Parreno  ;  situation  of,  98,  Arrate  ;  first  rail-
way in,  116,  Auber,  P.  A.:  improvements  in,  549,  Casaa
y  Aragorri ;  copper-mines  of,  II,  182.  Ditson  ;  slavery
in,  252,  Dulce  ;  fleet  to  guard,  365,  Ericsson  ;  cemeteries
in,  372,  Espada  ;  proposed  treaty  concerning,  455  ;  rav-
aged by  buccaneers,  III,  344,  Illigen  ;  conspiracy  in,  ex-
peditions to  capture  party  in  favor  of  annexation  to  the
U.  S.,  IV,  22,  Ijopez,  N.;  education  in,  57,  Luz  ;  public
works  in,  529,  Noda  ;  income  of — public  works— nautical
college,  V,  25,  Pinillos  ;  natural  history  of,  47,  Poey,  F.;
filibustering  expeditions  to — the  Ostend  manifesto — pro-
posal to  purchase,  10 :  sanitary  improvements  in.  314,
Romay;  subject  of  slavery  in,  365,  Saco  ;  negotiations
for  purchase  of.  405,  Saunders.  R.  M.\  proposed  acqui-
sition of,  611 ;  VI,  136,  Torre,  J.  M.\  tobacco-culture  in,
137,  Torres  y  Ayalas  ;  alleged  negro  plot  in,  222,  Valrles,
Gabriel ;  revolt  in,  223,  Vames,  Geronimo  ;  British  exj>e-
dition  to  (1762),  273,  Velasco,  L.  V.

Cubagua,  island  of,  IV,  588,  Orelbtna.

Cuci-Ccoyllar.  princess,  IV,  576,  Ollantai.

Cudworth,  Ralph.  II.  25,  Cud  north.  J.

Cuenca.  Tomas,  IV,  727,  Perez.  S.

Cuenca,  city  of,  founded,  III,  329,  Hurtado,  A.

Culhuas,  the,  VI,  63,  Tenoch.

Culpeper  minute-men,  IV,  221,  222.  Marshall.  T.  and  J. •

Cumaues.  the,  tribe  of,  II,  373,  Espejo.  A.:  398.  Fabert.

Cumberland,  the,  I.  42S.  Buchanan.  F.\  II,  365,  Ericsson  ',
sinking  of  the,  IV.  413.  Morris.  G.  U.

Cumberland  Gap  taken.  I,  464  ;  IV,  399,  Morgan,  G.  W.

Cumberland  island,  H,  520,  Fox,  L.

Cumberland  Presbyterian  church,  the,  II,  393.  Ewing,  F.',
organization  of,  tv,  120.  McGready  ;  130,  McKendree.

Cummings,  Mary  P.,  IV,  620,  Packer.


CUMMINS


DAVIS


725


Cummins,  Judge  David,  II,  31,  Cummins,  M.  S.

Cummins,  Elizabeth,  III,  391,  Jackson,  T.  J.

Cummington,  Bryant's  house  at,  illustration,  I,  434.

Cuna,  the,  I,  438,  Bucareli.

Cundinamarca,  liberation  of,  I,  304  ;  ancient  empire  of,  V,
534,  Simon,  P.  A.

Cunningham,  Ann  Pamela,  II,  387.

Cunningham,  Jane,  II,  14,  Croly,  J.  C.

Cunningham,  Ruth,  IV,  606.

Cunnington,  Col.  William,  VI,  70.  Tharin.

Cunyngham,  Mary,  V,  371,  Roberdeau,  D.

Cura,  battle  near,  I,  304.

Curieancha,  temple  of,  III,  391,  Hay  ana.

Curies,  Randolph  of,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W.

Currency,  proposal  for  uniform,  in  America,  I,  103  ;  ques-
tion of  the,  342  ;  bimetallic,  378 ;  question  of  paper,  II,
601-603  ;  III,  135,  136,  141  ;  'in  N.  E.  colonies,  1, 39,  Adams,
S.;  Ill,  331,  332,  Hutchinson,  T;  the  decimal,  418,  419;
relief  bill  of  1837,  V,  278,  Robertson,  G.;  the  legal-tender
act,  national  bank  bill.  623,  Spaulding,  E.G.;  &  uniform,
for  all  nations,  VI,  59,  Tefft,  T.  A. ;  measure  concerning
the  United  States,  407.

Currie,  Rev.  Robert,  VI,  12,  Swinton.

Currie,  Dr.  William,  VI,  268,  Vaughn,  J.

Currier,  J.  M.,  II,  174,  Dickinson,  M.  K.

Curtin,  Roland,  II,  34,  Curtin,  A.  G.

Curtis,  Daniel  Sargent.  VI,  615,  Wormeley,  A.  R.

Curtis,  Rev.  Moses  A.,  n,'  148,  DeRosset,  M.  J.  ;  V,  187,
Ravenel,  H.  W.

Curtiss,  Daniel  S.,  II,  37,  Curtiss,  A.  A.

Curtius,  pen-name,  VI,  91,  Thompson,  J.  ;  417,  Webster,  N.

Curves,  investigation  of,  III,  206,  Hill,  T.

Cashing,  Edmund  L.,  VI,  677,  Cashing,  W.

Cushing,  Mrs.,  I,  598,  Cheney,  H.  V.

Cushing,  S.  B.,  I,  750,  Corthell.

Custis,  Daniel  Parke,  VI,  383.

Custis,  Eleanor  P.,  UI,  704.  Lewis,  E.  P.  C.

Custis,  Col.  John  Parke.  II,  45,  Custis,  G.  W.  P.

Custis,  Martha  Parke,  VI.  383.

Custis,  Mary  R,  III,  674,  Lee,  M.  R.  C.

Custom-house,  first,  in  the  colonies,  IV,  491,  Nelson,  T.

Custom-house,  New  York,  investigation,  I,  100.

Cutbush,  Edward,  V,  351,  Rush,  W.

Cut  Knife  Creek,  battle  of,  V,  93,  Poundmaker.

Cutler,  Julia  Rush,  VI,  354,  Ward,  J.  R.

Cut-off,  invention  of  the,  I,  341,  Boyden,  S.

Cutt,  Mary,  IV,  710,  Penhallow.

Cuttr  Richard  and  Robert,  II,  48,  Cutt,  J.

Cutting,  Mr.,  imprisoned  in  Mexico,  n,  168.

Cutts,  Adele,  II,  215.

Cutts,  Hannah.  VI,  322,  Waldron,  R.

Cuttyhunk  island,  colony  on,  II.  691.  Gosnold.

Cuvier,  Baron,  I.  34,  35,  Agassiz,  J.  L.  R.

Cuyler,  Miss,  IV,  38,  Low,  I.

Cuzco,  founded, — of  its  name,  IV,  186,  Manco  Capac.

Cuzco,  conquest  of,  II,  164,  Diaz,  A.;  177,  Diente  ;  IV,  186,
Manco  Inca  ;  588,  Orgoiiez  ;  revolution  at,  II,  81,  Da-
valos  ;  struggles  for,  V,  36-37 ;  Temple  of  the  Sun  at,  37.

Cyane,  the,  I,  322,  Borland.

Cycloramas,  how  made,  IV,  757,  Philippoteaux.

Cymon,  pen-name,  V,  605,  Somerby,  F.  T.

Cynthiana,  Ky.,  attack  on,  III,  605.  Landram.

Cypress,  J..  Jr.,  Ill,  119,  Hawes,  W.  P.

Cyprus,  collection  of  articles,  from,  I.  561,  Cesnola.

Czar  of  Pennsylvania  politics,  the,  I,  509,  Cameron,  S.

Czermak,  Prof.  J.  N.,  IV,  271,  Maxwell,  G.  T.

D' Abbeville,  Father  Claude,  VT,  680,  Toulon.

Dabney,  Thomas  S.,  V,  554,  Smedes.

Da  Costa,  Diego,  III,  300,  Huelva.

Dacre,  Lord,  V,  458,  Selkirk.  Earl.

Dadiani,  Princess  of  Mingrelia,  IV,  463,  Murat.

Daggett,  Alfred,  III,  530,  Kensett.

Daggett,  Susan  E.,  II,  384,  D wight,  S.  E.

Dagon,  place  named,  IV,  433,  Morton,  T.

Daguao,  Chief,  IV,  33,  Loquillo.

Daguerre.  picture-process  of,  IV,  437.

Daguerrotype,  first,  of  a  person,  II,  327,  Draper,  J.  W.

Dahl,  Nielo  Carl,  pupil  of,  IV,  744.  Petersen.

Dahlgren,  Bernard  Ulric,  II,  53,  Dahlgren,  J.  A.

Dahlgren,  Charles  G.,  II,  207,  Dorsey,  S.  A.

Daingerfleld.  Col.  William,  V,  580,  Smith,  Meriwether.

Dakota  Indians,  the,  IV,  182,  Malleri/,  G.  ;  language  of,

missions,  V,  63,  Pond.  S.  W.  ;  IV,  238,  Marty.
Dale,  David,  IV,  615,  Owen,  R.
Dale,  Ebenezer,  II,  57,  Dale,  W.  J.
Dale,  Salvia,  pseudonym,  II,  60,  Dalsheimer.
D'Alembert,  J.  R.,  II,  270,  Dureau  ;  531.
Dalfinger,  Alexander,  II,  425,  Federmann.
Dalhoude,  Dr.,  ID.  189,  Hersey,  E.
Dallas,  Matilda,  VI,  511,  Wilkins.
Dallas,  engagement  at,  IV,  6,  Logan,  J.  A.;  158.
Dalzell,  John,  II,  61,  Dalzell,  R.  M.
Damas,  Baron  de,  II,  274,  Dnsuau.

Dana,  Benjamin,  II.  66,  Dana,  Joseph  ;  68,  Dana,  S.  W.
Dana,  Charles  E.,  V,  510,  Shindler.
Dana,  Daniel,  II,  68,  Dana.  R.
Dana,  Eleutheros,  IV,  289,  Meigs,  J.
Dana,  Jacob,  II,  64,  Dana,  C.  A.


Dana,  Richard.  II,  64,  66,  68,  Dana,  C.  A.,J.,S.  W.,  R.

Dana,  R.  H.,  country-seat  of,  illustration,  II,  70.

Dana,  Sophia  W.,  V,  359.

Dana  Hall  school,  H,  391,  Eastman,  Julia  A.

Danburite,  discover^  of,  V,  494,  Shepard,  C.  U.

Danbury,  Conn.,  skirmish  at,  I,  95  ;  H,  367,  Erskine,  Sir
W.  ;  VI,  611,  Wooster.

Dandridge,  Dorothea  S.,  HI,  175,  Henry,  P.

Dandridge,  Col.  John,  VI,  383.

Dandridge,  Philip,  VI,  55,  Taylor,  E.

Dandy  Wayne,  sobriquet,  VI,  399.

Dane,  John,  paper  by,  II,  115,  Dean,  J.  W.

Danforth,  Nicholas,  II,  73,  Danforth,  T.

Dangerfleld,  Capt.,  I,  406.

Daniel,  Peter  jmd  Travers,  II,  75,  Daniel.  P.  V.

Daniel  Boone  of  southern  Ky.,  the,  IV,  66,  Lynn.

Daniels,  Samuel,  I,  618.  Claflin,  H.  B.

Danites,  order  of,  VI,  646,  Young,  B.

Dansville,  hygienic  institute  at,  HI,  388,  Jackson,  J.  C.

Dante,  the  Divine  Comedy,  IV,  14  ;  translation  of,  HI,  286  ;
restoration  of  a  portrait  of,  Vl,  505,  Wilde,  R.  H.

Danvers,  Mass.,  gifts  to,  IV,  688,  Peabody,  G.  ;  Putnam's
birthplace  at,  illustration,  V,  141 ;  Oak  Knoll  at,  illustra-
tion, VI.  494.

Danville,  Ky.,  IV,  113,  McDowell,  E.

Danube,  the,  plan  to  improve  the  navigation  of,  IV,  73,
McAlpine.

Darboy,  Archbishop,  VI,  371,  Washburn  e,  E.  B.

Darby,  John,  pen-name,  II.  609,  Garretson,  J.  E.

Darby,  Sir  Richard,  V,  495,  Shepard,  T.

Darby,  William,  II,  383,  Dwight,  Theo.

Darien,  Conn.,  Fitch  home  at,  H,  470,  Fitch,  B.

Darien,  Isthmus  of,  early  description,  VI,  314,  Wafer;
Spanish  expedition  to,  II,  374,  Espinosa,  G.  ;  discoveries
in,  I,  751,  Cosa  ;  colonies  on,  I,  147,  Balboa  ;  II,  354,  En-
ciso  ;  H,  374,  Espinosa,  G.  ;  TV,  670,  Paterson,  W.  ;  V,
35,Pizarro;  83,  Portocarrero  ;  survey,  716,  Strain;  ship-
canal  at,  II,  3,  Craven,  T.  A.  M.

Dark  and  bloody  ground,  the.  I,  627.

Dark  day  of  1780,  the,  incident  of,  II,  84,  Davenport,  A.  ;
VI,  63,  Tenrtey,  S.

Dark  Stream,  the,  II,  667,  Glynn.

Darley,  Mrs.  John  C,  V,  743,  Stilly,  T.

Dartmouth,  Earl  of,  HI,  678,  Leqge.

Dartmouth  college,  founded,  VI,  455,  Wheelock,  E.  ;  con-
troversy in  and  suit,  456,  Wheelock,  J. ;  illustration,  456  •
name  of,  HI,  Legge  ;  suit  concerning,  I,  398,  Brown.  F.
VI,  407  ;  I,  471,  Burton  ;  IV,  552,  Occum  ;  admission  of
negroes,  25,  Lord,  N.  ;  gifts  to,  I,  571,  Chandler.  A.  :
II,  341,  Emerson,  B.  D.  ;  480,  Fletcher,  R.  ;  767,  Grimes
J.  W.  ;  III,  40,  Hall,  Frederick  ;  IV,  25,  Lord,  N.  ;  V,  210,
Reed,  W.  ;  712,  Stoughton,  E.  W.  ;  VI,  73,  Thayer,  S.
435,  Wentworth,  B.  and  J.;  436,  Went  worth,  J.;  514
Willard,  J.  D.  ;  548,  Wilson,  G.  F.  ;  565,  Winkley ;  ob-
servatory of,  V,  484,  Shattuck,  G.  C.

Darwin,  Charles,  quoted,  IV,  218,  Marsh,  O.  C.

Darwin,  Erasmus,  III,  415,  Jefferson,  T.  ;  VI,  677,  Darwin,

Darwinian  theory,  the,  II,  469,  Fiske,  John  ;  VI,  677,  Dar-
win, Charles  R.

Das  Cobras  island,  revolt  in,  II,  436,  Feijo.

Dashmore,  Frank,  pseudonym,  II,  333,  Downing,  F.  M.

Date-palm  tree,  a  famous,  I,  83,  Antonio.

D'Aubign6,  lb  51,  Dabney,  R.

D'Aubigny,  C.  F.,  pupils  of,  II,  359,  Enneking  ;  VI,  171,
Tryon,  D.  W.

D'Aubrey,  Louise.  IV,  207,  Marion.

Dauphin  island,  III,  339,  Iberville.

D'Aurusmont,  M.,  VI.  633,  Wright,  F.

Davenport,  la.,  scheme  for  colony  at,  III,  698,  Lesslie.

D'Avezac,  Louise,  in,  747,  Livingston,  E.

David,  Jacques  Louis,  I,  117,  Audubon  ;  II,  503,  Forestier  ;
IV,  611,  Durlac.

Davidge,  Dr.  J.  B.,  V,  90,  Potter,  N.  ;  II,  670,  Godman.

Davids,  John,  pseudonym,  H  187,  Dixwell.

Davidson,  Dr.  Oliver,  II,  88,  Davidson,  L.  M.

Davidson,  Robert  H.  M.,  V,  137,  Purman.

Davidson,  Gen.  William,  II,  393,  Swing,  F.

Davidson  college,  N.  C,  II,  89,  Davidson,  W.

Davies,  John,  II,  93,  Davies,  T.

Davies,  Rev.  Samuel,  quoted,  VI,  375.

Davila,  discourses  on,  I,  31.

Davila,  Pedrarias,  IV,  697,  Pedrarias.

Davis,  assumed  name,  I,  430,  Burroughs  S.

Davis,  Alexander,  II,  741,  Greeley,  H.

Davis,  Ari,  HI,  279,  Howe,  E.

Davis,  Col.,  II,  573,  Gaines,  Myra  C.

Davis,  Dr.  E.  S.,  II,  622,  Geddings.

Davis,  Rev.  Henry  L.,  II,  97,  Davis.  H.  W.

Davis,  Jefferson,  his  home,  illustration,  II.  101  ;  effect  of
Greeley's  signature  to  his  bail-bond,  740  ;  his  hostility
to  J.  E.  Johnston,  III.  459,  460.

Davis,  Lucius  D..  V,  33,  Pitman,  M.  J.

Davis,  Samuel,  II,  98,  Davis,  J.

Davis,  W.  M.,  V,  480,  Shaler,  N.  S.

Davis.  Rev.  Thomas,  VI.  381.

Davis,  Thomas.  II,  106,  Davis,  P.

Davison,  William.  I,  371,  Brewster,  W.

Davis  strait,  HI,  396,  Hudson,  H.


726


DAVY


DESSOUG


Davy,  Humphrey,  II,  207,  Dorsey,  J.  S. ;  V,  346.

Dawson,  G.  F.,  IV,  6,  Logan,  J.  A.

Dawson,  Moses.  Ill,  98.

Dawson,  Rev.  Thomas,  IV,  613,  Owen,  G.

Day,  John,  II,  113,  Daye.

Day,  Luke,  V,  488,  Shuys.

Day,  Mary  Anne,  I,  404.

Day,  Robert  and  Thomas,  II,  111,  Day,  J.

Day,  Dr.  Sylvester,  II,  111,  Day,  H.

Day-star  of  the  Revolution,  the,  HI,  62,  Hamilton,  A.

Dayton,  Aaron  O.,  Ill,  556,  Kirkpatrick,  A.

Dayton,  O.,  first  settlement  at,  IV,  673.  Patterson,  R.

Daza,  Cristobal.  II,  164,  Diaz  de  Pineda.

Dazier,  Adelaide,  1, 486,  Byrd,  H.  L.

Deacon,  H.  C,  I,  548,  Cary,  A.  L.

Deaconesses,  first  introduced  in  hospitals,  IV,  668,  Passa-
vant ;  order  of,  established,  VI,  495,  Whittingham.

Dead-rabbit  riot,  the,  II,  273,  Duryee.

Dead  sea,  the,  survey  of,  IV,  65,  Lynch,  W.  F.

Deaf-mutes,  instruction  of,  I,  212,  Bebian ;  213,  Beck,
T.  R.  ;  225,  Bell ;  374,  Bridgman  ;  344,  Brace,  J.  ;  526,
Carlin,  J.  ;  649,  Clare  ;  680,  Cogsivell,  M.  F.  ;  II,  579,
Gallaudet ;  HI,  335,  Hutton,  A.  B. ;  IV,  505,  Newsam  ;
700,  Peet,  H.  and  /.  L.  ;  V,  79,  Porter,  S.  ;  724,  Strong,
O.  S.  ;  701,  Stone,  C.  ;  gift  for,  V,  474,  Seybert.

Dean,  Edmund,  H,  115,  Dean,  Julia.

Dean,  Margery,  pen-name,  V,  33,  Pitman,  M.  J.

Dean's  Swamp,  engagement  at,  I,  482,  Butler,  W.

Dearborn,  Gen.,  at  the  surrender  of  Detroit,  HI,  309.

Dearborn  observatory,  V,  413,  Scammon,  J.  Y.

Deas,  Anne  I.,  HI,  372,  Izard.

De  Bary,  Henri  A.,  H,  409,  Farloio.

Debate  between  the  Church  and  Science,  the,  anonymous
book,  VI,  213,  Upham,  F.  W.

De  Berdt,  Esther,  V,  209,  Reed,  J.

De  Beriot,  I,  445,  Bull,  O.  B.

De  Bram,  William  Gerar,  V,  93,  Poulson.

Debt,  imprisonment  for,  abolished.  H,  453  ;  HI,  444,  John-
son, R.  M.  ;  HI,  703,  Lewis,  Ellis  ;  V,  691,  Stilwell ;  VI,
558,  Wiman.

Debt,  U.  S.,  reduction  of,  under  Gallatin,  H,  578  :  increase
during  war  of  1812,  578 ;  refunded,  720  ;  reduction  of,
1868-76,  723  :  in,  135.  136  ;  IV,  98.  McCulloch,  H.

Debtors,  colonization  of  imprisoned,  IV,  565,  Oglethorpe.

Debts,  assumption  of  state,  by  the  government,  IV,  169.

De  Camp,  Maria  Theresa,  III,  510,  Kemble,  C.

Decatur,  James,  II,  120,  121,  122.

Decatur's  monument,  illustration,  n,  121.

Deccan  survey,  the,  I,  107,  Arthur.  G.

Decimal  coinage,  commission  on,  I,  47,  Alexander,  J.  H.

Decius,  pen-name,  H,  598,  Gardner,  S.  J.  ;  HI,  743,  Living-
ston, H.  B.

Decker,  Adolf,  VI,  283,  Versehoor.

Declaration  of  Independence,  the  1, 17  ;  537  :  H,  326,  Ellery,
W.  ;  HI,  96,  Harrison.  B  :  665,  Lee,  R.  H  :  TV,  708,
Pendleton  ;  draft  of,  V,  501.  Sherman,  R.  ;  568,  Smith,
J. ;  congress  urged  to  rescind,  H  241,  Duche  ;  first  print-
ed, 258,  Dunlop,  John  ;  Franklin's  share  in,  531  :  as  first
published,  HI,  71,  Hancock,  J. :  publication  of,  208.  Hil-
legas  ;  adopted  in  New  York,  409  ;  committee  to  draft,
744,  Livingston,  R.  R.  :  its  authorship,  IV,  631,  Paine,  T.\
first  publicly  read,  IV,  525,  Nixon,  J.  ;  house  where  it
was  written,  illustration,  IV,  624  :  read  to  the  army,  VI,
377  :  second  celebration  of,  IH,  585,  Ladd,  J.  B.  ;  oiir  in-
tellectual, II,  345.

Declaration  of  Independence,  Mexican.  IH,  197,  Hidalgo,  M.

Decoration  day,  origin  of,  II.  198,  Donaldson,  J.  L.

De  Crillon,  Count.  Ill,  171,  Henry,  John.

Dedham,  view  of  house  at,  H,  400.

Deep  Bottom,  engagements  at,  H,  714,  715.

Deep-sea  soundings,  system  of,  instituted,  IV,  265.

Deer,  the,  capture  of, 'I,  175,  Barrett,  E.

Deerfleld,  Mass.,  captives  taken  from,  VT,  523,  Williams,
John.

Deerfleld,  the  Sevmour  house  at.  illustration,  V,  477.

Deering,  Mary,  V.  104,  Preble,  E.

Deering,  N.  H..  VI,  436,  Wentworth,  F.  D.

Deflagrator,  the.  III.  81,  Hare,  R.

Defoe,  Daniel,  V,  457,  Selkirk.

De  Forest,  W.,  II,  684,  Goodyear.

Defregger.  Franz,  III.  589,  Koehler,  R.

Degeraudo,  Baron,  VI,  177,  Tuckerman,  J.

De  Golyer  contract,  the,  II  603.

De  Graff,  the  buccaneer,  III,  631,  Laurent.

De  Groot.  Albert,  VI.  669.  Baker,  P.  C.

De  Hart,  Abigail,  IV,  277.  Mayo.  John.

De  Hart,  John.  IV,  277,  Mayo,  John.

Dehewamis,  III,  424,  Jemison,  M.

Dehn,  M.,  II,  63,  Damrosch.

Deimos,  satellite  named,  HI.  37,  Hall,  A.

Deirdre,  anonymous  poem,  III,  478,  Joyce,  R.  D.

De  Keyser,  pupil  of,  IV,  286.  Meeks  ;  331.  Millet,  F.  D.

De  la  Barre,  government  of,  in  Canada,  H,  654.

De  Laet,  III,  897.

Delafield,  Julia,  III.  705,  Lewis.  M.

De  Lancey,  Alice,  III,  372.  Izard.

De  Lancey,  Ann,  VI.  395,  Watts,  J.

De  Dancey,  Anne,  II.  488.  Floyd.  A. :  in,  471,  Jones,  T.

De  Lancey,  Charlotte,  IV,  70,  MacAdam.


De  Lancey,  Jane,  VI,  395,  Watts,  J.

De  Lancey,  Margaret  M.,  V,  294.  Rochester,  T.  F.

De  Lancey,  Susan,  VI,  367,  Warren,  Sir  P.

De  Lancey  house,  the,  illustration,  II,  129.

Deland,  Lorin  F.,  VI,  678.  Deland,  M.  W.

Delano,  Samuel,  II,  133,  Delano,  A.

Delaroehe,  Paul,  pupils  of,  I,  526,  Carlin.  J.  ;  I,  589,  Chas-
serieau  ;  H,  643,  Gignoux  ;  HI,  261,  Hoppin,  T.  F. :  V.
423,  Schoff ;  429,  Schussele.

Delaware,  oldest  deed  for  land  in,  1, 2S5,Blommaert  :  Lord
Baltimore's  claim  to,  HI,  188,  Herrman,  A.  ;  constitu-
tion of,  IV,  128,  McKean,  T.  ;  seizure  of  the  governor
and  records  of,  137,  McKinly,  J.  ;  separation  of,  from
Penn.,  210,  Markham,  W.  ;  revolt  in,  1776.  323.  Miles,  S.  ;
Swedish  colony  in,  IV,  338,  Minuit ;  Swedish  settle-
ments in,  V,  126,  Printz.  J.

Delaware,  destruction  of  the  frigate.  IH,  69,  Hamond.

Delaware  bay,  first  colony  on.  HI.  269,  Hosset ;  HI,  297.

Delaware  breakwater,  the,  1. 128,  Bache,  H.

Delaware  river,  the,  named.  II,  134.  Delawarr;  Dutch
colony  on,  157,  De  Vries  ;  HI.  214.  Hinoyossa  ;  crossing
of,  by  Washington,  566  ;  claim  to,  V,  463,  Sergeant,  J.

Delaware  Indians,  the,  books  in  their  language,  II,  378,
Ettwein  ;  mission  to,  552,  Frisbie  :  in  the  Revolution,
III,  572,  Koquethagachton  :  first  work  in  language  of,
238.  Holm  ;  VI.  58,  Teedyuseung.

Delawarr,  Earl,  VI,  440,  West,  L-  S.  S.

Del  Campo,  Fernandez,  III,  479.

Del  Cano,  Sebastian,  IV,  173,  Magellan.

De  l'Epee,  M.,  H,  579,  Gallaudet,  T.  H.

Delery,  Jean. See  L6ry,  HI,  694.

Delille,  Abbe,  n,  238,  Dubois,  J.

Delille,  H.  A.,  IV,  3,  Logan.  O.

Delisle,  Guillaume,  TV,  498,  Neuville,  P.  B.

Delisle.  Joseph  Nicholas,  II,  559,  Fuentes,  B.

Delia  Crusca,  IV,  309,  Merry.

Delphian  club,  the,  of  Baltimore.  IV,  484,  Neal,  J.

Delphi  of  New  England,  the,  II,  344.

Del  Techo,  N.,  VI,  127,  Toict.

Del  Valle,  Marquis,  IV,  722,  Peralta,  G.

Delvau,  Alfred,  V,  126,  Privat.

Demaray,  M.,  II,  267,  Duquet.

Demarest,  Rev.  W.,  II,  542,  Frelinghuysen,  T.  J.

Demarest.  Theodore  T.  C,  VI,  678.  Demarest,  M.  A.  L.

Demens  Egomet,  pen-name,  VI,  533,  Williams,  T.

Demetrios,  Andrea,  II,  179,  Dimitry.

Democratic  party,  the,  I,  27  ;  IH,  380  ;  formation  of,  IV,
142,  Maclay,  W.;  losses  of,  through  slavery  legislation,
V,  10  ;  two-third  rule  in  nominations,  V,  405,  Saunders,
R.M.

Democratic  Review,  I,  417,  Brownson,  O.  A.;  Ill,  126,  127.

Demologos,  the,  II,  564,  Fulton,  R.

Demos  krateo  principle,  the,  VI,  195.  412.

Demosthenes  of  the  mountains,  IV,  326,  Miller,  H.  M.  V.

Dempster,  Rev.  James,  H.  139,  Dempster,  J.

Denis,  Ferdinand.  II,  439,  Ferrand.

Denison  college,  gifts  to,  II.  142,  Dennison.

Denison  university,  gift  to,  II,  189,  Doane,  W.  H.

Denman,  Jacob  S..  IV,  48,  Lozier,  C.  I.

Denman,  Matthias,  II,  457,  Filson.

Denmark,  gift  from  the  king  of.  II,  295,  Eaton,  W.

Denning,  William.  II,  245,  Duer,  W.  A.

Denney,  Miss,  H,  225,  Drake,  F.  A.

Dent,  Capt.  George,  n,  725.  Grant,  J.  D.

Dent,  Dr.  John,  II,  249,  Dugas.

Dent,  Julia  B.,  n,  709.

Dental  institutions,  founded,  HI,  132.  Hayden,  H  H.

Denver,  Col.,  I,  205.  Beall,  S.  W.\  first  house  in,  III,  618,
Larimer  ;  school  at,  VI,  589.  Wolfe,  J.  D.

De  Palm,  Baron  de,  II.  144,  De  Palm,  J.  H.  L.

De  Patz,  Baron,  HI,  315,  Hunneus.

De  Pauw  university  and  college,  n,  144  ;  gift  to,  IV,  137,
McKim.

De  Peyster,  Alice  J.,  H,  337,  Elmendorf,  J.

De  Peyster,  Catherine,  VI,  237,  Van  Cortlandt,  Philip.

De  Poincy,  M.,  II,  375,  Espivent.

Derby,  Dr.,  n,  267,  Dupuis.

Derby.  Earl  of,  I,  452,  Burgoyne  :  V,  645,  Stanley,  F.  A.

Derby,  Conn.,  IV,  196,  Mansfield,  R.

Derevilla,plant  called,  H,  177,  Diereville.

Dermer.  H,  688,  Gorges.

De  Ronde,  Rev.,  Lambertius,  n,  237,  Du  Bois,  G.

Derqui,  Santiago,  IV,  350,  Mitre  ;  VI,  17,  Taboada  ;  218,
Urquiza.

Derrick,  invention  of  the  portable,  I,  422,  Bryant,  G.

Derryfield,  N.  H..  V,  652.  Stark,  J.

Desaguadero,  discovery  of  the,  V,  311,  Rojas,  G.\  battle
of,  395,  Santa  Cruz,  A.

De  Saussure,  H.  W.,  I.  499.

Deschamps,  M.,  HI,  699,  Lethih-e.

Deseret,  HI,  253,  Hooper,  W.  H ;  VI.  645.

Deseret  alphabet,  the.  author  of,  IV,  755,  Phelps,  W.  W.

Deserters,  alleged  British,  seized,  I,  178,  Barron.

Desertions  from  Washington's  army,  I,  95.

Drstoiirneaux.  Gen.,  Ill,  306,  Hugues.

Des  Granges,  Zulime,  II,  572,  Gaines,  Myra  C.

Desiccating  processes,  invention  of,  V,  698,  Stoddard,  W.  O.

Despard,  Matilda  P.,  II.  731.  Greatorex,  E.

Dessoug,  the  steamer,  H,  689,  Gorringe.


DESTRELEAU


DOPPLER


727


Destreleau,  M.,  II,  146,  Derbigny.

Destroyer,  the,  II,  271,  Durfee,  W.  F.;  365,  Ericsson.

Detective  service,  V,  25-26,  Pinkerton.

Detroit,  site  of,  II,  576,  Galinee  ;  founder  of,  I,  493,  Cadil-
lac ;  treaty  at,  353,  Bradstreet;  attack  on,  by  Ottawas.VI,
27,  Talon  ;  in  the  Revolution,  I,  627  ;  relief  of,  II,  61,  Dal-
zell,  J. ;  fortification  at,  II,  253,  Du  Lhut ;  surrender  of,  I,
381,  Brock  ;  551,  Cass,  L. :  III,  309,  Hull,  W. ;  V,  601,  Snell-
ing.  J. ;  VI,  44,  Taylor,  James  ;  Indian  plot  to  take,  siege
of,  V,  64.  Pontiac  ;  college  founded  in,  IV,  318,  Mieqe  ;  V,
229,  Reze  ;  hospital  founded  in,  IV,  150,  McMillan.  James;
gift  to,  502,  Newberry,  John  S. ;  pioneers  of,  I,  270,  Bishop,
Levi.

Detroit,  capture  of  the  brig,  II,  330,  Elliott,  J.  D.

Deux  Montagnes.  Indian  settlement  at,  V,  5,  Picquet.

De  Veaux  college,  II,  131.

De  Vela,  Nunez,  II,  165,  Diaz  de  Pineda.

Development  theory,  the,  I,  35  ;  VI,  632.

De  Vercheres,  II,  613,  Gaspe,  P.  I.

Devereux,  T.  P.,  I,  635,  Clarke,  M.  B.

Devesac,  Auguste,  V,  325,  Roselius.

Devil,  the,  sobriquet,  I,  372,  BriceHo,  A.  N.

Devil's  Adjutant,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  337,  Waller,  J.

Devil's  Run,  fight  at,  III,  247,  Hood,  J.  B.

Devlin,  Mary,  I,  319.

De  Vries,  Peter  Rudolphus,  IV,  758,  Philipse  ;  expedition,
the,  III,  269,  Hosset.

Dew,  theory  of,  VI,  431,  Wells,  W.  C.

De  Wecker,  Dr.,  V,  224,  Renting.

De  Wette,  II,  491,  Follen.

Dewey,  Daniel,  II,  158,  Dewey,  C.  A.

Dewey,  Mary  E.,  V,  452,  Sedgwick,  C.  M.

Dewey,  Paul,  II,  159,  Dewey,  O.

De  Witt,  Richard  Varick,  II,  337,  Elmendorf,  J.

Dexter,  Andrew,  II,  162,  Dexter,  8.  N.

Dexter,  George  T.,  II,  304,  Edmonds,  J.  W.

Dial,  the,  II,  345  ;  a  new,  346  ;  the,  561,  Fuller,  Sarah  Mar-
garet ;  V,  259.

Diamond,  the  Pitt,  I,  591,  Chatham.

Diamond-cutting,  art  of,  IV,  423,  Morse,  H.  D. ;  machine
for,  423.

Diamond-field,  alleged,  III,  545,  King,  Clarence.

Diamonds,  artificial,  V,  370,  Sainte-Claire,  H.  E.

Diamond  wedding,  the,  I,  185,  Bartlett,  W.  A.

Diard,  M.,  V,  374,  Saint  Simon.

Diarist,  A.,  pen-name,  VI,  71,  Thayer,  A.  W.

Diaz,  Felipe,  III,  633,  Lautaro.

Diaz  del  Castillo,  Bernal,  IV,  570,  Olid.

Dick,  A.  L.,  II,  169,  Dick,  J.  T.

Dick,  Capt.,  Ill,  567,  Knox,  James.

Dick,  Dr.  Thomas,  II,  507,  Forsyth,  John.

Dickens,  Asbury,  II,  141,  Dennie.

Dickens,  Charles,  I,  630.  Clark,  L.  O.  ;  original  of  Boz,  II,
170,  Dickens,  A.  N.  ;  738  ;  cited,  V,  32,  Pitchlynn  ;  the  plot
of  Barnaby  Rudge,  45.

Dickinson,  Barnabas,  II,  174,  Dickinson,  M.  K.

Dickinson,  Ellen  E.,  V,  624,  Spaulding,  S.

Dickinson,  John,  I,  11,  Adams,  Abigail.

Dickinson,  John,  quarrel  of,  with  Adams,  I,  17.

Dickinson,  Samuel  D.,  II,  173,  Dickinson,  J.

Dickinson,  Samuel  Fowler.  II,  173,  Dickinson.  E.

Dickinson,  Submit.  II,  447,  Field,  D.  D.

Dickinson,  Temperance,  IV,  556,  Odell,  J.

Dickinson  college,  founded,  II,  173,  Dickinson,  J.  ;  352,
Emory  ;  IV,  524,  Nisbet,  C.  ;  hospitals  at,  487,  Neill,  J.

Dick's  River,  Ky.,  Ill,  567,  Knox,  James.

Dictionaries,  American,  VI,  417,  Webster,  N.

Dictionary,  first  American,  of  English,  II,  331,  Elliott,
John.

Didimus.  H.,  pen-name,  II,  271,  Durell.

Diego  Ramirez  islands.  IV,  529,  Nodal.

Dietz,  Feodor,  IV,  351,  Moeller.

Diez,  Wilhelm,  pupils  of,  II,  176,  Dielman  ;  277,  Duveneck  ;
VI,  301,  Vinton,  F.  P.

Dieza,  Diego  de,  II,  368,  Escandon.

Digestion,  study  of  the  process  of,  I,  210,  Beaumont,  W.

Digges,  Sir  Thomas,  II,  177,  Digges,  Sir  D.

Diligent,  the.  I,  409,  Brown,  Moses.

Dillaye.  Harriette  A.,  VI,  697,  Rambaut.

Dillingham,  Paul,  I,  531,  Carpenter,  M.  H.

Dillon,  Peter,  III,  616,  La  Perouse.

Dining-room  Magazine,  the,  IV,  60,  Lyman,  L.  E.  B.

Dinnies,  John  C,  II,  180.  Dinnies.

Dinocerata,  the,  IV,  218,  Marsh,  O.  C.

Dinsmore,  W.  B.,  I,  11,  Adams,  Alvin.

Dinwiddie  Court-House,  engagements  at,  II,  716  ;  V.  500,
Sheridan.

Diocesan  house,  VI,  590,  Wolfe.

Dion,  pen-name,  VI,  119,  Tillinghast,  J.  L.

Diplomatic  service,  reorganization  of  the.  rV,  594,  Orth.

Directory  of  the  Friends  of  Ireland,  the,.rv,  555,  &Conor.

Disappearing  Mist,  the,  III,  445,  Johnson,  J.  S.

Disbrowe,  John.  II,  182,  Disbrowe.

Disciples  of  Christ,  the,  I,  515,  Campbell,  A.

Discovery,  the,  voyages  of,  I,  134,  Baffin  ;  484,  Button  ;
486,  Bylot ;  715  ;  III,  298,  Hudson,  H.  ;  alleged  confession
of  a  seaman  of,  298  ;  IV,  478,  Nares.

Dislocation,  Metacarpophalangeal,  reduction  of,  II,  16,
Crosby,  D.


Dissection,  act  legalizing,  VI,  390,  Watson,  B.  A.  :  595,
Wood,  J.  R.

Dissen,  Prof.,  I,  154,  Bancroft,  G.

Dissenters,  ejection  of,  from  England,  IV,  252,  Mather,  S.

Distillation,  invention  of  processes,  VI,  361,  Warren,  Cyrus
More.

District  of  Columbia,  scheme  to  abolish  slavery  in,  III,
716 ;  emancipation  in,  719  ;  slavery  in,  411,  412,  Jay,
William  ;  VI,  549.

Ditcher,  invention  of  a,  V,  173,  Randall,  T.  F.

Divan  of  Algiers,  the,  II.  533.

Dividers  and  calipers,  patent  on,  V,  408,  Sawyer,  S.

Dividing-engine,  invention  of  the,  I,  297,  Blunt,  E.

Diving-bell  boats,  invention  of,  II,  287,  Eads.

Divinity,  the  new,  VI,  192,  Tyler,  B.

Divinity  students,  Einerson's  address  to.  II,  345.

Divorce,  discussion  on.  IV,  616,  Owen,  R.  D.

Dix,  Timothy,  II,  183,  Dix,  J.  A.

Dixon,  Col.  Henry,  II,  185,  Dixon,  Archibald.

Dixon,  Samuel  G.,  V,  172,  Randolph,  N.  A.

Dixon,  Wynn,  II,  185,  Dixon,  Archibald.

Dixon's  Entrance,  strait,  discovered,  II,  186,  Dixon,  G.

Dobbs,  Arthur,  descendants  of,  V,  617,  Spaight.

Dobson,  Thomas,  I,  418,  Bruce,  G. ;  III,  642,  Lawson,  A.

Doctor  Johns,  original  of,  IV,  346,  Mitchell.  D.  G.

Doctor  of  Divinity,  title  of,  first  conferred  in  America,  IV,
254,  Mather,  I.

Dr.  Oldham  at  Greystones,  anonymous  book,  III,  170,
Henry.  C.  S.

Doctor's  mob,  the.  I,  200,  Bayley,  R. ;  V,  84,  Post,  W.

Documents,  official,  first  printer  of,  V,  352,  Russell  B.

Dodge,  Elizabeth  C,  III,  551,  Kinney,  Elizabeth  C;  V,  658,
Stedman,  Edmund  Clarence.

Dodge,  Rev.  Ezekiel,  IV,  521,  Niles,  S.

Dodge,  Henry,  III,  732,  Linn,  L.  F.

Dodge,  Israel,  II,  193,  Dodge,  H.

Dodge,  William.  II,  194,  Dodge,  M.  M.

Doesticks,  Q.  K.  Philander,  pen-name,  VI,  99,  Tliomson,  M.

Dog-show,  the  first,  in  America,  V,  545.  Skinner,  F.  G.

Dolfus.  Auguste,  VI,  297,  Villermet.

Dollar  Magazine,  the,  V,  45.

Dollar  Monthly,  the,  I,  238,  Bennett,  E.

Dollier,  Pere.  II,  575,  Galinee.

Dcillinger,  Prof.,  of  Munich,  I,  34.

Dollinger,  Dr.,  I,  761,  Coxe,  A.  C.

Dolores,  Chili,  battle  of,  I,  493.  Cdceres.

Dolores,  California,  mission  of.  III,  489,  Junipero.

Dolphin,  the,  I.  225,  Bell,  C.  H.

Dolphin,  story  of  the  sloop,  II,  452,  Fillmore.

Dolly  Mount,  shooting  contest  at,  II,  55.  Dakin.

Domesticus,  anonymous  novel,  I,  477,  Butler,  W.  A.

Dome  trocar,  invention  of  the,  II,  472,  Fitch,  Simon.

Domeyko,  Seiior,  III,  315,  Hunneus.

Domingue,  Gen.,  V,  378,  Salnave.

Dominica,  battle  in  the  channel  of,  V,  301,  Rodney.

Dominican  republic,  the,  founded,  II.  236,  Duarte,  J.  P.

Dominicans,  introduction  of,  into  U.  S.,  II,  431,  Fenwick,
E.  D.  ;  in  Nicaragua,  504,  Forres ;  Mexican  general
of,  IV,  362,  Monroy  ;  attempts  to  protect  the  Indians  by,
367,  Montesinos,  A.;  first  convent  of,  in  U.  S.,  VI,  556,
Wilson,  T.  ;  convents  of,  in  Ecuador,  IV,  366,  Monte-
negro ;  troubles  of,  in  Chili,  510,  Neyra  ;  missions  of,  I,
79,  Angulo,  P.  de  :  250-251,  Bertrand  ;  251,  Betanzos,  D.
and  P.,  Beteta  ;  368,  Breton  ;  518.  Cancer ;  545,  Carva-
jal,  G.  de  ;  738,  Cordova,  F.  de  ;  739,  Cordova,  P.  de  ;
III,  340,  Ietersdorf ;  748,  Lizarraga  ;  749,  Loayza  ;  IV,
30,  Los  Santos  ;  52,  Lugo  ;  299,  Menier  ;  340,  Miranda,
P.  ;  351,  Moguer ;  V,  221,  Rcngino  ;  257,  Rio,  D.  :  392,
San  Martin.  T.  de  ;  396,  Saravia  ;  464.  Servien  ;  VI,  123,
Toledo,  G. ;  224,  Valdivieso,  A.  de  ;  239,  Vanden  Broek  ;
286,  Viana,  F.  :  287,  Vico  ;  288,  Victoria,  T.  ;  654,  Za-
mora,  A.;  660,  Zepeda  ;  665,  Zuiliga,  D.

Dominican  sisters,  gift  to,  VI,  372,  Washburn,  C.  C.

Dominique,  Capt.,  VI,  642,  You.

Dominique,  naval  battles  off.  IV.  179,  Maitz.

Dominis,  Col.  J.  O.,  III.  490.  Kalaka.ua.

Domino,  new  style  of,  III,  336,  Hyatt,  J.  W.

Dom  Miguel,  throne  of  Portugal  usurped  by,  IV,  698,  Pe-
dro I.

Don,  the,  blockado-runncr,  III,  220,  Hobart,  A.  C.

Donald,  Thomas,  III,  004,  Lauder,  J.  M.  D.

Donaldson,  Maj.  J.,  III.  188,  Herrman,  E.  G.

Don  Carlos,  II,  274,  Dusuau.

Donegal  church,  Pa.,  illustration,  II,  574.

Donelson,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  Ill,  380.

Donelson,  Emily,  III.  384,  Jackson.

Donelson,  John  and  Rachel,  III,  374,  384,  Jackson,  R.

Donelson,  Mary,  VI,  675,  Coffee.

Doneraile,  Viscount,  V,  371,  St.  Leger.

Doney,  Thomas,  V,  567,  Smith,  H.  W.

Doniphan,  Joseph,  II,  200,  Doniphan.

Don  Martin,  IV,  206,  Marina.

Donnacona,  I,  543,  Cartier,  J.

Donner  party,  the,  I,  366.  Breen.

Don  Quixote  of  the  Jerseys,  the,  III,  743,  Livingston,  Will
iam.

Don  Simplicio,  newspaper.  V,  165,  Ramirez,  I.

"  Don't  give  up  the  ship,"  III,  641,  Lawrence,  J.

Doppler,  Herr,  V,  508,  Sherwood,  W.  H.


728


DORAN


DUFFY


Doran,  Ellen  C,  VI,  688,  Howarth,  Ellen,  C.
Dorchester,  settlement  of,  VI,  472,  White,  J.;  view  of  Ever-
ett's birthplace  at,  II,  389  ;  church  of,  blown  up,  475,  Fitz-

patriek,  J.  B.
Dorchester  company,  n,  355,  Endicott,  J.
Dorchester  heights,  fortification  of,  VI,  84,  Thomas,  John.
D'Orcy,  Gigot,  II,  637,  Gibbs,
Doremus,  Thomas  C.  D.  202.
Doria,  Dr.  Franklin,  II,  540,  Freire,  Luiz.
Dorn,  Maj.,  I,  196,  Bayard,  G.  D.

Dorothea,  the,  I,  428,  Buchan  :  II,  534,  Franklin,  Sir  J.
Dorr,  Ensign  Moses,  V,  651,  Stanwix.
Dorr,  Seneca  R,  II,  205,  Dorr,  J.  C.  R.
Dorr,  Sullivan,  H,  205,  Dorr,  T.  W.
Dorr's  rebellion,  H,  206,  Don;  T.  W. ;  IV,  154,  McNeill.
Dorset,  Duke  of,  II,  629,  Germaine.
Dorsheimer,  Philip,  II,  208,  Dorsheimer,  W.
Dorsey,  Owen,  II,  206,  Dorrego.
Dorsey,  Samuel  W.,  U,  207,  Dorsey,  S.  A.
Douay,  Gen.,  IV.  215,  Mdrquez,  L.
Double-shuffle  movement,  the,  Canadian  politics,  I,  543,

Cartier,  G.  E.;  IV,  103.
Double  stars,  discovery  of,  I,  624,  Clark,  A.  G.
Dough-face,  author  of  the  term,  V,  179,  Randolph.
Douglas,  Sir  Howard,  II,  266,  Du  Pont.
Douglas,  Marian,  pen-name,  V,  282,  Robinson,  A.  D.
Douglas,  R.  M.  and  S.  A.,  II,  215.
Douglas  monument,  illustration,  H,  215.
Douglass,  Mass..  II,  217,  Douglass,  W.
Douglass.  David.  VI,  20,  Tailfer.
Douglass,  Frederick,  on  John  Brown's  plans,  I,  406.
Douw,  Ann,  VI,  238,  Van  Cortlandt,  P.
Dove,  the,  I,  506,  Calvert,  L.

Dover,  N.  H.,  founded,  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  Anne.
Dove-tailing  machine,  invention  of  a,  III,  505,  Kellogg,  G.
Dowd,  J.  Luella,  pen-name,  V,  579,  Smith,  L.  D.
Dowell,  James  R.,  V,  58,  Pollard.  M.  A.  N.  G.  D.
Downing,  C.  W.,  II,  221,  Downing,  F.  M.
Downing,  Emanuel,  IV,  536,  Norton,  J.
Downing,  Major  Jack,  pen-name,  V,  589,  Smith,  Seba  ;

letters  of,  II,  94,  Davis,  C.  A.;  HI,  383.
Downing,  Lewis,  II,  221,  Downing,  Col.
Downing  college,  Cambridge,  II,  222,  Downing,  Sir  G.
Downing  street,  London,  H,  222,  Downing,  Sir  G.
Dowse,  Eleazer,  II,  222.  Dowse.
Doyen,  M.,  Ill,  699,  Lethiere.
Doyle,  Col.,  IV,  208.
Draft  of  1814,  the,  VI,  407.

Draft  of  1864,  outrages  in  Indiana.  IV,  432,  Morton,  O.  P.
Draft  riots,  the,  III,  517.  Kennedy,  J.  A.;  721  ;  causes  of,

V,  477  ;  noted  speech  on,  477  ;  the,  561,  Smith,  E.  D.\  in

Wisconsin,  590,  Smith,  T.  C.  H.
Dragging  Canoe,  Chief,  VI,  352,  Ward.  Nancy.
Dragondorff,  Prof.  G..  II,  249,  Duffleld,  S.  P.
Drake,  Alexander, II, 225, Drake,  Frances  Ann  ; first

travelling  dramatic  company,  IV,  51,  Ludlow,  Noah  M.;

V,  589,  Smith,  Solomon  Franklin.
Drake,  Sir  Francis,  illustration  of  his  ship,  II,  224.
Drake,  Janet,  II,  126,  De  Kay.  G.  C.
Drake,  John,  VI,  679,  Drake,  F.  R.
Drake,  Julia,  her  two  marriages,  II,  115,  Dean,  Julia  ;  509.

Fosdick,  William  Whiteman.
Drake,  Louise  and  Caroline,  II,  224,  Drake.  J.  R.
Drake,  Thomas,  V,  549,  Slenker.
Drake,  Miss,  II,  49,  Cutter,  G.  W.
Drake,  the,  capture  of,  III,  468.
Drake  university,  founded,  VI,  679,  Drake.
Drama,  first,  written  in  America,  II,  669,  Godfrey, T.  :

first  American,  acted,  VI,  201.  Tyler,  R.
Dranesville,  battle  at.  IV,  584, Old,  E. O. C.  ;  V,  727,

Stuart,  J.  E.  R.
Draper,  John.  II,  745,  Green,  B.
Draper,  Rev.  John  C,  II.  226,  Draper,  J.  W.
Draper,  Sir  W.,  II,  132,  De  Lancey,  O.
Draper,  Mrs.,  Ill,  350,  Inglis,  M.

Drawbridges,  self-acting,  inventor  of,  VI,  694,  Mayall.
Drayton,  Jacob,  II,  229,  Drayton.  W.
Drayton  and  Sayres.  trial  of,  IV,  191,  Mann,  H.
Dreadful,  the,  IV,  315,  Michel,  J.  L.
Dreadnought,  capture  by  the,  I,  323,  Boscawcn.
Dream  of  Alla-ad-Deen,  anonymous  poem,  IV,  597,  Os-

born,  L.
Dredging,  deep-sea,  V,  93.  Pourtales  J  691,  Stimpson.
Dredging-buckets,  automatic,  invention  of,  III,  442,  John-
son, F.  G.
Dredging-machines,  II,  563  ;  VI,  172,  Tuck  ;  first  steam,  n,

384,  Evans,  O.
Dred  Scott  decision,  the.  I.  502 :  n,  35,  Curtis.  B.  R. ;  444,

Fessenden,  W.  P. ;  IV,  144,  McLean,  J. ;  VI.  30,  Taney.
Dresser,  Amos,  II,-  611.

Drew  seminary,  gifts  to,  II.  231  :  IV.  87,  McClintock,  J.
Drexel,  Joseph  W.,  II.  725  ;  house  at  Mt.  MacGregor,  721.
Dreyfus  treaty,  the.  II.  298.  Eclienique,  J.  M.
Dreyschock,  Alexander,  IV,  248,  Mason,  W.
Dried-meal  process,  the,  IV,  219,  Marsh,  Sylvester.
Dries  or  Driesch.  II,  232.  Drisins.
Drilling-engine,  invention  of  a.  III,  116,  Hanpt,  H.
Drill-plough,  invention  of  a.  II,  574,  Gale,  B.
Drill-sowing,  II,  617,  Catling.


Driving  Home  the  Cows,  anonymous  poem,  IV,  600,  Os-
good, K.  P.

Drolling,  Michel  M.,  pupil  of,  V,  371,  Saintin.

Drop  Shot,  pseudonym,  I,  490,  Cable.

Drowne,  William,  H,  233.  Drowne,  S.

Drummer-boy  of  Mission  Ridge,  the,  IH,  574,  Kountz.

Drummond  light,  the,  HI,  81,  hare,  R.

Drury,  Warren  G.,  V,  439,  Scott  R-  K.

Drury's  Bluff,  engagement  at,  II,  654,  Gillmore.

Druzes,  the,  V,  191,  Rawscm,  A.  L.

Dry  den,  Mr.,  IH,  529,  Key,  P.  B.

Duane,  Mary,  IV,  534,  North,  W.

Duarte  de  Costa,  H,  671,  Goes.

Dubaldy,  H,  209,  Doubleday.

Du  Bellay,  Griffon,  H,  241,  Du  Chuillu.

Dubienka,  battle  of,  III,  573.

Dublin,  Congregational  church  in.  rv,  252,  Mather,  8.

Dubois,  Paul  A.,  H,  242,  Dudley,  B.  W.

Du  Bois,  Rev.  Peter,  H,  237,  Du  Bois,  G.

Dubose,  Charles  W.,  II,  238,  Dubose.

Dubroca.  Louis,  H,  154,  Dessalines.

Dubufe,  Edouard,  pupil  of,  VI,  556,  Wilson.  M.

Du  Buysson.  Lieut.,  IH,  491,  Kalb.

Duchaine,  Abb6,  HI,  695,  Lesieur.

Duch6,  Rev.  Mr.,  I,  31,  Adams,  S.

Duchesneau,  M.,  H,  554.

Duck  lake,  engagement  at,  V,  252,  Riel.

Duckworth,  Admiral.  I,  428,  Buchan.

Duckworth,  Sir  J.,  Ill,  644,  Laye.

Duclerc,  Jean  Baptiste,  VI,  651,  Ysambert,  G.

Ducoudray-Holstein. See  Holstein,  III,  243.

Dudley,  Catharina,  IV,  462,  Murat.

Dudley,  Charles.  II,  243.  Dudley.,  C.  E.

Dudley,  Mercy,  VI,  599,  Woodbridge,  J.

Dudley,  Mr.,  iV,  44,  Lbirenthal.  ■

Dudley  observatory,  II,  243,  Dudley,  B.  ;  693,  Gould,  B.  A.  ;
struggle  over  the,  IV.  701,  Peirce.

Duelling,  II,  357,  England,  J.  ;  bill  forbidding,  in  D.  C.  V,
107,  Prentiss,  S.  :  laws  against,  enacted,  VI,  599,  Wood-
bridge,  B. ;  IH,  583,  Lacour.

Duels,  McDuffie-Cumming,  I,  29  ;  IV,  112  :  Arnold's,  with  a
British  captain,  I,  94  ;  Arnold  and  Lauderdale,  96  ;  Aus-
tin and  Elliott,  121  ;  Decatur  and  Barron,  141 :  179  ;  Bar-
ron, J.,  H,  121  ;  I,  231,  Belmont,  A.  ;  241  ;  258.  Biddle,  T.  ;
challenge  by  Jefferson  Davis,  271,  Bissell,  W.  H.  ;  338,
Bowie.  J. ;  347,  Bradock  ;  382,  Broderick  ;  challenge  to,
389,  Brooks,  P.  S.  ;  453,  Burk  :  challenge  to,  456.  Burlin-
game  ;  467  ;  Cadwalader  and  Conway,  494  :  712,  Conway,
T.  :  Carey  and  Oswald,  524  ;  Castries  and  Lameth,  555,
Castries  ;  Carroll  and  Benton.  539,  Carroll,  W.  :  Cilley
and  Graves.  615,  Cilley,  Jonathan  ;  Clay  and  Marshall,
640  ;  Clay  and  Randolph,  642  ;  Clingman  and  Yancey,  658,
Clingman :  Cumming and  McDuffle,  II,  29,  Cumming,  W. ;
Gushing  and  Lewis,  40,  Cushing,  T.  H.  ;  74,  75,  Daniel,  J.
M.  :  John  Rowan,  92.  Daviess ;  Read  and  Hearing,  117  ;
Gilbert  and  Denver.  144  ;  Dulany  and  Allen.  252,  Dulany,
L.  ;  of  a  woman,  361  ;  Baker  and  Brown,  380.  Evans,  h.
R. ;  476,  Flagg,  E. ;  Foote  with  Prentiss,  Winston  and
Claiborne.  496,  Foote,  H.  S.  :  Temple  and  Whately,  680  ;
Fry  and  Brown,  557,  Fry,  Joseph  :  Gale  and  Stuart,  574,
Gale,  S.  :  Gates,  Wilkinson,  615  ;  challenge  to  J.  R.  Gid-
dings,  642:  Gilbert  and  Denver,  644:  Graves  and  Cilley,  727,
Graves,  W.  J.  ;  Grymes,  III,  8  :  Gwinnett  and  Mcintosh,
20  ;  Hamilton  and  Burr,  59 :  P.  Hamilton  and  Eckert,
60 ;  Horn  and  De  Graff,  263.  Horn,  Van  :  White  and
Houston,  274  ;  Howard  with  Prentiss  and  McNutt,  278,
Howard,  V.  E.  ;  Robert  Howe  and  Gadsden.  283,  Howe,
R.  ;  Hughes  and  Cameron,  305.  Hughes,  R.  W. ;  Inge
and  Stanley,  346  :  Jackson  and  Avery,  375  ;  Jackson  and
Dickinson,  375,  376  ;  Jackson's  challenge  to  Scott,  377  ;
Randolph  and  Clay,  379  ;  Wells  and  James  Jackson,  387,
Jackson,  J.  ;  J.  S.  Jackson,  T.  F.  Marshall,  388  :  of  Buc-
caneers, 441,  Johnson.  Daniel ;  Clay  and  Randolph,  456,
Johnston,  J.  S.  ;  J.  B.  Ladd,  585  :  John  Laurens  and
Charles  Lee.  631 ;  John  Law's,  636.  Law,  John  ;  of  A.  G.
Lawrence,  642  ;  of  Benjamin  Lee,  656  :  Charles  Lee,  658  ;
Lee  and  Laurens,  660 :  Leggett  and  Blake.  679 :  of  the  buc-
caneers, Horn  and  Laurent,  631 ;  Mcintosh  and  Gwinnett,
IV,  124  :  III.  20  ;  challenge  to  a,  IV,  128.  Ruggles  and  Mc-
Kean  ;  Mackenna  and  Carrera,  131  ;  Marryat  and  Willis.
216  ;  Marshall  and  Mitchell,  225,  Marshall,  T.  ;  Clay  and
Marshall,  226  :  Mason  and  McCarty,  243,  Mason.  A.  T.  ;
Middleton  and  Grant,  316.  Middleton,  T.  ;  Pleasants  and
Richie,  V,39;  PoindexterandHunt.48;  Porter  and  Smyth.
78,  Porter,  P.  B.  ;  Clay  and  Randolph.  179  :  Riker  and
Swartout,  254,  Riker,  R. ;  Soule  and  Duke  of  A 1  va  and  Mar-
quis de  Turgot,  611  :  Spaight  and  Stanlv.  618  :  Stockton,
694,  Stockton,  R.  F.  ;  Stokes  and  Pierson.  699.  Stokes,
M.  :  Stuart  and  Boswell,  730.  Stuart,  James:  Swartout
and  Riker,  VI,  5,  Swartout,  R.  ;  Thomas  and  Price,  78,
Thomas,  F.  ;  Waddell,  310.  Waddell,  J.  I.  :  Webb  and
Marshall.  403.  Webb.  J.  W.  :  Willis  and  Marrynt.  540 ;
Woodbridge  and  Phillips,  599,  Woodbridge,  B.  ;  Yancey
and  Clingman.  637.

Duer,  Dr.  George  S.,  II,  245,  Duer,  E.  L.

Duer,  John,  II.  245.  Duer,  W.

Du  Fav,  III.  550,  Kinnerslo/.

Duffleld,  George.  II.  249.  Duffleld.  J.  T.

Duffy,  William,  IH,  548,  King,  W.  R.


DUFRESNE


EDWAEDS


729


Dufresne,  Jose,  III,  352.  Inigo.

Dugay-Trouin,  V,  221,  Renard.

Dujarrier,  III,  583.  Lacour.

Duke,  Basil  W.,  IV,  68.

Duke,  the,  sobriquet,  V,  694,  Stockton,  R.  ;  VI,  499,
Wickliffe.

Duke's  laws,  the,  IV,  517,  Nicolls  Mathias ;  518,  Nicolls,
Sir  Richard.

Duluth,  Chief,  IV,  96,  McCrea,  J.

Duluth,  Daniel,  I,  9,  Accault.

Du  Lux  case,  the,  III,  413,  Jay,  J.

Dumas,  Alexandre,  II,  253,  Dumas,  A.  D.\  571,  Gaillardet ;
III,  245,  Home.

Dumas,  IV,  363,  Montcalm.

Dumas,  chemical  theories  of,  DTI,  319,  Hunt,  T.  S.

Dumont,  M.,  pupil  of,  V,  273,  Roberts,  H.

Dumourier,  M.,  II,  379,  Eustace.

Dumouriez,  Francois,  V,  133.  Pulaski.

Dunbar,  Dr.  J.  R.  W.,  V,  661,  Steiner.

Dunbarton,  N.  H.,  V,  652,  Stark,  J.

Duncan,  buccaneer,  II,  437,  Fernandez  de  Piedrahita.

Duncan,  David,  II,  255,  Duncan,  J.  A.

Duncan,  Capt.,  Ill,  75,  Hannegan.

Dundas,  Sir  D.,  II,  132,  Delancey,  0.

Dundonald,  Earl  of,  I.  671,  Cochrane,  A.F.I.

Dundreary,  character  of,  V,  608,  Sothern.

Dunfermline,  Scotland,  gifts  to,  I.  529,  Carnegie.

Dungeness,  Randolph  of,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W.

Dunham,  David,  VI,  508,  Wilhorst.

Dunkers,  Seventh-day,  I,  223,  Beissel.

Dunlap,  Frances,  IV,  41.

Dunlap,  William,  II,  258,  Dunlap,  John.

Dunlap,  W.,  in,  46,  Hallam,  L.

Dunlap  society,  the,  II,  259,  Dunlap,  W.

Dunn  Browne,  pseudonym,  II,  468,  Fisk,  S.

Dunning,  Rev.  Andrew,  II,  261,  Dunning,  A.  K.

Dunning,  Daniel,  II.  407,  Fargo,  W.  G.

Dunton,  John,  II,  323.

Duperrey,  M.,  II,  436,  Fernandez,  J.

Duponeeau,  P.  S.,  his  exposure  of  an  impostor,  HI,  322,
Hunter,  J.  D.

Du  Pont,  Charles  Irenee,  II,  264.

Du  Pont,  VI,  246,  Van  Dyke,  N.

Du  Pont,  Henry,  II,  265,

Dupontin,  Archbishop,  I,  391,  Brophy.

Duppa,  Abraham,  III,  711,  Ligon.

Du  Puy,  H.  W.,  I,  52,  Allen,  E.

Dupuy,  Col,  II,  267,  Dupuy.

Duquesne,  Admiral,  II,  267.

Duquesne,  Fort,  II,  267,  Duquesne  de  Menneville.

Duran,  Carolus,  pupils  of,  I,  214,  Beckwith.  J.  C;  II,  733,
Greatorex,  E.  E. ;  760,  Gregory,  E. ;  IV,  638,  Palmer,  W.
L. ;  V,  398,  Sargent,  J.  S. ;  VI,  507,  Wiles,  I.  R.

Duran,  Father,  IV,  250,  Mastrilli.

Durang,  Ferdinand,  III,  530,  Key,  F.  S.

Durant,  Henry,  I.  32,  Adams,  W.

Duren,  N.  G.  and  R.,  II,  695.  Gould,  N.  D.

Durham  tract.  Pa. ,  V.  43.  Plumsted.

Durossy,  M.,  II.  353,  Enambuc.

Durrall,  Mary,  I,  537.

Dury,  John,  IV,  536,  Norton,  J.

Duryee's  zouaves,  II,  273,  Duryee.

Dustin,  Thomas.  II,  274,  Dustin,  H.

Dustin's  island,  n,  274,  Dustin,  H.

Dutch,  the,  American  relations  with,  I,  18, 19  ;  expedition
of,  against  the  Spanish  colonies,  HI,  159.  Hein  ;  contro-
versy with  the  Swedes,  295,  Hudde  ;  uneasiness  in  Spain
at  the  discoveries  of,  343,  Ihering ;  contests  with  the
Spaniards  in  American  waters,  V,  631,  Spielbergen  ;  colo-
nies of,  VI,  240,  Van  den  Broek.

Dutch  church,  New  Amsterdam,  view  of,  IV,  287.

Dutch  church,  old,  at  New  Utrecht,  V,  426.

Dutch  East  India  company,  the,  III,  297  ;  privileges  of,
684,  Le  Maire  ;  V,  427,  Schouten.

Dutch  millionaire,  the,  IV,  758,  Philipse.

Dutch  Reformed  church,  separation  of  the  American
branch,  HI,  78,  Hardenbergh  ;  missions  of,  VI,  98,  Thom-
son, F.  B.  ;  schism  from,  H,  138,  Demarest,  J.  ;  553,
Froeligh.

Dutch  West  India  company,  the,  HI.  214,  Hinoyossa.

Duval.  Gabriel,  HI,  163,  Henderson,  Jacob.

Duval,  Maj.  William,  II,  277,  Duval.  W.  P.

Du  Vivier,  assumed  name,  V,  41,  Pleville.

Duxbury,  Mass.,  Miles  Standish  monument  at,  illustration,
V  644.

Duyckinck,  Evert,  II.  278.

Dwight,  Elizabeth,  VI,  610,  Woolsey,  T.  D.

Dwight,  Elizabeth  B.,  II.  280,  Dwight,  H.  G.  O.

Dwight,  Capt.  Henry,  II,  279,  Dwiqh  t,  J.  S.  and  Joseph.

Dwight,  James  Scott,  II,  280,  Dwight,  F.

Dwight,  John,  II,  279,  Dwight,  Joseph.

Dwight,  Capt.  John,  n,  279,  Dwight.  J.  S.

Dwight,  Nathaniel.  II,  281,  Dwight.  Timothy.

Dyer,  Elisha,  IV,  59,  Lyman,  D.  XV.

Dyer,  Minnie,  IV.  325,  Miller,  M.  D.

Dyke,  Mary  Ann  and  Elizabeth,  II,  246,  Duff,  M.  A.

Dynamometer,  invention  of  the,  I,  191,  Batchelder,  S. ;  301,
Bogardus,  J.

Dynamophone,  invention  of  a,  V,  484,  Shaver.


Eades,  Capt.  Benjamin,  HI.  529,  Key,  F.  S.

Eagle,  The,  sobriquet,  V,  138,  Pushmatahaw.

Eagle,  W.  H.,  II,  758,  Gregg,  Andrew.

Eagle  orator  of  Tennessee,  the,  III.  176,  Henry,  G.  A.

Eagle's  eyesight,  H.  24,  Cuauhtemotzin.

Eaglesville.  engagement  at,  V,  498.

Eakin,  Maj.  C.  M.,  V,  513,  Shiras.

Eames.  Rev.  J.  H..  II,  288.  Eames,  J.  A.

Earle,  Sir  James,  pupil  of,  VI,  639,  Yates,  W.

Earle,  Phebe,  H,  637,  Gibbons,  Joseph.

Earle,  Ralph,  H,  288,  Earle,  P.  ;  289,  Earle.  R.

Earth,  the,  curious  theory  of  the  form  of,  VI.  16.  Symmes,
J.  C.  ;  experiments  to  prove  the  shape  of,  II,  263,  Du-
perrey ;  expedition  to  determine  the  form  of  the,  669,
Godin,  L.

Earthquakes,  at  Lima  and  Lisbon,  the.  II,  669.  Godin,  L.  ;
study  of,  V,  295,  Rockwood  ;  in  New  England  (1755),  VI,
575,  Winthrop,  J.

Earthquake  Allen,  I,  56,  Allen,  W.

Easter  island,  discovery  of,  II,  436,  Fernandez,  J.

Easthampton,  Mass.,  seminary  founded  at,  VI,  541,  Willis-
ton,  S.

East  Hampton,  L.  I.,  Payne's  house  at,  illustration,  IV,  686.

East  India  traffic,  the,  II.  224,  Drake,  Sir  F.

East  Indies,  the,  first  American  trade  with,  VI,  481,  White-

Eastman.  Abigail,  VI,  406,  Webster.  D.

Easton,  Mary,  V,  520,  Sibley,  G.  C.  '

Easton,  Pa.,  law-school,  IV,  78,  MacCartney.

East  River  bridge,  the  first  project  for,  III,  549,  Kingsley,

W.  C.  ;  V,  303, 304  ;  illustration,  304  :  VI,  428,  Wellington.
East  Town,  Pa.,  Wayne  house  at,  illustration,  VI,  399.
East  wick,  Andrew  M.,  Ill, 100,  Harrison,  J.  ; VI,  559,

Winans,  T.  D.  K.
East  Windsor  theological  seminary,  IV,  24,  Lord,  E.
Eaton,  Benjamin.  II,  292,  Eaton,  C.
Eaton,  Rev.  Joshua,  II,  498,  Forbes,  Eli.
Eaton,  Prof.,  IV,  67,  Lyon,  M.
Ebeling,  Christoph  D.,  VI,  103,  Thorndike,  I.
Ecce  Deus  Homo,  anonymous  book,  V,  35,  Pitzer.
Eccles  hill,  engagement  at,  I,  565,  Chamberlin.
Ecclesiastical  and  Missionary  Record,  the,  217,  Reid,  Wm.
Echandia.  Mexican  governor  of  California,  IV,  748,  Peyri.
Echavarri,  Gen.,  HI,  368.
Echeagaray,  Gen..  V,  290,  Robles.
Echobund,  Chief,  IV,  374,  Montour,  E.
Eckert,  III,  60,  Hamilton,  P.
Eckford,  Miss,  H,  224,  Drake,  J.  R.
Eclair,  Lyden,  pen-name,  II,  479,  Flash.  H.  L.
Eclipses,  observations  of,  IV,  430,  Morton,  H.
Economic  subjects,  books  on,  I.  114.  Atkinson,  E.
Economy,  Pa.,  community  at,  V,  184,  Rapp.
Ecuador,  explorations  and  missions  in,  II.  441,  Ferrer,  R.  ;

independence  of, II, 375,  Espinom.  J.  ; rebellion  in,

486,  Flores,  J.  J.  ;  III,  8,  Gual  ;  I,  306  ;  reign  of  terror  in,

V,  347,  Rumiilagui  ;  revolutions  in.  I,  488,  Caamano  ;
H,  593,  Garcia-Moreno  ;  TV,  528,  Noboa,  D.  ;  (1876),  VI,
272,  Veintemilla  ;  end  of  Spanish  domination  in,  V,  739,
Sucre,  A.  J.  ;  towns  founded  in,  II,  81,  Davalos  ;  V,  395,
Santa  Cruz,  R.  ;  roads,  in.  V,  395,  Santa  Cruz,  R.

Eddy  Brothers,  the,  I,  205,  Beard.

Eddyville  iron-works,  the,  Ky.,  HI,  508,  Kelly,  W.

Eden,  Richard,  I.  491.  Cabot.

Edes,  John,  II,  302,  Edes,  B.

Edgar,  the  ship,  destruction  of,  VI.  326,  Walker,  Sir  H.

Edgarton,  Sarah  C,  IV,  276,  Mayo,  S.  C.  E.

Edgehill  seminary,  I,  46,  Alexander,  J.  A.

Edge  Hill  school,  V,  174.  Randolph,  S.  N.

Edgerton,  Sydney,  IV,  283,  Meagher.

Edge-tools,  inventor  of,  II,  342,  Emerson,  J.  E.

Edinburgh,  gift  of  library  to,  I,  529,  Carnegie.

Edla,  Countess  of,  in,  178,  Hensler.

Education,  common-school,  I,  257  ;  common-school  fund
of  New  York,  III,  705,  Lewis,  M.  :  in  Dakota,  I,  203,
Beadle  ;  division  of  publics-school  money.  III,  304  ;  in-
dustrial. VI,  88,  Thompson.  C.  O.  ;  Jefferson's  scheme
of,  in  Virginia,  III,  422 ;  Lancaster  system,  2,  Gris-
com, J.  : 603, Lancaster, Joseph  ; manual training,

VI,  606,  Woodward,  C.  M.  ;  method  of  teaching  reading,
402,  Webb,  J.  R.  ;  methods  of,  359.  Warner.  C.  D.  ;
Mexican  association  for,  I,  40,  Alcocer  ;  National  board
of  popular,  218  ;  plan  for  public,  II,  264 ;  public  lands
devoted  to,  VI,  700,  Thornton  ;  in  Rhode  Island,  I,  168,
Barnard  H.  ;  secular,  HI,  136 ;  separate  R.  C.  schools,
IV,  159,  McQuaid  ;  in  the  south,  contributions  for,  688,
Peabody,  G.  ;  technical,  VI,  252,  Van  Rensselaer,  S.  ;
departments  of,  in  expositions,  HI,  290,  Hoyt,  J.  W.

Edmonds,  J.  W.,  II.  668.  Oilman,  J.  R.
Edward,  the,  capture  of,  I,  180,  Barry,  J.
Edwards,  Alexander.  II,  307',  Edwards,  J.
Edwards,  Esther,  I,  465.  Burr.
Edwards,  Dr.  George,  II.  305.  Edwards,  A.
Edwards,  J.  D.,  I,  421,  Bryan.  M.  E.
Edwards,  Lucy,  VI,  599.  Woodbridge.  T.
Edwards,  Maj.  J.  D.,  I.  425,  Bryan,  M.  E.
Edwards,  Mary,  II,  281,  Dwight,  Timothy.
Edwards,  Richard,  II,  309.
Edwards,  Samuel,  II,  307,  Edwards,  J.
Edwards,  Thomas,  I,  530,  Carpenter,  E.  M.


730


EDWARDS


EMULOUS


Edwards,  William,  II,  309.

Edwin,  John.  II,  313.  Edwin.  D.

Eencluys,  Hans  Janse,  VI,  239,  Van  Curler.

Effingham,  destruction  of  the,  I,  180,  Barry,  J.

Egmont.  Earl  of,  IV,  723,  Perceval.

Egypt,  Abyssinian  expedition  from,  n,  284,  Dye  ;  Ameri-
cans in  service  of,  358,  English,  G.  B.  ;  V,  701,  Stone,
C.  P. ;  Canadian  voyageurs  in.  III,  518,  Kennedy,  W.  N. ;
expedition  to  provinces  of,  IV,  8, 9,  Long,  C.  C.

Egyptology,  VI,  502,  Wilbour  ;  571,  Winslow,  W.  C.

Ehrenberg,  IV,  218,  Marsh,  O.  C.

Ehret,  George,  III,  569,  Koehler,  R.

Eichhorn,  Prof..  I,  154,  Bancroft,  G.

Eighteen  Presbyterian  ministers  for  a  groat,  anonymous
book.  III.  518,  Kennedy,  8,

Eisteddfodau,  the,  II.  306,  Edwards,  John.

Eizenbrodt,  Lewis  E.,  II,  130,  De  Lancey,  W.  H.

El  Bienio,  I,  39,  Alcantara.

El  Calabozo,  battle  at,  I,  333,  Boves.

El  Chato,  II,  168,  Diaz,  F.

Elder,  Charles  D.,  II,  318.  Elder,  S.  B.

Elder,  John,  portraits  by,  III,  674,  Lee,  R.  E.

Elder,  Thomas,  II,  334,  Ellmaker.

El  Dorado,  search  for,  IV,  330-331,  Millet ;  460,  Munoz  de
Collantes ;  527,  Noble,  A.  E.  ;  588,  Orellana  ;  V.  36,  Pi-
zarro,  G.  :  148,  Quesada ;  VI,  394,  Watteau  ;  III,  335,
Hutten  ;  V,  633,  Spire.

Eldredge,  Charles  H.,  IV,  666,  Parton.  S.  P.  W.

Eleazar,  VI,  69,  Thacher,  T.

Election,  presidential,  of  1789,  III,  71,  Hancock,  J. ;  VI,  379
of  1792,  380 ;  of  1796,  HI,  420  ;  of  1800,  421,  745,  Living
ston,  E. ;  of  1808,  IV,  170  ;  of  1812,  170  ;  of  1816,  III,  543
King,  R. ;  IV,  360.  Monroe  ;  VI,  130,  Tompkins  ;  of  1820

IV,  360  ;  of  1824.  in,  379  ;  VI,  419,  Weed,  T.\  of  1828,  HI
379 ;  of  1832,  382  ;  VI,  578,  Wirt ;  of  1836,  III,  98  ;  444
Johnson,  R.  M.;  VI,  195,  196,  232,  412,  472,  White,  H.  L
of  1840,  I,  268  ;  III.  98,  687,  Le  Moyne,  F.  J.;  VI,  196.  232.
413  ;  of  1844,  I,  268  ;  V,  52, 198.  199  :  VI,  232  ;  of  1848,  H,
454  :  VI,  233,  414  ;  of  1852,  III,  34,  Hale,  J.  P.;  548,  King,
W.  R.;  V,  9,  441,  664  ;  of  1856,  II,  456.  547.  Fremont ;  of
1860,  candidates  for  nomination,  II,  739  ;  III,  323,  Hunter,
R.  M.  T.;  V,  199,  Read,  J.  M.\  471  ;  the  election,  II,  214
389,  Everett,  E.  ;  IH,  607,  Lane,  Joseph  ;  717  ;  of  1864
723;  124,  Hawleti,  J.  B.;  438;  IV,  84,  McClellan,  G.  B
of  1868.  n,  718  :  V,  477  ;  of  1872, 11,721  ;  740  ;  III,  4,  Groes
beck  ;  IV,  555,  O' Conor  ;  V,  664  ;  of  1876,  665  ;  748  ;  VI
549  ;  contested,  I,  100:  n.  602,  722;  III,  6,  Grover,  L.
136,  137,  139  ;  IV,  96,  McCrary  ;  V,  722,  Strong,  W.;  VI
115;  394,  Watterson,  H.;  455,  Wheeler,  W.  A.;  V,  507
of  1880,  U,  219,  Dow,  N;  603  :  III,  74,  Hancock  ;  V.  507
VI,  401,  Weaver,  J.  B.\  of  1884, 1,  279,  449,  Burchard  ;  V,
371,  St.  John,  J.  P.;  507  ;  of  1888,  507  ;  celebrated  letter
on,  VI,  441,  West,  L.  S.  S. :  result  of,  686.

Election,  New  York,  of  1882,  Folger,  C.  J.

Election  returns,  falsification  of,  I,  213,  Beckford.

Elections,  military  interference  at,  I,  278  ;  III,  141  ;  pro-
posed repeal  of  laws,  141,  142  ;  proposed  amendment  on
presidential,  etc.,  437  ;  alleged  frauds  of  1868,  V,  482,
Sharpe,  G.  H.

Electoral  commission  of  1877,  the,  I.  278 :  n,  544,  Freling-
huysen,  F.  T;  Ill,  137  ;  V,  722,  Strong,  W.

Electoral  college,  the.  Ill,  379.

Electricity,  early  experiments,  discoveries,  inventions,
theories,  first  suggestion  of  the  lightning-rod,  suggestion
about  the  solar  system.  Ill,  550-551,  Kinnersley  ;  Frank-
lin's discovery,  II,  528  ;  early  experiments,  III,  260,  Hop-
kinson.  T.  ;  lectures,  theories,  invention,  550-551  ;  re-
searches on.  V,  338,  Rowland  ;  VI,  164,  Trowbridge,  J. ;

V,  554,  Smallwood,  C. ;  methods  of  developing,  VI,  629,
Wurtz  ;  method  of  firing  guns  by,  120,  Timby  ;  early  use
of,  in  disease.  073.  Cadwallader,  T.;  I.  205,  Beard  ;  III,
536,  Kimball,  G. ;  first  applied  for  movable  torpedoes,  V,
542,  Sims,  W.  S.;  applications  of,  in,  385,  Jackson,  C.  T;
I.  122,  Averell,  W.  W.\  225,  Bell,  A.  G.;  240,  Benton,  J.
G.;  247,  Berliner;  380,  Brittan;  395,  Brown,  Joseph;
722,  Cooley.  L.  R.  C;  II,  304,  Edison  ;  582,  Gaily  ;  662,
Gisborne  ;  729,  Gray,  E.;  Ill,  172  ;  IV,  425  :  V,  67,  Pope,
F.  L.;  308.  Rogers,  J.  H;  319,  Roosevelt,  H.  L.;  VI,  443,
Weston,  E. ;  lighting,  I,  420,  Brush,  C.  F. ;  Tl,  304,  Edi-
son ;  VI,  98,  Thomson,  Elihu  ;  443,  Weston,  E. ;  motor,
first  in  America,  I,  696,  Colton,  G.  Q. ;  inventions,  IV,  623,
Page,  C.  G  :  V.  541,  Sims,  W.  S.

Electric  shadow,  the,  VI.  619,  Wright,  A.  W.

Electro-chronograph,  invention  of  the,  III,  751,  Locke,  J.

Electro-magnetic  engine,  invented,  H,  85,  Davenport,  T.

Electro-magnetism,  III,  172.

Electrotypes,  V,  33,  Pitman.  B.

Elevated  railways,  II,  449,  Field,  C.  W. ;  inception  of  liti-
gation, 647,  Gilbert,  R.  H.

Elevators,  grain,  invented.  II.  61,  Dalzell,  R.  M.

Elevators,  invention  of,  III.  442,  Johnson,  F.  G. :  IV.  605,
Otis,  E.  G.;  hydraulic,  VI,  72.  Thayer,  Eli  ;  safety,  I,  77,
Andrews.

Elgin,  Earl  of.  I.  418.  Bruce,  F.  W.  A.

Ellas,  the,  of  Guatemala,  VI,  288,  Victoria,  T.

Elibank,  Lord,  II,  433,  Ferguson,  P.;  IV,  468,  Murray,
James.

Elio.  Gen.,  V,  316,  Rondeau.

Eliot,  Rev.  Adam,  III,  445,  Johnson,  G.  H.  M.


Eliot,  Andrew,  m,  47.

Eliot,  Bennett,  U,  321.  Eliot,  J.

Eliot,  Sir  John,  VI,  573.

Eliot.  Rev.  Joseph,  U,  323.

Elisabetha  regia,  the,  discovery  of,  V,  424,  Schomburgk.

Elizabeth,  Queen,  U,  223,  224,  Drake,  Sir  F.;  V,  162-163,

Ralegh.
Elizabeth  City,  N.  C,  expedition  to,  H,  765,  Griffin.
Elizabeth,  wreck  of  the,  II,  561,  Fuller,  S.  M.
Elizabeth  island,  colony  on,  II,  691,  Gosnold.
Elizabeth  Thompson  science  fund,  the,  VI,  90.
Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  Livingston  residence  near,  illustra-
tion, III,  743.
Elizondo,  Capt.,  Ill,  197,  Hidalgo,  M.
El  Jazmin.  battle  of,  H,  167.
Elk  hill,  III,  418.

Elkhoru,  battle  of. See  Pea  Ridge.
Ellauri,  Dr.,  VI,  259.  Varela,  P.
Ellen,  pen-name,  IV,  514,  Nichols,  R.  S.  R.
Ellen,  Henry,  pen-name,  IH,  253,  Hope,  J.  B.
Ellen,  Louise,  pen-name,  IV,  446,  Moulton,  L.  C.
Ellerslie.  estate  of,  in,  508,  Kelly,  W.
Ellesmere  Land,  explored,  HI,  133,  Hayes,  1. I.
Ellice,  Edward,  III,  592,  Lafontaine.
Ellicott  City,  founded.  II,  327,  Ellicott.
Elliot.  Henry,  I,  560,  Celeste.
Elliot,  Miss,  VI,  384,  Washington,  W.
Elliott,  Barnard,  II,  332,  Elliott,  Susannah.
Elliott,  Elizabeth,  V,  44,  Plumsted,  W.
Elliott,  Sir  Gilbert,  II,  328,  Elliott,  A.
Elliott,  John,  III,  284.  Howe,  Maud.
Elliott,  0.  A.,  Ill,  413,  Jay,  W.
Ellis,  John,  Harvard,  IV,  575,  Oliver,  G.  A.
Ellis,  Sarah  A.,  II,  207,  Dorsey,  S.  A.
Ellis,  the,  U,  40.  Cashing.  W.  B.  •
Ellison,  J.,  I,  725,  Cooper,  J.  F.
Ellison,  Rev.  T.,  IH,  411,  Jay,  W.
Ellsworth,  Annie  G.,  IV,  426.
Ellsworth,  Miss,  V,  586,  Smith,  Rosicell.
Ellsworth  outrage,  the,  II,  475,  Fitzpatrick,  J.  B.
Elmes,  James,  IH,  118,  Haviland,  J.
Elmira,  N. Y.,  gift  to,  U,  319,  Eldridge,  E.  ; hospital

founded  in,  IV,  562,  Ogden,  W.  B.
Elmore,  Gen.  John  A.,  his  son,  II,  337,  Elmore,  Franklin

H. ;  his  daughter,  475,  Fitzpatrick,  B.
Elmore  correspondence,  the,  II,  338,  Elmore,  F.  H.
Elmwood,  Cambridge,  IV,  39,  Lowell ;  illustration,  40.
El  Noco,  sobriquet,  VI,  586,  Witte.
Elorreaga  I.,  II,  573,  Gainza  ;  IV,  566,  O'Higgins,  B.
Elphinston,  James,  II,  58,  Dallas.
Elskwatawa,  I,  273,  Black  Hawk.
Elston,  Susan  A.,  VI,  334,  Wallace,  S.  A.  E.
Ely,  Smith,  II,  448,  Field,  D.  D.
Ely,  Rev.  Zebulon,  II,  339,  Ely,  E.  S.
Emancipation,  gradual,  I,  403,  Brown,  S.  ;  advocacy  of

gradual,  VI,  329, Walker,  R.  J. ; 649, Young,  J.  C.  ;

Emerson's  plan  for,  II,  346  ;  post-natal  plan  for,  V,  173,

Randolph,  T.  J. ;  constitutional  right  or,  I,  28,  Adams,

J.  Q.  ; proclaimed  in  Missouri,  II,  547,  Fremont ; bills

for,  III,  530,  Key,  T.  M. See  Abolition. Slavery.

Anti-slavery  cause.
Emancipation  proclamation,  the,  n,  612,  Garrison  ;  HI,

719-720  ;  sale  of  the  original  draft  of,  740,  Livermore,  M.

A.;  retaliatory  measures,  H,  100.
Emancipator,  the,  ni,  650,  Leavitt ;  VI,  32,  Tappan,  A.
Embargo  of  1807,  the,  I,  25,  423  ;  Jefferson's  view  of,  in,

422 ; enforcement  of,  IH,  454,  Johnson, W.  ; V,  710,

Story,  J.
Emeralds,  search  for,  VI,  305,  Vogue.
Emerson,  Dr..  V,  435,  Scott.  D.
Emerson,  Charles  C,  II,  343.  Emerson,  R.  W.
Emerson,  Edward  Waldo,  II,  347.
Emerson,  Rev.  Joseph,  II,  343,  Emerson,  R.  W.
Emerson,  Lydia  A.,  V,  78,  Porter,  L.  A.  E.
Emerson,  Mary  Moody,  n,  343,  Emerson,  R.  W.
Emerson,  Dr.  Reuben,  II,  695,  Gordd,  N.  D.
Emerson's  house,  illustration.  H,  346.
Emery,  Stephen  A.,  II,  495,  Foote,  A.  W.
Emery,  discovery  of  deposits,  HI,  385,  Jackson,  C.  T. ;  V,

573,  Smith,  J.  L.
Emigrant  aid  company,  VI,  71,  Thayer.  E.
Emigrants  to  United  States,  rights  of,  I,  155.
Emigration,  board  of,  III,  110.  Havemeyer;  curious  work

on,  IV,  162,  McSparran  ;  assisted.  VI.  700,  Sullivan.
Emilv  Chester,  anonymous  novel.  II,  1.  Crane,  A.  M.
Emin  Pasha,  expedition  to  relieve,  V,  646,  Stanley.
Emma,  Queen,  HI,  490,  Kalakaua.
Emma  silver-mine  company,  the,  V,  418,  Schenck,  R.  C.
Emmanuel  college,  founded,  IV ,  144,  McLean,  J.
Emmet,  Robert,  H,  349-350,  Emmet,  T.  A.
Emmet,  William  J.,  II,  350,  Emmet.  R.  T.
Emmettsburg,  Md.,  sisters  of  charity  at,  V,  465,  Seton,  K

A. ;  college  at,  II,  238,  Dubois,  J.
Emmons,  Albert  H.,  HI.  443,  Johnson,  H.  C.
Emmons.  Rev.  Dr..  quoted.  II,  812.
Emory  college,  gift  to,  V,  461,  Seney,  G.  I.
Emott,  James,  HI,  531,  Kidd.
Emperor  of  the  Indies,  the  V.  98,  'Powhatan.
Emulous,  captures  by  the  sloop,  IV,  456,  Mulcaster.


ENAMELLED


EWING


731


Enamelled  cloth,  machine  for,  IV,  57,  Lyall.

Endicott,  Samuel,  II,  355,  Endicott,  C.  M.

Enemy,  we  have  met  the,  etc.,  IV,  736,  Perry,  O.  H.

Ent'antin,  M.,  II,  55,  Dain.

Enforcement  act,  the,  II,  719.

Engelmann,  F.  T.,  II,  356.  Engelmann,  G.

Engineering,  in  the  Revolution,  III,  573,  Kosciuszko.

Engineering,  school  of  application  in,  I,  4,  Abbott,  H.  L.

Engineering,  work  in,  III,  557,  Kirkivood,  J.  P.  ;  impor-
tant works  of,  V,  490,  Shedd,  J.  H.  ;  Mexican  aqueduct.
VI,  61,  Tenibleque  ;  hydraulic,  VI,  617,  Worthen.  Worth-
ington,  H.  R.

Engineering  Magazine,  VI,  250,  Van  Nostrand.

Engines,  improvements  in,  I,  683,  Colburn,  Z.  ;  portable,

III,  219,  Hoadley,  J.  C;  V,  80,  Porter,  R.:  steam  cut-off
for,  223,  Renwick,  E.  S.;  436,  Scott,  I.  M.\  straight-line
high  speed,  VI,  8,  Sweet.  J.  E. ;  rotary,  172,  Tuck.  See
Steam-enoines.

England,  Mary,  III,  101,  Harrison,  S.

England,  policy  of,  as  to  Texas,  I,  502  ;  theory  of  the  de-
cadence of,  18  ;  proposed  French  invasion  of,  III,  588  ;
VI,  296,  Villeneuve,  Pierre  ;  relations  of,  with  America
during  the  war  of  secession,  III,  721.

Englewood  school,  II,  280,  Dwight,  W.  B.

English,  Elisha  G.,  II,  359,  English,  W.  H.

English,  George  B.,  book  of,  criticised,  II,  387.

English,  Miss,  school  of,  II,  57,  Dall,  C.  H.

English,  Philip,  IV  377,  Moody,  Joshua.

English,  T.  D.,  libel  suit  concerning,  V,  46.

English  bill,  the,  II,  &59,  English,  W.  H.

English-speaking  empire,  project  for  an,  V,  100,  Pownall.

Engraving,  machines  for.  invented,  I,  301,  Bogardus.  J.  ;
first  historical,  in  America,  II,  201,  Doolittle,  A.;  bank-
note, machines  for,  IV,  590,  Ormsby,  W.  L.;  improved
processes,  729,  Perkins,  Jacob  ;  photography,  process
for,  V,  383.  Samuels,  E.  A.  ;  555.  Smillie,  J.  and  W.
C. ;  VI,  438,  Wellstood  ;  early,  on  copper,  II,  268.  Durand,
Asher  Brown.

Enna,  Gen.,  IV,  22,  Lopez,  N.

Enquirer,  an,  pen-name,  VI,  175,  Tucker,  G.

Enriquez,  Beatriz,  I,  699,  Columbus,  F.

Ensign-men,  the,  II,  360-362,  Erauzo.

Entail,  system  of,  in  Virginia,  III,  418.

Entero-colitis,  treatment  of,  I,  701,  Comegys.

Enterprise,  fight  of,  with  the  Boxer,  I,  471,  Burrows,  W.  ;

IV,  75,  McCall,  E.  R.;  captures  by,  I,  119,  Aulick,  J.  H.  ;

V,  485,  Shaw,  J.  ;  667,  Sterett,  A.

Enthusiasm,  anonymous  letter  on,  in,  323,  Hunter,  Robert.

Entomology,  studies  in,  in,  652-653,  Le  Conte,  J.-E.  and
J.  L.  ;  715,  Lincecum ;  733,  Lintner ;  new  classification,
IV,  619,  Packard,  A.  S.  ;  635,  Palisot ;  researches  in,  V,
128,  Provancher  ;  410-411,  Say,  T.  ;  443,  Scudder,  S.  H.  ;
largest  collection  in  the  United  States,  V,  255,  Riley,  C.  V.

Entre  Rios,  Uruguay,  II,  515,  Foucher.

Envelopes,  machines  for  making,  I,  288,  Blanchard,  T.

Eos  Glan  Twrch,  II.  306,  Edwards.  John.

Eothen,  Arctic  voyage  of  the,  V,  433,  Schwatka.

Epaminondas,  pen-name,  n,  705,  Granger,  G.

Epatlan,  battle  of,  II,  167.

Epervier,  the,  ship-of-war,  II,  220.  Downes  ;  V,  517,  Shu-
brick,  J.  T.  ;  VI,  368,  Warrington.

Ephemera,  anonymous  book,  V,  234,  Rice,  G.  E.

Ephrata,  monastic  society  at,  I,  223,  Beissel.

Epidemic,  matlazahual,  I.  492,  Cabrera,  Q.

Epidemics,  I,  672,  Cock,  T.

Episcopacy,  growth  of.  Ill,  221.  Hobart ;  prejudice  against.
221  ;  in  the  Revolution,  405,  Jarvis,  A.  ;  controversy
on,  448,  Johnson,  S.:  in  the  colonies,  consecrations  by
nonjuring  bishops,  VI,  434,  Welton  ;  pioneer  of,  in  Vir-
ginia, 464,  Whitaker,  A.  ;  high  church,  495,  Whitting-
ham. See  Protestant  Episcopal  church.

Episcopalians,  persecution  of.  IV,  267,  Maverick,  S.

Episcopal  seal,  illustration,  VI,  21.

Episcopius,  V,  286,  Robinson,  J.

E  pluribus  unum,  adoption  of,  as  a  motto,  and  its  origin,
III,  417.

Eppes,  Francis,  III,  422.

Eppes,  Maria  Jefferson,  in,  424,  Jefferson.

Equity  jurisprudence,  system  of,  V,  710,  Story,  J.

E.  R.  and  S.  S.,  pen-name,  V,  191,  Rawson,  E.

Era  of  good  feeling,  the,  I,  429 ;  first  use  of  the  phrase,
rV,  361  ;  author  of,  V,  352.  Russell,  B.

Era,  capture  of  the,  II.  327,  Ellet,  C.  R.

Erebus,  the,  II,  535,  Franklin,  Sir  J.  ;  III,  38.  Hall,  C.  F.

Erebus  and  Terror,  voyage  of,  V,  330,  Ross,  Sir  J.

Erie,  laid  out,  II,  327.  Ellicott.

Erie  canal,  the.  I,  660,  661  ;  690-,  Colles  :  building  of,  II,
328,  Ellicott,  J.;  Ill,  236,  Holley,  M.\  enlargement  of,  V,
343,  Ruggles,  S.  B.  ;  first  projected,  V,  433,  Schuyler,  P.
J.  ;  VI,  251,  Van  Rensselaer,  8.

Ericsson,  Nils,  II,  363,  Ericsson.

Ericsson,  Olof,  II,  363,  Ericsson.

Ericsson,  the,  experiments  with,  III,  559,  Kitching,  J.  B.

Erikson,  Leif,  statue  of,  illustration,  VI,  487.

Ermite,  pen-name,  IV,  405,  Moriarty.

Errani,  Achille,  VI,  108,  Thursby.

Erratic,  Enrique,  pen-name.  IV,  53,  Lukens.

Erskine,  Rev.  J.  M,  II.  367,  Erskine,  M.

Erskine,  Rev.  Ralph,  II,  367,  Erskine,  R.


Erskine,  Thomas,  n.  366.  Erksine,  D.  M.

Erviug,  George.  II.  367,  Erving.

Escacena,  Seflor,  III,  363,  Irving,  W.

Eschaillons,  Sieur  d\  V,  373,  St.  Ours,  J.  B.

Escobar,  Diego,  IV,  567,  OJeda.

Esling,  George  J.,  II,  371,  Esling,  C.  H.

Esopus,  burning  of,  V,  129.

Esparbes.  Gen.  d\  V,  59,  Polverel.

Espiritu  Santo  river,  II,  590,  Garay,  F.  de.

Esquemeling,  A.  O.,  V,  419,  Schimmelin.

Esquilache,  Prince  of,  I,  322,  Borja  y  Aragon.

Essayist,  the,  III,  711,  Light,  G.  W.

Essex,  conspiracy  of,  U,  687,  Gorges  ;  in,  28,  Hakluyt ;  V,

613,  Southampton.
Essex,  the,  battle  of,  with  the  Phoebe  and  the  Cherub,  II,

413  ;  V,  73,  74,  Porter.  D.
Essex,  the,  at  Forts  Henry  and  Donelson  and  Vicksburg,

V,  74,  Porter,  W.  D.

Essex,  Junior,  the,  II,  220,  Downes  ;  V,  74,  Porter,  D.
Essex  institute,  gift  to,  VI,  469,  White,  D.  A.
Essex  junto,  the,  III,  125  ;  IV,  664,  Parsons,  T.  ;  V,  3,  Pick-
ering, T.  ;  152.
Estabelcimiento,  storming  of.  IV,  499,  Neves.
Estancel,  Valentine,  V,  648,  Stansel.
Estancelin,  C,  V,  29,  Pinzon,  M.  A.
Estaugh,  John,  II.  377,  Estaugh.
Este,  Mrs.  D.  K.,  III.  98,  Harrison,  L.
Este,  Capt.  Moses,  II,  377,  Este.
Estedio,  capture  of  the,  II,  121.
Estelle,  pseudonym,  I,  302,  Bogart,  E.
Esterhazy,  Count,  I,  539,  Carroll,  W.  T.
Estill,  Capt.,  Ill,  &59,  Irvine,  W.
Etah  Esquimaux,  the,  in,  493,  Kane,  E.  K.
Etching,  process  for,  in  glass,  II,  254,  Du  Motay  ;  art  of,

VI,  464,  Whistler,  J.  A.  M.

Etchoe,  battle  at,  II,  708,  Grant,  J.  ;  IV,  207,  Marion.

Eternal  punishment,  doctrine  of,  I,  219. See  Immortality.

Etharita,  Huron  settlement,  destroyed,  II,  607,  Gamier,  C.

Ether,  controversy  concerning,  I,  4,  Abbot,  J.  H.  ;  first
administered  in  New  York,  III,  267,  Hosack,  A,  E.  ;  dis-
covery of,  as  an  anaesthetic,  385,  Jackson,  C.  T.  ;  IV,  434,
Morton  ;  first  use  of,  in  surgery,  9,  Long,  C.  W.  ;  first
use  of,  as  an  anaesthetic— controversy  as  to  the  discov-
ery, 434,  Morton,  W.  T.  G.  ;  monument  commemorat-
ing, illustration,  434  ;  as  a  working  energy,  HI,  499,
Keely.

Ethiopic,  translations  from  the,  V,  423,  Schodde.

Ethnography,  researches  in,  IV,  611,  Ouvrard.

Ethnology,  Indians  of  N.  A.,  II,  638,  Gibbs,  G.  ;  languages
of  North  America,  617,  Gatschet;  bureau  of,  IV,  183,
Malleri) ;  Studies  in,  423,  Morse,  E.  S.  ;  V,  95,  Powell,  J.
W.  ;  680,  Stevenson,  J.  ;  VI,  632.

Etowah  campaign,  the,  V,  467,  Sevier,  J.

Eu,  Count  d\  IV,  590,  L.  P.  M.  F.  G.

Eucharist,  the,  Emerson's  view  of,  H,  343  ;  unfermented
wine  in,  IV,  143,  Maclean,  J.

Euelpides,  military  college  of  the,  ni,  570,  Koeppen.

Eugenie,  Empress,  escape  of,  II,  384,  Evans,  T.  W.

Eureka  college,  II,  85,  Davenport,  W.

Eusebius,  pen-name.  V,  123,  Prime,  S.  I.

Eutaw  Springs,  battle  of,  I,  515,  Campbell,  Richard  ;  II,
315,  Eggleston,  J.  ;  753 ;  error  regarding,  753 ;  III,  277,
Howard,  J.  E.  ;  667,  Lee,  H.  ;  IV,  209,  Marion.

Eutaxia,  anonymous  book,  I,  143,  Baird,  C.  W.

Evangelical  alliance,  the,  first  suggestion  of,  IV,  677,
Paiton,  W.  ;  V,  422,  Schmucker,  S.  S.

Evangelical  association,  the,  I,  39,  Albright.

Evangelical  Episcopal  church,  the,  II.  80,  Dashiell.

Evangelical  knowledge  society,  the,  IV,  282,  Meade,  W.

Evangelical  Magazine  and  Review,  V,  228,  Reynolds,
William  M.

Evangelical  Quarterly  Review,  the,  III,  575,  Krauth  ;  V,
699,  Sioever.

Evans,  Dr.  Cadwalader,  IV,  649,  Parke,  T.

Evans,  Fred  W.,  II.  202,  Doolittle,  M.  A.

Evans,  Rev.  John,  V,  662,  Steinhauer.

Evans.  Dr.  M.  F.  T.,  n,  381,  Evans,  E.  H.

Evans,  Richard,  II,  383,  Evans,  J.

Evelyn,  George,  I,  620.

Evelyn  college,  N.  J.,  IV,  123,  Mcllvaine,  J.  H.

Evening  Hours,  anonymous  book,  II,  183,  Dix,  D.  L.

Everett,  C.  C,  quoted,  II,  348.

Everett,  Edward,  n,  344:  358,  English,  G.  B.;  quoted,  I,
504,  Calhoun  ;  his  birthplace,  illustration,  II,  389.

Everett,  Rev.  Oliver.  II,  386,  Everett.

Everett,  Richard,  pseudonym,  II,  20,  Cross,  E.  E.

Everett,  Sarah  P.,  Ill,  31,  Hale,  N.

Everglades,  fighting  in  the,  I,  695,  Colt.

Everhart,  W.,  II,  390,  Ever  hart,  B.  M.

Ever-victorious  army,  the,  VI,  349,  Ward,  F.  T.

Evolution,  theory  of,  II,  348 ;  469,  Fiske,  John  :  in,  336,
Hyatt ;  680,  Leidy ;  IV,  218,  Marsh,  O.  C.  See  Dar-
winian theory.

Ewaipanoma,  the,  V,  163.

Ewen,  W.  Ogilvie,  II,  392,  Ewen,  M.  C.  ;  VI,  47,  Taylor,
M.  C.

Ewing,  Ellen,  II.  394.  Firing,  T.\  V,  502,  Sherman,  W.  T.

Ewing,  George,  II,  393,  Ewing,  T.

Ewing,  James,  II,  393,  Ewing,  C.


732


EXCHANGES


FERDINAND


Exchanges,  international,  of  books,  art  objects,  etc.,  VI,
264,  Vattemare.

Exeter,  N.  H.,  II,  2,  Cranfield  ;  founded,  IH,  331,  Hutchin-
son, Anne  ;  VI,  457,  Wheelweight,  J.  ;  Indian  grant  of
land  near,  IV,  668,  Passaconaway.

Exmouth,  Lord,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,  W.

Expatriation,  right  of,  I,  155.

Expilly,  J.  J.,  II,  395,  Expilly.

Exploring  expedition,  U.  S.,  II,  66,  Dana,  J.  D.

Explosives,  investigations  on,  IV,  461,  Munroe,  C.  E.  ;
methods  for  using,  V,  479,  Schaffner ;  improvement  in,
VI,  141,  Totten,  C.  A.  L.

Express  companies,  founded,  I,  11,  Adams,  Alvin  ;  II,  407,
Fargo  ;  VI,  429,  Wells,  H.

Express  system,  the,  originated,  in,  84,  Harnden.

Express,  the  railway,  VI,  157,  Trego.

Expunging  resolutions,  the,  I,  242,  430.

Exterminator,  the,  IV,  363,  Montbars.

Extra  Billy,  sobriquet,  V,  594,  Smith,  W.

Extradition,  first  suggestion  of,  VI,  600,  Woodbridge,  W. ;

.  precedent  in,  IV,  223-224.

Eye,  the,  inventions  for  operations  on.  II,  149,  De  Rosset.

Eye  and  ear  infirmary,  the,  founded,  II,  128,  Delafleld,  E.

Eyre,  Lieut.-Col.,  Ill,  654,  Ledyard,  W.

Eyster,  D.  A.  T.,  H,  396,  Eyster.

Ezpeleta,  Jose  de,  V,  301,  Rodriguez,  M.  del  S.

Ezra  Church,  battle  at,  V,  504.

Fabius,  pseudonym,  II,  173,  Dickinson,  J.
Fabricius,  Dr.  J.,  Ill,  509,  Kelpius  ;  IV,  4,  Logan,  James.
Fadette,  pen-name,  V,  213.  Reeves,  M.  C.  L.
Fahnestock,  Caspar,  II,  605,  Gleim,  J.  G.
Fairbanks.  Jonathan,  II,  400,  Fairbanks,  E.
Fairbanks  house,  the,  Dedham,  illustration,  n,  400.
Fairchild,  Frances,  I,  424.
Fairfait,  Gen.,  VI,  145.
Fairfax,  Edward,  II,  401,  Fairfax,  T.
Fairfax,  Ferdinando,  II,  402,  Fairfax,  G.  W.
Fairfax,  Sir  Guy,  II,  401,  Fairfax,  T.
Fairfax,  Henry,  II,  401,  Fairfax,  T.
Fairfax,  Robert,  II,  402.
Fairfax,  Lord  Thomas,  II,  401,  Fairfax,  T.
Fairfax,  Sir  William,  II,  402.

Fairfax  Court-House,  reconnoissance  at,  VI,  130,  Tomp-
kins, C.  H.
Fairfax  house,  the,  illustration,  II,  402.
Fairfax  light-horse,  the,  II,  703,  Graham,  G.
Fairfield,  Gertrude,  VI,  301,  Vingut.
Fairfield,  Conn.,  founded— records  of,  rv,  52,  Ludlow  ;

burning  of,  II,  281,  Dwight,  Timothy.
Fair  Haven,  Vt.,  founded,  IV,  67,  Lyon,  M.
Fair  Hill,  estate  of,  IV,  532.  Norris,  I.
Fairmount  water-works,  II.  700,  Groff,  F.
Fair  Oaks,  battle  of,  I,  551,  Casey ;  IH,  669  ;  718 ;  rv,  81 ;

695,  Peck,  J.  J.
Falces,  Marquis  de.  rv,  722,  Peralta,  G.
Falcon,  Gen.,  IV,  623,  Paez.
Falcon,  J.  C,  in,  19,  Guzman- Blanco.
Falconet,  M.,  IV,  317,  Middleton,  J.  I.
Fales,  Joseph  T.,  II.  404,  Fales.
Fales,  Stephen,  n,  142,  Dennison.
Falkland  islands,  colony  on,  I,  328,  Bougainville  ;  VI,  219,

Ussieux.
Fallen  Timbers,  battle  of,  III,  740,  Little  Turtle  ;  VI,  399.
Falling  Creek.  Va.,  Indian  massacre  at.  I,  247,  Berkeley,  J.
Falls  Church  Corners,  church  at,  II,  402.
Falls  of  St.  Anthony,  the,  discovered,  H,  619,  Gay,  P.  du  ;

IH,  168,  Hennepin.
Falls  Town,  N.  Y.,  V,  293,  Rochester.
Falmouth,  Lord,  I,  323,  Boscawen.
Falmouth,  Me.,  capture  of,  H,  107,  Davis,  S. ;  destruction

of,  IV,  664,  Parsons,  T.
False  Jew  Detected,  the,  book  entitled,  VI,  425,  Welde.
Falstaff  played,  H,  118,  De  Bar.
Family  Magazine,  the,  IV,  31,  Lossing  ;  V,  204,  Redfield,

Justus  S.
Fancher,  Mollie,  VI.  32,  Tanner.  H.  S.
Faneuil,  Andrew,  HI,  685,  Le  Mercier,  A.
Faneuil  hall,  illustration,  II,  405.
Fanny,  Aunt,  pseudonym,  I,  179,  Barrow,  F.  E.
Faraday,  M.,  II,  364.

Farbrick,  Jonathan,  pen-name,  III,  231,  Holbrook,  S.  P.
Farewell  address,  Washington's,  date  of,  original  MS.  of,

VI,  381.
Farfan,  Admiral,  m.  181,  Heredia,  P.  de.
Faria,  Miguel  de,  VI.  437,  Wernicke.
Farias,  Valentin  Gomez,  V,  393.  394,  Santa-Anna.
Faribault.  Minn.,  founded.  II,  408,  Faribault,  J.  B.  ;  school

at,  V,  484,  Shattuck,  G.  C.  ;  Seabury  mission  at,  VI.  461,

Whipple,  H.  B.
Farley,  Mary,  VI,  300,  Vincent,  M.  A.
Farlinger.  Nicholas,  II,  409,  Farlinger,  A.
Farm,  a  charity,  H,  232,  Drexel,  J.  W.
Farmer,  A.  W.,  pen  name,  V,  445,  Sealrury.
Farmers'  Cabinet,  the,  IV,  697,  Pedder.
Farmers'  letters.  Ill,  729,  Lincoln,  L.
Farmers'  Library,  the.  magazine,  V,  545,  Skinner,  J.  S.
Farmington.  Conn.,  seminary,  V,  79,  Porter,  Sarah.
Farmville,  Va.,  engagement  at,  V,  197,  Read,  T.


Farnham,  Henry,  H,  411,  Farnham,  N.  L.

Farnsworth,  Ephraim,  I,  11,  Adams,  Alvin.

Farquharson,  Martha,  pen-name,  II,  461,  Finley.  M.

Farragut,  Admiral,  II,  492,  Folsom,  C.  ;  his  entrance  into
Mobile  bay,  illustration,  417  ;  his  flag-ship,  illustration,
418  ;  statues  and  portraits  of,  419  ;  quoted,  HI,  809,
Hull,  I.

Farragut  monument,  the,  illustration,  VI,  475,  White,  Stan-
ford.

Farragut,  George,  H,  412,  413,  Farragut.

Farragut,  Loyall,  H,  419.

Farragut,  William.  II,  413,  415.

Far  West,  Mo.,  Mormon  settlement  at,  V,  253.  Rigdon.

Fasting,  experiments  in,  VI,  32,  Tanner,  H.  S.

Fat  Contributor,  the,  pen-name,  VI,  684,  Griswold.

Father  Abbey's  Will,  humorous  poem,  V,  449,  Seccomb,
John.

Father  of  American  anthropology,  the,  rv,  403,  Morgan,
Lewis  H.

Father  of  American  geography,  IV,  424,  Morse.  J.

Father  of  American  geology,  the,  rV,  147,  Maclure.

Father  of  the  American  navy,  the,  HI,  313,  Humphreys,  J.

Father  of  American  surgery,  the,  IV,  765,  Physick.

Father  of  Chautauqua  county,  H,  495,  Foote,  E.  T.

Father  of  colonization  in  America,  the,  H.  688.  Gorges.

Father  of  the  Connecticut  school  fund,  II,  705,  Granger.  G.

Father  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  church  in  America,  the,  III,
747,  Livingston,  J.  H.

Father  of  foreign  mission  work,  the,  IV,  333,  Mills,  S.  J.

Father  of  grain  inspection,  the,  V,  348,  Rumsey.

Father  of  greenbacks,  the,  V,  623,  Spaulding,  E.  G.

Father  of  historical  societies,  V,  28.  Pintard.

Father  of  the  house  of  representatives,  III,  505,  Kelley,  W.
D.  ;  VI,  531,  Williams,  L.  ;  370,  Washburne,  E.  B.  ;  607,
Woodward,  S.

Father  of  iron  bridges,  the,  VT,  462,  Whipple,  S.

Father  of  the  jurisprudence  of  Louisiana,  the,  IV,  230,
Martin,  F.  X.

Father  of  New  Spain,  the.  VI,  272,  Velasco,  L.

Father  of  the  New  York  bar,  the,  IH,  472,  Jones,  S.;  VI,
256,  Van  Vechten,  A.

Father  of  the  North  Carolina  bar,  the,  IV,  378,  Moore,  B.  F.

Father  of  paper  currency,  I,  624,  Clark,  Abraham.

Father  of  Presbyterianism  in  New  York,  the,  IV,  155,  Mc-
Nish.

Father  of  Presbyterianism  in  Virginia,  the,  IV,  418,  Mor-
ris, Samuel.

Father  of  the  public-school  system  of  Pennsylvania,  VI,
588,  Wolf.  G.

Father  of  Rhode  Island  and  of  American  Baptists,  I,  634.

Father  of  rifle-practice,  VI,  564,  Wingate,  G.  W.

Father  of  the  telegraph,  the,  IV.  428,  Morse,  S.  F.  B.

Father  of  Universalism  in  America,  the.  IV,  469,  Murray,  J.

Father  of  Wilmington  art,  the,  VI,  38,  Tatnall,  H.  L.

Fathers  of  Mercy,  order  of,  III,  592,  Lafonte.

Fauchet,  Baron,  intercepted  despatch  of,  V,  177,  Ran-
dolph, E.

Faunce,  Thomas.  II,  422,  Faunce.

Faustin  I.  of  Hayti,  V,  612,  Soulouque.

Faxon,  William,  III,  123,  Hawley,  J.  R.

Fay,  Joseph,  V,  372,  St.  Leger.

Fayal,  colony  founded  at,  i,  222,  Behaim  ;  fight  in  the  har-
bor of,  V,  216.

Fayetteville,  engagement  near,  II,  701,  Graham,  G.  ;  715.

Featherstone,  Isabelle,  IV.  679,  Paul,  I.  F.

Federal,  the,  I,  225,  Bell,  C.  H.

Federal  bull-dog,  the,  IV,  233,  Martin,  L.

Federalists,  the,  I,  21  ;  167,  Barlow,  J.  ;  their  hatred  to
France,  25  ;  criticism  of,  II,  578  ;  HI,  57  ;  dissensions
in,  58,  59  ;  76,  Hanson,  A.  C.  :  effect  of  their  course  in
the  war  of  1812,  379  ;  not  necessarily  loose  construction-
ists, IV,  169  :  the  Essex  junto  and  the  Hartford  conven-
tion, V,  3,  Pickering,  T.

Federal  Republican,  the,  mob  attack  on,  IH,  76,  Hanson,
A.  C.  ;  732,  Lingan.

Feejee  islands,  destruction  of  a  village  in.  I,  133,  Badger,
O.  C. ;  139,  Bailey  :  fighting  on,  496,  Caldwell,  C.  H.  B.  ;
V,  257,  Ringgold,  C.

Feet-washers,  the,  IV,  330,  Miller,  W.

Felch,  Abijah,  II,  427,  Fetch.

Felicia,  pseudonym,  I,  116,  Auber,  V.  F.

Fellenberg,  P.  E.  von,  VI,  600,  Woodbridge,  W.  C.

Female  Druids,  order  of.  Ill,  337,  Hyneman.

Female  Petrarch,  the.  III,  703.  Lewis,  Estelle.

Fencibles,  the  state,  I,  255,  Biddle,  C.  C.

Fenelon,  his  Telemaque  in  English  verse,  II,  433,  Fergu-
son, E.

Fenelon,  Archbishop,  supposed  labors  of,  II,  756,  Green-
horn.

F6nelon,  F.  S.  de  la  Mothe,  VI,  163.  Trouve.

Fenians,  I,  663,  Cluseret ;  II.  717  ;  rv,  116.  McGee  ;  trial  of,
188,  Mackenzie.  K.',  149-150,  McMicken  ;  organizer  of,
579-580,  O'Mahony  ;  invasion  of  Canada  by,  581,  O'Neill,
J.  ;  587.  CTReillv,  J.  B.

Fenno,  Eliza,  I,  291,  Bleecker,  A.

Fenwick,  Rev.  Enoch,  II,  431,  Fenivick,  B.  J.

Ferdinand  of  Aragon,  I.  697.

Ferdinand  VII..  Ill,  308  ;  369,  Iturrigaray  ;  IV,  335,  Mina;
V,  386,  San  Carlos.


FERGUS


FLORES


733


Fergus,  Canada,  founded,  II,  432,  Ferguson,  A.

Ferguson,  Col.,  IV,  90,  McClure,  J.

Ferguson,  Col.  Ebenezer,  V,  585,  Smith,  C.  F.

Ferguson,  Hugh  Henry,  II,  433,  Ferguson,  E.

Ferguson,  James,  II.  433.  Ferguson,  P.

Ferguson,  Thomas.  II,  329.  Elliott,  A.

Fern,  Fanny,  pen-name,  IV,  GOO,  Parton,  S.  P.  W.

Fernandez,  Garcia,  I,  097.

Fernandez,  Manuel  Felix,  VI,  288,  Victoria,  G.

Fernandina,  Fla..  expedition  to  take,  V,  502,  Sherman,
Thomas  IT.

Fernow,  Edward,  II,  439,  Femow.

Ferragut,  Agustin,  Pablo,  Antonio,  Gonzalo,  II,  412,  Far-
ragut.

Ferragut,  Don  Pedro,  II,  412,  Farragut.

Ferraro.  Signor,  HI,  443,  Johnson,  H.  C.

Ferreira,  Silvestre  Pinheiro,  V,  25,  Pinheiro.

Ferreira,  Vicente,  II,  525,  Franco.

Ferrer,  Joaquin  M.,  II,  302,  Erauzo.

Ferret,  wreck  of  the,  I,  225,  Bell,  C.  H.

Ferris  institute,  II,  442.  Ferris,  I.

Ferro,  island  of,  H,  440,  Feuillet.

Ferry-boats,  horse  and  steam,  V,  073,  074,  Stevens,  R.  L.

Fertilizers,  artificial,  invention  of,  IV,  198,  Mapes,  James
J.  ;  manufacture  of,  709,  Pendleton,  E.  M.  ;  use  of,  V,
093,  Stockbridge,  L.

Fessenden,  Rev.  W.,  H,  443,  Fessenden,  S.;  445,  Fessenden,
Thomas.

Feuardent,  G.  L.,  I,  501,  Cesnola.

Feuillet,  Louis,  III,  570,  Koenig,  J.  R.

Feyles,  III,  201,  Hopkinsox,,  J.

Fiction,  schools  of,  III,  280  ;  analytical  and  metaphysical
school  of,  398,  James,  H.

Fidelis,  Father,  V,  702,  Stone,  J.  K.

Field,  Braddock,  pseudonym,  II,  180,  Dimitry,  C.  P.

Field,  Emilia,  II,  448,  Field,  S.  J.

Field,  Matthew,  II,  448,  Field,  C.  W.

Field,  Miss,  IV,  471,  Musgrave,  Sir  A.

Field,  Peter,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W.

Field,  Timothy,  II,  447,  Field,  D.  D.

Fielden,  Samuel,  V,  032,  Spies.

Fielding,  Fanny,  VI,  214,  Upshur,  M.  J.  S.

Fielding,  Henry,  II,  520,  Frankland.

Fierro,  Gen  ,  I,  304.

Fifleld,  Mary,  I,  29,  Adams,  S.

Fifty-five,  the,  VI,  573,  Willard,  A.

Fifty-four  forty,  or  fight,  author  of,  I,  56,  Allen,  W.  ;  H,
642,  Giddings,  J.  R.  :  origin  of,  IV,  285,  Medary  ;  V,  53.

Fighting  chasseurs,  IH,  14,  Gurney,  W.

Fighting  Dick,  sobriquet,  V,  242  Richardson,  I.  B.

Fighting  Fifth,  the.  II,  20,  Cross,  E.  E.

Fighting  Joe,  sobriquet,  III,  250.

Fighting  Nat,  V,  002.  Snowden.

Fighting  parson,  the,  IV,  376.  Moodi/,  G.

Fighting  Quakers,  the,  IV,  200,  Maiback.

Figueira,  Father,  II,  398,  Fabregat.

Figuerero.  Gen.,  execution  of,  II,  168.

Figueroa,  I,  61,  Alvarado,  J.  B.

Filia  Ecclesiae,  pseudonym,  II,  207,  Dnrsey,  S.  A.

Filibusters,  expedition  of  alleged,  V,  609,  Soto  ;  projected
expedition  of,  VI,  106,  Thrasher ;  296-297,  Villeraye ;
fight  with,  at  San  Bias,  316,  Wainwright,  J.  M.  :  inva-
sions of  Mexico  and  Central  America  by,  331-332,  Walk-
er, William.

Filipina  bay.  III.  581,  Lnbezares.

Filkins,  Squire,  I,  221,  Beekman,  G.

Fillmore,  Abigail.  II,  456.

Fillmore,  Caroline  C,  II,  457.

Fillmore,  John,  II.  452,  Fillmore,  M.

Fillmore,  Millard,  his  home  at  Buffalo,  illustration,  H,
457.

Fillmore,  Nathaniel,  II,  452,  Fillmore.

Filson  club,  the,  II,  273,  Durrett.

Finances,  embarrassment  of  the  U.  S.,  I.  20  ;  242  ;  n,  57-58,
Dallas  ;  during  the  war  of  secession,  I,  587  ;  V,  507  ;  HI,
567-568,  Knox,  J.  J.

Financial  crisis  of  1837,  the,  in,  544,  King,  James  Gore ;
VI,  196  ;  232.

Finch,  Sherman,  III,  134.

Finegan,  Gen.  Joseph,  V,  479,  Seymoui\  T.

Finlater,  Earl  of,  V.  448.  Seaton.

Finley,  James,  II,  460.  Finley,  R.

Finley,  James  B.,  II,  461,  Finley,  M.

Finnegan,  Terry,  pen-name.  IV,  77,  McCarroll.

Fire-alarm  telegraph,  the,  VI,  699,  Stearns.

Fire-arms,  inventions  and  improvements  in,  I,  49,  Alger,
C;  240,  Benton,  J.  G.:  439,  Buckland,  C:  442,  Buffing-
ton  ;  695,  Colt ;  HI,  269,  Hotchkiss,  B.  B. ;  509-510,  Kel-
ton  ;  IV,  276,  Maynard,  E. ;  312,  Metcalfe,  H. ;  V,  219,
Remington,  P.;  272.  Roberts,  B.  S.;  VI,  94,  Thompson,
M.  J.;  489, Whitney,  E.\  561, Winchester,  O.  F.;  654,

Fire  department,  a  paid,  IV,  706,  Piatt,  J. W.;  II,  758,

Greenwood,  M.
Fire-engines,  invention  of  a,  I,  57,  Allen,  Z.;  first  steam,

385,  Brooks,  C.  S.;  steam,  546.  Cory.  J.  C;  II,  364  ;  first,

in  New  York,  129,  De  Lancey  :  the  first,  in  America,  HI,

425,  Jenckes,  J.
Fire-escape,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  696,  Peacock.


Fire-extinguishers,  invention  of,  I,  125,  Babcock,  J.  F. ;  TV,
272,  Maxwell,  W.  H.

Fire-proof  buildings,  invention  of  processes  for  construct-
ing, HI,  271,  Hough,  J.  S.;  VI,  502,  Wight.

First  Citizen,  the,  signature,  I,  537.

First  in  war,  first  in  peace,  etc.,  authorship  of,  III,  667,
Lee,H.\  VI,  381.

Fiscal  corporation  bill,  the,  VI,  197.

Fish,  Sarah,  VI,  174,  Tucker,  Sarah.

Fish-culture,  II,  746,  Green,  S.;  IV,  61,  Lyman,  T.:  251,
Mather,  F.;  VI,  545,  Wilmot.

Fisher,  Prof.  A.  M.,  1,  217,  Beecher,  C.  E.

Fisher,  Caroline  M.,  V,  409,  Sawyer,  C.  M.

Fisher,  Col.  C.  F.,  II,  465,  Fisher.  F.  C.

Fisher,  C.  J.  B.,  V,  80,  Porter,  W.  T.

Fisher,  Deborah,  VI,  448,  Wharton,  J.

Fisher,  George,  III.  279,  Howe,  E.

Fisher,  Hugh,  V,  578,  Smith,  Josiah.

Fisher,  Jane  M..  VI,  280,  Vernon,  J.  M.  F.

Fisher's  Hill,  battle  of,  U,  290,  Early,  J.  A.;  352,  Emory,
W.  H. ;  714  ;  III,  134.

Fisher's  island,  II,  513,  Foster,  L.  S.;  grant  of,  VI,  574.

Fisheries,  termination  of  treaty  clauses  on,  I,  103 ;  U.  S.
commission  of,  143,  Baird,  S.  F.;  273,  Blackford,  E.  G.;
controversy,  280,  Blaine  ;  II,  720  ;  III,  390,  Jackson,  M.
M.  ;  negotiations,  III,  409,  410  ;  IV,  345,  Mitchell,  Peter  ;
VI,  181  ;  St.  Lawrence,  II,  508,  Fortin,  Pierre  ;  desire
of  France  to  exclude  the  United  States  from,  532,
Franklin.

Fishes,  scientific  studies  of,  I.  35.

Fishing  Creek,  S.  C.  engagement  at,  V,  752  ;  VI,  35,  Tarle-
ton. See  Mill  Springs.

Fishkill,  Verplanck  house  at,  illustration,  VI,  281.

Fisk,  James,  murder  of,  II,  106.  Davis,  N.

Fisk  university,  Tenn.,  II,  467,  Fisk,  C.  B.;  IV,  399,  Mor-
gan, H.  C.\  Jubilee  Hall  of,  VI,  470,  White,  G.  L.

Fiske,  Rev.  D.  T.,  II,  468,  Fisk.  Fidelia.

Fiske,  Rev.  S.,  II,  469,  Fiske,  John.

Fitch,  Helen,  IV,  654,  Parker,  H.  F.

Fitch,  Rev.  James,  III,  608,  Langdon,  S.

Fitch,  John,  III.  884,  Irwin,  A.

Fitch,  Stephen,  II,  470,  Fitch,  B.

Fitch  creche  and  institute.  II,  470,  Fitch,  B.

Fittig,  Rudolph,  V,  220,  Remsen.

Fitzgerald,  Edward,  VI,  271,  Vedder.

Fitzherbert,  III,  409,  410,  412.

Fitzherbert,  Alleyne.  IV,  603,  Oswald,  R.

Fitzhugh,  Miss,  I,  268.

Fitzhugh,  William,  III,  664,  Lee,  R.

Fitzhugh,  W.  F..  II,  475.  Fitzhugh,  W.  H.

Fitzhugh,  Col.  W.,  V,  293,  Rochester.

Fitz-Randolph,  Edward,  V,  172.  Randolph,  J.  and  J.  F.

Fivaz,  Rev.  JVI.,  I.  34,  Agassiz,  J.  L.  R.

Five-cent-fare  bill,  the,  I,  652.

Five  Forks,  battle  of,  II.  156.  Devin  ;  716  ;  V,  500,  Sheri-
dan ;  VI,  362,  Warren,  G.  K.

Five  of  clubs,  the,  I,  650.  Cleveland,  H.  R.

Five  Points,  mission  at,  V,  202,  Realf ;  founder  of,  352,
Russell,  A.

Five-principle  Baptists,  the,  I.  395.

Flaccus,  pen-name,  VI,  355,  Ward,  T.

Flag,  the  first  with  the  13  stripes.  IV.  211,  Markoe  ;  de-
signer of,  first  raised,  V,  216  ;  first  carried  around  the
globe,  II,  731,  Gray,  "If  any  one  tries  to  haul  down,1'
etc.,  184,  Dix.  J.  A.

Flaherty,  Bernard,  VI,  520.  Williams.  Barney.

Flambeau,  fight  of  the,  with  the  Enterprise,  V,  486,  Shaw,
John.

Flame-engine,  invention  of  a,  n.  364.

Flanders,  Charles,  II,  478,  Flanders,  H.

Flatbush,  L.  I.,  prisoners  taken  at,  IV,  &5C,  Moncrieffe.

Flatbush.  theological  school  at,  HI,  747,  Livingston,  J.  H.

Flatheads.  the,  mission  to,  II.  151,  De  Smet.

Flax,  machine  for  dressing.  TV,  592,  Orr,  H.

Flax  mill,  first  in  U.  S.,  V,  431,  Schuyler,  P.  J.

Fleeta,  pen-name,  III,  04,  Hamilton,  K.

Fleming,  George,  pen-name.  II.  481,  Fletcher,  J.  C.  •

Fleming,  Sir  Thomas,  IV.  171,  Madison,  D.  P.

Fletcher,  B.,  his  seal,  illustration,  II,  481.

Fletcher,  Grace,  VI,  400,  Webster,  D.

Fletcher,  Rev.  J.  C.  HI.  152.  Heade,  M.  J.

Fletcher,  Richard.  II,  175,  Dickson,  A.  F.

Fletcher,  Col.  T.,  V,  50,  Polk.  W.

Fletcher,  Gen.  Thomas,  III,  523,  Kenton.

Fleur  de  TEpee.  fortress  of.  III.  305,  Hugues.

Fleury,  Hercule  Andre  de.  II,  482,  Fleury.

Fleury,  I.  530,  Carpenter.  E.  M.

Fleury.  Robert,  pupil  of,  VI.  697,  Reich.

Flint,  James,  V,  320,  Root,  F.  W.

Floating  palace,  the,  in,  499.  Keeler.

Flogging,  abolition  of,  in  the  navy,  in,  34.  Hale,  J.  P.;  V,
695,  Stockton,  R.  F. ;  of  English  militiamen,  I,  069,  Cob-
bett,  W.

Flood,  Dr.,  n.  413.

Flood-sufferers,  relief  of.  I.  104  ;  188.  Barton,  C.

Florence,  pen-name,  IV.  599,  Osgood,  F.  S.

Florence,  American  chapel  in.  IV,  62,  Lyman.  T.  B.

Flores,  Isabel.  V,  320.  Rosa  of  Lima.

Flores,  Luis,  IV,  230,  Martinez,  E.


734


FLORES


FORT


Flores,  Reynaldo,  VI,  272,  Veintimilla.

Flores  Valdez,  Diego,  V,  400,  Sarmiento  Oamboa.

Florida,  discovery  of,  V,  62,  Ponce  de  Leon  ;  exploration
of,  II,  153,  De  Soto  ;  VI,  262,  Vasconcellos,  A. ;  expedi-
tions to  conquer,  IV,  478,  Narvaez  ;  VI,  272,  Velasco,  L.;
to  colonize,  IV,  54,  Luna  ;  the  three  caciques  of,  Spanish
settlements  in,  579,  Olotoraca  ;  first  description  of,  III,
120,  Hawkins,  Sir  J.;  the  Huguenot  colony  on  the  St.
John's,  II,  697,  Oourgues  ;  III,  366,  Isles  ;  629,  Laudon-
niere  ;  IV,  609,  Ottiyny  ;  V,  232,  Ribaut ;  VI,  292,  Vigne  ;
first  Spanish  settlement  in,  293,  Villafane  ;  English
colony  in,  V,  312,  Rolle  ;  a  haunt  of  adventurers.  III,  3*7  ;
atrocities  in,  378 ;  Spain  unable  to  control,  Jackson's
campaign,  trouble  with  Spain,  purchase  of,  Jackson  gov-
ernor, 378 ;  invasion  of,  IV,  565,  Oglethorpe  ;  expedition
against,  in  the  Revolution,  III,  282,  Howe,  R. ;  the  British
defeated  in,  II,  5^5,  Gdlvez,  B. ;  first  surveyor  of,  natural
history  of,  V,  314,  Romans  ;  cession  of,  I,  26  ;  IV,  -279.
Meade,  R.  W.\  360,  582,  Onis;  Indians  of,  V,  85,  Pota-
tion ;  their  enmity  to  Spaniards,  85  ;  removal  of  Semi-
noles,  II,  568,  Gadsden,  James  ;  R.  C.  institutions  in,V,  81-
82,  Portier  ;  VI,  281,  Verot ;  ship-canal,  survey  for,  V,  701,
Stone,  C.  P. ;  Federal  expedition  up  the  St.  John's,  678,
Stevens,  T.  H.

Florida  Blanca,  count  of,  III,  352,  liligo.

Florida  war,  the,  III,  458,  Johnston,  J.  E.

Florida,  the  capture  of,  1, 692,  Collins,  N. ;  captures  by,  IV,
172,  Maffitt ;  pursuit  of,  V,  105,  Preble,  G.  H.

Florin,  Juan,  VI,  282,  Verrazano.

Florio,  pseudonym,  I.  386,  Brooks,  J.  G.

Floyd,  Charity,  IV,  518,  Nicolls,  B.

Floyd,  Col.  C,  II.  487,  Floyd,  J.

Floyd,  Mary  F.,  rv,  70,  McAdoo.

Floyd,  Nicoll,  H,  488,  Floyd,  W.

Floyd-Jones  family,  the,  III,  471,  Jones,  T.

Flucker,  Lucy,  HI,  566,  Knox,  L.

Flushing,  L.  I.,  famous  oak  at,  II,  519,  Fox,  G.;  college  at,
648,  Gilder,  W.  H.

Fluxions,  discovery  of  the  method  of,  V,  263.

Flying  artillery,  the,  V.  706,  Storer.  B.

"  Flying  camp,"  the,  III,  315,  Humpton  ;  VI,  395,  Watts,
Frederick.

Flying-machines,  experiments,  TV,  311,  Metcalf,  M.  J.

Flying-ship,  inventor  of  a,  V,  80,  Porter,  R.

Fobbes,  William,  V,  614,  Southworth,  C.

Fog-trumpet,  steam,  II,  52,  Daboll.

Folding-machine,  invention  of  a,  VI,  428,  Wells,  D.  A.

Folger,  Lydia,  H,  518,  Fowler,  L.  F.

Folk-lore  of  Canada,  II.  613.  Gaspe,  P.  A.  de.

Follen,  Christopher.  II,  491,  Follen.

Folsom,  Oscar,  I,  656.

Folsom  City,  Cal.,  II.  493,  Folsom,  J.  L.

Fones,  Martha,  VI,  574.

Fontaine,  Rev.  James,  IV,  266,  Maury,  A.

Fontaine,  John,  V,  635,  Spotswood.

Fontaine,  Joseph.  VI,  145.

Fontaine,  W.  M.,  IV,  266,  Maury,  M.  F.

Fontanarossa,  Susanna,  I,  696,  Columbus.

Fonthill,  illustration,  II,  505.

Food,  adulteration  of.  I,  572,  Chandler,  C.  F.

Foot,  Ebenezer,  II,  495,  Foot,  S.  A.

Foot,  Rev.  George,  II,  495,  Foot,  J.  I.

Foote,  Moses,  II,  497,  Foote,  T.  M.

Foote,  Roxana,  I,  216,  Beecher.

Forbes,  Christiana.  IV,  716,  Penn,  W.

Forbes.  Edward,  III,  119,  Hawkins,  B.  W.

Forbes,  Hugh,  I,  406.

Force,  theory  of  the  entitative  nature  of,  IV,  444,  Mott,
Henry  A.

Force,  William,  II,  499,  Force,  P.

Force  bill,  the,  I,  500  ;  II,  394,  Ewing,  T.;  VI,  195,  411.

Ford,  Gabriel.  I,  273.

Fordham,  home  at,  VI,  589.  Wolfe,  C.  L.

Forest,  the,  plantation,  II,  255.  Dunbar,  Sir  W.

Forester,  Frank,  pen-name,  III,  180.  Herbert.

Forestier,  Auber,  pen-name,  VI,  607,  Woodward,  A.  A.

Forestry,  VI,  346,  Waugenheim  ;  American  woods,  V,  399,
Sargent,  C.  S.

Forestry  association,  VI,  356,  Warder.

Forests,  influence  of,  on  rainfall,  H,  228,  Draper,  D.

Forkel,  Mr.,  Ill,  362.

Formosa,  island  of,  TV,  133,  Mackenzie,  R.  S.

Forney,  John  W.,  quoted,  II,  143,  Dent,  Frederick  F. ;  V,
340,  Royall,  Anne.

Forrest,  Edwin,  IV,  99.  McCullough  ;  his  house  on  the
Hudson,  illustration,  TI,  505.

Forrest  divorce  suit,  the.  II,  505,  Forrest,  E. ;  rv,  554,
(yConor,  C.

Forrester,  Fanny,  pen-name,  HI,  485.  Judson.  E.  C.

Forrester,  Francis.  Esq.,  pen-name,  VI.  579,  Wise,  D.

Forster.  Dr..  II,  550.  Fuentes,  B.

Forster,  William  Edward,  II,  506,  Forster,  W.

Forsythe,  W..  III.  552.  Kinzie.

Fort  Adams,  Newport.  IV.  175,  Magruder  ;  VI,  399.

Fort  Alamo,  illustration.  VI,  155.

Fort  Alibamon,  VI.  143,  Tour,  L.  B.

Fort  Altona,  IH,  205.  Hudde.

Fort  Amsterdam,  built,  IV,  338,  Minuit.

Fort  Anne,  I,  452,  Burgoyne.


Fort  Arraial  do  Bom  Jesus,  siege  of,  H,  163,  Dias,  H.

Fort  Barrancas,  HI,  377.

Fort  Biloxi,  HI.  339,  Iberville.

Fort  Boca-Chica,  destruction  of,  IV,  126,  Mackan.

Fort  Bourbon,  III,  339,  Iberville  ;  siege  of.  430,  Jeremie  :
VI,  294,  Villaret.

Fort  Bowyer,  III,  377.

Fort  Brown,  bombardment  of,  VI,  53  ;  IV,  196,  Mansfield,
J.  K.  F.

Fort  Caridon. See  Fort  Ticonderoga.

Fort  Caroline,  III,  629,  Laudonniere  ;  H,  697,  Gourgues ;
capture  of,  V,  232,  Ribaut.

Fort  Casimir,  HI,  295,  Hudde.

Fort  Catarocouy,  VI,  59,  Teganissorens.

Fort  Ceperon,  III,  300,  Huet.

Fort  Chagres,  capture  of,  VI,  280,  Vernon,  E.

Fort  Charles,  H,  134,  Delawarr.

Fort  Chartres,  111.,  V,  221,  Renault.

Fort  Christiana,  built,  IV,  338,  Minuit ;  TO.,  295,  Hudde.

Fort  Clark,  captured,  I,  478,  Butler,  B.  F. ;  II,  18,  Crosby,  P.

Fort  Clendenin,  I,  135,  Bailey.

Fort  Clinton,  storming  of,  1,  659,  Clinton,  J.

Fort  Crawford,  VI,  52,  53.

Fort  Crevecoeur,  HI.  168,  Hennepin  ;  622  ;  VI,  132,  Tonty.

Fort  Darling,  Va.,  attack  on,  V,  £97.

Fort  Dauphin,  VI,  277,  Verandrye.

Fort  Dearborn,  built,  VI,  463,  Whistler,  J.;  evacuation  of,
432,  Wells,  W.\  HI,  292,  Hubbard,  G.  S.;  308  ,Hull,  W.

Fort  de  Boeuf ,  V,  374,  Saint  Pierre.

Fort  de  Couty,  HI,  168,  Hennepin.

Fort  Defiance,  Navajoe  attack  on,  V,  495,  Shepherd,  O.  L.

Fort  de  la  Reine,  VI,  277,  Verandrye.

Fort  de  Russy,  capture  of,  V,  556,  Smith,  A.  J.

Fort  Diamant,  storming  of,  VI,  296,  Villeneuve,  Pierre.

Fort  Donelson,  siege  of,  I.  440,  Buckner  ;  II,  488,  Floyd,  J.
P.;  496,  Foote,  A.  H.\  506,  Forrest,  N.  B.;  T10,  711  :  III,
321,  Hunter,  D.;  V,  20,  Pillow  ;  586,  Smith,  C.  F.\  effect
of  its  fall  in  the  south,  III,  455.

Fort  Douglas,  attack  upon,  V,  461.  Semple,  R.

Fort  Duquesne  (Pitt),  I,  329,  Bouquet ;  347.  Braddock ;
711,  Contrecceur ;  movement  on,  H,  255,  Dunbar,  T.  ;
Forbes's  expedition  against,  498,  Forbes,  J. ;  engage-
ment near,  663,  Gist ;  V,  692,  Stobo  ;  VI,  375.

Fort  Edward,  Martinique,  HI,  520,  Kent,  Duke  of.

Fort  Edward,  IV.  61,  Lyman,  P.;  V,  140.

Fort  Erie,  assault  on,  H,  234,  Drummond,  Sir  G.  ',  235,
Drummond,  W.  ;  639,  Gibson  ;  V,  268,  Roach,  I.  ;  440,
Scott,  Winfield ;  incident  of  the  defence  of,  VI,  529,
Williams,  A.  J.

Fort  Esperanza,  Tex.,  evacuation  of,  VI,  371,  Washburn,
Caduialldder  C.

Fort  Fisher,  assaults  on,  I.  367,  Breese,  K.  R. ;  478,  Butler,
B.  F;  II.  41,  dishing,  W.  B.:  Ill,  285,  Howell,  J.  C;  H,
715  ;  V,  75  ;  158,  Radford  ;  230,  Rhind  ;  VI,  66,  Terry,
Alfred  H.

Fort  Frontenac,  I,  353,  Bradstreet ;  HI,  621,  La  Salle.

Fort  Gaines,  Ala.,  II,  417.

Fort  Garry,  expedition  to,  F7,  177,  Mair,  C. ;  Fenian  at-
tack on,  150,  McMicken.

Fort  George,  Scotland,  II,  349,  Emmet,  T.  A.

Fort  George,  New  York,  I,  684,  Colden,  C. ;  capture  of,  H,
117,  Dearborn,  H.\  action  at,  HI,  285,  Howell,  R.  L.

Fort  George,  siege  of,  III,  687,  Le  Moyne,  P.  J.

Fort  George,  capture  of  (war  of  1812),  HI,  705,  Lewis,  M.;
evacuation  of.  firing  of  Newark,  and  retaliation  for,  IV,
90,  McClure,  G.

Fort  Granby,  I,  752  ;  III.  667,  Lee,  H.

Fort  Gregg,  capture  of.  IV,  598,  Osborne.  T.  O.

Fort  Griswold,  massacre  at,  1, 136,  Bailey,  A.  W.;  Ill,  654,
655,  Ledyard.

Forth,  Marv,  VI,  572,  Winthrop.

Fort  Hale,  III,  31,  Hale.  N.

Fort  Harmar,  treaties  at,  H,  233,  Drowne,  S.  ;  VI,  679,
Doughty.

Fort  Harrison,  capture  of.  II,  715  ;  III.  97  ;  capture  of,  IV,
584.  Ord,  E.  O.  C.;  VI.  52.

Fort  Harrison,  Va.,  capture  of.  V,  647,  Stannard.

Fort  Hatteras,  captured,  I,  478,  Butler,  B.  F.  ;  H,  18,
Crosby,  P.

Fort  Hell,  II,  765,  Griffin.

Fort  Henry,  in  Virginia,  II,  134,  Delawarr  ;  in  Tennessee,
capture  of,  287,  Eads  ;  496,  Foote,  A.  H;  710.

Fort  Henry  (Wheeling),  attack  on,  II,  662,  Girty,  Simon  ;
established,  VI,  655,  Zane,  Ebenezer.

Fort  Hill,  Calhoun's  residence  at,  I,  500.

Fort  Hindman,  capture  of,  V,  503.

Fort  Hope,  III,  295,  Hudde.

Fortifications,  I,  104.

Fort  Independence,  attack  on,  in,  728,  Lincoln,  B.

Fort  Jackson,  bombardment  of,  I.  406,  Caldwell,  C.  H.  B.\
II.  414,  416  ;  and  St.  Philip,  bombardment  of,  V,  75.

Fort  Jacques  Cartier.  II,  150,  Des  Barres.

Fort  Johnson,  attack  on,  III,  289,  Hoyt,  H.  M. ;  452 ;  cap-
ture of,  IV.  207,  Marion.

Fort  Johnston,  N.  C,  destruction  of,  IV,  233,  Martin.  J.

Fort  King,  Fla.,  Indian  fight  at.  II,  58,  Dade,  F.  L.

Fort  Lawrence,  N.  S..  Ill,  639,  Lawrence,  C.

Fort  Leavenworth,  HI,  316,  Hunt,  H.  J.  ;  649,  Leaven-
ivorth,  H.


FORT


FRANCE


735


Fort  Loudon,  massacre  at,  I,  115,  Atta-Culla-Culla ;  IV,

555,  Oconostota ;  V,  730,  Stuart,  John  ;  VI,  82,  Thomas,

Isaac.
Fort  Lyman,  IV,  61,  Lyman,  P.
Fort  McAllister,  bombardment  of,  n,  230,  Drayton,  P.;

266,  Du  Pont  ;  III,  150,  Hazen,  W.  B.
Fort  McHenry,  III,  529,  Key,  F.  S.;  IV,  121,  McHenry.
Fort  Mackinaw,  IV,  34.  Louvigny  ;  107,  MacDouall.
Fort  Macon,  surrender  of,  I,  463  ;  V,  337,  Rowan,  S.  C.
Fort  McRee,  IV,  161,  McRee,  W.
Fort  Massachusetts,  capture  of,  VI,  265,  Vaudreuil,  P.  F.

de  R.
Fort  Manchac,  taken,  II,  584,  Gdlvez,  B.
Fort  Meigs,  siege  of,  I,  639,  Clay,  G.  ;  m,  97  ; VI,  58,

Tecumseh.
Fort  Mercer,  assault  on,  II,  748,  Greene,  C.
Fort  Miami,  VI,  399.

Fort  Mifflin,  defence  of,  V,  587,  Smith,  S.
Fort  Miller,  V,  140.
Fort  Minims,  massacre  at.  III,  376.
Fort  Monroe,  re-enforcement  of,  V,  275,  Roberts,  M.  O.
Fort  Monsipi,  VI,  165,  Troyes.
Fort  Montgomery,  storming  of,  I,  659,  Clinton,  J.  ;  II,  145,

De  Peyster,  F.
Fort  Morgan,  Ala.,  II,  417  ;  IV,  515,  Nicholson,  J.  W.  A.
Fort  Motte,  captured,  II,  752  ;  HI,  667,  Lee,  H.  ;  IV,  209,

Marion  ;  445,  Motte,  R.  B.
Fort  Moultrie,  II,  598,  Gardner,  J.  L.  ;  incident  of  the  at-
tack on,  III,  407,  Jasper  ;  battle  at,  659  ;  IV,  207,  Marion  ;

building  and  defence  of,  446,  Moultrie.
Fort  Nassau,  in,  295,  Hudde  ;  settlement  near,  402,  Jansen

van  Ilpendam.
Fort  Natchez,  taken,  II,  584,  Gdlvez.  B.
Fort  Natchitoches,  besieged  by  Indians,  III,  482,  Jucherau.
Fort  Necessity,  engagement  at,  III,  487,  Jumonville  ;  V,

692,  Stobo  ;  VI,  374.
Fort  Neck  House,  illustration,  III,  471.
Fort  Nelson,  III,  339,  Iberville.
Fort  Niagara,  surrender  of,  II,  130,  De  Lancey,  J.  ;  III,

452  ;  rebuilding  of,  686,  Le  Moyne  ;  capture  of  (1759),  IV,

373,  Montigny,  J.  B.  T.  ;  capture  of,  469,  Murray,  J.  ;

settlement  at,  541,  Nouvel ;  attack  on,  V,  120,  Prideaux  ;

VI,  165,  Troyes.
Fortnightly  club,  the,  II,  195,  Doggett,  K.
Fort  Ninety-six,  II,  752.

Fort  No.  4,  Indian  attacks  on,  V,  676,  Stevens,  P.
Fort  Ocracoke,  destruction  of,  V,  337,  Rowan,  S.  C.
Fort  Oplandt,  II,  157,  De  Vries  ;  HI,  269,  Hosset.
Fort  Orange,  expedition  against,  V,  373,  St.  Ours  ;  name

of,  changed  to  Albany,  378,  Salisbury,  S.  :  VI,  250,  Van

Rensselaer.
Fort  Oswegatchie,  capture  of,  V,  140.
Fort  Pemaquid,  III,  339,  Iberville  ;  taken  by  the  French.  IV,

373,  Montigny,  J.  T.  de  ;  destruction  of,  V,  368,  St.  Castin.
Fort  Pemberton,  rv,  28,  Loring,  W.  W.
Fort  Pentagoet,  VI,  143,  Tour,  C.  A.
Fort  Pickens.  V,  548,  Slemmer  ;  VI,  323,  Walker.
Fort  Pillow,  II,  94,  Davis,  C.  H  ;  massacre  at,  506,  Forrest,

N.  B.  ;  bombardment  of,  VI,  296,  Villepigue.
Fort  Pitt,  IV,  124,  Mcintosh,  L.  ;  VI,  375.
Fort  Pontchartrain,  I,  493,  Cadillac.
Fort  Powell,  attack  on,  IV,  515,  Nicholson,  J.  W.  A.
Fort  Pownall,  Me.,  V,  100,  Pownall.

Fort  Prince  George,  invested  by  Cherokees,  IV,  555,  Ocono-
stota.
Fort  Pulaski,  capture  of,  n,  654,  Gillmore  ;  surrender  of

(1862),  IV,  591,  O'Rorke.
Fort  Quitchitchonen,  III,  339,  Iberville  ;  687,  Le  Moyne,

James.
Fort  Recovery,  HI,  96,  Harrison,  W.  H. ;  VI,  399.
Fort  Roberdeau,  V,  271,  Roberdeau,  D.
Fort  Rosalie,  1, 493,  Cadillac  ;  burning  of,  rV,  529,  Nogaret.
Fort  Rouge,  VI,  277,  Verandrye.
Fort  Royal,  Florida,  attacked,  III,  366,  Isles.
Fort  St.  Charles,  Ark.,  capture  of.  HI,  535,  Kilty.
Fort  St.  George,  Me.,  H,  646,  Gilbert,  R.;  687,  Gorges ;  V,

69,  Popham.
Fort  St.  Ifligo,  V.  118.  Price,  J.
Fort  St.  Jean,  III,  687,  Le  Moyne,  J.  D.  E.
Fort  St.  John  and  Fort  Cham'bly,  capture  of,  rv,  371.
Fort  St.  Louis,  III,  477,  Joutel ;  VI,  132,  Tonty.
Fort  St.  Peter  and  Fort  St.  Charles,  VI,  277,  Verandrye.
Fort  St.  Philip,  bombardment  of,  I,  496,  Caldwell,  Charles

H.  B. ;  II,  416.
Fort  St.  Rupert,  III,  687,  Le  Moyne,  James.
Fort  San  Mateo,  II,  697,  Gourgues.
Fort  Saunders,  attack  on,  IV,  141,  McLaws.
Fort  Schuyler,  siege  of,  H,  589,  Gansevoort,  P. ;  III,  182,

Herkimer.
Fort  Smith,  confederate  occupation  of,  I,  322,  Borland  ;

evacuation  of,  V,  734,  Sturgis,  S.  D.
Fort  Snelling,  V,  601,  Snelling,  J.
Fort  Stanwix  expedition,  the,  I,  387,  Brooks,  John;  treaty

of,  III,  452  ;  investment  of,  in  the  Revolution,  453,  John-
son, Sir  J.;  expedition  against,  V,  372,  St.  Leger  ;  V,  651,

Stanwix.
Fort  Steadman,  taken  by  Lee,  and  retaken,  II,  716 ;  HI,

105,  Hartranft.
Fort  Stevenson,  defence  of,  H,  13,  Croghan.


Fort  Sumter,  fall  of,  I,  211,  Beauregard  ;  282,  Blair,  M.;
question  of  re-enforcements  for,  435,  436  ;  bombardment
of,  II.  332,  Elliott,  Stephen  ;  removal  from  Fort  Moultrie
to,  511,  Foster,  J.  G.;  proposed  re-enforcement  of ,  520,
Fox,  G.  V. ;  654,  Gillmore  ;  first  gun  fired  on,  V,  342,
Ruffln,  E. ;  surrender  of,  VI.  499,  Wigfall ;  proposed
evacuation  of,  V,  648,  Stanton.

Fort  Taylor,  supposed  attempt  to  seize,  V,  646,  Stanly,  F.

Fort  Ticonderoga.  I,  330,  Bourlamarque  ;  attack  on,  II,
132  ;  skirmish  near,  III,  280,  Howe,  G.  A.  ;  built,  IV,  31,
Lotbiniere  ;  battle  of,  364  ;  capture  of,  in  1775,  663,  Par-
sons. S.  H.  ;  753,  Phelps,  N.  ;  evacuation  by  St.  Clair,
763.  Phillips.  William  ;  (1777),  V,  369,  St.  Clair.

Fort  Trent,  capture  of,  H,  181,  Dinwiddie.

Fort  Trumbull,  III,  654,  Ledyard,  W.

Fortun,  pen-name,  VI,  656,  Zarco.

Fortune,  the  largest,  in  America  in  the  18th  century,  H,
147,  Derby,  E.  H.

Fortunee,  captures  by  the,  VI,  255,  Vansittart.

Fortuny,  pupil  of,  IV,  380,  Moore,  H.  H.

Fort  Vaughan,  VI,  268,  Vaughan,  Sir  J.

Fort  Wagner,  H,  654,  Gillmore  ;  V,  139,  Putnam,  H.  S.  ;
298,  Rodgers,  G.  W.  ;  486,  Shaw,  R.  G.

Fort  Walker,  II,  653,  Gillis,  J.  P.

Fort  Washington,  controversy  on  the  retention  of,  II,  750,
753  ;  HI,  96,  Harrison,  W.  H.  ;  capture  of,  280,  Howe,
W.  ;  fall  of,  659  ;  and  Lee,  capture  of,  V,  141  ;  storm-
ing of,  190,  Rawlings,  M.  ;  illustration,  VI,  679.

Fort  Watson,  capture  of,  II,  752 ;  storming  of,  HI,  458,
Johnston,  P.  ;  667,  Lee,  H.  ;  surrender  of,  IV,  175-176,
Maham  ;  209,  Marion.

Fort  Wayne,  HI,  97  ;  VI,  399.

Fort  William  Henry,  siege  of,  I,  330,  Bourlamarque  ;  capt-
ure and  massacre  at,  IV,  364  ;  V,  412,  Scammell.

Fort  Yuma,  Indian  siege  of,  VI,  7,  Sweeny.

Forum,  the,  magazine,  IV,  311,  Metcalf,  L.  S.  ;  V,  235,
Rice,  I.  L.

Forward,  Chauncey,  I,  272,  Black,  J.  S.

Forward,  attack  on  the  pirate-ship,  VI,  316,  Wainwright,
Jonathan  M.

Fossil  footprints.  Ill,  216,  217,  Hitchcock,  E.  and  C.  H.

Fossils,  new  group  of,  II,  280,  Dwight,  W.  B.  ;  discovery
of,  VI,  449,  Wheatley.

Foster,  Rev.  Daniel,  I,  460,  Burns,  Anthony.

Foster,  Capt.  Daniel,  H.  512,  Foster,  L.  S.

Foster,  Festus,  II,  295,  Eaton,  W.

Foster,  George  G.,  H,  358,  English,  Thomas  Dunn  ;  IV,  205,
Marguerittes.

Foster,  Rev.  John,  II.  510,  Foster,  Hannah.

Foster,  Miriam,  I,  608,  Choate.

Foster,  Rebecca,  II,  571,  Gaillard,  P.  C.

Foster,  Dr.  Robert  D.,  V,  576,  Smith,  Joseph.

Fothergill.  Dr.  John,  pupil  of,  VI,  386,  Waterhouse.

Fouke,  Philip  B.,  IV,  86,  McClernand.

Foulke,  Col.,  II,  567,  Cabaret.

Foul- Weather  Jack,  I,  487,  Byron.

Founens,  M.  de,  I,  119,  Aurelio.

Fountain,  Rev.  Peter,  IV,  277,  Mayo,  W.

Fountain  of  youth,  the,  search  for,  V.  62,  Ponce  de  Leon.

Fountain-pen,  inventor  of  a,  V,  409,  Saxton.

Four  Brothers,  the,  I,  395.

Four  Corners,  battle  at,  V,  375,  Salaberry.

Fourier,  C,  II,  55,  Dain.

Fourierism,  II,  736.

Fowke,  Col.  Gerard,  IV,  241,  Mason,  G.

Fowler,  Nancy  C,  1, 127,  Bache,  A.  D.

Fowler,  Sophia,  II,  579,  Gallaudet,  S.  F.

Fowlerite,  discovered,  H,  518,  Fowler,  S.

Fowles,  Zachariah,  VI,  82.  Tliomas,  Isaiah.

Fowltown,  burning  of,  III.  378.

Fox,  Charles  James,  I,  166,  Barlow,  J.  ;  454,  Burke,  E.  ;  n,
520,  Fox,  H.  S.  ;  532  ;  quoted,  IV,  371  ;  VI,  266,  Vaughan.

Fox,  Christopher.  II,  519,  Fox,  G.

Fox,  Gen.  Henry,  II,  520,  Fox,  H.  S.

Fox,  John  D.,  H,  520,  Fox,  M.

Fox,  Kate,  II,  520,  Fox,  M.

Fox,  capture  of  the,  IV,  189,  Manley,  J.

Fox,  voyage  of  the,  IV,  87,  McCIintock,  F.  L.

Foxborough,  gift  to  library  of,  I,  341.  Boyden,  U.  A.

Fox-hunting  club  of  Gloucester,  the,  VI,  447,  Wharton,  R.

Fox's  Mills,  engagement  at,  III,  453,  Johnson,  Sir  J.

Foxton,  E.,  pen-name,  IV,  634,  Palfrey,  S.  H.

Foy,  M.,  Ill,  363,  Irving,  W.

Fra  Angelico  of  Ecuador,  the,  I,  216,  Bedon.

Fractional  currency,  V,  28,  Pintard.

Fractures,  treatment  of,  I,  437,  Buck,  G. See  Surgery.

Franc,  Pierre.  IV,  733,  Perrot,  P.

Franca,  Manuel  J.  de,  V,  401,  Sartain,  J.

Francais,  M.,  II,  237,  Dubois.

Francais,  F.  L.,  IV,  407.  Morrell,  I.  R.

France,  alliance  of,  with  America,  I,  17  ;  aid  of,  18,  19  ;  U.
S.  relation  with,  22 ;  indemnity  paid  by,  27 ;  II,  336,
Ellsworth,  O. ;  relations  of.  with  U.  S.,  I,  167,  Barlow,  J. ;
aid  of,  during  the  Revolution,  210,  Beaumarchais :  314,
Bonvouloir  ;  II,  116,  Deane,  S.;  376,  Estaing  ;  531  ;  loans
and  gift,  531  ;  her  desire  in  reference  to  the  Mississippi
valley,  532.  533  ;  defeat  of,  by  England.  532  ;  aid  of,  in
the  Revolution,  726,  Grasse;  III,  631,  Laurens,  J.;  409,
410  ;  V,  291,  Rochambeau  ;  Fouchet's  intercepted  and  re-


736


FRANCE


FRIENDSHIP


cently  discovered  despatches,  177,  Randolph,  E.;  alli-
ance of,  VI,  183,  Turgot,  A.  R.  J. ;  279,  Vergennes ;  II,
336,  Ellsworth,  0.;  solicits  aid  in  the  Revolution,  624,
Genest ;  rupture  with  U.  S.  (1798),  III,  306,  Hugues  ;  the
Directory,  375  ;  opinions  of  the  Revolution  in  America,
420 ;  Jay's  mission  to,  409  ;  proposed  alliance  with,  IV,
246,  Mason,  J.  M. ;  relations  of,  with  America.  359  ;  rela-
tions with  U.  S.  during  the  war  of  secession,  III,  721  ;
government  of,  before  the  Revolution,  419  ;  protective
system  of,  419  ;  threatened  war  with  the  U.  S.,  IV,  4,  Lo-
gan, G.;  desire  for  war  with,  fighting  on  the  sea,  169;
reception  of  U.  S.  envoys  by  the)  Directory,  223  ;  threat-
ened difficulty  with  the  U.  S.,  mission  to,  471,  Murray,
W.  V. ;  treaties  with,  497,  Neuville ;  preparations  for
war  with,  VI,  381  ;  22,  Talbot,  8.;  170,  Truxton  ;  122,  Tin-
gey  ;  colony  of.  in  S.  A.,  II,  373,  374,  Espeleta ;  Orleans
princes  of,  IV,  589.

France  equinoxiale,  III,  344,  Imfreville.

Francesca  de  Braganza,  Princess,  IV,  589,  Orleans,  F.  F.

Francestown,  N.  H.,  name  of,  VI,  436,  Wentworth,  F.  D.

Francis,  Ebenezer,  II,  47,  Cutler,  M.

Francis,  Sir  Philip,  II,  524.  Francis,  T.;  asked  to  petition
for  grants  in  America,  525  ;  VI,  85,  Thomas,  P.  Fi

Francis,  Richard,  I,  603,  Child.  L.  M.

Francis,  Richard,  II,  524,  Francis,  T.

Franciscans,  missions  of,  I.  555,  Castro,  A.;  618,  Ciudad
Real ;  745,  Corpa  ;  III,  183,  Hernandez,  V. ;  345,  Infante,
H.;  480,  Juarez,  Juan  ;  488.  Junipero  ;  603,  Landa  ;  651,
Le  Caron  ;  IV,  205,  Margil ;  440,  Motolinia  ;  526,  Niza,
M.  and  T. ;  576,  Olmos :  585,  Ordonez.  D. ;  622,  Padella,
Juan;  748,  Peyri ;  V,  39,  Plaza,  M.;  131,  Puerta;  179,
Rangel  ;  368,  Sahagun  ;  464,  Serra  ;  534,  Simon.  P.  A. ;
543,  Sitjar  ;  604,  Solana  ;  VI,  37,  Tastera  ;  57,  Tecto  ;
134,  Toral ;  140,  Torntbia  ;  157,  Trejo  ;  205,  Uhland  ;  219,
Urtiaga  ;  222.  Valades  ;  225,  Valencia  ;  262,  Vasquez  ;
294,  Villalpando;  458,  Whelan,  C;  635,  Ximenez  ;  638,
Yanguas  ;  654,  Zamora,  C. ;  656,  Zarate,  M. ;  657,  Zarco,
Oiulio.

Franciscus  Honorius  Philoponus,  I,  444,  Buil.

Franck6,  August  Herman,  IV,  255,  Mather,  C.

Francois,  Jean,  ID,  688,  Lempereur ;  VI,  144,  Toussaint,
Dominique  F.

Franconia,  case  of  the,  I,  235,  Benjamin,  J.  P.

Franco-Prussian  war,  the,  I,  202,  Bazaine  ;  the  letters  on,
IV,  115-116.  MacGahan  ;  project  to  teach  French  troops
English,  V,  199,  Read,  J.  M.\  hospital  service  in,  378,
Salm  Salm.  A.;  Anglo-American  ambulance  corps,  541,
Sims,  J.  M.\  sale  of  arms  to  France,  748;  the,  VI,  371,
Washbume,  E.  B.

Frank,  pseudonym,  V,  669.

Frankenstein.  John  P.,  VI.  396,  Way.

Frankland,  proposed  state  of,  I,  541,  Carter,  J. ;  III,  75,
Handley.

Frankley,  baron  of,  IV,  69,  Lyttleton.

Franklin,  our  later,  II.  741,  Greeley,  H.

Franklin,  Abiah.  II,  491,  Folger,  A.

Franklin,  Ann.  Ill,  43,  Hall^  S.

Franklin,  Benjamin,  statue  of,  in  New  York,  II.  124,  De
Groot ;  his  birthplace,  illustration,  531  ;  his  tomb,  533  ;
his  epitaph,  534  ;  translation  attributed  to,  rv,  4,  Logan,
James  ;  quoted,  254,  Mather,  C.  ;  essay  attributed  to,
585,  Witherspoon,  J.

Franklin,  James.  II,  527.

Franklin,  John.  II.  527.

Franklin,  Sir  J.,  search  for,  II,  125,  De  Haven  ;  m,  492-
493,  Kane.  E.  K.  ;  504.  Kellett ;  discovery  of  his  fate,  IV,
87,  McClintock,  F.  L.  ;  search  for,  first  traces  of,  V,  158,
Rae.  J.  ;  search  for,  242,  Richardson,  Sir  J.  ;  330,  Ross,
Sir  J.  ;  discovery  of  relics  of,  433,  Schwatka.

Franklin,  Josiah,  tl.  527.

Franklin,  Sarah.  I,  126,  Bache.

Franklin,  Thomas.  II,  526,  Franklin.  B.

Franklin,  state  of,  V,  168,  Ramsey.  J.  G.  M  ;  467,  Sevier,  J.

Franklin,  N.  H.,  gift  to,  rv,  495.  Nesmith,  J.

Franklin,  Pa.,  surveyed,  II.  327,  Ellicott.

Franklin,  Pa.,  battle  of,  V,  424,  Schofield  ;  II,  715  ;  rv,
583.  Opdycke.  E. ;  V,  645,  Stanley.  D.  S.

Franklin  college,  Ind..  Ill,  239,  Holman.  J.  L.

Franklin  institute,  Philadelphia,  founding  of,  III,  498,
Keating,  W.  H;  gift  to,  VI,  488,  Whitney,  A.

Franklinite,  II.  518,  Fowler,  S.

Franklin's  press,  first  book  from,  V,  189.  Rawle,  F.

Franks,  Rebecca,  III,  412,  Johnson,  Sir  H.

Franzelin,  Cardinal,  I,  417,  Brownson,  O.  A.

Fraser,  Alexander,  II,  537,  Fraser,  S.

Fraser,  Simon,  III.  503,  Keith,  Sir  W.

Fraunce's  tavern.  III,  566.

Fray  Domingo,  pen-name.  III,  407,  Jauregui.

Fray  Domingo,  V.  520,  Sibiel.

Frazer,  Carolina,  G.,  IV,  463,  Murat.

Frazer,  Lieut. -Col.  Persifor,  II,  538,  Frazer,  J.  F.;  583,
Smith,  P.  F.

Frazier's  farm,  battle  at.  IV,  82.

Frederick  the  Great,  V,  668,  Steuben  ;  quoted,  II,  457,  Fill-
more :  VI.  377  ;  sword  given  bv.  385,  Washington,  L.  W.

Frederick  IV.,  of  Denmark,  II,  314.  Egede.

Frederick,  Md.,  capture  of,  II,  657,  Gilmor;  R.  C.  institu-
tions in,  IV.  114,  McElroy,  J;  deaf-mute  school  at.  V,
102,  Pratt,  E.


Fredericksburg,  battle  of,  I,  232,  Benedict ;  464,  Burn-
side  ;  H,  54,  Dahlgren,  U.\  5SG.  Frank-tin,  W.  B.;  562,
Fuller,  A.  B.;  Ill,  72,  Hancock,  W.  S.  :  671.

Fredonia,  name  proposed  for  the  U.  S.,  IV,  349,  Mitchill.

Free  Church  of  Canada,  I,  202,  Bayne

Freedmen,  the  ill  treatment  of,  II,  719.  720  ;  fund  for  edu-
cation of,  V,  548,  Slater ;  veto  of  bureau  bill,  III,  438 ;
second,  439.

Freedmen's  relief  association,  the  national,  II,  548,  French,
Mansfield.

Freedom  of  the  press,  III,  61,  62,  Hamilton,  A.

Freedom-of-worship  clause,  the,  V,  595,  Smith,  W.  E.

Free  Lance,  the,  III.  6!3,  Lanigan.

Freeman,  signature,  II,  230,  Drayton,  W.  H.

Freeman,  case  of,  V,  471.

Freeman,  Carter  C,  VI,  456,  Wheelock,  J.  S.

Freeman,  Chapman,  II,  485,  Florence,  T.  B.

Freeman,  E.  A.,  reference  to,  I,  13,  Adams,  C.  F.

Freeman,  Elizabeth,  V,  451,  Sedgwick,  T.

Freeman,  T.  B.,  II,  313.  Edwin.

Freeman's  farm,  battle  at,  I,  95  ;  IV,  396.

Freeman's  Oath,  the,  first  printing  in  America,  II,  113,
Daye.

Freemasonry,  prejudice  against,  I,  27  ;  IV,  404,  Morgan.
W. ;  poet  laureate  of,  417,  Morris,  Robert ;  introduc-
tion into  Mexico,  III,  580,  Labastida  ;  V,  49,  Poinsett ;
705,  Stone,  W.  L. ;  movement  against,  745.

Freemason's  Magazine,  the,  V,  238,  Richards,  G.

Free  Quakers,  the,  V,  410,  8m.  B.

Free  religious  association.  II,  556,  Frothingham,  O.  B.

Free-soil  party,  II,  184 ;  III,  34,  Hale,  John  Parker ;  or-
ganization of,  V,  747  ;  VI,  548,  Wilson,  Henry.

Free-trade,  Carlisle  on.  I,  527.

Free  Trade  and  Sailors'  Rights  flag,  the,  V,  73,  Porter,  D.

Free-trade  convention  (1831).  VI,  692,  Lee,  H.

Free- Will  Baptist  missions,  IV,  542,  Noyes,  E.

Freiligrath,  Ferdinand,  IV,  13,  14.

Frejo,  Hernando  de,  III,  489,  Justiniano.

Fremont,  Dr.,  II,  212,  Douglas,  J.

Fremont,  O.,  Hayes  house  at,  illustration,  in,  135.

Fremont's  Peak,  II,  545,  Fremont.

French,  Eliza  M.,  VI,  44,  Taylor,  G.  L.

French,  Col.  John,  II,  548,  French,  D.

French,  John  L.,  II,  548,  French,  L.  V.

French,  Rosalie,  IV,  704,  Pelby.

French,  the,  in  America.  I,  457,  Burnet :  plan  for  colonial
union  against  the,  H,  528  ;  relations  of,  in  Canada  with
the  Indians,  III,  572,  Kondiaronk  ;  577,  Kryn  ;  American
possessions  of,  documents  on,  V,  6,  Pidansat.

French  and  Indian  wars,  the,  II,  132;  181,  Dinwiddie  ;
554  ;  IV,  33,  Loudoun  ;  364  ;  expense  of,  517,  Nicolls,  W.;
siege  of  Quebec,  in  1690,  764,  Phips  ;  siege  of  Louisburg,
721,  Pepperrell ;  V,  6,  Picquet ;  140 ;  368,  St.  Castin  ;
373,  St.  Ours ;  372,  St.  Luc ;  430,  Schuyler,  P.  ;  431,
Schuyler,  P.  J.  ;  676,  Stevens,  P.  ;  noted  spy  in,  692,
Stobo ;  capture  of  privateers  in,  VI,  203,  Tyng,  E.  ;  206,
Ulloa,  A.  de  ;  naval  operations  in,  269,  Vauquelin  ;  374-
375  ;  mission  of  Washington,  374.

French  army,  surrender  of  the,  I,  202,  Bazaine.

French  Bay,  II,  625.  Gennes.

French  claims,  the,  I,  430.

French  colonies,  slave  legislation  in,  IV,  472,  Mutin.

French  Lick  fort,  V,  50,  Polk,  W.

French  Prophets,  the,  sect  of,  in,  502,  Keimer ;  656,  Lee,
Ann.

French  relief  fund,  the,  II,  280.  Dwight,  E.

French  revolution,  the,  attitude  of  U.  S.  government  to-
ward, I,  21,  22 ;  379,  Bressot ;  II,  263,  264,  Du  Pont  de
Nemours;  HI,  58;  operations  in  America,  311.  Hum-
bert ;  589,  590 ;  633,  Lauzun  ;  exiles  after  the,  IV,  710,
Peniires  ;  royalist  conspiracy— arrest  of  the  Guyoma-
rais  family— revolt  of  Les  Chouans,  V,  334,  Rouarie ;
outbreak  of,  VI,  266,  Vaudreuil,  Louis ;  "  pacte  de
famine  "— "  noyades,"  297,  Vilmot.

French  spoliation  claims,  law  on,  I,  105  ;  in,  883,  746.

Frenchtown  (Monroe),  capture  of,  in,  97 ;  massacre  at,
195,  Hickman,  P.;  VI,  561,  Winchester,  J.

French  vessels,  engagements  with,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,  W.

Freneau,  quoted,  V,  268,  Rivington.

Frere,  E.,  I,  131,  Bacon,  H.;  HI,  449,  Johnson,  S.  F;  VI,
76,  Thorn,  J.  C.

Fretum  Christianeum,  IV,  459,  Munk.

Frey,  Samuel  Levi,  n,  550,  Frey.

Friedel,  Charles,  I,  764,  Crafts,  J.  M.

Friedenstadt,  VI.  658,  Zeisberger.

Friedrich,  Karl,  IV,  251,  Materna.

Friedsam  Gottrecht,  I,  223,  Beissel.

Friend  of  Industry,  a,  signature,  II,  117,  Dearborn,  B.

Friend  of  Peace,  the,  quarterly.  VI,  618,  Worcester,  N.

Friend  of  the  Indian,  the,  V,  732,  Stuart,  R.

Friendly  address  to  reasonable  Americans,  I,  730,  Cooper,
Myles.

Friendly  club,  the,  IV.  326.  Miller,  E.

Friendly  society,  the,  I,  730.  Cooper,  S.  F.

Friendly  society  of  St.  Patrick,  the,  IV,  494,  Nesbitt.

Friends,  society  of,  II,  519,  Fox,  G.

Friendly  sons  of  St.  Patrick,  the,  IV,  451,  Moylan.

Friendship,  plunder  of  the  ship,  by  Malays,  V,  518,  Shu-
brick,  I.


FRIENDS


GEAUGA


737


Friends'  Review,  the,  III,  703,  Lewis,  Enoch.
Frigate,  first  American,  I,  257,  Biddle,  N.
Fringe-machine,  a,  IV,  495,  Nesmith,  J.
Fritz,  G.,  Ill,  318,  Hunt,  R.  W.
Frobisher  strait,  II,  553,  Frobisher.
Froissart,  quoted,  V,  643,  Standish.

Frolic,  capture  of  the,  I,  91,  Armstrong,  James  ;  256,  Bid-
die,  James  ;  III,  405,  Jones,  J.
Frontenac,  Count,  IV,  374,  Montour,  C.
Frontignieres,  Baron  de,  V,  419,  Schimmelin.
Front  Royal,  battle  at,  II,  156,  Devin  ;  III,  515,  Kenly.
Frost,  Daniel  M.,  IV,  68.
Frost,  John,  II,  555,  Frost,  G.
Frost,  Nicholas,  II,  555,  Frost,  C.
Fruitlands,  community  at,  I,  40,  Alcott.
Frye,  Sir  Frederick,  II,  245,  Duer,  W.
Fryeburg,  Me..  II,  558,  Frye,  Joseph  ;  poem  descriptive  of,

III,  730,  Lincoln,  E.

Fuca,  Juan  de,  VI,  226,  Velerianos.

Fuchs,  Prof.,  I,  34.

Fuenclara,  Count  de,  VI,  295,  Villasenor.

Fuertes,  Dolores  A.,  IV,  299,  Menken.

Fugitive-slave  cases,  I,  72,  Andrew,  J.  A.\  406  ;  454,  Burke,
S.;  460,  Burns.  Anthony;  Thomas  Sims,  n,  35,  Curtis,
G.  T. ;  V,  183,  Rantoul.

Fugitive-slave  law,  the,  I,  432,  586,  587,  644  ;  II,  421,  Faulk-
ner ;  455  ;  noted  case  under  the,  III,  199,  Higginson,
T.  W. ;  sermon  on,  IV,  25,  Lord,  J.  C. ;  author  of,  243,
Mason,  J.  M. ;  imprisonments  under,  695,  Peck,  H.  E. ;
trials  under,  703,  Peirce,  W.  S.  ;  Daniel  Webster's  at-
titude, VI,  414.

Fulham  library,  I,  650,  Bradford,  W.

Fuller,  Abraham.  Ill,  308,  Hull,  W.

Fuller,  Allen  C,  V,  190,  Rawlins.

Fuller,  Frances  A.  and  Metta  V.,  I,  178,  Barritt ;  VI,  287,
Victor.  M.  V.  and  FA.

Fuller,  Samuel  W.,  V,  413,  Scammon,  J.  Y.

Fuller,  Thomas,  II,  561,  Fuller,  Timothy.

Fuller,  Rev,  Timothy,  II,  561,  Fuller,  T.

Fuller's  Worthies,  quoted,  VI,  572,  Winthrop.

Fulton,  Robert,  II,  471,  472,  Fitch,  John.

Fulton  the  First,  II,  564,  Fulton,  R.

Fulton's  steamboat,  illustration,  II,  583.

Fulton,  Mo.,  engagement  at,  IV,  153,  McNeil.

Funes,  the  historian,  quoted,  II,  699,  Ooyeneche.

Furdustrandir,  VI,  101,  Thorfinn.

Furman,  Rev.  Samuel,  VI,  465,  Whitaker,  M.  S.

Furman  university,  S.  C,  II,  565,  Furman,  R.

Furnaces,  inventions,  I,  88,  Arento  ;  530,  Carpenter,  R.  C. ;
600,  Chilson  ;  II,  317,  Eilers  ;  VI,  302,  Lamson,  D.  L.

Furness,  Annis  L.,  VI,  583,  Wister,  A.  L.

Fur-trade,  the,  I,  112,  Astor;  610.  Chouteau.

Fuses,  improvements  in.  I,  49,  Algzr,  C.

Fuss  and  Feathers,  sobriquet,  V,  442,  Scott,  W.

Futhey,  Henry,  II,  566,  Futhey,  J.  S.

Gabalda,  Bartolome  de,  III,  345,  Infante,  H.

Gadsden  treaty,  the,  II,  352,  Emory,  W.  H.

Gaffney,  Margaret,  III,  115,  Haughery.

Gage,  H.  H.,  II,  568,  Gage,  M.  J.

Gage,  James  L.,  II,  568,  Gage,  F.  D.

Gage,  Viscount,  of  Castle  island,  II,  569,  Gage,  T.

Gager,  Rev.  W.,  I,  14,  Adams,  E.

Gag  resolution,  the,  VI,  196.

Gag-rule,  the,  I,  27.

Gaines,  James,  II,  571,  Gaines,  E.  P.

Gainesborough,  Earl  of.  IV.  465,  Murphy,  B.

Gaines's  Mills,  battle  of,  III,  392,  Jackson,  T.  J.;  669,  718  ;

IV,  82.

Gainesville,  surrender  at,  II,  506,  Forrest,  N.  B.

Galatea,  the,  yacht,  I,  451,  Burgess,  E

Galaxy,  the,  magazine,  I,  613,  Church,  W.  C.

Galbraith,  James,  II,  574,  Galbraith,  A.

Gale,  Leonard  D.,  Ill,  172 ;  IV,  425.

Galena,  111.,  Ill,  520,  Kent,  A.

Gales,  Weston,  II,  575,  Gales,  J

Gales,  W.  W.  S.,  II,  575.  Gales,  J.

Galibis,  the,  HI,  300,  Huet ;  language  of  the,  V,  106,  Pre-

fontaine.
Gallaga.  Ana,  III,  197,  Hidalgo,  M.
Gallaher,  James,  V,  328,  Ross,  F.  A.
Gallatin,  Jean.  II.  577,  Gallatin,  A.
Gallatin- Vaudenet,  Madame,  II,  577.
Gallaudet  home  for  deaf-mutes,  the,  n,  579.
Gallego,  Hernan.  IV,  296,  MendaHa.
Gallego,  Pedro,  IV,  369,  Montezuma.
Gallichwis,  I,  510.  Carnmerhoff.
Gallissoniere,  M.,  II,  267,  Duquesne  de  Menneville.
Galloping  Head,  sobriquet,  III,  151,  Head,  Sir  F.  B.
Gallo  Pitagorico,  El,  pen-name.  IV,  386,  Morales,  J.  B.
Galloway,  Earl  of,  H,  260,  Dunmore  ;  V,  685,  Stewart,

C.  J.
Gallup,  Albert,  VI,  697.  Reed.

Gait,  John,  original  of  a  character  of,  VI,  100,  Thorburn,  G.
Gait,  Ont.,  town  of.  II,  583,  Gait,  J.
Gal  van.  Gen.,  H,  167.

Galvanic  battery,  invention  of  a,  n,  108,  Dawson,  B.  F.
Galvanism,  invention  of  batteries,  III,  81,  Hare,  R.
Galvarino,  cacique,  III,  329,  Hurtado,  G.

VOL.  VI. — 47


Galve,  Count  of,  HI,  690,  Leon,  Alonso  de;  V,  387,  San-
doval Silva.
Galveston,  founder  of,  IV,  295,  Menard,  M.  B. ;  capture  of,

V,  222,  Renshaw.
Galvez,  Gen.,  H,  124,  Degollado  ;  IV,  26,  Lorencez.
Galway,  Viscount,  IV,  355,  Moncktun.
Gama,  Judge,  II,  177,  Diente.
Gambier  seminary,  founded,  I,  585,  Chase,  P.
Gamble,  Agnes  S.,  I,  489.  Cabell,  W.  H.
Gamble,  Elizabeth  W.,  VI,  579,  Wirt,  E.  W.
Gamble,  Maj.  R,  III,  109,  Harvie.
Gamble,  Maj.  W.,  II,  587,  Gamble,  T.
Gambler,  the  reformed,  II,  744.  Green,  J.  H.
Gambrill,  Charles  D.,  V,  241,  Richardson,  H.  H.
Game-cock  brigade,  the,  V,  5,  Pickett,  G.  E.
Game-cock,  the,  sobriquet,  IV,  208.
Gang- wells,  invention  of,  I,  77,  Andrews.
Gannett,  Benjamin,  V,  382,  Sampson,  D.
Garabito,  I,  147,  Balboa.
Garcia,  Albino,  III,  367,  Iturbide.
Garcia  island,  II,  591,  Garcia,  D.
Garcia,  Manuel,  HI, 132, Hayes, C.  ;  pupil  of,  IV,  758,

Phillips.
Garcia,  Maria  and  Paulina,  II,  592,  Garcia,  M.
Garden  City,  L.  I.,  cathedral  at,  illustration,  V,  683.
Garden,  John,  IV,  463,  Murat.
Gardener's  Monthly,  the,  IV,  286,  Meehan.
Gardiner,  Col.  Abraham,  VI,  92,  Thompson,  J.
Gardiner,  David,  VI.  199,  Tyler,  J.  G.
Gardiner,  Deborah,  V,  140.
Gardiner,  Elizabeth,  II,  595.
Gardiner,  Julia,  VI,  199,  Tyler,  J.  G.
Gardiner.  Lydia,  VI,  460.  Whipple,  E.  P.
Gardiner  Mary  L'H.,  HI.  266,  Horsford,  M.  VH.
Gardiner,  Mercy,  I,  352,  Bradley,  J.  P.
Gardiner,  Nathaniel,  VI,  92,  Thompson,  J.
Gardiner,  Phoebe  D.,  Ill,  266,  Horsford,  M.  VH.
Gardiner,  W.  H.,  V,  4,  Pickering,  O.
Gardiner,  Rev.  Dr.,  II,  188,  Doane,  G.  W.
Gardiner's  island,  II,  595  ; manor-house  on,  illustration,

595  ;  pirates  and  smugglers  on,  595  ;  treasure  buried  on,

III,  532,  Kidd.
Gardiner,  Me.,  n,  596,  Gardiner.
Gardner  brothers,  trial  of,  IV,  272,  May,  H.
Gardner  will  case,  the,  II,  385,  Evarts,  W.  M.
Gardwell,  Godek,  pen-name,  HI,  505,  Kellogg,  Edward.
Garfield,  Abram,  II,  599.
Garfield,  Edward,  II,  599.
Garfield,  James  A.,  his  proposed  monument  in  Cleveland,

illustration,  II,  604  ;  his  monument  in  Washington,  602  ;

his  birthplace,  illustration,  599.
Garibaldi,  Guiseppe,  V,  327,  Ross,  A.  M.  ;  proposition  by,

H,  75,  Daniel,  J.  M.
Garibay,  Gen.,  Ill,  748,  Lizana.

Garland  of  Flora,  the,  anonymous  book,  II,  183,  Dix,  D.  L.
Garland  forgery,  the,  I,  268.
Garner  tragedy,  the,  I,  587.
Garnet,  Mr.,  IV,  349,  Mitchill.
Garrett,  Robert,  H,  609,  Garrett,  J.  W.
Garrett,  T.  H.,  Ill,  318,  Hunt,  R.  W.
Garrett  Biblical  institute,  the,  founded,  II,  139,  Dempster,  J.
Garrick,  A.,  I,  131,  Bacon,  Edmund.
Garrison,  Abijah,  II,  610,  Garrison,  W.  L.
Garrison,  Fanny,  VI,  294,  Villard.
Garson,  Gen.,  Ill,  714,  Lima.
Garth,  Charles,  III,  450,  Johnson,  Tliomas.
Garth,  John,  II,  612,  Garth,  G.
Gartner,  Carl,  pupil  of.  VI,  607,  Woodward,  W.  A.
Gartrell,  Lucius  J.,  V,  665,  Stephens,  A.  H.
Garyan-wah-gah,  I,  743,  Cornplanter.
Garza,  Felipe  de  la,  HI,  368.
Gas  analysis,  invention  of  processes  for,  V,  550,  Sloane,

T.  CC.  ;  invention  of  a  consumer,  531,  Silver  ;  for  light-
ing and  extinguishing,  I,  420,  Brush,  C.  F.
Gas-lamp,  regenerative,  invention  of  a,  IV,  55,  Lungren,

Charles  M.
Gas-metre,  invention  of  a  dry.  I,  301,  Bogardus,  J.
Gas-regulator,  inventor  of  a,  V,  602,  Snow,  W.  D.
Gasca,  Pedro  de  la,  III,  214,  Hinojosa.
Gaskell,  Christiana  G..  IV,  716,  Penn,  W.
Gasparin,  Comte  de.  IV,  87,  McClintock,  J.
Gasp*\  naval  engagement  near,  III,  554,  Kirke,  Sir  D.
Gaspee,  destruction  of  the.  I,  396,  Brown,  John  ;.  Ill,  266,

Horsmanden ;  VI,  334,  Wallace,  Sir  J.  ;  347,  Wanton ;

459,  Whipple,  A.
Gaston,  Alexander,  II,  614,  Gaston,  W.
Gaston,  John,  H,  614,  Gaston,  W.
Gates,  Lemuel,  H,  616,  Gates,  W.
Gates,  Sarah,  V,  196,  Read,  Collinson.
Gath,  pen-name,  VI,  148,  Townsend,  G.  A.
Gatien,  Abbe,  II,  661,  Girouard,  J.J.
Gatling  gun,  the,  II,  617.
Gauchos,  the,  I,  107,  Artigas ;  V,  266,  Rivera.
Gaudin,  M.,  IV,  235,  Martin  de  Moyville.
Gauley Bridge,  engagement  at,  VI,  580,  Wise,  H.  Alexander,
Gauss,  Carl  F..  II,  693,  Gould,  B.  A.
Gavett.  Sarah  H.,  II,  646,  Gilbert,  S.  H.
Gaylord,  Glance,  pen-name,  I,  353.  Bradley,  W.  I.
Geauga  seminary,  U,  599,  Garfield.


738


GEBEL


GLACIERS


Gebel  Teir,  anonymous  book,  VI,  178,  Tudor.

Gebhard,  Rev.  J.  G.,  Ill,  160,  Helfenstein.

Geddes,  Capt.  Alexander,  II,  621,  Geddes,  J.  L.

Geffrard,  Gen.  Nicolas,  II,  622,  Geffrard.

Gems,  specialist  on.  III,  578,  Kunz.

Genealogy,  New  England,  V,  406,  Savage,  James  ;  tablets
for  records,  VI,  487,  Whitmore,

General,  grade  of,  created  and  first  conferred,  II,  717.  718.

General  Armstrong,  the,  privateer,  fight  of,  V,  215-216.

General  Monk,  the,  capture  of,  1, 172,  Barney.

General  Pattison,  capture  of  the,  IV,  550,  O'Brien,  Jere.

General  theological  seminary,  the,  II,  188,  Doane,  G.  W. ;
gifts  to,  IV,  378,  Moore,  C.  C;  V,  15,  Pierrepont.  W.  C;
28,  Pintard  ;  475,  Seymour,  G.  F. ;  removal  of,  VI,  187,
Turner,  S.  H.\  gifts  to,  688,  Hoffman  ;  699,  Sherred  ;  il-
lustration, 699.

General  welfare  rule,  the,  I,  499.

Genesee  valley,  purchase  of  land  in,  n,  688,  Gorham,  N. ;

V,  293,  Rocliesier.

Geneseo,  N.  Y.,  gifts  to,  VI,  312,  Wadsworth,  J.  and  J.  S.

Genesta,  the,  yacht,  I,  451,  Burgess,  E.

Genet,  Citizen,  I,  24.

Genet,  Edmond,  III,  420.

Geneva,  lyceum  at,  V,  641,  Squier,  M.  P.

Geneva  award,  the,  I,  559,  Cattell.

Genevese  traveller,  the.  pen-name,  n,  105,  Davis,  M.  L.

Genin,  Thomas  H.,  II,  624,  Genin.

Genius  of  Universal  Emancipation,  the,  magazine,  IV,  54,
Lundi/.  B. ;  H,  610,  Garrison,  W.  L.

Genlis,  Madame  de,  IV,  589,  Orleans,  L.  P.

Genoa,  capture  of,  n,  338,  Elphinstone.

Gentleman  George,  sobriquet,  I,  175,  Barrett,  G.  H.

Gentleman's  Magazine,  the,  I.  473,  Burton  ;  II,  702,  Gra-
ham, G.  R.',  motto  on,  III,  417.

Gentry,  Gen.  Richard,  V.  313,  Rollins,  J.  S.

Geoffroy,  development  theory  of,  I,  35.

Geodesic  conference,  II,  48,  Cutts,  R.  D.

Geography,  III,  17,  Guyot ;  first  textbook  of,  in  America,
IV,  424,  Morse,  J.;  system  of,  invented,  498,  Neuville,  P.
11. ;  method  of  teaching,  579,  Olney.

Geology/surveys,  discoveries,  and  researches,  I,  109,  Ash-
burner;  702,  Comstock.  T.  B.;  II,  109,  Datcson,  J.  W.;
116,  Deane,  J.;  276,  Dutton,  C.  E.\  280,  Dwight,  W.  B.;
351,  Emmons,  E.;  424,  Featherstonehaugh  ;  512,  Fos-
ter, John  Wells;  538,  Frazer,  P.;  567,  Gabb  ;  645,  Gil-
bert, G.  K;  HI,  26,  Hague,  A.;  39,  Hall,  C.  W.\  41,  Hall,
James;  106,  Hartt,  C.  F.;  119,  Hawkins,  B.  W.;  131,
Hayden,  F.  V.;  192,  Hewitt,  A.  S.;  217,  Hitchcock,  C.  H;
216,  Hitchcock,  E.;  319.  Hunt,  T.  S.;  359,  Irving,  R.  D.;
335,  Jackson,  C.  T;  486,  Julien,  A.  A.;  545,  King,  C;
695,  Lesley  ;  705,  Lewis,  H.  C;  IV,  7,  Logan,  Sir  W.  E.;
revolution  in  the  science  of,  58,  Lyell,  Sir  C;  researches
in,  117,  McGee,  W.  J.;  147,  Maclure  ;  202,  Marcou  ;  257,
Mather,  W.  W. ;  fossils  discovered,  453,  Mudge  ;  surveys
and  collections.  501,  Newberry,  J.  S.;  560,  Winchell  ;  577,
Olmsted,  D.;  616,  Owen.  D.  D.  and  R.;  724,  Percival,  J.
G. ;  V.  95,  Powell,  J.  W. ;  1&5,  Pumpelly ;  205,  Redfield  ;
306-307,  Rogers,  W.  B.  and  H.  D. ;  369-370,  Sainte-Claire  ;
480,  Shaler,  N.  S.;  528 ;  VI,  48,  Taylor,  R.  C;  453,  Wheel-
er, G.  M.;  469,  Wliite,  C.  A.;  discoveries  In,  471,  White,
I.  C. ;  surveys,  489,  Whitney,  J.  D. ;  496,  Whittlesey,  C. ;
616,  Worthen.

Geometrical  fan,  the,  VT,  15,  Sylvester,  J.  J.

George  II.,  I,  591,  592,  Chatham.

George  III.,  I,  19,  20 ;  poems  on  the  accession  of,  335,  Bow-
doin  ;  on  Franklin,  II,  529  ;  in,  75  ;  address  to,  174  ;  V,
198,  Read,  G.;  descendant  of,  III,  281,  Howe,  W.;  statue
of,  on  Bowling  Green,  VT,  587,  Wolcott,  O.

George  Law,  the,  III,  184,  Herndon,  W.  L.

Georgetown,  Catholic  institutions  in,  III,  597,  Lalor ;  IV,
485,  Neale,  L.

Georgetown,  S.  C,  attack  upon,  IV,  208,  209.

Georgetown  college,  I,  539,  Carroll,  J. ;  IV,  485,  Neale,  L.

George  Washington,  sobriquet,  VI,  79,  Thomas,  G.  H.

Georgia,  projected  colony  in,  IV,  372,  Montgomery,  R.;
Moravian  settlement  in,  489,  Neisser ;  colonization  of,
565,  Oglethorpe  ;  colony  of  Highlanders  in,  124,  Mcintosh,
L. ;  protest  against  the  introduction  of  slaves  in,  124 :  mis-
sionary work  in.  VI,  437^138,  Wesley  ;  events  of  the  Revo-
lution in,  III,  288,  Howley,  R.;  VI,  624.  Wright,  Sir  J.;
boundary  of,  III,  274,  Houston,  J. :  275  ;  imprisonment  of
Cherokee  missionaries,  VI,  350,  Ward,  J.  E. ;  cession  of
Creek  lands  in,  163,  Troup,  G.  M. ;  129,  To-mo-chi-chi  ;
nullification  first  attempted  in,  in,  381 ;  platform  of
1850,  the,  V,  664  ;  railroad  war  in,  VI,  133,  Toombs ;
Sherman's  march  through,  III.  723  ;  capture  of  cities  in,

VI,  552,  Wilson,  J.  H;  reconstruction  in.  I,  447,  Bullock,
R.  B. ;  debt  of,  IV,  900,  McDonald,  C.  J. ;  R.  C.  institu-
tions in,  VI,  281,  Verot.

Georgia  university,  gift  to,  II.  657,  Gilmer,  G.  R. ;  IV,  324,
Milledge,  J. ;  gift  to,  VI,  65,  Terrell.

Georgiana,  the,  destroyed,  II,  105,  Davis,  J.  L.

Gerard,  M..  Ill,  270,  Houdon.

Gerhardt,  Karl,  statue  by,  illustration,  III,  31.

Gerhardt,  Paul,  statue  by,  illustration,  VI,  302.

Gerland,  Prof.,  I.  378,  Brinton.

Germain,  Lord  George,  II,  301,  Eden,  Sir  R. ;  paper  at-
tributed to,  III,  280,  Howe,  R.

Germanicus,  pen-name,  V,  177,  Randolph,  E.


German  Methodist  churches,  IV,  481,  Nast,  W.

German  Reformed  churches,  the — schools  among,  V,  420,
Schlatter.

Germantown,  Pa.,  settlement  of — its  seal,  IV,  668,  Pas-
tortus ;  Chew's  house  at,  illustration,  I,  602  ;  battle  of,
601-602  ;  Sower  house  at,  illustration,  V,  616  ;  academy
of,  617,  Sower,  C;  battle  of.  II,  751 ;  III,  280,  Howe.  W.;
258,  Hopkins,  S. ;  incident  of,  566  ;  IV,  320,  Mifflin  ;  V,
663,  Stephen,  A.;  VI,  398,  Wayne.

Germany,  rebellion  of  1848  in,  III,  156,  Hecker,  F.  K.  F.;
V,  428,  Schurz  ;  VI,  538,  Willich  ;  exclusion  of  American
pork  from,  V,  396,  Sargent,  A.  A.

Gerome,  Jean  Louis,  pupils  of,  I,  373,  Bridgman  ;  759,  Cox,
K;  H,  288,  Eakins  ;  296,  Eaton,  Wyatt ;  IV,  38.  Low,  W.
H;  380,  Moore,  H  H;  520,  Memei/er,  J.  H;  V,  5.  Pick-
nell;  VI,  71,  Thayer,  A.  H.;  306,  Volk,  S.  A.  D.;  420,
Weeks,  E.  L.;  422,  Weir,  J.  A.;  542,  Wilmarth.

Geronimo,  Fray,  III,  300,  Huelva.

Gerritz,  Hessel,  VI,  283,  Verschoor.

Gerry,  E.,  monument  to,  illustration,  II,  632.

Gerry,  Thomas.  II,  630,  Gerry,  E.

Gerrymander,  the,  II,  631.

Gerrymandering,  in  Tennessee,  III,  437 ;  in  Virginia,  IV,
168.

Gesner,  Henry,  II,  632,  Gesner.

Gethsemane,  Ky.,  II,  476,  Flaget.

Gettysburg,  battle  of,  I,  443,  Buford,  J.;  II,  210,  Double-
day,  A.;  334,  Ellis,  T.  G.;  401,  Fa irchild,  L.;  657.  (lil-
mor ;  749,  Greene,  G.  S.;  Ill,  73,  672  ;  IV,  16,  Longstreet,
J.;  119,  McGilvery;  280-281,  Meade,  G.  G.;  defence  of
Little  Round  Top,  591,  ORorke  ;  V,  228,  Reynolds,  J.  F.;
523,  Sickles;  647,  Stannard;  727,  Stuart,  J.  E.  B.;  VI,
299,  Vincent,  S.;  313,  Wadsworth,  J.  S.;  Weed's  hill,  419,
Weed,  S.  H.;  362.  Warren,  G.  K.;  statue  at,  illustration,
362  ;  survey  of  the  field  of,  I,.589,  Chase,  W.  H. ;  Lincoln's
speech  at  the  dedication  of  the  cemetery  at,  III,  722.

Gettysburg,  hero  of,  I,  461,  Burns,  J.

Gettysburg  theological  seminary,  III,  579,  Kurtz,  B. ;  gift
to,  V,  514,  Shober.

Gevneaux,  Francis,  II,  589,  Gano,  J.

Ghent,  treaty  of,  I,  197,  Bayard,  J.  A. :  641 ;  II,  328,  Elli-
cott,  A.

Ghirardi,  Gen.,  IV,  290,  Mejia.

Gholson,  Maj.  W.,  II,  634,  Gholson,  T.  S.

Gholson,  Thomas,  II,  634,  Gholson,  W.  Y.

Ghost,  the,  sobriquet,  IH,  300,  Huepon.

Ghuznee,  in  Cabool,  capture  of,  III,  496,  Keane,  J.

Gibbes,  Robert,  II,  634,  Gibbes,  W.  H.

Gibbes,  W.,  II,  634,  Gibbes,  W.  H.

Gibbon,  Lardner,  HI,  184,  Herndon,  W.  L.

Gibbons,  John,  n,  635,  Gibbons,  James

Gibbons,  Thomas,  V,  675,  Stevens,  J.  A.

Gibbons,  William,  VI,  631,  Wyllys.

Gibraltar,  I,  19  ;  siege  of.  614,  Churruca  ;  II,  532.

Gibson,  Elizabeth  E.,  II,  381,  Evans,  E.  P.

Gibson,  John,  II,  5,  Crawford,  T.

Gibson,  John.  HI,  268,  Hosmer,  H.

Gibson,  Miss,  II,  80,  Dauvray.

Gibson,  Tobias,  II,  640,  Gibson,  R.  L.

Gibson's  Lambs,  II,  640,  Gibson,  G.

Giddings,  Almena  D.,  I,  152,  Ballou,  M.

Gift,  the,  annual,  IU,  696,  Lesley.  E.

Gilbert,  Sir  Humphrey,  III,  114,  Hatheway,  S.  G.

Gilbert,  John,  II,  647,  Gilbert,  T.

Gilbert,  Joseph,  II,  644,  Gilbert,  A.

Gilbert,  Lucia  I.,  V,  348,  Runkle,  L.  I.

Gilbert,  Maria  D.  P.,  IV,  368,  Montez.

Gilbert,  Otto,  V,  162.

Gilbert,  Prudence,  IV,  403,  Morgan,  M.

Gil  Bias,  authorship  of.  V,  605,  Solis.

Gilder,  John,  n,  648,  Gilder,  W.  H.

Giles,  Deacon,  I,  597,  Cheever,  G.  B.

Gill,  John,  II,  302.  Edes,  B.

Gillespie,  Maria,  I,  275,  Blaine.

Gillette,  Rev.  Daniel  H.,  II,  652.  Gillette,  A.  D.

Gilliland.  William,  VI.  391,  Watson,  W.  C.

Gilman,  Edward,  II,  655,  Gilman,  A.

Gilman,  Joseph,  II,  656,  Gilman,  N.

Gilman,  Mary,  I,  679,  Cogsu-ell,  J.  G.

Gilman,  Samuel,  VI,  63.  Tenney,  T.

Gilman.  Tristram,  I,  398,  Broum,  F.

Gilmer.  Mildred,  VI.  5r8,  Wirt.

Gilmer,  Mr.,  murder  of,  I,  607,  Chisolm.

Gilpin,  Joseph,  II,  659,  Gilpin,  T.

Gimbrede,  Thomas,  V,  130,  Prud'homme.

Ginesta,  M.,  II.  673,  Gdmez.

Ginseng.  Ill,  590,  Lafitau  ;  preparation  of,  I,  403,  Brown,
Samuel.

Ginx's  Baby,  anonymous  book,  in,  426,  Jenkins,  E.

Gipps,  Sir  George,  H,  690,  Gosford.

Girard  college,  I.  127,  Bache,  A.  D.;  founded,  II,  661,  Gi-
rard,  S.;  HI,  710.

Girdlestone,  Dr.  T.,  HI,  661,  Lee,  Charles.

Girl  of  the  Period,  the,  anonymous  publication,  III,  734.
Linton,  E.  L.

Girls,  higher  education  of,  II,  281,  Dwight,  Timothy.

Giro,  Juan  Francisco,  V,  266,  Rivera.

Giron,  Gilbert,  I,  490.  Cabezas.

Glaciers,  studies  of,  I,  35.


GLADSTONE


GRAY


739


Gladstone,  "VV.  E.,  Irish  policy  of,  in,  615,  Lansdowne.

Gladstone,  Miss,  V,  236,  Rice,  T.  D.

Glasgow,  James,  trial  of.  III,  148,  Haywood,  J.

Glasgow,  the,  I,  256,  Biddle,  N.

Glass,  machine  for  pressing,  1, 301,  Bogardus,  J. ;  painting,

III,  586,  La  Farge.
Glass,  Rev.  John,  V,  386,  Sandeman.
Glastonbury,  settlement  of,  VI.  23,  Talcott,  S.
Glastonbury  sisters,  the,  V,  578,  Smith,  J.  E.
Gleig,  Bishop,  II,  664,  Gleig,  E.  R.
Glen,  John  Sanders,  III,  339,  Kerville.
Glencairn,  Earl  of,  V,  271,  Roberdeau,  D.
Glenn,  John,  VI,  338,  Wallis,  S.  T.
Gleyre,  C.  G.,  pupils  of,  VI,  464,  Whistler,  J.  A.  M.:  87,

Thompson,  A.  W.\  II,  237,  Dubois  ;  467,  Fisher,  W.  M.;

HI,  562,  Knight,  D.  R.
Globe,  an  ancient,  I,  222.  Behaim.

Globe,  invention  of  a  terrestrial  magnetic,  IV,  723,  Perce.
Gloggner,  Carl,  II,  338,  Elson.
Gloria  Dei  church,  illustration,  VI,  618.
Gloucester  Point,  engagement  at,  III.  587.
Gloucester,  Universalism  in,  IV,  469,  Murray,  J.
Glover,  Nelson,  II,  657,  Gilman.  C.  H.
Glover,  Rev.  Joseph,  U,  113,  Daye.

Gloversville,  N.  Y.,  gift  to  librarv  of,  IV,  664,  Parsons,  L.
Glumley,  Col.,  I,  347,  Braddock.
Glyndon,  Howard,  pen-name,  V,  447,  Searing.
Gnadenhtttten, founded, IV, 126, Mack ; massacre of

Christian  Indians  at,  V,  455,  Seidel ;  466,  Senseman,  J.
Gnyandipaka,  the,  Gujurati  magazine,  IV,  379,  Moore,  D.
Goddard,  D.  C,  II,  54,  Dahlgren,  M.  V.
Goddard,  Henry  P.,  IV,  233,  Martin,  L.
Godey's  Lady's  Book,  II,  668,  Godey,  L.  A.;  Ill,  35,  Hale,

Sara  J.
Godfrey,  George  F.,  VI,  112,  Ticknor,  W.  D.
Godinez,  IV,  181,  Maldonado.
Godkin,  James,  n,  670.  Godkin,  E.  L.
Godwin,  Daniel,  VI,  669,  Baker,  P.  C.
Godwin,  William,  I,  7*3,  Cooper,  T.  A.:  Ill,  345,  Imlay.
Godyn,  Samuel,  I,  295,  Blommaert ;  III,  269,  Hossei ;  U,

157,  De  Vries.
Goes,  Damian  de,  II.  671,  Goes.
Goethe,  J.  W.  von,  II,  344.
Goff,  Edmund,  VI,  164,  Trowbridge,  E.
Goffe,  Dr.,  U,  552,  Frink.
Goffe,  Rev.  Stephen,  II,  672,  Goffe,  W.
Goffe,  William,  II,  a3,  Davenport,  J.
Goggin,  W.  L.,  II,  657,  Gilmer,  T.  W.
Going,  Rev.  Jonathan,  IV,  696,  Peck,  J.  M.
Gold,  discovery  of,  in  California,  HI,  351,  Ingulf:  TV,  221,

Marshall,  J.  W.;  first,  discovered  in  U.  S.,  V,  208,  Reed,

John. See  California.
Gold  and  silver,  treatment  of  ores,  III,  205,  Hill,  N.  P.
Golden  Rule,  wreck  of  the  steamer,  V,  105,  Preble.  G.  H.
Gold-plating,  invention  for,  I,  149,  Baldwin,  M.  W.
Goldschmidt,  Otto,  III,  731,  Lind.
Goldsmith  of  America,  the,  VI,  49,  Taylor,  B.  F.
Goliad,  capture  of,  by  Mexicans,  IU,  274,  Houston,  S.  ;

massacre  at,  V,  393,  Santa-Anna.
Golves,  Marquis  of,  IV,  618,  Pacheca.
Gomara,  Francisco,  the  historian,  V,  35,  Pizarro  ;  H,  427-

428,  Felipe  ;  chronicle  of,  I,  554,  Castillo.
GomberviUe,  I,  10,  Acuna,  C.  de  ;  HI,  344,  Imhoffer.
G6mez,  J.  P.,  II,  674,  Gomez,  A.  C.
Gonor,  Father,  VI,  277,  Verandrye.
Gonzaga,  Vespasiano  de,  IU,  186,  Herrera  y  Tordesillas.
Gonzales  college,  Tex.,  HI,  210,  Hilly er,  J.  F.
Gooch,  Ann,  I,  241.

Goodell,  William,  V,  683,  Stewart,  Alvan.
Good  gray  poet,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  486,  Whitman.
Goodhue,  Dr.  Josiah,  V,  581,  Smith,  Nathan.
Goodman,  Charles,  V,  17,  Piggot.
Goodrich,  Abigail,  VI,  495,  Whittlesey,  A.  G.
Goodwin,  Isaac,  VI,  668,  Austin.
Goodwin,  John,  IV,  255.
Goodwin,  Ozias,  V,  32.  Pitkin,  W.
Goodwin,  P.  A.,  HI,  3*3.
Goodyear,  Amasa,  II,  683,  Goodyear,  C.
Gookin,  Sir  Vincent,  II,  684,  Gookin,  C.
Goold,  William,  VI,  611,  Woolson,  A.  L.  G.
Goose,  Mother,  H,  479,  Fleet,  T.
Gordon,  Charles  G.,  VI,  349,  Ward,  F.  T.
Gordon,  Duchess  of,  H,  707,  Grant,  Anne  ;  IV,  415,  Morris,

Staats  Long.
Gordon,  Duke  of,  V,  246.  Richmond,  Duke  of.
Gordon,  Lord  George,  III,  631,  Laurens,  H.
Gordon,  John,  II,  685,  Gordon,  C.

Gordon,  John  Watson,  U,  707,  Grant,  Anne  ;  VI,  551,  Wil-
son, W.
Gordon,  Mary  Duff,  pseudonym,  H,  247,  Duffee.
Gordon,  Nathaniel,  V,  561,  Smith,  E.  D.
Gordon,  Thomas  Knox,  II,  230,  Drayton,  W.  H.
Gore,  Anne  E.,  VI,  486,  Whitmarsh.
Gore,  Catherine  F„  VI,  436,  Went  worth,  C.  M.
Gore,  Col.  C.  S.,  IV,  493,  Nelson,  W.
Gore,  John,  II,  687,  Gore,  C.
Gorgeana,  town  of,  n,  688.  Gorges,  T.
Gorges,  Lord  Edward,  II,  688,  Gorges.
Gorges,  Robert,  William,  Thomas,  and  John,  n,  688,  Gorges.


Gorges,  Robert,  VI.  444.  Weston.

Gorilla,  the,  named,  VI,  632  ;  first  specimen  of  the,  555,

Wilson,  J.  Leighton.
Gorton,  Samuel,  VT,  208,  XJncas.
Goshen,  O.,  founded,  VI,  658,  Zeisberger.
Goshen  Place,  N.  C,  estate  of,  IV,  739,  Person.
Goss,  Prothesia  S.,  n,  339,  Elton.

Gottschalk,  Blanche  and  Clara,  IV,  745,  Peterson,  H.  M.  R.
Gouge,  William,  H,  83,  Davenport.  J.
Gough,  J.  B.,  poem  recited  by,  I,  98,  Arrington.
Gough,  Lord,  IV,  448,  Mountain,  A.  S.  H.
Gould,  Daniel,  IV,  417,  Morris,  R.
Gould,  Rev.  Edwin,  HI,  647,  Leach,  W.  T.
Gould,  George  A.,  n,  337,  Ellsworth,  H.  W.
Gould,  Robert,  V,  486,  Shaw,  S.
Gould  memorial  society,  the,  H,  203,  Doremus,  S.  P.
Gouldsborough,  Me.,  founded,  V,  486,  Shaw,  S.
Gouverneur,  Samuel  L.,  IV,  361.
Gove,  Mary  S.,  TV,  513,  Nichols,  M.  S.  G.
Government  publications,  U.  S..  V.  67,  Poore.
Governor's  Letters,  the,  III,  446,  Johnson,  O.  F.
Gowan,  Capt.  J.  H,  II,  698,  Gowan,  O.  R.
Gowrie  conspiracy,  the.  IV,  3,  Logan,  J.
Gracchus,  pen-name.  VI,  91,  Thompson,  John.
Grace  church,  New  York,  gifts  to,  VI,  590,  Wolfe.
Gracie,  W.,  IU,  544,  King,  J.  G.
Gracios  &  Dios,  revolt  against  the  Spaniards  in,  HI,  688,

Lempira.
Graciosa  island,  gift  of,  TV,  448,  Moura.
Graefe,  Karl  F.  von,  V.  224,  Reuling.
Graff,  Andre,  IV,  304.  Merian.
Graff,  Jeanne  and  Dorothee,  rv,  304,  Merian.
Grafton,  Joseph,  II,  700,  Grafton,  E.  C.
Graham  diet,  the,  I,  218.  Beecher,  C.  E.
Graham,  James,  IV,  397,  Morgan,  D.
Graham,  Dr.  John,  II,  702,  Graham,  I.
Graham,  Robert,  IH,  613,  Lanigan.
Graham,  Rev.  William,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archibald.
Graham,  William,  II,  703,  Graham.  H.  H.
Graham's  Magazine,  II,  702,  Graham,  G.  R.;  Til,  4,  Gris~

wold,  R.  W. ;  V,  45.
Grahame,  Nellie,  pen-name,  II,  261.  Dunning,  A.  K.
Grain-dryer,  invention  of,  V,  531,  Silver.
Gram,  Hans,  HI,  233,  Holden,  O.

Grammagraph,  the,  inventor  of,  rV,  590,  Ormsby.  W.  L.
Granada,  island  of,  H,  263,  Duparquet ;  HI,  270,  Houdetot.
Granada,  Nicaragua,  siege  of,  II,  378,  Estrada  ;  1, 568,  Cha-

morro.
Granada,  Salvador,  VI,  276,  Venegas,  M.
Grand  Commons  rebellion,  the,  HI,  540,  King,  J.  G.
Grand  Coteau,  battle  of,  VI,  371,  Washburn,  C.  C.
Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  II,  712.
Grand  island,  N.  Y.,  project  for  making  a  refuge  for  Jews,

IV,  526,  Noah.
Grand  Junction,  II,  711.
Grand  Ligne  mission,  II,  202,  Doremus.
Grandmaison,  Don  Pedro  de,  II,  670,  Godin,  I.
Grand  Order  of  the  Iroquois,  the,  rv,  403,  Morgan,  L.  H.
Grand  Terre,  island  of,  establishment  of  buccaneers  on,

in,  591,  Lafitte.
Granger,  Gehazi,  II,  213.  Douglas,  S.  A.
Granger  laws,  repeal  of,  in  Iowa,  VI,  668,  Aldrich.
Grange-Trianon.  Mdlle  de  la,  II,  554.
Granier,  Juan,  II,  114,  Daza.

Granite  State,  the,  name  first  applied,  I,  535,  Carrigain.
Grannis,  John,  I,  88,  Arey.
Grant,  Anne,  original  of  her  "American  Lady,"  IH,  453,

Johnson,  Sir  J.
Grant,  Cuthbert,  V.  461,  Semple,  R.
Grant,  Dr.  James,  II,  405,  Fannin  ;  708,  Grant,  J.  A.
Grant,  James,  V,  59,  Pollard,  H.  R.
Grant,  Rev.  James,  II,  707,  Grant,  Anne.
Grant,  Jesse  R.,  II,  709.
Grant,  John  Peter,  n,  707,  Grant,  Anne.
Grant,  Mary  F.,  I.  767,  Cramer,  M.  J.
Grant,  Matthew,  II,  709.
Grant,  Mrs.,  of  Carron,  n,  707,  Grant,  Anne.
Grant,  Simpson,  II,  710.

Grant,  Sir  Francis,  portrait  by.  Ill,  689,  Lenox,  J.
Grant,  U.  S.,  his  birthplace,  illustration.  U,  709  ;  scene  of

his  death,  721 ;  medal  presented  to,  720  ;  McLean  house,

scene  of  Lee's  surrender,  716;  a  favorite  poem  of,  UI

228,  Hoffman,  C.  F. ;  sale  of  his  memoirs,  H,  724.
Grant  and  Ward,  firm  of,  H,  724.
Grant,  equestrian  statue  of,  illustration,  H,  723,  724.
Grant  fund,  the,  m,  290,  Hoyt,  O.
Grantley,  Lord,  IV,  536,  Norton,  C.
Granville  seminary,  founder  of,  II.  548,  French,  M.
Grassmann,  Dr.,  II,  639.  Gibbs.  J.  W.
Grass-scythe,  invention  of  a,  III,  425,  Jenckes,  J.
Gratiot,  fort  and  villages,  II,  727.  Gratiot.
Graver,  double,  invention  of  a,  V,  696,  Stockton,  F.  R.
Gravier,  John,  HI,  746.
Gray,  Ann  A.,  I,  522,  Carter.
Gray,  Barry  .pseudonym,  I,  676,  Coffin,  R.  B.
Gray,  Sir  C.  E.,  II,  690,  Gosford.
Gray,  Dr.  Francis  C,  quoted,  VI,  353,  Ward,  N.
Gray,  Harrison,  IV,  607,  Otis,  S.  A.
Gray,  John  E.,  H,  241,  Du  Chaillu,


740


GRAY


GUERRA


Gray,  William,  II,  732,  Gray,  F.  C.

Grayson,  E.,  pen-name,  I,  271.  Bixby,  J.  M.

Grayson,  Eldred,  pen-name,  III,  81,  Hare,  R.

Great  American  doctor,  the,  sobriquet,  V,  247,  Ricord,  P.

Great  American  traveller,  the,  V,  101,  Pratt,  C.

Great  Bethel,  battle  of,  VI,  577,  Winthrop,  T.

Great  Bridge.  Va..  battle  of,  II,  260.  Dunmore ;  TV,  138,
McLane  ;  222,  282,  Meade,  R.  K. ;  VI,  602,  Woodford,  W.

Great  Commoner,  the.  I,  591.  Chatliam  ;  title  reapplied,  V,
677,  Stevens,  T.

Great  Crooked  River  state,  the.  III,  375.

Great  Eastern,  the,  illustration,  II,  449  ;  repair  of,  V,  223,
Renieick,  E.  S.

Great  Jesuit  of  the  West,  the,  V,  6,  Picquet.

Great  Kanawha,  Indian  fight  on  the.  IV,  5,  Logan,  John.

Great  Meadows,  battle  at.  III.  487,  Jumonville  ;  VI,  374.

Great  Mohawk,  the.  III,  577,  Kryn.

Great  Northwest,  the  balloon,  III,  546,  King,  S.  A.

Great  Objector,  the,  sobriquet,  III,  239.  Holman,  W.  S.

Great  Pacificator,  the,  I,  671,  Cochrane,  C.  B.

Great  petition,  the,  V,  659.  Steel.

Great  White  Arrow,  II,  481,  Fletcher,  B.

Greece,  war  for  independence  in;  III,  283,  Howe,  S.  G. ;  frig-
ates built  for,  V,  451,  Sedgwick,  H.  D.;  revolution  in,
VI,  408  ;  mission  to.  Ill,  204,  Hill,  F.  M.\  crisis  in  (1878),
V,  199,  Read,  J.  M.;  religious  intolerance  in,  III,  541,
King,  J.

Greek  pirates.  II,  673,  Goldsborough,  L.  M.  and  /.  R.

Greek  play,  first  production  of  a,  in  U.  S.,  V,  248,  Riddle,  G.

Greek  relief  mission,  II,  202,  Doremus.

Greek  slave,  the,  V,  97,  Powers,  H.

Greeks,  colony  of,  VI,  184,  Turnbull,  R.  J.

Greeks,  mission  to  the,  III,  492,  Kalojwthakes.

Greeley,  Col.,  II,  738.

Greeley,  Esther,  I,  Cleveland,  J.  F.

Greeley,  Horace,  his  birthplace,  illustration,  II,  734:  quoted,
II,  193,  Dodge,  A.  C. ;  lyric  attributed  to,  III,  53,  Halpine.

Greeley,  Zaccheus,  II,  734.

Green,  Annie  D.,  V,  282,  Robinson,  A.  D.

Green,  Ashbel,  III,  401,  Janeway,  J.  J.

Green,  Benjamin.  Ill,  561,  Kneeland,  S.

Green,  Charles,  IV,  338,  Minturn.

Green,  Edmund  B..  II.  469.  Fiske,  John.

Green,  James  S.,  IV,  327,  Miller,  E.  S.

Green,  Roger,  II.  234,  Drummond,  W.

Green,  Samuel,  II,  113,  Daye.

Green,  Thomas.  VI,  390,  Watson,  Ebenezer.

Greenback,  draft  of  the  first,  IV,  24,  Lord,  E.

Greenback  theory,  a,  I,  277.

Greenbacks,  ink  used  for,  in,  319.  Hunt,  T.  S.

Green  bay,  S.  A.,  HI,  371,  Iwert.

Greene,  Albert  G,  II,  430.  Fenner,  C.  G.

Greene,  Anne  Terry,  IV,  760.

Greene,  C.  G.,  II,  748,  Greene,  F.  H.

Greene,  Franklin  L.,  IV,  145,  McLean.  S.  P.

Greene,  John.  H,  749,  Greene,  G.  S.

Greene,  Miss  L.  F.,  HI,  684,  Leland.

Greene,  Nathanael,  V,  660.  Steele,  John.

Greene,  Mrs.  Nathanael,  VI,  488,  Whitney,  E.

Greene,  Perry,  H,  753,  Greene,  A.

Greene,  Richard,  VI,  444,  Weston.

Greenfield,  La.,  battle  at,  III,  293,  Hubbard,  L.  F.

Greenfield,  gifts  to  library  of,  VI,  372,  Washburn,  W.  B.

Greenharbor.  Mass. See  Marshfield.

Greenland,  discovery  of,  VI,  659,  Zeno  ;  H,  363,  Eric  ;  colo-
nization, Eric  the  Red  ;  early  voyage  to,  IU,  297  ;  dis-
covery of  mountains  in,  IV,  684,  Payer  ;  new  coast  added
to,  III,  752.  Lockwood,  J.  B.

Greenland,  the  apostle  of.  II,  314,  Egede.

Greenleaf,  Edward,  n,  756,  Greenleaf,  M.

Greenleaf.  William,  VI,  417,  Webster,  N.

Greenly,  Elizabeth,  I,  677,  Coffin,  I.

Green  mountain  boys,  I,  51,  Allen,  Ethan;  146,  Baker,  Re-
member ;  II,  235.  Duane.

Green  Mountain  Valley,  capture  of  the  ship,  IV,  407,  Mor-
rell,  T.

Greensboro  college,  n,  123.  Deems.

Green  Spring,  Va..  engagement  at,  III,  588  ;  VI,  399.

Greenway,  Anne,  V,  13,  Pierce,  J.

Greenway  court,  view  of,  II,  402.

Greenwich,  meridian  of,  I,  103.

Greenwich.  Conn.,  Putnam's  escape  at.  V,  141.

Greenwood,  Dr.,  IH,  131,  Hayden,  H.  H.

Greenwood,  Grace,  pen-name,  HI,  735,  Lippincott,  S.  J.

Greenwood,  Rev.  F.  W.  P..  II,  540,  Freeman,  James.

Greenwood  cemetery,  II,  216,  217,  Douglass,  D.  B. ;  V,  15,
Pierrepont,  H.  E.

Gregoire,  the  Abb6, 1,  14,  Adams.  Hannah.

Gregoire,  Madame,  I,  493.  Cadillac.

Grenada,  Mex.,  burned.  VI.  332,  Walker.  W.

Grenada,  purchase  of  the  island  of,  II,  275,  Dutertre.

Grenville.  Hester,  I.  591.  Chatham.

Greville,  Charles,  quoted,  V,  94,  Powel,  J.  H.

Grey,  Lieut.,  IV.  208.

Greyhound,  cruise  of  the,  H,  414.

Grevtown,  destruction  of,  1, 322,  Borland  ;  HI,  237,  Hollins  ;
(1854),  V.  1,  Pickering.  C.  W.;  9.

Griffin,  Eliza,  III.  454,  Johnston.  A.  S.

Griffin,  the,  La  Salle's  vessel,  IH,  622.


Griffith,  Arabella,  1, 166,  Barloui,  F.  C.

Griffith,  John  Y..  II,  424.  Jeffrey.

Griffiths.  John.  II.  765,  Griffiths.  J.  W.

Grillo,  Marquis  del,  V.  261.  Ristori.

Grimes,  W.,  II,  767,  Grimes,  B.

Grimwood,  Newton  S.,  n,  199,  Donaldson.  W.  H.

Gringo,  Harry,  pen-name,  VI,  580,  Wise,  H.  A.

Grinnell,  la.,  Ill,  2,  Grinnell,  J.  B.

Grinnell,  Joseph,  VI,  540.

Grinnell  Land,  m,  1,  Grinnell.  H.\  492,  Kane,  E.  K.

Grisi,  Signora,  IV,  207.  Mario.

Griswold,  Eugene  S.,  Ill,  3,  Griswold,  H.  T.

Griswold,  Ezra,  HI.  3,  Griswold,  C.  C.

Griswold,  George,  VI,  253,  Van  Rensselaer,  M.  G.

Griswold,  Phoebe,  IV,  662,  Parsons,  J.

Griswold,  Sarah  E.,  IV,  427.

Griswold  college,  gift  to,  VI.  590.  Wolfe.

Grito  de  Dolores,  the,  III,  197,  Hidalgo,  M.

Grog,  origin  of  the  word,  VI.  280,  Vernon,  E.

Grolier  club,  the,  IH,  226,  Hoe,  R.

Gronovius,  I,  645,  Clayton,  J.

Gronow.  Owen.  IV,  613,  Owen.  G.

Grosse-He,  -Canada,  n,  434,  Ferland.

Grosvenor,  Col.  W.  M.,  Ill,  111,  Hassard,  J.  R.  G.

Grotius,  III,  300,  Huelva;  controversy  with,  585,  Laet.

Groton  academy,  Mass..  gift  to.  III.  638.  Lawrence,  A.

Groton  monument,  lottery  for  the.  I,  172,  Barnum.  P.  T.

Grove  Place  plantation,  Pa.,  rv,  706,  Pemberton,  P.

Grover,  Rev.  Stephen,  I,  651,  Cleveland,  G.

Groveton,  battle  of,  HI.  392,  Jackson,  T.  J.

Growdon.  Lawrence,  IH,  7,  Growdon,  J.

Gruber,  Jacob,  VI,  29.

Grumbler,  Anthony,  pen-name,  HI.  226,  Hoffman.  D.

Grymes,  Lucy,  IH,  667.  Let,  H;  TV,  491,  Nelson,  T.

Grymes,  Medora,  VI,  354,  Ward,S.

Grymes,  Col.  Philip,  IV,  491,  Nelson,  T.

Guachi,  battle  of,  V,  739.  Sucre,  A.  J.

Guachos,  the,  V,  144.  Puysegur  ;  320,  Rosas.

Guadalajara,  founded,  HI,  18,  Guzman,  N.  B.  de ;  battle
of,  197,  Hidalgo,  M.

Guadaloupe,  American  prisoners  at,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,
W. ;  II,  428,  Felix ;  taken  from  the  English  by  the
French,  IH,  305,  Ungues ;  troubles  in,  525,  Kergorlay ;
insurrections  in,  584,  Lacrosse  ;  605,  Ltiudolphe  ;  public
•works  in,  IV,  582,  Onesime  ;  insurrection  in, "704,  Pelage;
fortified  castle  in,  public  works,  marguisate  in,  V,  24,
Pinel ;  insurrections  in,  244,  Richepanse  ;  a  poet  of,  IH,
691,  Leonard.  N.  G. ;  governmental  and  sanitary  re-
forms in,  public  works,  V,  334,  Rotours  ;  earthquake  in,
1834,  370,  Sainte-Claire  ;  insurrection  in,  famous  episode
of,  VI,  280,  Vermont.

Guadalupe  Hidalgo,  treaty  of,  I,  644  :  V,  441.  •,

Guaicapuro,  Chief,  IV.  30,  Losada.  D.  de.

Guaimaro,  battle  at,  III,  474.  Jordan,  T.

Guaipata,  chief,  IV,  30,  Losada,  D.  de.

Gualle.  H,  575,  Gali.

Guanahani,  island  of,  I,  697.

Guanajuato,  capture  of.  I,  505,  Calleja,  F.;  slaughter  at,
III,  197,  Hidalgo,  C.  M. ;  assault  on,  403,  Jarauta  ;  battle
at,  rV,  214,  Marquez.

Guano,  sale  of,  on  consignment,  II,  298,  Echenique,  J.  M.

Guaqui,  count  of,  II.  699,  Goyeneche.

Guaranis,  the.  I,  490,  Cabeza  ;  the,  VI,  205,  Uffenbach.

Guararapes,  battles  of,  H,  164,  Dias,  H. ;  TV,  487,  Negrei-
ros.

Guard,  Theodore  de  la,  pen-name.  VI,  353,  Wai-d,  N.

Guarnerius,  Tobias,  pen-name,  II,  180,  Dimitry,  A.  and
C.P.

Guatemala,  the  British  repelled  from,  n.  584,  Gdlvez,  M. ;
war  in,  I,  535,  Carrera,  R. ;  revolutionary  movements  in,
177  ;  improvements  in.  178  ;  revolutions  in,  180,  Bamni-
dia;  II,  585,  Gdlvez,  M.;  593,  Garcia-Granados ;  III,  18,
Guzman,  A.;  college  in,  IV,  205,  Margil ;  VI,  219.  I'rti-
aga  ;  mission  farm  in,  V,  464,  Servien  ;  economical  soci-
ety of,  H,  672,  Goicoschea ;  dialects  of,  IV,  658,  Parra,
F. ;  Indian  rebellions  in,  V,  166.  Ramirez  ;  ruins  of  an-
cient civilization  of,  257,  Rio,  A.;  old  MS.  history  of,  VI,
635,  Ximenes ;  theory  of  the  origin  of  its  inhabitants,
654,  Zamna  ;  university  in,  655,  Zapata  y  Sandoval.

Guatemala,  city  of,  taken  and  retaken,  IV,  389,  Morazan.

Guayabo,  battle  of,  n,  206,  Dorrego.

Guayana.  Spanish  towns  and  institutions  founded  in,  II,
360,  Epiphane.

Guayaquil,  capture  of.  I.  488,  Caamano ;  capture  of,  II,
63,  Dampier ;  taken  by  pirates,  IV,  56,  Lussan.

Guaymas,  capture  of,  V,  646,  Stanly,  F.;  VI,  297,  Ville-
raye.

Gude,  Hans,  pupil  of,  VI,  629,  Wyant.

Guelph,  Ont..  founded,  n.  583.  Gait.  J.

Guelves,  Marquis  de.  IV.  236,  Martinez,  E.

Guemes.  Gen..  II,  690,  Gorriti.

Guenterol,  Chief,  rv,  587,  Orilie.

Guerabella,  Madame,  stage-name,  VI,  349,  Ward,  O.

Guerbel,  Countess,  VI,  349,  Ward,  G.

Guercheville,  Madame  de,  IV,  249,  Massi  ;  V,  94,  Poutrin-
court.

Guerillas,  in  the  civil  war,  IV.  434-435,  Mosby.

Gueristersigo.  V,  83,  Posey,  T.

Guerra,  Donato,  HI,  480,  Juarez,  B.  P.


GUERRA


HANCOCK


741


Guerra.  Louis  and  Christopher  de  la,  TV,  524,  Nino.

Guerrero,  capture  of,  by  the  Lealtad,  V,  76,  Porter,  D.  H.

Guerriere,  the,  II,  52,  Dacres ;  fight  of,  with  the  Constitu-
tion, III,  310,  311.

Guevarra,  Vasco,  II,  169,  Diaz,  R.

Guiana,  taken  from  the  Spaniards.  I,  305  ;  exploration  of,
II,  767,  Orillet ;  French  colony.  III,  300.  Huet ;  explora-
tion of,  340,  Iff ;  Dutch,  473,  Jordeens,  M.\  exploration
of,  IV,  299,  Mentelle  ;  French,  missions  in,  8,  Lombard  ;
mission  in,  449,  Mousse  ;  French  claims  in,  complication
-with  Portugal,  498,  Neuville,  J.  N.\  colonies  in,  530,
Noirclerc  ;  Ralegh's  description  of,  V,  163  ;  scientific
exploration  of,  424-425,  Schomburgk  :  exploration  of,  615,
Soutman  ;  French,  VI,  183,  Turgot,  E.  F. ;  first  missions
in.  297,  Villiers.

Guichen,  Count  de,  III.  527,  Kersaint ;  IV,  179,  Maitz.

Guide  to  Christian  Perfection,  A,  magazine,  IV,  308,  Mer-
ritt,  T.

Guild,  James  and  Anne  E.,  VI,  486,  Whitmarsh.

Guilford,  Earl  of,  IV,  534,  North,  F.

Guilford,  Conn.,  settlement  of,  II,  182,  Disbrowe  ;  found-
ing of,  III,  676,  Leete  ;  founded.  VI,  481,  Whitfield.  H.;
old  stone-house  at,  illustration,  481  ;  Halleck's  home  and
monument  at,  illustrations,  III,  47.

Guilford  Court-House,  battle  of,  I,  744 ;  II,  752 ;  in,  600,
Lamb,  R.

Guillemet,  J.  B.  A.,  VI,  171,  Tryon,  D.  W.

Guillermin,  Gilbert,  II,  439,  Ferrand.

Guillotine,  the,  III.  256,  Hopkins,  L.

Guiney,  Gen.  P.  R.,  VI,  684,  Guiney,  L.  I.

Guio,  David,  I,  657,  Clevenger.

Guistersigo,  Chief,  VI,  399.

Guizot,  F.  P.  G.,  V,  622. .

Gulf  coast,  exploration  of,  I,  489,  Cabeza.

Gulf  of  California,  old  map  of,  III,  306.  Hiihne.

Gulf  of  Mexico,  grant  of  the  coast  of,  II,  590,  Garay,  F.  de.

Gulf  of  Pearls,  the,  IV,  524,  Nino.

Gulf  Stream,  the,  first  correctly  described,  IV,  265.

Gully,  John  W.,  murder  of,  I,  607,  Chisolm.

Gumery,  M.,  pupil  of,  V,  273.  Roberts,  H.

Gum  Swamp,  capture  at,  III,  464,  Jones,  J.  R.

Gun-barrels,  machine  for  making,  I,  288,  Blanchard,  T.

Gun-carriages,  I,  240,  Benton,  J.  G.

Gun-cotton,  discovery  of  method  for  preparing,  II,  327,
Ellet,  W.  H.

Gun-lock,  a  self-acting,  II,  364.

Gunn,  Alexander,  III,  747,  Livingston,  J.  H.

Gunnery,  the,  school,  VI,  684,  Gunn.

Gunny  Green,  Va.,  Ill,  703,  Lewis,  F.

Gunpowder,  manufacture  of,  II,  265.

Guns,  firing,  by  locks,  introduced,  II,  211,  Douglas,  Sir  C;
271,  Durfee,  W.  F.;  363,  Ericsson,  J.;  revolving  battery,
617,  Gailing  ;  telescope  sight  for,  IV,  23,  Lorain  ;  fired  by
steam,  729,  Perkins,  Jacob  ;  invention  of  a  hammer  for,
V,  257,  Ringgold,  S.;  invention  of  method  for  casting,
298,  Rodman,  T.  J. ;  multicharge,  VI.  687.  Haskell.

Gun-stocks,  machine  for  working,  I,  439,  Buckland,  C.

Gunston  Hall,  Va.,  illustration,  IV,  241.

Gurney.  John  J.,  VI,  503,  Wilbur,  J.

Gurowski,  Ladislas,  ID,  14,  Gurowski,  A.

Guthrie,  Sarah  J.,  V,  573,  Smith,  J.  L.

Gutierrez,  Gen.,  I,  153,  Balta.

Gutierrez,  Tomas,  IV.  645,  Pardo.

Guyard,  Mdlle,  III,  714,  Z/ Incarnation.

Guy  Park,  III,  453,  Johyison,  Guy.

Guzman,  Alonzo  D.  R.  de,  pseudonym,  II,  361.

Gwin,  Rev.  James,  III,  19,  Gwin,  W.  M.

Gwynn  island,  II,  260,  Dunmore  ;  Lord  Dunmore  driven
from,  III,  702,  Lewis,  A.

Gye,  Ernest,  I,  39,  Albani.

Gymnasium,  first,  in  America,  IV,  484,  Neal,  J.

Gymnotus  electricus,  the,  II,  594,  Garden.

Gynecology,  revolution  in  the  practice  of,  V,  541,  Sims,  J.
Marion.

Gyroscope,  the,  electric,  invention  of,  n,  195,  Dolbear.

Habeas  corpus  act,  first  use  of,  I,  254,  Beverly  ;  right  of,  to

suspend,  II,  720  ;  451,  Field,  R.  S. ;  VI,  30.
Hackensack,  attempted  union  of  churches  in,  II,  553,  Froe-

ligh  ;  engagement  near,  I,  466.
Hackleman,  John,  III,  23,  Hackleman,  P.  A.
Hackley,  Martha  J.,  II,  48,  Cutts,  R.  D.
Haddington  college,  III,  464,  Jones,  H.  G.
Haddonfield,  N.  J.,  II,  377.  Estaugh  ;  engagement  at,  V,

133,  Pulaski.
Haddon,  John,  n,  377,  Estaugh.
Hadermann.  Charles  J.,  VI.  344,  Walworth,  J.  R.  A.
Hadley,  John,  II,  669,  Godfrey,  T.
Hadley,  Mass.,  II,  672,  Goffe  ;  Indian  attack  on,  IV,  756  ;

32,  Lothrop,  T.
Hagerman,  Mr.,  II.  229,  Draper,  W.  H.
Hagerstown,  hospitals  at,  IV,  485,  Nebinger,  G.  W.;  487,

Neill,  J.
Hague,  the  frigate,  TV,  189,  Manley,  J.
Hahn,  Peter,  I,  290,  Blavatsky.
Hahnemanian  Monthly,  the,  II,  555,  Frost,  J.  H.  P.
Haight,  Fletcher  M..  Ill,  27.  Haight.  H.  H.
Hail  Columbia,  the  song,  I,  22  ;  HI,  261,  Hopkinson,  J.;

suggestion  of,  IV,  556,  Odell,  J.


Haines,  Elias,  n,  202,  Doremus.

Haines's  Bluff,  attack  on,  II,  712.

Hait,  Monson,  trial  of,  III,  80,  Hardy,  E.

Hal,  a  Dacotah,  pen-name,  V,  522,  Sibley,  H.  H.

Halcyon  Luminary,  the.  magazine,  VI.  608,  Woodworth,  S.

Haldeman,  Walter  N.,  VI.  394,  Watterson,  H.

Haldimand  collection,  the,  H,  569,  Gage,  T.

Hale,  Rev.  Cyrus.  IH,  51,  Hallock.

Hale,  David,  III,  34,  Hale,  S.  ;  a5,  Hale,  S.  J.

Hale,  Rev.  Enoch,  VI,  524,  Williams,  E.

Hale,  Sir  Matthew,  HI,  416.

Hale,  Nathan,  statue  of,  illustration,  in,  31.

Half-moon,  the,  illustration,  III,  297.

Half-way  covenant,  the,  II,  83,  Davenport,  J.  ;  310,  312 ;
IV,  345,  Mitchell,  J.  ;  253.

Halifax,  Earl  of,  II,  526,  Franklin,  B.

Halifax,  R/  C.  institutions  founded  in,  TV,  549,  O'Brien,  C.

Halkett,  Sir  Colin.  IV,  448,  Mountain,  A.  S.  H.

Halkett,  James,  HI,  36.  Halkett,  Sir  P.

Hall,  Anne,  III,  545,  King,  S.

Hall,  Rev.  E.  B.,  Ill,  42,  Hall,  L.  J.  P.

Hall,  Sir  J.,  HI,  37,  Hall.  B.

Hall,  Sir  James,  II,  133,  De  Lancey,  W.  H.

Hall,  Col.  James  Carvill,  V,  587,  Smith,  S.

Hall,  Rev.  John,  I,  46,  Alexander,  J.  W.

Hall,  Dr.  John,  III,  37,  Hall,  B.  R.;  IV,  346,  Mitchell,  D.  G.

Hall,  Mrs.  S.  C,  HI,  245,  Home.

Hall.  Prescott,  II,  637,  Gibbs.

Hall,  Samuel,  IH,  43,  Hall,  R.  P.

Hall,  Sarah,  I,  298.  Boardman  ;  III,  484,  Judson,  S.  H.  B.

Hallam,  Admiral.  Ill,  46.  Hallam,  W.

Halle,  M.,  II,  691,  Gottschalk.

Halleck,  F.  G.,  quoted,  I.  719,  Cooke,  T.  F.  ;  his  home  and
monument,  illustrations,  III,  47  :  statue  of,  48  ;  poem  of,
IV,  271,  Maxwell,  H.  ;  subject  of  poem  by,  V.  254,  Riker,
R. ;  subject  of  one  of  the  Croakers,  V,  319.  Root,  Erastus  ;
quoted,  VI,  5,  Swartout,  S.  ;  life  and  letters,  552,  Wil-
son, J.  G.

Halleck,  Peter,  HI,  46,  Halleck,  F.  G,

Halley,  Edmund,  I,  683,  Colden  :  Tl.  668.  Godfrey.  T.

Hallowell,  Benjamin,  VI,  266-267,  Vaughan.

Hallowell,  Briggs,  III,  333,  Hutchinson,  T.

Hallowell,  Robert,  II,  596,  Gardiner.

Hallowell,  Sarah,  VI,  266,  Vaughan.

Hallowell,  Me.,  VI,  267,  268,  Vaughan,  B.  and  C.

Haloid  benzyl  compounds,  HI,  384,  Jackson,  C.  L.

Halpine,  Charles  G.,  H,  738.

Halpine,  Rev.  N.  J.,  Ill,  53,  Halpine.

Halsted,  Caleb  O.,  HI.  54,  Hoisted,  N.  N.

Halsted,  Oliver,  VI,  307,  Voorhees,  J.  S.

Hambacher  Volksfest,  the,  VI,  590,  Wollenusber.

Hamet,  bashaw  of  Tripoli,  I,  179,  Barron,  S.  ;  II,  295,
Eaton,  W.

Hamilton,  pen-name,  VI,  393,  Watson,  W.  R.

Hamilton,  Alexander,  his  home,  illustration,  III,  57 ;  his
tomb,  59.

Hamilton,  Maj.  Archibald  G.,  V,  323,  Rose,  T.  E.

Hamilton,  Frederick,  III,  239,  Holman.  J.  G.

Hamilton,  Gail,  pseudonym,  H,  193,  Dodge,  M.  A.

Hamilton,  James,  HI,  55,  Hamilton,  A. ;  469,  Jones,  John
Paul.

Hamilton,  John,  IV,  300,  Mercer.  A.  J.

Hamilton,  Lady  Maud  Evelyn,  ni,  615,  Lansdowne.

Hamilton,  Robert.  III.  64,  Hamilton,  John.

Hamilton,  Sir  William.  VI.  201,  Tyler,  S.

Hamilton  college,  first  president  of.  I,  129,  Backus,  A.  ;
founded,  III,  555,  Kirkland,  S. ;  TV,  534,  North,  S.  and
E.  ;  536,  Norton,  A.  S.  ;  gifts  to,  II,  162,  Dexter,  S.  N.  ;
HI,  567,  Knox,  James  ;  V,  272,  Roberts,  C.  R.

Hamilton  literary  and  theological  institution,  IH,  109,  Has-
call,  D.

Hamilton  outrage,  the.  IV.  152.  MacNab.

Hammida,  Admiral  Rais,  II,  121 .

Hammonaset,  Conn.,  VI,  23,  Talcott,  J.

Hammond,  Benjamin,  III,  67,  Hammond,  E.

Hammond,  G.,  Ill,  420.

Hammond,  Harry,  III,  67,  Hammond,  J.  H.

Hammond,  W.  G.,  IH,  710.

Hampden,  pen-name,  III,  253,  Hooper,  W.  ;  IV,  593,  Orr,  1.

Hampden  Sidney  college,  V,  585,  Smith,  S.  S.

Hampton,  Va.,  post  established  at,  II,  134,  Delawarr.

Hampton,  Caroline,  V,  115,  Preston,  J.  S.

Hampton,  Susan  F.,  IV,  193.  Manning.  R.  I.

Hampton  institute,  founded,  I,  130,  Bacon,  R.  T.  ;  VI,  668,
Armstrong.

Hampton  Roads,  peace  conference  in,  H,  101 ;  battle  in,
VI,  602,  Woodford,  W.

Hampton's  legion,  HI,  70.

Hanaford,  Joseph  H.,  III.  71,  Hanaford.  P.  A.

Hancock,  siege  of,  III,  604,  Lander,  F.  W.

Hancock,  capture  of  the,  I,  690,  Collier,  G;  IV,  189,  Man-
ley,  J.

Hancock, captures by the schooner,  VI,  174, Tucker,

Hancock,' B.  F.,  III.  72,  Hancock,  W.  S. .
Hancock,  Ebenezer,  III,  71,  Hancock,  J.
Hancock,  Richard,  III,  72,  Hancock,  W.  8.
Hancock,  Thomas,  II,  684,  Goodyear.
Hancock  house,  the,  illustration,  IH,  72.


742


HANDEL


HATTON


Handel  and  Haydn  society,  founded,  VI,  404,  Webb,  T.  S.

Hanford,  Francis,  shooting  of,  VI,  700,  Sullivan.

Hanger,  Maj.  George,  VI,  35,  Tarleton.

Hanging  Rock,  battle  of,  IV,  90,  McClure,  J.;  V,  752.

Hanks,  Nancy,  HI.  715,  Lincoln.

Hannah,  capture  of  the,  V,  380,  Saltonstall,  D.

Hannah,  anonymous  drama,  VI,  221,  Vail,  T.  H.

Hannibal,  capture  of  the,  IV,  550,  O'Brien,  Jere.

Hanover  Court-House,  battle  at,  IV,  234,  Martindale,  J.
H.\  81.

Hanover  college,  gift  to,  II,  261,  Dunn,  Williamson.

Hansen,  Marie,  IV,  41.

Hansen,  Maurice  G..  HI.  708,  Leydt.

Hansihl,  Rev.  Mr.,  HI,  107,  Hartuick.

Hanson,  Harriet,  V,  289,  Robinson,  H.  H.

Hanson,  Rev.  J.  H.,  VI,  524,  Williams,  E.

Hapsburg,  branch  of  the  house  of,  1, 160,  Baraga.

Harbor  improvements,  H,  287,  Eads.

Harbors  of  refuge,  IV,  55,  hunt,  G.

Harcourt,  Sir  William  Vernon,  IV,  438,  Motley.

Hardenbergh,  Johannes,  III,  77.

Hardenbergh,  Rev.  John  R.,  IV,  312,  Meyer,  H.

Hardin  college,  Mo.,  gift  to,  ni,  78,  Hardin,  C.  H.

Hardy,  Richard  and  George,  III,  80.  Hardy,  S.

Hare,  Emily,  pen-name,  VI,  577,  Winlhrop,  L.

Harlot,  Thomas,  V,  162.

Harlem  Heights,  battle  of,  HI,  565,  Knowlton,  T.;  V,  141.

Harland,  Marian,  pen-name,  VI,  64,  Terhune,  M.  V.

Harland,  Thomas,  VI,  66.  Terry,  E.

Harlow,  George  H.,  VI,  440,  West.  B.

Harmonic  flute,  the,  inventor  of.  V,  657,  Steckel.

Harmonica,  the,  H,  91,  Davies.  M.

Harmonists,  the,  founder  of,  V,  183,  Rapp.

Harmony,  Pa.,  community  at,  V,  183-184,  Rapp.

Harnden,  H.  F.,  VI,  429,  Wells,  H.

Harned,  David,  IV,  48,  Lozier,  C.  S.

Harney,  Thomas,  IH,  85,  Harney,  J.  M.

Haroun-al-Raschid,  tomb  of,  I,  190,  Bassett,  J.

Harper.  Africa,  III,  88,  Harper,  R.  G.

Harper,  John,  III,  460,  Johnston,  W.  F.

Harper,  Joseph,  III,  87.

Harper,  Robert  Goodloe,  II,  148,  De  Rosset,  A.  J.

Harper's  Ferry,  Brown"s  raid  on,  1, 406,  407  ;  III,  392,  Jack-
son, T.  J. ;  V,  83 ;  burning  of  the  armory  at,  III,  549,
Kingsbury,  C.  P. ;  VI,  690,  Jones,  R. ;  captured.  III,  670  ;
IV,  *140,  McLaws ;  321,  Miles,  D.  S.  ;  raid  on,  V,  583,
Smith,  G. ;  destruction  of  arsenal  at,  VI,  690,  Jones,  R.

Harper's  Magazine,  IH,  286.

Harriet  Lane,  the,  capture  of,  IV,  175,  Magruder ;  VI,
316,  Wainwright,  J.

Harrington,  G.  F.,  pen-name,  1, 146.  Baker,  W.  M.

Harriott,  Frederick  C,  IV,  412,  Morris,  C.

Harris,  Old  Captain,  VI,  58,  Teedyuxsung.

Harris,  Alexander,  quoted,  H,  334,  Ellmaker.

Harris,  Dr.  Charles  T..  II,  203,  Doremus,  R.  O.

Harris,  Rev.  Elijah.  IV,  424,  Morse,  J.

Harris,  John,  III,  108,  Harvey,  M.

Harris,  Martin,  V,  575,  Smith,  Joseph.

Harris,  Sidney,  III,  93,  Ham-is,  M.  C.

Harris,  Thomas,  IH,  447,  Johnson,  Reverdy.

Harris,  W.,  Ill,  93,  Harris,  T.  M.

Harrisburg,  Cameron's  residence  at,  illustration,  I,  509 ;
founder  of,  HI,  92,  Harris,  John ;  his  house,  illustra-
tion, 92.

Harrison,  Dr.,  IV,  252,  Mather,  S.

Harrison,  Miss.,  n,  175,  Dickson,  J.  A.

Harrison,  Benjamin,  III,  100,  Harrison.  J.  T.

Harrison,  Burton,  III,  99,  Harrison,  C.  C.

Harrison,  George,  V,  198,  Read,  T.

Harrison,  Jeannette  S..  IV,  20,  Loop.

Harrison,  Mary,  VI,  476.  White,  W.

Harrison,  Russell,  VI,  687,  Harrison,  C.  S.

Harrison,  Samuel  A..  HI,  213,  Hindman,  W.

Harrison,  Thomas,  HI,  100,  Harrison,  J.  T.  ;  101,  Harri-
son, S.

Harrison,  Walter,  V,  5,  Pickett,  G.  E.

Harrison,  Gen.  W.  H.,  famous  interview,  H,  335,  Ells-
kwatawa.

Harrisonburg,  Va.,  battle  at,  IH,  28,  Haines,  T.  R.\  493,
Kane,  T.  L.

Harrison  medal,  illustration,  in,  98.

Harrison  safety -boiler,  the,  HI,  100,  Harrison,  J.

Harrison's  Landing,  Va..  retreat  to,  IV,  83.

Harrisse,  Henry,  I,  167,  Barlow,  S.  L.  M.

Harrodsburg,  Ky.,  HI,  101,  Harrod.

Harrwitz,  Herr,  IV,  407,  Morphy.

Harry  Wadsworth  clubs.  III.  32,  Hale,  E.  E.

Harston  rifle,  the.  Ill,  102,  Harston.

Hart,  Ebenezer.  IH,  103,  Hart,  J.

Hart,  Edward,  III,  102,  Hart,  J.

Hart,  Francis,  II,  157,  De  Vinne,  T.  L.

Hart,  John  de,  III.  102,  Hart,  J.

Hart,  Lucretia,  I,  640,  Clay,  H.

Hart,  Samuel.  IV,  750,  Phelps,  A.  H.  L. :  VI,  513,  Willard,  E.

Hart,  Rev.  Seth,  II,  130,  De  Lancey,  W.  H.

Hart,  Col.  Thomas,  V,  293,  Rochester.

Hart,  William,  IV.  752,  Phelps,  O.

Harte,  Bret,  subject  of  a  poem  by,  I,  89.  Arguello  ;  II.  738.

Hartford,  founded,  IH,  251,  Hooker,  T.;  settlement  of,  V,


703,  Stone,  S.;  VI,  23,  Talcott.  J.:  gifts  to  charities  of,

IV,  521.  Niles,  J.  M.;  VI.  389,  Watkinson  ;  first  state-
house  in,  V,  32,  Pitkin,  W. ;  armory  at,  I,  695,  Colt ;  Capi-
tol at.  illustration,  VI,  213  ;  orphan  asylum,  gift  to.  TV,
402,  Morgan,  J.  S.;  House  of  Hope  at,  VI,  239,  Van  dul-
ler ;  255,  Van  Twiller  ;  historical  society  of,  V,  140  ;
view  of  Trinity  college,  565.

Hartford,  the,  Farragut's  flag-ship,  n.  416,  417  :  Farragut
in  the  rigging,  illustration,  417,  after  the  battle  of  Mobile
bay,  illustration,  413  ;  IH,  427,  Jenkins,  T.  A.

Hartford  convention,  the.  I,  491,  Cabot,  G. ;  protest  against,
IH,  729,  Lincoln,  L.\  IV,  607,  Otis,  H.  G.;\,  3,  Pickering,
T.;  582,  Smith,  Nathaniel.

Hartford  Wits,  the,  I,  60,  Alsop,  R.:  166.  Barlow,  J.;  Ill,
256,  Hopkins,  L.;  H,  282.  Dwight,  Theodore;  IH,  313,
Humphreys,  D.

Hartley,  David,  H,  531.

Hartley,  Samuel,  pen-name.  HI,  258,  Hopkins,  S.

Hartman,  George,  III,  105,  Hartman.  W.  D.

Hartshorne,  R.  and  W.,  Ill,  105,  Hartshorne,  J.

Hart's  mill,  engagement  at,  II,  701,  Graham,  J.

Hartt,  Jarvis  W.,  HI,  106,  Hartt,  C.  F.

Hartwell,  Mary,  VI,  674,  Catherwood.

Hartwick  seminary.  III,  107,  Hartirick.

Harvard,  Mass.,  community  at,  I,  40.  Alcott.

Harvard,  John,  family  of,  traced,  VI,  S87.  Waters.  H.  F.  G.

Harvard,  Robert,  III,  107,  Harvard.

Harvard  college,  founded,  III,  107,  Harvard  :  gift,  to,  107,
Harvard  ;  charter  prepared  for,  IV,  253  ;  affairs  of.  254  ;
first  arrangement  of  graduates'  names  at,  I,  15,  Adams,
John  ;  first  professor  of,  II,  295,  Eaton,  N. ;  buildings  of.
reforms  in,  marking  system  of,  elective  system,  V.  152  ;
during  the  Revolution,  III,  608*  Langdon,  S. ;  library  of,
destroyed,  I,  247,  Bernard  ;  V,  521,  Sibley,  J.  L. ;  first
graduate  of.  VI,  599,  Woodbridge.  B. ;  grand  commons,
rebellion  at.  Ill,  540,  King,  J.  G. :  Whitefield's  journal  on.
245,  Holyoke,  E.;  building  of  Harvard  hall.  IV.  194.  Man-
ning, W. ;  battle  window  at,  III,  586,  La  Farge  ;  change
in  government  of,  II,  324,  Eliot,  C.  W. ;  in  methods.  325  ;
annual  lecture  fund.  244,  Dudley,  P.;  loss  of  a  legacy  by,
222,  Dowse  ;  gifts  to,  I,  34,  Agassiz,  A. ;  48,  Alvord,  J. ;
246  ;  334,  Bowditch,  N.  I. ;  342,  Boylston,  N.  and  W.  N. ;
346,  Brackett,  J.;  376,  Bright,  J.  B.;  444  Bulkeley,  P. ;
679,  Cogswell,  J.  G.:  H,  161,  Dexter,  S.;  land  given  to,
262,  Dunste,  H;  gifts  to,  296,  Ebeling ;  465,  Fisher,
Joshua;  574,  Gale,  T.;  687,  Gore,  C;  732,  Gray.  F.  C;
756,  Greenleaf,  E.  P.;  in,  71,  Hancock,  T.  and  J.;  189,
Hersey,  E.  and  A.;  237,  Hollis,  T.:  252,  Hooper,  S.;  498,
Keayne  ;  555,  Kirkland,  J.  T.;  639,  Lawrence,  A.;  IV,
143,  McLean,  John  ;  658,  Parkman.  F. :  688.  Peabody,  G. ;

V,  340,  Royall,  I. ;  347,  Rumford ;  466,  Sever ;  gift  of
Gage  papers  to,  638.  Sprague.  W.  B.:  gifts  to,  712,
Stoughton,  I.:  713,  Stoughton,  W.;  VI,  73,  Thayer,  N.;
103,  Thorndike,  I.;  155.  Treadwell,J.  G.;  156,  Treat../.
H.;  164,  Trowbridge,  E.:  179,  Tufts,  Q.\  202,  Tyndale  ;
318,  Wakefield,  C;  327,  Walker,  J.;  483,  Whiting,  W.

Harvard  annex,  the,  H,  655,  Gilman,  A.

Harvard  book-rack,  the,  I,  170,  Barnard,  J.  G.

Harvard  hall,  the  first,  illustration,  IH,  107.

Harvard  law-school,  H,  72,  Dane  ;  V,  710,  Story,  J.

Harvard  lyceum,  the,  II,  387,  Everett.  E.

Harvard  memorial  hall,  illustration,  VI,  229.

Harvard  natural  history  society,  III,  94,  Harris.  T.  W.

Harvard  observatory,  IV,  701,  Peirce  :  gift  to,  V,  4,  Pick-
ering, E.  C;  152  ;  work  of,  VI,  565,  Winlock.

Harvesters,  invention  of.  I,  151,  Ball,  E.;  170,  Barnard.
W.  S.;  VI,  597,  Wood,  W.  A.;  self -rake  for,  III,  460,
Johnston,  S. See  Reapers.

Harvey,  Alexander,  III,  108,  Harvey,  P.

Harvey,  Mathew,  III,  88.  Harper,  J.  M.

Harvey,  Prof.  W.  H,  III.  252,  Hooper,  J.

Harwick,  Earl  of,  III,  210,  Hillsborough.

Harwood,  John,  pen-name,  IV,  335,  Miner,  C.

Hascall,  Asa,  VI,  455,  Wheeler,  W.  A.

Haseltine,  Anne,  HI,  483-484,  Judson.

Haskell,  Lieut.  W.,  V,  339,  Rowson.

Haskins,  Elizabeth,  III,  585,  Ladd,  J.  B.

Hassler,  Henry  and  Mark,  III,  122,  Hassler,  S.

Hastings,  Charles  S.,  IH,  233,  Holden,  E.  S.

Hastings,  Charlotte,  VI,  461,  Whipple,  E.  P.

Hastings,  Daniel  H.,  V.  507.

Hastings,  Marquis  of,  V,  188,  Ran-don.

Hastings,  Warren,  impeachment  of.  I,  454,  Burke,  E.

Hastings  college  of  law,  endowed,  HI,  112.  Hastings,  S.  C.

Hastings-on-Hudson,  observatory  at,  II,  228,  Draper,  H.

Hatcher's  Run,  engagement  at,  II.  715.

Hatchie,  battle  of  the,  TV,  584,  Ord,  E.  O.  C;  II,  711.

Hatch's  Ranch,  engagement  at,  II,  256,  Duncan,  T.

Hatfield,  J.  B.  T.,  Ill,  114.  Hatfield,  E.  F.

Hatfield,  Mass.,  gifts  to,  V,  582,  Smith,  O.  and  S.

Hathorne,  W.  and  J.,  Ill,  124.  Hawthorne.

Hats,  n,  635,  Genin ;  machine  for  making,  I,  341,  Boy-
den,  S.

Hatteras,  loss  of  the,  I,  284.  make.  H.  C.

Hatteras  inlet,  flght  at,  U,  653,  Gillis,  J.  P. ;  V,  720,  String-
ham.

Hattie,  Aunt,  pseudonym,  I,  144,  Baker,  A.  R.

Hatton,  Sir  Christopher,  III.  115,  Hatton,  T.

Hatton,  Richard,  HI,  115,  Hatton,  F.


HAUPT


HEWITT


743


Haupt,  Pi  of.,  H,  300,  Eddy,  H.  C. ;  IV,  G29.  Paine,  J.  K.

Hauptmann,  Moritz,  I,  437,  Buck,  D. ;  III,  266,  Horsley  ;
IV.  248.  Mason,  W.

Hauser,  pupil  of,  V,  264,  Ritter,  F.  L.

Haiiy,  Abbe,  VI,  162,  Troost.

Havana,  institutions  founded  in,  IIIT  16,  Gutierrez,  J.  N.;
capture  of ,  by  tbe  English  (1762),  524,  Keppel;  expedi-
tion to,  IV,  61,  Lyman,  P.;  surrender  of,  197,  Manso  ;  V,
100,  Prado,  J.  de  ;  meteorological  observatory,  47,  Poey,
A.;  public  works  of ,  VI,  60,  Tejeda;  founding  of,  273,
Velasquez.

Haveland,  Charles,  III,  116,  Haveland,  L.  S.

Haven,  Samuel  L.,  Ill,  117,  Haven,  A.  B.

Haverhill,  capture  of,  V,  373,  St.  Ours.

Hawaii  university,  founded,  I,  75,  Andreios,  Lorrin.

Hawaiian  islands,  exploration  of,  I,  665,  Coan,  T. ;  mission
to,  IU,  12,  Gulick ;  482,  Judd,  G.  P. ;  king  of,  490,  Kala-
kaua  ;  treaty  of,  with  Great  Britain,  496,  Kearny,  L. ;  law
giving  lands  to  the  people  in,  675,  Lee,  W.  L. ;  a  governor
of,  VI,  647,  Young,  John.

Hawes,  M.  J.,  IH,  243,  Holmes,  M.  J.

Hawes,  Mary  E.,  VI,  248,  Van  Lennep,  M.  E.

Hawes,  Samuel  P.,  VI,  64,  Terhune,  M.  V.

Hawes's  Shop,  battle  of,  V,  498.

Hawke,  Sir  Edward,  III,  616,  La  Perouse.

Hawkins,  Richard,  defeat  of,  IH,  329,  Hurtado,  G.

Hawkins,  W.,  Ill,  120,  Hawkins,  Sir  J.

Hawkinsville,  Ga.,  III.  121,  Hawkins,  B.

Hawley,  Rev.  F.  and  Samuel,  IH,  123,  Hawley,  J.  R.

Hawley,  Laura  M.,  VI.  109,  Thurston,  L.  M.

Hawthorne,  Julian,  quoted,  II,  348.

Hawthorne,  Nathaniel,  statues  described  by,  I,  38,  Akers;
his  home,  illustration,  IH,  127  ;  his  grave,  129.

Hawthorne,  Rose,  HI,  624,  Lathrop,  R.  H.

Hay,  Dr.  John,  V,  345,  Rumford.

Hayes,  Henry,  pen-name,  HI,  554,  Kirk,  E.  W.  O.

Hayes,  Col.  Richard,  II,  641,  Giddings.

Hayes,  R.  B.,  his  home,  illustration,  HI,  135.

Hayes  farm,  Ralegh's  house,  illustration,  V,  163.

Hayes  river,  discovered,  V,  433,  Schwatka.

Hay-fever,  I,  205,  Beard.

Hayley,  William,  II,  363,  Ercilla.

Hayne,  Dr.  Arthur,  H,  115,  Dean,  Julia.

Haynes,  Charles  G.,  II,  350,  Emmet,  T.  A.

Haynes,  J.  C,  H,  183,  Ditson,  C.

Haynes,  Nathaniel,  III,  145,  Haynes,  H.  W.

Hays,  Dr.  I.  M.,  Ill,  146,  Hays,  I.

Hayter,  Sir  G.,  Ill,  41,  Hall,  H.  B.

Hayti,  conquest  of,  I,  752,  Cotabanama  ;  slavery  in,  II.  340,
Emangard  ;  Columbus  in,  I,  521,  Caonabo  ;  claims  of
French  residents  in,  HI,  594,  Lagraviero  ;  indemnity  to
French  colonists,  IV,  126,  Mackau  ;  league  to  extermi-
nate the  Spaniards  in,  187,  Manicaotex  ;  resistance  to  the
Spaniards,  IU,  8,  Guacanagari ;  69,  Guarionex  ;  IV,  187,
Manicaotex  ;  277,  Mayobanex  ;  public  works  in,  445,
Motte,  E.  A.;  English  invasion  of  (1796),  451,  Moyse,  H.;
Oge  ;  V,  737,  Suard  ;  civil  dissensions  in,  745-746,  Petion  ;
indemnity  paid  by,  V,  158,  Radiguet ;  the  British  in,  VI,
298,  Vincent,  C. ;  insurrections  and  revolutions  in,  I,  322,
Borgella  ;  341,  Boyer  ;  595,  Chavannes  ;  611,  Christophe  ;
637,  Clausel  ;  n,  154,  Dessalines  ;  359,  Enrique ;  622,  623,
Geffrard  ;  660,  Girard,  S. :  IV,  264.  Mauduit  du  Plessis  ;
451,  Moyse,  H. ;  563,  Oge  ;  V,  244,  Riclie,  J.  B. ;  252,  Rigaud,
B.  J.  A.  ;  378,  Salnave  ;  612,  Soulouque  ;  VI,  308,  Vostey  ;
revolutions  in,  698,  Salomon.

Hayward,  Abraham,  quoted,  H,  387.

Haywarde,  Richard,  pseudonym,  I,  762,  Cozzens.

Haywood,  Egbert,  HI,  148,  Haywood,  J.

Hazard,  Caroline,  II,  179,  Dinian,  J.  L.

Hazlett,  Capt.  C.  E.,  VI,  299,  Vincent,  S.

Hazlitt,  execution  of,  I,  407.

Head,  Rev.  Sir  J.,  Ill,  151,  Head,  E.  W.

Head- light,  inventor  of  the  locomotive,  IV,  248,  Mason,
Melancthon  W.

Head  of  Iron,  sobriquet,  II,  498,  Forbes,  John.

Heald,  Mi-.,  IV,  368.  Montez.

Healey,  Mark,  II,  57,  Ball.

HeHlth-lifting,  VI,  562,  Windship.

Healy,  G.  P.  A.,  illustration  from  painting  b3r,  V,  505.

Healy,  Joseph,  III,  153,  Healy,  J.  P.

Heap,  George,  IH.  153,  Heap,  G.  H.

Heard,  Col.,  IH,  165,  Henderson,  T.

Heard,  M.  A.,  assault  by.  I,  98.  Arnold,  T.  D.

Heart,  experiments  on'  the  action  of  the,  IV,  379,  Moore,
Edward  M.

Heat,  discoveries  concerning,  V,  346.

Heath,  James,  VI.  113,  Tiebout.

Heathcote,  Sir  Gilbert,  IH.  155,  Heathcote,  C.

Heating  apparatus,  improvements  in.  V.  346.

Hebert,  Antoine  A.  E.,  pupil  of,  VI.  501,  Wight,  M.

Hebrew,  a,  with  Egyptian  principles,  I,  235,  Benjamin,
Judah P.

Hebrew,  summer  schools  of,  V,  423,  Schodde  ;  VI,  421,
Weidner.

Hebrew  Review,  the,  V,  183,  Raphall.

Hebrews,  in  Russia,  I,  103  ;  colony  of,  at  Cayenne.  V,  638-
339,  Spranger.

Hebrew  union  college,  the,  VI,  580.  Wise,  I.  M.

Hecatomb  of  Vera  Cruz,  the,  II,  168.


Heck.  Paul,  IH,  156,  Heck,  B.

Hedonville,  Gen.,  VI,  145.

Heenan,  John  C,  IV,  299,  Menken.

Heeren,  Prof.,  I,  154  ;  quoted,  156,  Bancroft,  G.

Heges,  Capt.,  Ill,  269,  Hosset.

Heitzman,  Martin,  III,  160,  Heitzman,  C.

Helderbergia,  anonymous  poem,  V,  426,  Schoolcraft,  H.  R.

Helena,  Ark.,  engagement  at,  V,  106,  Prentiss.  B.  M.

Helene,  capture  of  the  schooner,  II,  673,  Goldsborough ,  J.  R.

Helen  Jewett  trial,  the.  Ill,  288,  Hoxie,  J.

Helen's  Babies,  anonymous  book,  HI,  21,  Habberton.

Helffrich,  Rev.  J.  H.,  IH,  160.  Helfenstein.

Heller,  Robert,  pseudonym,  IV,  641,  Palmer,  W.  H.

Hell  Gate,  first  passage  of.  I,  295,  Block  ;  removal  of  ob-
structions from,  IV,  508,  Newton,  J.

Hellmuth  college,  III,  161,  Hellmuth.

Helluland,  VI,  101,  Thorfinn.

Helm,  Benjamin  and  Leonard,  HI,  161,  Helm,  J.  L.

Helm,  Peter,  II,  660,  Girard,  S.

Helmholtz,  pupil  of,  IV,  702,  Peirce,  B.  O.

Helping  Hand,  mission  of  the,  IV,  74,  McAuley.

Helvidius,  pen-name,  VI,  380.

Hemlandet  det  Gamla  och  det  Nya,  the,  III,  111,  Hassel-
quist.

Hemmenway.  John,  III.  585,  Ladd,  W.

Hemp,  machine  for  spinning,  VI,  155,  Treadwell,  D.

Hemp-break,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  94,  Thompson,  M.  J.

Hempstead,  C.  H.,  VI,  370.  Washburne,  E.  B.

Hendee,  Joshua,  III,  163,  Hendee.

Hendricks,  Bodnyn,  IV,  196,  Manso.

Hendricks,  John,  HI,  166,  Hendricks,  T.  A.

Heneage,  Charles,  V,  378,  Salm  Salm,  A.

Henkel,  Gerhardt,  III,  166,  Henkel,  P.

Henning's  Statutes  at  Large  (Va.\  III,  416.

Henrico,  settlement  of,  II,  57,  Dale,  Sir  T.

Henrietta  island,  discovered,  II,  137,  De  Long.

Henry  IV.  of  France,  IV,  374,  Monts.

Henry,  Benjamin  T.,  VI,  561,  Winchester,  0.  F.

Henry,  Gabriel,  VI,  308,  Vostey.

Henry,  James  Buchanan,  1, 432.

Henry,  John  B  ,  III,  411,  Jay,  W.

Henry,  John  H.,  HI,  170,  Henry,  A.

Henry,  John  and  Alexander,  HI,  173,  Henry,  P.

Henry,  Patrick,  his  license,  V,  175.  Randolph,  P.

Henry,  Judge  W.  J.,  Ill,  95,  Harris,  W.  L.

Henry  Clay,  destruction  of  the  steamer,  H,  221,  Down-
ing, A.  J.

Henshaw,  Sarah  E.,  IV,  439.

Hensken,  Mr.,  IH,  95,  Harris,  T.

Hensley,  Joseph,  III.  147,  Haythorne.

Hepburn,  G.  B.,  H,  538,  Fraser,  S.

Herald  (Wrangell)  Land,  III,  504,  Kellett.

Herard,  Riviere,  V,  244,  Riche,  J.  B.\  396,  Santana.

Herban,  M.,  I,  684,  Colden,  C.

Herbert,  George,  memorial  to,  I,  605,  Childs,  G.  W.

Herbert,  Morgan.  Ill,  180,  Herbert,  H.  W.

Herbert,  Rev.  W.,  Ill,  179,  Herbert.

Heresy,  trials  and  punishment  for,  1, 170,  Barnes,  A.  ;  217;
364,  Breck,  R.  ;  the  anabaptist,  395  ;  trial  for,  475,  Bush-
nell,  H.  ;  II,  262,  Dunster,  H.  :  of  Columbus,  627,  Ger-
aldini  ;  punishment  of,  690.  Gorton ;  trials,  IV,  106,
Macdonnell,  D.  J. ;  676,  Patton,  F.  L.\  V,  308,  Rogers,  J.;
415,  Schaff ;  VI,  12,  Swing.

Herkimer  convention,  the,  I,  553,  Cassidy.

Herkimer  monument,  the,  illustration,  III,  182.

Hermine,  pen-name,  II.  318,  Elder,  S.  B.

Hermitage,  the,  near  Trenton.  II,  174,  Dickinson,  P.

Hermitage,  the,  illustration,  III,  381.

Hermit  of  Newfane,  the,  I,  397.

Hermit  of  New  York,  pen-name,  II,  556,  Frothingham,  W.

Hermits  of  St.  Augustine,  order  of,  HI,  519,  Kenrick,  F.  P.

Hermit's  spring,  the,  HI,  509,  Kelpius.

Hernandez,  n,  152,  De  Soto.

Herndon,  Ann,  IV,  265.

Herndon,  Ellen  L.,  I.  106,  Arthur.  C.  A.

Herndon,  Reuben,  III,  184,  Herndon.  M.  E.

Hernia,  system  for  treatment  of,  II,  219,  Dowell.

Hero  of  Charleston,  the,  III,  659.

Hero  of  the  Crater,  the,  IV,  177,  Mahone.

Hero  de  la  Mojonera,  the,  I,  745,  Corona.

Heron,  William,  IV,  663,  Parsons,  S.  H.

Herrada,  Juan,  I,  59.  Almagro.

Herrick,  Christine,  VI,  64.  Terhune,  C.

Herrick,  James  B..  III.  187,  Herrick.  S.  M.  B.

Herschel,  Sir  W.,  II,  255,  Dunbar,  Sir  W.

Hersey,  E.  J.,  I,  73,  Andrew.

Hervey,  Rev.  Alpheus  B.,  VI,  355,  Ward,  R.  H.

Herz,  Henri,  rV,  674,  Patti.  C.

Herzen,  Alexander,  HI,  494.  Kapp.

Hesperian,  the,  periodical,  II,  576.  Gallagher,  W.  D.

Hesse- Wartegg.  Ernest  v.,  Ill,  115,  Hauck.

Hessians,  the,  in  the  Revolutionary  war,  H,  201,  Donop ;
III,  569.  Knyphausen  ;  IV.  6R3.  Pamch.

Heterodoxy,  charges  of,  II.  283,  Dwight,  T.  W.;  HI,  4,
Griswold,  S. ;  82,  Harker,  S. See  Heresy.

Heteroscian,  pen-name,  HI,  149,  Hazard,  R.  G.

Heth,  Joyce.  I,  173,  Barnum,  P.  T.

He  wins,  Mary,  II,  521,  Fox.  M.  H.

Hewitt,  James  L.,  HI,  192,  Hewitt,  M.  E.


744


HEWLINGS


HOOSAC


Hewlings,  Esther,  VI,  476,  White,  W.

Hewson,  W.,  Ill,  193,  Hewson,  T.  T.

Heyden,  Katherine,  V,  543,  Skeiie,  P.

Heyden,  Rev.  T.,  II,  581,  Gallitzin.

Heydon,  Sir  Christopher,  VI,  300,  Vincent,  P.

Heyes,  Peter,  II,  157,  De  Vries.

Heyward,  Daniel,  III,  193,  Heyward,  T.

H.  H.,  pen-name,  III,  386,  Jackson,  H.  M.  F.

H.  H.  M.,  pen-name,  III,  106,  Hartshorne,  H.

Hiawatha,  case  of  the,  IV,  24,  Lord,  D.

Hibbard,  Rev.  Billy,  III,  194,  Hibbard,  F.  G.

Hibbens,  Mistress,  execution  of,  I,  229,  Bellingham.

Hibbins,  William,  IV,  741.  Peters,  H.

Hibernia,  the  privateer,  IV,  550,  O'Brien,  Jere.

Hickling,  William,  pseudonym,  II,  122,  De  Costa.

Hickory  island,  capture  of,  II,  698,  Gowan,  O.  R.

Hicks,  Beverley  A.,  Ill,  184,  Herndon,  M.  E.

Hicks,  Isaac,  I,  165,  Barker,  J.

Hicks,  Rev.  Thomas,  IV,  713.

Hicksites,  III,  196,  Hicks,  E.

Hidalgo,  Cristobal,  Joaquin,  and  Mariano,  III,  197,  Hidalgo.

Hieroglyphics,  Egyptian,  key  to,  V,  474,  Seyffarth ;  first
type  or,  used  in  America,  IV,  352,  Mooldenke,  C.  E.;
Mexican,  III,  342,  Jgnacio  ;  key  to,  lost,  Igolino.

Hierophant,  the,  magazine,  I,  474,  Bush,  G.

Hierophilos,  pen-name,  IV,  405,  Moriarty.

High  Bridge,  III,  636,  Law,  G.

Higher  law,  the,  V,  471.

Highlanders,  colonies  of,  IV,  105,  Macdonell,  Alexander  ;
106,  Macdonell,  M.

Highlanders,  regiment  (79th  N.  Y.),  mutiny  in,  V,  672,
Stevens,  1. 1.

Hildreth,  Richard,  HI,  200,  201,  Hildreth,  H.  and  G.  M.

Hildreth.  Sarah,  I,  478,  Butler,  B.  F.

Hilgard,  Gustavus,  VI,  294,  Villard.

Hill,  Abraham,  HI,  204,  Hill,  I.

Hill,  Dr.  John  H.,  HI,  204,  Hill,  F.  M.

Hill,  Sir  Rowland,  HI,  650,  Leavitt.

Hill,  Samuel  H.,  IH,  691,  Leonard,  A.

Hill,  Sarah  A.,  V,  482,  Sharon.

Hill,  Mai.  Thomas,  III,  202,  Hill,  A.  P.

Hill,  William  and  Solomon,  III.  203,  Hill,  D.  H.

Hillard,  George  S.,  quoted,  H,  388.

Hillard,  William,  I,  402.  Brown,  James.

Hillities,  II,  539,  Freeman,  B.

Hill  memorial  school,  the  Athens,  HI,  204,  Hill,  F.  M.

Hillsborough,  N.  H.,  President  Pierce's  house  at,  illustra-
tion, V,  8.

Hillsborough,  N.  C,  church  at,  founded,  II,  747,  Green,

Hillsborough^  Earl  of,  rv,  66,  Lyndon  ;  VI,  171,  Tryon,  W.

Hillyar,  Capt.  James,  V,  74,  Porter,  D.

Hilton,  Capt.,  V,  185,  Rasle.

Hilton,  Col.,  V,  293,  Rochester.

Hilton  Head,  attack  on  the  fort  at.  n,  671,  Godon.

Hincks,  Chief -Justice  J.,  Ill,  211.  Hincks,  E.  W.

Hincks,  Dr.  T.  D.,  in,  212,  Hincks,  W.

Hindman,  Jacob,  IH,  213,  Hindman,  W.

Hine,  Charles,  pupil  of.  V,  710,  Story,  G.  H.

Hingham, Mass..  settled, III,  222,  Hobart,  P.;  academy  at,
II,  147,  Derby,  R. ;  IH,  189,  Hersey,  E. ;  gift  to  library  of,
II,  423,  Fearing  ;  meeting-house  at,  illustration,  IV.  537.

Hinman,  Rev.  S.  D.,  Ill,  82,  Hare,  W.  H.

Hinton,  Col.  Richard  J.,  V,  202,  Real/.

Hiokatoo,  IH,  424,  Jemison,  M.

Hip-diseases,  treatment  of,  I,  394,  Brown,  Buckminster.

Hiram,  O.,  mob  at,  V,  253,  Rigdon.

Hiram  college,  H,  600.

Hirscher,  Dr.,  I,  761,  Coxe.  A.  C.

Hisingerite,  discovery  of,  VI.  628,  Wurtz.

Hispaniola,  colony  in,  I,  697.  698  ;  royal  university  of,  739.
Cordova,  P.  de  ;  H,  376,  Esquivel  ;  cruelties  to  Indians
in,  I,  67,  Anacaona. ;  IV,  612,  Ovando  ;  III,  183  ;  Hernan-
dez, V. ;  gold-mines  in,  conquest  of,  IV,  567,  Ojeda  ;  towns
founded  in,  VI,  273,  Velasquez.

Historical  Magazine,  the.  VI, .487,  Whitmore.

Historical  societies,  Chicago  and  Pennsvlvania  gifts  to,  U,
659,  Gilpin,  H.  D. ;  of  Massachusetts,  687,  Gore,  C.

Hoadley,  Eli  S.,  rv,  248,  Mason,  W.

Hoar,  Lieut.  Daniel,  III,  220,  Hoar,  J.

Hoaxes,  the  Hvidsaerk  inscription,  I,  756,  Cowan,  F.;
newspaper,  III,  751,  Locke,  R.  A.;  brain  pictures,  VI,
698,  Rockwood.

Hobart,  Edmund,  III,  222,  Hobart,  P.

Hobart,  Miss,  III.  370.  Ives,  L.  S.

Hobart,  Rev.  Noah,  VI,  426,  Welles.  N.

Hobart  college,  H.  131  ;  gift  to,  V,  15,  Pierrepont.  W.  C.

Hobbs,  Frederic,  II,  705,  Granger,  D.  T.

Hobby,  Mr.,  VI.  373.

Hobkirk's  Hill,  battle  of,  V,  188,  Rawdon  ;  VI,  384,  Wash-
ington, W.

Hoboken,  N.  J.,  site  of,  I,  199,  Bayard,  W.;  Stevens  insti-
tute in,  illustration,  V,  675.

Hochelaga.  the.  I,  543-544,  Cartier,  J.

Hodgdon.  Maj.  S.,  V,  2.

Hodge,  Margaret,  I.  198.  Bayard.  J.

Hodgson,  John.  I.  198.  Bayard,  J.

Hoerkil.  the.  III.  869,  Husset.

Hoes,  Hannah,  VI,  234.


Hoes,  Mary,  VI,  230.

Hoey,  John,  in,  226,  Hoey.

Hoffman,  Edward  F.,  HI,  228,  Hoffman,  C.  F.

Hoffman,  Heinrich,  pupil  of,  IV,  308,  Merritt,  A.  L.

Hoffman,  J.  O.,  II,  290,  Eaton,  A.

Hoffman,  Matilda,  III,  228,  Hoffman,  S. ;  her  death,  360.

Hoffman,  Nicholas,  HI,  228,  Hoffman,  S.

Hoffman,  Prof.,  H,  384,  Jackson,  C.  L.

Hoffman,  Samuel  V.,  VI,  688,  Hoffman.  E.  A.

Hofmann,  Anna  K.,  H,  180,  Dimmock,  G.

Hofmann,  August  W.,  V,  260,  Rising,  W.  B.

Hoke,  Gen.  Robert  F.,  VI,  66,  Terry,  A.  H.

Holbrook,  Eliza  R.,  Ill,  76,  Hanson,  E.  R.

Holbrook,  Josiah,  III,  231,  Holbrook,  Alfred.

Holbrook,  Nelson  M.,  VI,  147,  Town,  S.

Holcombe,  R.  I.,  IV,  69,  Lyon,  N.

Holcroft,  Thomas,  I,  733,  Cooper,  T.  A.

Holden's  Magazine,  II,  517,  Fowler,  H.

Hold  the  Fort,  motive  of,  I,  294,  Bliss,  P.  P.

Holdup,  Thomas,  V,  678,  Stevens,  T.  H.

Holguin,  IV,  181,  Maldonado.

Holguin,  Alvarez,  TV,  366,  Montemayor.

Holka,  Mahratta  chief,  IV,  468,  Murray,  James.

Holland,  proposed  treaty  of,  with  America— its  result,  in,
630,  Laurens ;  commercial  treaty  with  America,  war
with  England,  666,  Lee,  W.

Holland,  J.  J.,  V,  218,  Reinagle.

Holland,  John,  II,  244,  Dudley,  W.  L.

Holland  land  company,  the,  IV,  560,  Ogden,  T  L.;  V,  470,
Seward,  W.  H.

Holland  purchase,  the,  II.  328,  Ellicott,  J.

Holley,  Alexander  H.,  HI,  235,  Holley,  A.  L.

Holliday,  Samuel,  V,  61,  Pomroy.

Hollingsworth,  Valentine,  IU,  237,  Hollingsworth,  L.

Hollis,  Thomas  Brand,  in.  237,  Hollis,  T.

Hollister,  Frederick,  V.  475,  Seymour,  H.

Holloway,  Junius  B.,  UI,  238.  Holloway,  L.  C.

Holly  Springs,  raid  on,  I,  337,  Bowers,  T.  S.;  capture  of,
H,  711  ;  VI,  245.  Fan  Dorn.

Holmes,  Ann  S.,  VI,  213,  Upham,  C.  W.

Holmes,  Daniel,  III,  243,  Holmes,  M.  J.

Holmes,  John  and  David,  III,  240,  Holmes,  A.

Holmes,  George,  VI,  255,  Van  Twiller.

Holmes,  Maj.,  in,  97.

Holmes,  Mary  Anne,  I,  317.

Holmes,  O.  W,  quoted,  II,  348,  418  ;  m,  48,  Halleck.  F.  G.;
TV,  702,  Peirce,B.;  heroine  of  a  poem  by.  U,  526,  Frank-
land  ;  his  birthplace,  illustration,  HI.  240.

Holmes,  William,  VI,  239,  Van  Curler,  J.;  255,  Van  Tiviller.

Holt,  Catherine,  IV,  252.  Mather,  R.

Holt,  Henry,  HI,  708,  Leypoldt.

Holton,  James,  VI,  491,  Whitney,  F.  A.

Holy  Alliance,  the,  III,  377.

Holy  band,  Wesley's,  I,  108,  Asbury.

Holy  Cross,  order  of  the,  I,  330,  Bourget ;  II,  650.  651.  Gil-
lespie, E.  M. ;  founded,  mission  of,  V,  607,  Sorin  ;  IV,  52,
Luers.

Holy  cross  college,  founded,  II,  286,  Dzierozynskin.

Holy  Ground,  the,  III,  376.

Holyoke.  founded,  II,  280,  Divight,  E.\  gift  to  charity  of,
X,7\%,  Street,  W.

Holyoke,  Rev.  Elizur,  m,  245,  Holyoke,  E.

Home  for  incurables,  the,  H,  447,  Field,  B.  H.

Home-Maker,  the.  magazine,  VI,  64,  Terhune,  M.  V.

Homes,  Luther,  III,  246.  Homes,  M.  S.  S.

Homes,  Capt.  Robert,  IU,  246,  Homes,  W.

Homes,  Sarah,  VI,  32.  Tuppan.B.

Homespun,  Henry,  pen-name,  V.  014,  Southwick.

Homespun,  John,  pen-name,  VI,  190,  Tuttle,  J.  F.

Homestead  bill,  I,  434  ;  HI,  7,  Grow  ;  the  first,  534,  Kil-
bourne,  James.

Homestead  laws,  I,  241.

Home,  Sweet  Home,  song,  TV.  686,  Payne,  J.  H.

Homiletic  Magazine,  the,  VI.  554,  Wilson,  J.  G.

Homoeopathy,  first  lady  in  the  institute  of,  HI,  390,  Jack-
son, if.  B.

Homoeopathic  institutions,  founder  of,  VI,  393,  Watson,
William  H.

Hondius,  Jodocus,  HI,  297.  298,  Hudson,  H.

Honduras,  conquest  of,  IV,  570.  Olid  ;  invasion  of,  388-389,
Morazan  ;  H,  593,  Garcia-Granados  ;  filibustering  expe-
dition to,  V,  609,  Soto  ;  revolt  of  slaves  in,  1, 106,  Arthur,
G.\  revolt  in,  revolution,  III,  9,  Guardiola;  grant  of
lands  in,  VI,  17.  Tabor ;  project  for  a  colony  in,  459,
Whelpleti,  J.  D.

Hone,  Philip,  m,  422.

Honest  John,  VI,  58,  Teedyuscung.

Honestus,  pseudonym,  I,  120,  Austin,  B.

Honorius,  pen-name,  Vl,  417,  Webster,  N.

Hook.  George  F.,  VI,  17,  Tabor.

Hooker,  Rev.  Edward,  III.  145.  Haynes,  John.

Hooker,  Joanna,  V,  495.  Shepard.  T.

Hooker,  John.  III.  219.  Hooker.  /.  B.

Hooker,  Sir  William.  II.  211,  Douglas,  D.

Hooper,  Alice  M.,  V,  749.

Hooper,  Robert  M.,  III.  252.  Hooper.  L.  H.

Hoorn,  exploring  company  of.  Ill,  684,  Le  Ma  ire.

Hoosac  tunnel,  the,  II.  117,  Dearborn,  H.  A.  S. ;  147,  Derby,
E.  H. ;  completion  of  the,  V,  481,  Shanly,  W.


HOOTON


HUNTINGDON


745


Hooton,  Elizabeth,  VI,  364,  Warren,  Joseph.

Hoover's  Gap,  defence  of,  II,  424,  Fearing,  B.  D.

Hope,  attacks  on  the  ship,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,  W.

Hope,  Henry,  HI,  64,  Hamilton.  H.

Hope,  Col.  James,  VI,  334,  Wallace,  J.  H.

Hope,  Sir  James,  IV,  109,  Macdougall,  W.

Hope  college,  I,  396.

Hope's  Check,  I,  484,  Button.

Hopetown,  Earl  of.  VI,  &34,  Wallace,  J.  H.

Hopewell,  the.  IH,  296,  Hudson,  H.

Hopkins,  Francis,  I,  516,  Campbell,  W.

Hopkins,  Gen.,  VI,  52.

Hopkins,  James,  VI,  471,  White,  H.  L.

Hopkins,  Mark,  II,  600.

Hopkins,  Dr.  Samuel,  satirized,  in,  585,  Ladd,  J.  B.

Hopkinsianlsm,  HI,  258,  Hopkins,  S.

Hopkinton,  HI,  254,  Hopkins,  Edward  ;  estate  at.  II,  526,
Frankland  ;  church  at,  V,  118,  Price,  Roger.

Hopothlayohola,  Chief,  IV,  125,  Mcintosh,  W.

Hopson,  Admiral,  VI,  280,  Vernon,  E.

Horace,  pen-name,  III,  348,  Ingersoll,  E.

Horace,  queer  translation  of,  IV,  649,  Parke,  John.

Horatius  Codes  of  the  Tyrol,  the,  II,  253,  Dumas.

Horatius  Flaccus,  pen-name,  VI,  626,  Wright,  R.  M.

Horgan,  Thomas,  IV,  257,  Mathew,  T.

Horicon,  Wis.,  founded,  HI,  620,  Larrabee,  C.  H.

Horn,  George,  III,  300,  Huelva.

Hornblower,  Mary,  I,  353.

Horner,  Robert,  III,  265,  Horner,  W.  E.

Hornet,  capture  by  the,  I,  256,  Biddle,  James  ;  fight  with
the  Peacock,  IH,  640,  Lawrence,  J.

Hornet's  nest,  at  Shiloh,  the,  II,  640,  Gibson,  R.  L.

Horse,  earliest  known  ancestors  of,  IV,  218,  Marsh,  0.  C.

Horsemanden,  Mary,  I,  486,  Byrd,  W.

Horseneck,  Putnam's  escape  at,  V,  141.

Horse-rake,  inventor  of  a,  V,  697,  Stoddard,  J.  C.

Horses,  fast,  I,  313,  Bonner  ;  humane  treatment  of,  II,  487,
Flower,  E.  F.  ;  taming  of,  V,  184,  Rarey  ;  VI,  604,  Wood-
ruff, H.

Horse-shoe,  battle  of  the,  VT,  620,  Wright,  B.;  Ill,  274,
Houston,  S. ;  376.

Horse-shoes,  machine  for  making,  I,  450,  Burden.

Hortalez  and  Co.,  Arm  of,  I,  210,  Beaumarchais.

Hortensius,  pen-name,  HI,  130,  Hay,  O.

Horton,  Gilbert,  case  of,  III,  411,  Jay,  W.

Horton,  Jotham,  II,  510,  Foster,  Ellen  H.

Kospicio,  in  Mexico,  the,  I,  428,  Bucareli.

Hospital  ward  dressing-carriage,  invention  of,  IV,  433,  Mor-
ton, T.  G.

Hot  Cinders,  Chief,  II,  608,  GaronhiaguS.

Houdon,  Jean  A.,  statue  by,  illustration,  VI,  379.

Houel,  M.,  II,  375,  Esnivent.

Hough,  Horatio  G.,  HI,  270,  Hough,  F.  B.

Hours  at  Home,  magazine,  V,  443,  Scribner  ;  V,  508,  Sher-
wood,  J.  M.

Housatonic,  discovery  of  the,  I,  295,  Blocks.

Housatonic,  the,  destruction  of,  III,  199,  Higginson,  F.  J. ;
V,  1,  Pickering,  C.  W.

Housatonnuck  Indians,  mission  to,  II,  310.

House-tax,  or  window-tax,  the,  II,  551,  Fries.

Houssatonnuc,  battle  at  the,  VI,  23,  Talcott,  J.

Houston,  Sir  Patrick,  III,  273,  Houston,  J.

Howard,  Sir  Charles,  IH,  277,  Howard,  F.

Howard.  J.  Q.,  Ill,  143,  Hayes,  R.  B.

Howard,  Joseph,  V,  700,  Stone,  D.  M.

Howard,  Joshua,  III,  277,  Howard,  J.  E.

Howard,  Martin,  IV,  381,  Moore,  M.

Howard,  O.  O.,  quoted,  III,  497,  Kearny,  P.

Howard,  Silence,  I,  422,  Bryant,  W.  C.

Howard  house,  Belvedere,  illustration,  ni,  277.

Howarth,  Joseph,  VI,  688,  Howarth,  E.  C.

Howe,  Eber  D.,  V,  624,  Spaidding,  S.

Howe,  Gen.,  opinion  on,  II,  266,  Duportail ;  charge  of  in-
competency, 582,  Galloivay,  J.

Howe,  Hezekiah,  III,  281.  Howe,  H.

Howe,  John,  II,  229,  Draper,  M.

Howe,  Judge,  I.  423.

Howell,  Elias,  in,  284,  Howell,  J.  B.

Howell,  Nathaniel  W.,  II,  760,  Greig.

Howitt,  Mary,  HI,  245,  Home  ;  William  and  Mary,  II,  490,
Foley,  M.  E.

Howland,  Gardiner  G.,  Ill,  287,  Howland,  R.  S.

Howland,  John,  III,  287,  Howland,  J.  ;  288,  Howland,
William  P.

Hoxie,  Richard  L.,  in.  289,  Hoxie,  V.  R.

Hoyt,  Denis,  HI,  428,  Jenks,  P.

Hoyt,  Mary,  V,  502,  Sherman,  W.  T.

Huaina  Capac,  II,  593,  Garcilaso.

Huajuapam,  Mex.,  siege  of,  III,  690,  Leon,  Antonio.

Huamacucho,  battle  near,  I,  493,  Cdceres.

Huarte,  Ana  M.,  Ill,  367,  Iturbide.

Huarte,  Catalina  de,  II,  325,  Elizaga.

Huascar,  the  monitor,  II,  727,  Grau.

Huato  Pioquinto,  bandit,  U,  370,  Escobedo,  M.;  HI,  634,
Lerdo.

Hubard,  James,  III,  291.  Hubard,  W.

Hubbard,  Charles  F.,  Ill,  293,  Hubbard,  L.  F.

Hubbard,  Sarah,  VI,  167.  Trumbull,  J.

Hubbard,  Thomas,  V,  309,  Rogers,  JV.


Hubbard's  Trail,  III,  292.  Hubbard,  G.  S.

Hubbardton,  battle  at,  H,  537,  Fraser,  S. ;  V,  369,  St.  Clair  ;
VI,  360,  Warner,  Seth.

Hubbell,  Rev.  Stephen,  III,  294,  Hubbell,  M.  S.

Huck,  Capt.  Christian,  I,  360.  Bratton  ;  IV,  90,  McClure,
J. ;  V,  752.

Huddleston,  William,  I,  174,  Ban:

Huddy,  Joseph,  I,  109,  Asgill.

Huddy,  Capt.  Joshua,  murder  of,  VI,  603,  Wocdhull,  J.

Hudson,  Christopher,  John,  Thomas,  and  Stephen,  HI,  296,
Hudson,  H.

Hudson,  Edmund,  I,  65,  Ames,  M.  C.

Hudson,  Henry,  his  ship,  illustration,  HI,  297.

Hudson,  Richard,  IV,  259,  Mathews,  J.

Hudson,  Stephen,  HI,  295,  Hudson,  C.

Hudson  bay,  expedition,  I,  227,  Bell,  R.\  VI,  165,  Troyes  ;
exploration,  II,  520,  Fox,  L. ;  534,  Franklin,  Sir  J. ;  HI,
399,  James,  T. ;  bay  and  strait,  discovery  of,  298,  Hudson,
H. ;  hostilities  in,  339,  Iberville  ;  destruction  of  trading-
posts  on,  616,  La  Perouse.

Hudson  Bay  Company,  claims,  HI,  436,  Johnson,  A.  S.;
posts  established,  struggles  with  rival  companies,  IV,
146,  McLeod,  John  ;  withdrawal  of  the  charter,  ibid.,
Malcolm  ;  revolt  against,  V,  252,  Riel ;  conflict  with  the
Northwest  Trading  Company,  461,  Semple,  R.;  union
with  Northwest  Company.  537,  Simpson,  Sir  G.

Hudson  river,  discovery  of,  in,  297  ;  underflow  of,  TV,  348,
Mitchell,  H. ;  attempt  to  bar  the,  V,  141  ;  steam  naviga-
tion of,  673.

Huemac,  King,  V,  149,  Quetzalcohuatl.

Huerta,  Gen.,  II,  167,  369,  Escobedo.

Huetzin,  King,  III,  371,  Ixtlilcuechahua  ;  VI,  140,  Tote-
pehu.

Huger,  F.  K.,  I,  308,  Bollman.

Huggerford,  Dr.  Peter,  III,  80,  Hardy,  E.

Huggins,  Louisa  C,  VI,  189,  Tuthill.

Hughes,  Margaret,  III,  517.  Kennedy,  A.

Hughes,  Sarah  M.,  IV,  266,  Maury,  S.  M.

Hughes,  William,  V,  46.

Huguenots,  settlement  of,  H,  267,  Dexpuy  ;  in  New  York,
55,  Daille  ;  massacre  of  a  colony  of,  697,  Gourgues  ;  New
Rochelle  purchased  for.  HI,  682,  Leisler  ;  colonies  of,  in
Florida  ;  366,  Isles  ;  629,  Laudonniere  ;  V,  232,  Ribaut ;
colony  of,  in  Brazil,  VI,  295,  Villegaignon.

Huguenot  society,  II,  122,  De  Costa  ;  III,  414,  Jay,  J.

Huitzilopochtli,  the  god,  VT,  64,  Tenoch  ;  123,  Tizoc.

Hulaniski,  I,  484,  Buttre.

Hull,  Canada,  founder  of,  VI,  619,  Wright,  A.

Hull,  Anna,  IV,  196,  Mansfield,  R

Hull,  Hannah,  V,  467,  Sewall.

Hull,  Isaac,  at  Bomba,  II,  295,  Eaton,  W. ;  medal  given  to,
illustration,  III,  310  ;  his  tomb,  311.

Hull,  Richard  and  Joseph,  HI,  308,  Hidl,  W.

Hulsemann,  Webster's  letter  to,  II,  455.

Humacao,  Chief,  IV,  23,  Loquillo.

Humbird,  Jacob,  V.  277,  Roberts,  W.  M.

Humble  Attempt  at  Scurrility,  a,  anonymous  pamphlet,
III,  317,  Hunt,  J.

Humboldt,  A.  von,  quoted,  IV,  481,  Navailles  ;  VI,  304,
Vizcaino.

Humboldt  glacier,  discovery  of.  III,  493,  Kane,  E.  K.

Humboltina,  discovery  of,  V,  266,  Rivero.

Hume,  David,  epistle  to,  III,  658.

Hume,  Joseph,  IV,  120,  MacGregor.

Humphrey,  Heman,  II,  470,  Fiske,  N.  W.

Humphreys,  Daniel,  HI,  312,  Humphreys,  D.\  313,  Hum-
phreys, J.

Humphreys,  Gen.  A.  A.,  VI,  379.

Hunchback,  attack  on  the  ship,  IV,  76,  McCann.

Hundred  Associates,  the,  IV.  529,  Nogaret.

Hundred-dollar  act,  the,  V,  603,  Snyder.  S.

Hungary,  controversy  on,  I,  336,  Boteen,  F.;  542.  Carter,
R. ;  revolution  in,  I,  344,  Brace,  C.  L. ;  crown-jewels  of,
V,  690,  Stillman,  W.  J.

Hungerford,  Henry  J.,  V,  598.  Smithson.

Hunkers,  I,  484,  Butts  ;  VI,  232  ;  245,  Van  Dyke,  H.  H.

Hunnibee,  Kate,  pen-name,  IV,  60,  Lyman,  L.  E,  B.

Hunsdon,  Lord,  I,  548,  Gary,  A.

Hunt,  Abijah.  V,  48,  Poindexter.

Hunt,  Charles  H.,  in,  747,  Livingston,  E.

Hunt,  Henry,  II,  232.  Drew,  L.

Hunt,  James,  VI,  578,  Wirt.

Hunt,  Leigh,  monument  to,  I.  605,  Childs,  G.  W.;  IH,  317,
Hunt.  J.;  quoted,  V,  27,  Pinkney,  N.

Hunt,  Louise  L..  III.  747,  Livingston.  E.

Hunt,  Thomas  and  Samuel  W.,  HI,  316,  Hunt,  H.  J.

Hunt.  Col.  Thomas,  V.  601,  Snelling,  J.

Hunter,  the,  m,  322,  Hunter,  J.  D.

Hunter-preacher,  the,  IV,  66,  Lynn.

Hunter,  John,  HI,  323,  Hunter,  W.

Hunter.  Dr.  J.,  HI.  301,  Huger,  T.  K;  TV,  705,  Physick  ;  V,
368,  St.  Clair  :  512,  Shippen,  W.

Hunter,  Dr.  William,  V,  512,  Shippen,  W.

Hunter,  W.  R„  I,  348,  Bradford,  J.

Huntley,  Ezekiel.  V,  525,  Sigourney.

Huntley,  Lydia.  HI,  337,  Hyde.  N.  M.

Huntilite,  discovery  of,  VI.  629,  Wurtz.

Huntingdon,  Countess  of,  VI.  478,  Whitefield.

Huntingdon,  Enoch,  H,  281,  Dwight,  Timothy.


746


HUNTINGTON


INDIANS


Huntington,  L.  I.,  British  occupation  of.  V,  121,  Prime ;
346,  Rumford.

Huntington,  Daniel.  HI,  325,  Huntington,  F.  D.

Huntington,  Jabez.  V.  502.  Smith,  S.  L.

Huntington,  Joseph,  HI,  30,  Hale,  N.

Hurbal,  Viscount  d\  H,  421,  Faucher.

Hurlbut,  Dr.  P.,  V,  624,  Spaulding,  S.

Hurley,  N.  Y.,  founding  of,  IV,  35,  Lovelace.

Huron,  wreck  of  the,  V,  359,  Ryan,  G.  P.

Huronian  rocks,  IH,  319,  Hunt,  T.  S.

Hurons,  the,  missions  to,  HI,  651,  Le  Caron  ;  I,  561,  Cha-
banel ;  592,  Chaumonot ;  363,  Brebeuf ;  mission  to,  II,
607 ;  IV,  314,  Gamier,  C;  slaughter  of,  by  Iroquois,  II,
607;  massacre  by,  74,  Daniel,  A.;  warfare  with  Mo-
hawks, IH,  435,  Jogues  ;  and  the  Iroquois,  572,  Kondia-
ronk  ;  village  destroyed  by  the  Iroquois,  596,  Lalemant ;
defeat  by  the  Iroquois,  IV,  314,  Michel.

Hurry,  William,  V,  261,  Ritch.

Hurtado,  Father  Juan,  H,  135,  Delgato.

Hurtado,  Lucia  Miranda  de,  IV,  187,  Mangore  ;  436,  Mos-
quera.

Hussey,  Christopher,  III,  330,  Hussey,  C.  G.

Hussey,  Obed,  V,  436,  Scott,  I.  M.

Huston,  Gen.  Felix,  III,  454,  Johnston,  A.  S.

Hutchins,  John,  V,  620,  Spalding,  B.  J.

Hutchinson,  Elisha,  IV,  253.

Hutchinson,  Elizabeth,  III,  373,  Jackson,  Andrew^

Hutchinson,  Ellen  M.,  V,  658,  Stedman,  E.  C.

Hutchinson,  Henry,  III,  334,  Hutchinson,  John.

Hutchinson,  Peter  O.,  HI,  333.

Hutchinson,  Richard.  Ill,  334,  Hutchinson,  Jesse.

Hutchinson,  Sallie,  IV,  574,  Oliver,  W.  S.

Hutchinson,  Col.  S.,  II,  488,  Floyd.  R.

Hutchinson,  Susanna,  HI,  331,  Hutchison,  Anne.

Hutchinson,  Thomas,  MS.  saved  from  his  house,  n,  320,
Eliot,  A.  ;  III,  294,  Hubbard,  W.

Hutchinson,  W..  J.  M,  and  J.,  IH,  331,  Hutchinson,  Anne.

Hutchinson  letters,  affair  of  the,  H,  529,  530  ;  HI,  333  ;  IV,
684,  Paxton,  C.

Hutton,  Dr.,  II,  264,  Du  Pont  de  Nemours.

Huxley,  Thomas  H.,  m,  680,  Leidy ;  pupil  of,  VI,  643,
Youmans,  W.  J.

Huygens  medal,  the,  IV,  503,  Newcomb,  S.

Hvidsaerk,  falls  of,  V,  160,  Rafn.

Hwa,  VI,  348,  Ward,  F.  T.

Hy  Brassail,  voyage  to,  I,  367,  Brendon.

Hydraulic  engineering,  II,  523,  Francis,  J.  B.

Hydraulic  machine,  invention  of  a,  II,  339,  Eluyar.

Hydrocephalus,  operation  for,  II,  666.  Glover,  Joseph.

Hydrogen,  life-boat,  the,  II,  524,  P>-ancis,  J.

Hydrography,  investigations  in.  IV,  348,  Mitchell,  H.

Hydrometers,  VI,  19,  Tagliabue  ;  immersed,  inventor  of  a,
V,  409,  Saxton.

Hydropathy,  introduction  of,  V,  508,  Sheio.

Hydrophobia,  prophylactic  treatment  for,  IV,  444,  Mott,  V.

Hydro-pneumatic  pulsating  vacuo-machine,  HI,  499,  Keely.

Hyleger,  Susan,  I.  140,  Bainbridge,  W.

Hyneman,  Leon,  V,  230,  Rhine.

Hyperion,  pen-name,  V,  151,  Quincy,  J.

Hyperion,  the,  balloon,  IH,  546.  King,  S.  A.

Hyperion,  character  in  Longfellow's.  IV.  13.

Hypochondriacs,  Roxbury  asylum  for,  I,  32,  Adams,  Seth.

I,  signature,  n,  312,  Edwards,  J.

Ianthe,  pen-name,  n,  341,  Embury,  Emma  C.

Icamole,  battle  at,  II,  167.

Ice.  artificial,  machine  for,  rv,  39,  Lowe,  T.  S.  C.  ;  inventor

of,  VI,  192,  Twining,  A.  C.
Iceland,  II,  468,  Fiske,  D.  W.  ;  millennium  of,  469  ;  VI,  41.
Icy  cape.  I,  715.

Idaho,  wreck  of  the,  VI,  42,  Taylor.  B.  R.
Ida  May,  story  and  song  entitled,  V,  19,  Pike,  M.  H.  G.
Ide,  Jacob,  HI,  318,  Hunt,  8.
Ide,  Jacob  D.,  II,  351,  Emmons,  N.
Idiots,  instruction  of,  HI,  283,  Howe,  S.  G.  ;  V,  454,  Seguin,

E.  ;  VI,  503.  Wilbur.  H.  B.  and  C.  T.
Idlewild,  illustration,  VI,  540.
Iguanodon  dinner.  III,  119,  Hawkins,  B.  W.
Iguarassu,  siege  of,  II,  163,  Dias,  H.
Iffuarassu  river,  colony  on,  HI,  403,  Jaquez.
Ike-Sima,  island  of,  V.  457,  Selkirk.
Ilchester,  Earl  of,  I,  9,  Acland.
Ilfracombe,  Canada,  HI.  102,  Harston.
Ilhuicamina,  IV,  368,  Montezuma  I.
Ilia,  IV,  588,  Orlando.
Illinois,  Indian disturbances in,  IH,  258,  Hopkins,  S.  ;

reservations  in,  V,  403,  Sauganash  ;  V,  484,  Shaubena  ;

Catholic  institutions  founded  in,  IH,  487,  Juncker  ;  V,

146,  Quarter  ;  northern  boundary  of,  V,  68,  Pope,  N.
Illinois  college,  gift  to,  III,  21J,  Hitchcock,  S.  A.
Illinois  country,  capture  of  the,  I.  627.
Illinois  Indians,  the.  grammar  of  their  language,  n,  728,

Oravter;  attacked  by  Iroquois,  III,  622; alliance  of,

with  the  French,  VI.  132,  Tontt/.
Illinois  normal  university.  Ill,  276,  Hovey,  C.  E.
Illustrated  New  Monthly,  the,  V,  665,  Stephens,  A.  S.
Ima  Sumac,  IV,  576.  Ol'lantai.
Imlay,  George,  n,  457,  Filson.
Iminaculates,  the,  HI,  479.


Immigration,  V,  476.

Imminent  Dangers  to  the  Free  Institutions  of  the  U.  S.,
anonymous  book,  IV,  428,  Morse,  S.  F.  B.

Immortality,  conditional,  doctrine  of,  IV,  747.  Pettingill,
John  H.

Impeachment,  first  case  of,  in  America,  IV,  389,  More  ;  of
the  president,  IH,  439.

Imperial,  city  of,  burned,  I,  603,  Chiguaihue.

Imports  in  bond,  direct  transportation  of,  II,  503,  Forney,
John  W.

Impost  law,  proposed,  of  1783,  IV,  165-166.

Inauguration  of  Washington,  the,  scene  of,  HI,  744,  Liv-
ingston, R.  R.

Inca,  the,  historian,  II,  593,  Garcilaso.

Incas,  the  last,  HI,  329,  Hurtado,  A.;  mummies  of,  HI,
329,  Hurtado,  A.

Inconnue,  pen-name,  H,  548,  French,  L.  V.

Incubators,  improvements  in,  V,  223,  Rcnwick,  E.  S.

Indemnification  for  losses  in  the  public  service.  IV,  144,
McLean,  J.

Independence,  American,  recognized  by  Holland,  1, 19.

Independence  hall,  IH,  61,  Hamilton,  A. ;  498,  Kearsley.

Independence,  Mt.,  I,  134,  Badlam.

Index  Expurgatorius,  the,  H,  227,  Draper,  J.  W.;  HI,  584,
Lacunza,  M.

India,  native  wars  in,  I,  340.  Boyd,  J.  P. ;  the  French  in,
712,  Conway,  T. :  war  in,  744,  745  ;  wars  in.  IV,  468,  Mur-
ray, James  ;  missionaries  in,  IH,  483,  Judson  ;  project
for  a  native  university  in,  625,  Lathrop,  John  ;  governor-
general  of,  IV,  311,  Metcalfe ;  exploration  of,  V,  420,
Schlagintweit,  R.

India,  ship,  loss  of,  ni,  314,  Humphreys,  Clement.

India  company,  the,  HI,  637,  Law,  John.

Indiana,  purchase  of  land  in,  HI,  96,  Hai-rison,  W.  H.;
early  days  of,  715,  Lincoln  ;  German  colonies  in,  IV,  237,
Marty  ;  legislature  broken  up,  insurrection  planned,  432,
Morton,  O.  P.;  community  in,  615,  Owen,  R.;  gift  to
orphans  in,  694,  Peck,  E.  J. ;  Catholic  institutions  in,  52,
Liters  ;  V,  373,  St.  Palais  ;  pioneer  of.  509,  Shields,  P.  H;
selection  of  site  for  capital,  VI,  123.  Tipton,  J.;  the
French  in,  298,  Vincennes ;  debt  of,  466,  Whitcomb,
James  ;  tract  named,  447,  Wharton,  S.

Indianapolis,  VI,  696.  Pierce ;  Gen.  Benjamin  Harrison's
home,  illustration.  686.

Indian  Apostle,  the,  II,  321,  Eliot,  J.

Indian  association,  Woman's,  VI,  697,  Rambaut.

Indian  Bible,  the,  II,  745,  Green,  S.

Indian  canoes,  fight  of  the  4,000, 1,  161.  Barba.

Indian  captivity,  story  of,  IH,  350,  Inglis,  M. ;  pretended,
322,  Hunter,  J.  D.

Indian  charity-school,  subscriptions  for,  IV,  552,  Occum  ;
VI,  455,  Wheelock,  E.

Indian  commissioners,  Albany  board  of,  III,  452.

Indian  creek,  I,  674,  Cody.

Indian  department,  frauds  in,  IV,  218,  Marsh,  O.  C.

Indian  fighter,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  23,  Tulcott,  J.

Indian  general,  the,  V,  138.  Pushmatahaw.

Indian  hill  farm,  V,  67,  Poore.

Indian  hunter,  statue,  illustration,  VI,  350.

Indian  knight,  the,  III,  200,  Higuaihue.

Indianola,  wharf  at,  IV,  395,  Morgan,  C.

Indianola,  surrender  of  the,  I,  399,  Brown.  G. ;  destroyed,
V,  75;  Porter,  D.  D.

Indians,  American,  oratory  of,  H,  120,  Decanesora  ;  speech
of  a  Stockbridge  chief,  I,  205,  Beall.  S.  W. ;  theories  of
the  origin  of,  10,  .4dai'r,  James;  208,  Beatty,  C;  327,
Boudinot ;  HI,  585,  Laet ;  590,  Lafitau  ;  VI.  75,  Thibaud  ;
277,  Verandrye  ;  their  claim  to  lands.  57,  Tecumseh  ;  mis-
sion to  the  Ojibways,  1, 129,  Bacon,  D. ;  mission  to  Potta-
wattamies,  134,  Badin  ;  160,  Baraga  ;  Cherokee  mission,
272,  Blackburn,  G.;  missions  in  Oregon,  288,  Blanchet,  A.
M.  A.  and  F.  R.:  missions  to. 331,  Bourne,  R.;  357,  Brain-
erd,  D. ;  363,  Brebeuf ;  368,  Bressani.  Breton  ;  397,  Brown,
D.;  421,  Bruyas;  485,  Byington;  549,  Casas,  B.;  617,
Ciquard  ;  II,  151,  De  Smet ;  155,  Detre  ;  in  California,
mission  to,  176,  Diego  :  Sulpician  mission  to  the,  196,  Dol-
lier  ;  mission  to  the  Illinois,  217,  Doutreleau  ;  of  New
England,  mission  to,  322 ;  first  book  in  their  language,
323  ;  of  Maine,  missions  to,  431,  Fenwick,  B.  J.  ;  552,
Frisbie  ;  early  missions  to,  728.  Gravier ;  767,  Grillet ;
HI,  41,  Hall,- James;  gift  to  missions,  71,  Hancock.  T.;
123.  Hawley,  G.;  first  Christian  convert  in  New  England,
194,  Hiacoomes  ;  missions  to.  on  Long  Island,  266,  Hor-
ton.  A.;  677,  Lefevre  ;  of  Martha's  Vineyard,  mission  to,
IV,  275,  Mayhew  ;  the  gospel  first  preached  to,  V.  478,
Seymour,  M.;  society  for  Christianizing,  VI,  506,  Wins-
low,  E. ;  treatment  of,  I.  349 ;  Spanish  cruelty  toward,
IV,  612,  Ovando  :  VI.  37.  Tastera  ;  135,  Toribio  ;  136,
Torre,  T.;  205,  Uhland  ;  224,  Valdivieso,  A.;  226,  Vahm-
zuela,  P.  F. ;  228,  Valvei-de  ;  treatment  of.  by  the  Portu-  •
guese,  290,  Vieira,  A. ;  treatment  of.  in  New  Spain.  586,
Witte  ;  bounty  offered  on  scalps  of,  IV,  36,  Lovewell ;
treaties  with,  1,  540,  Carson  ;  first  treaty  with,  in  Massa-
chusetts. VI.  566.  Winslow,  E. ;  first  blood  of,  shed  by  the
whites,  IV,  277,  Mayohanex  ;  war  with.  I.  77,  Andros,  E.;
Ill,  105,  Hartley.  T;  V,  64.  Pontiac  ;  672,  Stevens,  J.  J.;
fight  with  Chiekasaws,  I,  98.  Artaguette  ;  wars  with.  131,
Bacon.  N.;  273,  Black  Hawk  :  II.  15.  Crook  ;  Tuscaroras,
L  173,  Barnwell ;  Lord  Dunmore's  war  with,  315  ;  revolt


INDIANS


IRVING


747


of  Creeks,  323,  Bosomivorth  ;  the  Creeks,  338.  Bmoles,  W.
A. ;  at  Fort  Duquesne.  347  ;  Mohawks  and  Miamis,  359,
Brant ;  Creeks  and  Cumberlands,  war  with,  436,  Bu-
chanan. S. ;  Florida,  treachery  of,  518,  Cancer  ;  fighting
with,  in  Kansas  and  Colorado,  533,  Carr,  E.  A.;  battles
in  the  west,  II,  143,  Dent,  F.  T.;  193.  Dodge,  H.;  VI,  52  ;
III,  96,  Harrison,  W.  H;  IV,  322-323,  Mies,  N.  A.;  ex-
peditions against  western.  III,  278,  Howard,  0.  0.;
in  the  French  and  English  war,  610  ;  in  the  Revolu-
tion, 611,  Langlade  ;  Pigwacket  battle,  rvT,  36,  Love-
well  ;  war  with  Cayuse  and  Yakima,  495.  Nesmith,  J.  W. ;
first  contest  with,  in  New  England,  V.  643,  Standish  ;
expeditions  to  the  northwest  against,  743,  Sully,  A. ;  in
the  Revolutionary  war,  I,  479,  Butler,  J. ;  610,  Christian,
W. ;  scheme  to  unite  the,  IV,  295,  Menard,  M.  B. ;  mur-
ders by,  in  Tennessee,  III,  374  :  see  Nickajack  ;  liquor
traffic  with,  635,  Laval,  F.  X. ;  TV,  610,  Oudin  ;  bequest
for,  I,  48,  Alvord,  J. ;  promissory  notes  of,  V,  64,  Pon-
tiac  ;  Christian  villages  of,  I,  357,  Brainerd  ;  363.  Bre-
beuf;  administration,  improvements  in.  III,  72,  Han-
cock, J.;  only  Indian  graduate  of  Harvard,  I,  596,
Cheeshahteaumuck  ;  improvements  in  the  condition  of,

II.  719  ;  education  and  civilization  of,  VI,  680,  Fletcher  ;
the  Arkansas,  II,  263,  Du  Poisson  ;  books  in  the  dialects
of,  I,  160,  Baraga ;  literature  and  antiquities  of,  378,
Brinton  ;  manuscript  said  to  relate  to,  II,  197,  Domeneck  •
study  of  the  Poncas,  Sioux,  and  Oregon  tribes,  207,  Dor-
set/, J.  O. :  volume  on  the,  IV,  131,  McKenney  ;  dictionary,

III,  266,  Horsford,  E.  N. ;  collection  of  information  con-
cerning, V,  425,  Schoolcraft.  H.  R.

Indians  of  South  America,  missions  to,  I,  251,  Bertrand  ;
252,  Bete/a  ;  in  Santo  Domingo,  Central  America,  and
Mexico,  251,  Betanzos,  D.  de.

Indian  territory,  intrusion  into,  I.  104  ;  settlers  in.  III,  142.

India-rubber,  invention  of  processes  for,  III,  148,  Hayward,
N.\  shoes  of,  II,  683,  Goodyear,  C;  compound  of,  in-
vented, III,  282,  Howe,  J.  I;  machines  for  working,  I,
301,  Bogardus,  J.;  vulcanization,  II,  683-684,  Goodyear.

Indigena,  pen-name,  IV,  299,  Menken.

Industrial  education,  I,  731. See  Manual,  training.

Industrial  school  in  New  York,  founded,  IV,  24,  Lord,  J.  C.

Inebriates,  treatment  of,  IV,  245,  Mason,  T.  L. ;  660,  Par-
Inebriety'  I,  205j  Beard  ;  congress  of,  VI,  627,  Wright,  T.  L.

Ines  Huayllas  Nusta,  Princess,  V,  36,  Pizarro,  F.

Inez,  anonymous  novel,  II,  380,  Evans,  A.  J.

Infantry  equipments,  invention  of,  VI,  696,  Penrose.

Infant  schools,  I,  375,  Brigham.

Infernal  division,  the,  I.  333,  Boves.

Inflation  bill,  the,  II,  722.

Inflexible,  the,  defeat  of  Arnold's  fleet  by,  V,  416,  Schanl:,  J.

In  for  a  penny  in  for  a  pound  letter,  the,  V,  24,  Pine.

Ingalls.  Edmund,  III,  346,  Ingalls,  W.

Ingavi,  battle  of,  III,  34.3,  Iguain.

Ingersoll,  Eben,  III,  348,  Ingersoll,  R.  G.

Ingersoll.  Joseph  R,  II.  659,  Gilpin,  H.  D.

Ingersoll,  Lewis  D.,  II,  741,  Greeley,  H.

Inginac.  Gen.,  IV,  29.  Lorquet.

Inglis,  Mrs.  Charles,  tV,  418,  Morris,  M.  P.

Inglis,  Frances,  I,  496,  Calderon  de  la  Barca.

Ingraham,  Capt.  Joseph,  III,  350,  Ingraham,  D.  N.

Ingraham,  Nathaniel,  III,  350,  Ingraham,  D.  N.

Ingres,  I,  589,  Chasserieau.

Initial  deed,  the,  I,  395. '

Inkle  and  Yarico,  story  of.  III,  712,  Ligon.  R.

Innis,  Ky.,  attack  on,  I,  714,  Cook,  H.  and  J.

Inoculation,  I,  342,  Boylston,  Z. ;  prejudice  against,  II,  750,
Greene,  N. ;  introduction  of,  IV,  254,  Mather,  C.

Inpanqui,  Inca,  III,  291,  Huayna;  343,  Illatopa.

Inquiry  concerning  the  principles  of  a  commercial  system
for  the  U.  S.,  I,  38,  Aitken.

Inquisition,  the,  in  Mexico,  II,  267,  Duran  ;  566.  Furtado
de  Mendoca  ;  VI,  137,  Torres  y  Rueda  ;  320,  Waldeck.

Insane,  asylums  for,  disease  peculiar  to,  I,  228,  Bell,  L.  V. ;
abuse  or,  566,  Chambers,  C.  J.  ;  laws  for  asylums,  II,
105.  Davis,  L.  C;  reforms  in  care  of,  175,  Dickson,  J.  R.;
relief  for  the,  183,  Dix,  D.  L.\  asylums  for,  282,  Divight,
Nathaniel  ;  asylum  for,  III,  389,  Jackson,  James  ;  in-
struction of,  II,  289,  Earle,  P.;  care  of,  731,  Gray,  J.  P.;
Ill,  512,  Kempster ;  661,  Lee,  C.  A.  ;  IV,  101,  McDonald,-
J.  ;  512,  Nichols,  Charles  H.  ;  V.  668,  Steuart,  R.  S.;  VI,
126,  Todd,  Eli ;  hospitals  for,  HI,  554,  Kirkbride,  T.  S.  ;
Longview  asylum,  608,  Langdon,  O.  M;  Worcester  asy-
lum, IV,  190,  Mann,  H. ;  proposed  appropriation  for  the,
V,  9  ;  village  system  for  the,  VI,  563,  Wines,  F.  H.

Insanity,  V,  633,  Spitzka.

Insects,  injurious,  researches  on,  V,  255,  Riley,  C.  V.

Instruction,  doctrine  of,  I,  430.

Insurance  companies,  II,  127,  Delafleld.  John  ;  first,  in  U.
S.,  IV,  494,  Nesbitt ;  methods  of.  originated,  754,  Phelps,
G.  R.;  commission;  a,  VI,  622,  Wright,  E.

Insurgente,  the,  capture  of,  V,  296,  Rodgers.

Integralism,  I,  76,  Andrews,  S.  P.

Internal  improvements,  policy  of,  V,  54.

Internal  revenue,  V,  186,  Raum  ;  districts,  I.  103.

Intercolonial  railway,  the,  II,  480,  Fleming,  S.

Interest,  inventor  of  a  new  method  of  computing,  VI,  424,
Welch,  J.

International  law,  controversy  over  Wheaton's,  II,  71  ;


association  for  reform  in,  448,  Field,  D.  D. ;  association
for  the  codification  of,  IV,  322,  Miles,  J.  B.

International  Magazine,  the.  III,  4,  Griswold,  R.  W.

International  Review,  the,  III,  649,  Leavitt,  J.  M.  ;  IV,  1,
Lodge,  H.  C. ;  428,  3for.se,  J.  T.

Interstate  commerce  commission,  the,  V,  668,  Sterne.

Interstate  commerce  act,  VI,  668,  Aldrich.

Interviewing,  newspaper,  in  Europe,  IV,  116,  MacGahan.

In  the  Hospital,  anonymous  poem,  HI,  288,  Howlaud,
Mary  W.

Inti  Cusi  Huallpa,  in,  291,  Huascar.

Intrepid,  the,  I,  409,  Brown,  Moses  ;  H,  121  ;  destruction  of
the,  IV,  10,  Longfellow,  H.  W.  ;  V,  605.  Somers,  R.  ;  VI,
313,  Wadsworth.  H;  IV,  87,  McClintock,  F.  L.

Intrepide,  the,  burning  of,  VI,  269,  Vaugiraud.

Inverness,  Ga.,  IV,  124,  Mcintosh,  L.

Investigator,  voyage  of  the,  IV,  90,  McClure,  Sir  R. ;  V,  21,
Pirn,  Bedford,  C.  T.

Invincible  Captain,  the,  n,  166,  Diaz  Melgarejo.

Iowa,  gift  to,  VI,  668,  Aldrich  ;  Catholic  institutions  in,  IV,
23,  Loras  ;  V,  599,  Smyth,  C.

Iowa  colleges,  gifts  to,  H.  767,  Grimes,  J.  W.  ;  HI,  2,  Grin-
nell,  J.  B.

Ipecacuanha,  discovery  of,  III,  340,  Iff ;  V,  30,  Pison  ;  cult-
ure of,  III,  636,  Lavradio  ;  IV,  472.  Mutis.

Ipswich,  Mass.,  I,  678,  679,  Cogswell  ;  laid  out,  IH,  312,
Humfrey  ;  settlement  of,  V,  380,  Saltonstall,  R. ;  remon-
strance of  citizens  of,  VI,  580,  Wise,  J.

Iredell,  James,  H,  242,  Duckinfleld.

Iredell,  Penelope.  IV,  161.  McRee,  W.

Ireland,  Gov.,  of  Texas,  II,  168.

Ireland,  agitation  in,  I,  524  ;  II,  178,  Dillon,  J.  B. ;  German
emigrants  to,  341,  Embury,  P.;  efforts  for  independence
of,  349,  350,  Emmet ;  patriotic  movements  in,  473,  Fitz-
gerald, Lord  ;  famine  in,  650,  Gillespie  ;  insurrection  of
1798,  665,  Glendy,  J. ;  rebellion  of  1798,  698,  Gowan,  O.  R. ;
IV,  105,  Macdonell,  Alexander ;  V,  383,  Sampson,  W. ;
movement  for  independence  in,  1848,  IV,  283,  Meagher  ;
national  party  in,  treason  felony  bill  passed,  341,  Mitchel,
J.  ;  revolutionary  movements  in,  579,  (XMahony  :  587,
O^Reilly,  J.  B.  ;  Desmond  rebellion  in,  V,  162 ;  relief  in
time  of  famine,  289,  Robinson,  W.  E.  ;  revolutionary
movements  in,  406,  Savage,  John  ;  gift  to,  682.

Irenaeus,  pen-name,  V,  122,  Prime,  S.  I.

Iridium,  process  for,  invented,  II,  244,  Dudley,  W.  L.

Irish  brigade,  the,  IV,  283,  Meagher  ;  458,  Mulligan.

Irish  national  league,  the,  VI,  700,  Sullivan.

Iron,  made  from  black  sand,  H,  324,  Eliot,  Jared  ;  medal
awarded  for,  illustration,  324  ;  first  works  in  America,  I,
246,  Berkeley,  J. ;  HI,  425,  Jenckes,  J.  ;  inventions  in  pro-
cesses and  uses  of,  I,  49,  Alger,  C. ;  the  industry  in  Penn-
sylvania, 237,  Benner  ;  works,  529,  Carnegie  ;  manufact-
ure, 731.

Iron  and  steel,  manufacture  of,  IH,  192,  Hewitt,  A.  S.:  im-
provements in  the  manufacture  of,  318,  Hunt,  R.  W.

Iron  boats,  II,  524,  Francis,  J.

Iron  brigade,  the,  H,  401,  Fairchild,  L. ;  TV,  303,  Meredith,
Solomon.

Iron  buildings,  I,  301,  Bogardus,  J.

Iron-clad  oath,  the,  I,  197,  Bayard,  J.  A. ;  H,  448,  Field,
S.  J. ;  605,  Garland.

Iron-clad  vessels,  II,  287,  Eads  ;  V.  674-675,  Stevens,  R.  L.

Iron  grays,  the,  II,  628,  Gerard  ;  VI,  5,  Swartout,  S.

Iron-mines,  I,  282,  Blair.  J.  I. ;  at  Lynn,  373.  Bridges,  R.

Ironsides,  Old,  IH,  309,  310  ;  name  given,  311.

Ironton,  library  at,  I,  374,  Briggs,  C.

Iroquois,  the,  I,  363,  Brebeuf ;  mission  to  and  treaty  with,
421,  Bruyas;  missions  to,  525,  Carheil,  S.;  hostility
of,  to  the  French,  568,  569,  Champlain  :  H,  80,  Daulac  ;
554 ;  warriors,  sent  to  the  galleys,  142,  Denonville  ;
French  expedition  against,  HI,  189,  Hertel ;  in  war  of
1812,  445,  Johnson,  J.  S.;  under  Sir  W.  Johnson,  452  ;  in
the  Revolution,  555,  Kirkland,  S. ;  and  the  Hurons,  572,
Kondiaronk ;  and  the  French,  577,  Kryn  ;  alliance  of,
with  the  English,  601,  Lamberville  :  defeated  at  Ville-
marie,  686,  Le  Moyne  ;  mission  to,  688,  Le  Moyne,  S. ;  ex-
pedition against,  IV,  34,  Louvigny ;  purchase  of  land
from  (1788),  348.  Mitchill ;  French  treaty  with,  at  Three
Rivers,  374,  Montmagny;  study  of  the,  403,  Morgan,  L.  H. ;
title  of,  to  lands,  560,  Ogden,  A. ;  efforts  to  reconcile,  with
the  French,  611,  Oureouhari  ;  present  chief  of,  650.  Pmrr-
ker,  E.  S. ;  temporary  peace  of,  with  the  French,  V,  30,
Piskaret ;  languages,  studies  in,  145,  Pyrlams  ;  studies
in  dialects,  563,  Smith,  Erminnie  A.:  villages  burned,
738,  Subercase  :  expedition  of  1779  against,  741,  Sullivan,
J.;  relations  of,  with  the  French,  VI,  59,  60,  Teganisso-
rens  ;  reservations  of,  in  New  York.  85,  Thomas,  P.  E.;
hostilities  against  the  French,  132,  Tonty ;  defeated  by
the  French,  151,  Tracy,  Marquis  de  ;  last  attempt  to  de-
tach, from  the  British,  265,  Vaudreuil,  P.  F.  de  R. ;  alli-
ance of  the,  291,  Viele,  A.  C.

Irrepressible  conflict,  the,  V,  471.

Irvin,  Alexander.  IV,  277,  Mayo,  W.

Irvine,  Adam,  in.  357,  Irvine,  James.

Irvine,  George,  III.  357,  Irvine,  James.

Irving,  Ebenezer,  IU,  361,  363.  Irving,  T.

Irving,  Washington,  sketch  by,  II.  127,  Delafleld.  John  ;
original  of  a  character  of,  277,  Duval,  W.  P.:  his  house,
illustration,  HI,  362  ;  house  described  by,  VI,  243.


748


IRVING


JEROME


Irving,  William,  III,  360.

Irwin,  Sarah  A.,  IV,  474,  Myers,  S.  A.

Isaac  T.  Hopper  home,  II,  636,  Gibbons,  A.  H.;  Ill,  261.

Isabel,  pen-name,  IV,  450,  Mowatt.

Isabel  de  Braganza,  Princess,  IV,  590,  Orleans,  L.  P.  M.

Isabella,  Princess,  IV,  699,  Pedro  II.

Isabella,  of  Spain,  I,  697  ;  II,  373,  Espartero  ;  494,  Fonseca,
J.  R. ;  V,  464,  Serrano.

Isabella,  Empress,  II,  362,  Ercilla.

Isabey,  Eugene,  I,  399,  Brown,  G.  L.

Isham,  John,  in,  366.

Isham,  Mary,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W.

Isis,  capture  of  the  frigate,  IV.  429,  Mortemart.

Isla,  M.  M.,  IU,  197,  Hidalgo,  M.

Isla,  the  brothers,  III,  480,  Juarez,  B.  P.

Island  No.  10,  plan  for  passing,  I,  159,  Banvard :  II.  497,
Foote,  A.  H;  Ill,  50;  61,  Hamilton,  S.;  VI,  191,  Twee-
dale  ;  324,  Walke.

Island  of  St.  John,  III,  521,  Kent,  Duke  of.

Island  Queen,  the,  capture  of,  I,  204,  Beall,  J.  Y.;  456,
Burley.

Islas  Ricas,  discovery  of,  VI,  304,  Vizcaino.

Isle  aux  Noix,  I,  611,  Christie,  G.

Isle  of  Pines,  the,  II,  414.

Isle  of  Wight  (N.  Y.),  H,  595,  Gardiner.

Islip  Grange,  estate  of,  IV,  517,  Nicolls,  W.

Ismail,  Khedive,  II,  689,  Gorringe.

Israel,  lost  tribes  of,  II,  322.

Is  That  All  ?  anonymous  novel.  V,  113,  Preston,  H.  W.

Itabira  gold-mines,  III,  200.  Hilbemaz.

Italian  mission,  established,  VI,  590,  Wolfe.

Italian  opera,  first  company  in  U.  S.,  II,  592,  Garcia.  M.

Italy,  struggle  of  1849  in,  II,  561,  Fuller,  S.  M.;  schools
and  home  for  children  in,  693,  Gould,  E.  B. ;  first  minis-
ter to  the  new  kingdom  of,  IV,  217,  Marsh,  G.  P. ;  free-
dom of,  VI,  681-682,  Garibaldi.

ItamaracA,  battle  at,  II,  434,  Fernandes',  C.

Itamaraca,  island  of,  HI,  574,  Koster.

Itard,  Jean  Gaspard,  pupil  of,  V,  454,  Seguin,  E.

Itasca,  the,  I,  399,  Brown,  G.\  496.  Caldwell,  C.  H.  B.

Itinerant  Dey  of  New  Jersey,  the,  III,  743,  Livingston,  Wm.

Itinerant  preachers,  law  concerning,  II.  461,  Finley,  S.

Ituzaing6,  battle  of,  HI,  186,  Herrera,  N. ;  634,  Lavalleja.

Itza  nation,  the,  founded,  1, 519,  Canek  ;  III,  345,  Infante,  H.

Itzen-caan.  or  Itzen-mayal,  VI,  654,  Zamna.

Itzstein,  III,  156,  Hecker,  F.  K.  F.

Iuka,  battle  of,  II,  711 ;  V,  119,  Price,  S.\  324.

Ives,  Lieut.  Joseph  C,  IV,  353,  Mollliausen ;  501,  New-
bern/,  J.  S.

Ives,  Thomas  B.,  I,  396.  Broum,  N.

Ivie,  Mary,  n,  148,  De  Rosset,  A.  J.

Ivison,  David  B.,  Ill,  371,  Ivison,  H.

Ivy  Creek,  battle  of,  IV,  225,  Marshall,  C.  A.

Izamal,  city  of,  VI,  654,  Zamna.

Izamnat-Ul,  VI,  654,  Zamna.

Izard,  Elizabeth,  VI,  624,  Wright,  A.

Izard,  Mary,  IV,  317,  Middleton,  A.

Izard,  Sarah,  I,  515,  Campbell,  W.

Izquierdo,  II,  673,  Gomez.

Jablousky,  Bishop  D.  E.,  IV,  524,  Nitschmann,  D.

Jachman,  B.  de.  II,  439,  Fernow.

Jack,  Captain,  Modoc  leader,  I,  518,  Canby.

Jack-chain,  machine  for  making,  HI,  505,  Kellogg,  G.

Jackson,  Judge  Albert,  III,  564,  Kuott.

Jackson,  A.,  disruption  of  his  cabinet,  II,  294,  Eaton,  M.
L. ;  headquarters  at  New  Orleans,  illustration,  III,  376  ;
Hermitage,  illustration,  381.

Jackson,  Anna  C,  IV,  43,  Lowell,  A.  C.

Jackson,  Judge  Charles,  IH,  240,  Holmes,  0.  W. ;  294,  Hub-
bard, S.

Jackson,  Charles  L.,  rv,  70,  Mabery.

Jackson,  Cummins,  HI,  391,  Jackson,  T.  J.

Jackson,  Capt.  Daniel,  HI,  390,  Jackson,  M.  B.

Jackson,  Hugh,  IH,  373,  Jackson?;  Andrew.

Jackson,  James,  parodied.  II,  533  ;  VI,  691.  Lakey.

Jackson,  Dr.  James.  Ill,  240,  Holmes,  O.  W.

Jackson,  I.  R.,  HI,  98.

Jackson,  Miss  L.,  II.  344.

Jackson,  Richard,  II.  118,  De  Berdt.

Jackson,  Maj.  Timothy,  III,  386,  Jackson.  F.

Jackson,  W.  S.,  in,  386,  Jackson,  H.  M.  F.

Jackson,  Miss.,  capture  of,  II,  712.

Jacksonville,  Fla..  capture  of,  HI,  199,  Higginson,  T.  W.\
battle  of,  IV.  157.  McPherson,  J.  B. ;  engagement  near,
II,  40.  Gushing,  W.  B.

Jacob,  Relief,  V,  744.  Sumner,  C.

Jacob's  ladder.  Mt.  Washington,  illustration,  IV,  219.

Jacobins,  Lafayette's  letter  denouncing,  IH,  589.

Jacobs,  Bela,  III,  395.  Jacobs,  S.  8.

Jacque,  Charles,  I,  685,  Cole,  J.  F.

Jacquesson,  Louis,  pupils  of,  IV,  520,  Niemeyer,  J.  H. ;  VI,
171,  Tryon,  D.  W.

Jacquet.  Jean  Paul.  ni.  295.  Hudde.

Jaequet.  Col.,  Ill,  557,  Kirkioood.  R.

Jadassohn,  I,  563,  Chadwick,  G.  W.

Jakob,  Prof.  L.  H.  von,  V,  284,  Robinson,  E.

Jalapa.  plan  of,  I,  476.  Bustamente,  A.:  capture  of.  V,  441.

Jamaica,  discovery  of,  I,  697 ;  towns  founded  in,  II,  376,


Esquivel ;  capture  by  the  English,  569,  Gage.  T. ;  earth-
quake in,  III.  222,  Hobby,  Sir  C;  New-Englanders  in-
vited to  colonize,  II,  684,  Gookin,  D.\  insurrections  in,
396,  Eyre.  E.  J. ;  685  ;  executions,  686,  Gordon,  G.  W. ;
French  and  Spanish  in,  III,  631,  Laurent ;  revolt  in,  IV,
457,  Mulgrave,  C.  H.

Jamaica,  N.  Y.,  II,  133,  De  Lancey,  O. ;  church  contest  in,
IV,  155,  McNish.

Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.,  school  at.  I,  475,  Bussey,  B.

James  II.,  U,  85,  David,  E.;  his  toleration  of  dissenters,

IV,  714.

James,  Abel,  IH,  399,  James,  T.  C.

James,  Capt.,  IV,  368,  Montez.

James,  Charles  P.,  I,  5,  Abbott.  B.  V.

James,  Dr.  Daniel,  HI,  397,  James,  E.

James,  Elizabeth,  VI,  478,  Whitefleld.

James,  G.  P.  R.,  II,  450,  Field,  M.  B.

James,  Judge,  I,  482.  Butler.  A.  P.

James,  Julia  L.,  I,  483,  Butterfield,  D.

James,  Mrs.  Louis.  VI.  316,  Wainwright,  J.  M.

James,  Uriah  P.,  Ill,  398,  James,  J.  F.

James,  W.  D.,  IV,  209,  Marion.

James  bay,  III,  399,  James,  T.

James  river,  bridge  over,  IV,  277,  Mayo.  John.

James  Stanley,  anonymous  book,  III,  516,  Kennedy,  C.

Jamestown,  N.  Y.,  II,  495,  Foote,  E.  T.

Jamestown,  Va.,  settlement  on  the  site  of,  I,  123,  Ayllon ;
colony  at,  II,  691,  Gosnold  ;  settlers  of,  IV,  505,  Newport ;
supposed  discovery  of  gold,  IV,  505  ;  settlement,  V,  570  ;
burned,  I,  131,  Bacon,  N.

Jamestown  Ford,  engagement  at,  VI,  399.

Janemo,  Chief,  IV,  523,  Ninegret.

Janeway,  T.  L.,  Ill,  401,  Janeway,  J.  J.

Jans,  Anneke,  I,  301,  Bogardus.  E.

Jansen,  William,  grant  to,  III,  453.

Jansen  family,  the,  HI,  444,  Johnson,  J.  B.

Jansenists,  the,  VI,  261,  Varlet.

Janvrin.  Mary  W.,  II,  335,  Ellsworth.  M.  W.

Japan,  II,  765,  Griffls;  fight  at  Osaka,  358,  English,  E.;
ports  of,  opened,  455  ;  American  seamen  imprisoned  in,
667,  Glynn  ;  first  commercial  treatj*  with,  HI,  95,  Harris,
T.;  survey  of,  IV,  59,  Lyman,  B.  S.;  scientific  researches
in,  423,  Morse,  E.  S. ;  296,  Mendenhall,  T.  C. ;  first  scien-
tific navigator  of,  476,  Nakahama  ;  U.  S.  relations  with,

V,  131,  Pruyn,  R.  H;  first  American  official  of,  562,
Smith,  E.  P. ;  expedition  to  and  treaty  with,  IV,  737,  Per-
ry, M.  C;  agricultural  college  in,  I,  631.  Clark,  W.  S.;
indemnity  fund,  the,  II,  544," Frelinghuysen,  F.  T.;  Ill,
272,  House,  E.  H.

Japanese,  dictionary  of,  III,  179,  Hepburn.

Jaramillo,  Juan  de,  IV,  206,  Marina.

Jaranta,  Chief,  HI,  607,  Lane,  Joseph.

Jardineiros,  the,  III,  430,  Jequitinhonha.

Jarvis,  William,  IV,  151,  MacNab.

Jason,  the  privateer,  IV,  189,  Manley,  J.

Jasper,  Margaret,  IV,  712.

Java,  capture  of  the,  1, 141.

Jay,  Eve,  rV,  461,  Munro,  H.

Jay,  John,  I,  19  ;  residence,  illustration,  III,  410  ;  investi-
gating commission,  I,  100  :  treaty,  III,  58,  410 ;  an  Eng-
lish opinion  of,  ibid. :  III.  542,  King,  R. ;  papers  relating
to,  rv,  169,  223  ;  popular  clamor  over,  242,  Mason,  S.  T. :
V,  177,  Randolph,  E.\  VI,  417,  Webster,  N.;  V,  596,  Smith,
William  Loughton.

Jayne,  Juan,  n,  575,  Gali.

Jayne,  Ebenezer,  HI,  414,  Jayne,  D.

Jeannette,  voyage  of  the,  II,  72.  Danenhower  ;  137,  DeLong.

Jeannette  island,  discovered,  H,  137.  De  Long.

Jebb,  Dr.  John,  V,  129.

Jefferson,  Hettie,  IV.  133,  Mackenzie,  H.

Jefferson,  Maria,  II,  360,  Eppes.

Jefferson,  Peter,  11.557,  Fry,  Joshua  ;  HI,  415,  Jefferson,  T.

Jefferson,  Thomas,  sermon  aimed  at.  II.  351.  Emmons,  A'.;
his  controversy  with  Livingston,  HI.  746  :  election  of.  59;
his  home,  illustration,  419  ;  his  tomb,  423 ;  his  seal,  421  ;
414,  Jefferson,  J.

Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  IV,  150,  McMillan,  John.

Jefferson  college,  La.,  founded,  V.  313.  Roman.

Jefferson  medical  college,  IV,  85,  McClellan,  G. ;  gifts  to,

• H,  340,  Ely,  E.  S.

Jefferson  Davis,  the  privateer,  II.  99.

Jeffrey,  Alexander,  III.  424,  Jeffrey,  R.  V.  G.

Jeffrey,  Lord,  III,  668.  Lee,  H.

Jeffrey,  Miss,  V,  222,  Renwick.

Jemison,  Thomas,  III,  424,  Jemison,  M.

Jenkins,  Alexander  M.,  lV,  5,  Logan,  J.  A.

Jenkins.  W.,  Ill,  426,  Jenkins,  A.  A.

Jenks.  Lewis  E.,  HI,  428,  Jenks,  P.

Jenks,  Nathan,  III,  428,  Jenks,  E.  W.

Jenks,  Dr.  Phineas,  IV,  683.  Paxon.

Jennings,  Edmund,  IV,  358,  Monroe,  J.

Jenninps,  William,  VI,  690,  Jennings.  F.

Jennison.  Silas  H.,  V,  478.  Seymour.  H.

Jennison's  Jayhawkers,  IV,  251,  Mather,  F.

Jeremie,  III,  584,  Lacroix.

Jeremie,  Hayti,  founded,  IV,  445,  Motte,  E.  A.

Jeremy  Levis,  anonymous  book,  IV,  597,  Osborn,  L.

Jerome,  Ambrosini.  Ill,  17.  Guy.  S.  J.

Jerome,  Rev.  C,  IH,  430,  Jerome,  I.  E.


JERSEY


JOURNALISM


749


Jersey  blues,  the,  II,  113,  Dayton,  E.;  V,  430,  Schuyler,  P.

Jersey  City,  ^Esthetic  society  of,  V,  563,  Smith,  Erminnie  A.

Jerusalem,  N.  Y.,  VI,  512,  Wilkinson,  Jemima.

Jervey,  Mrs.  Louis,  II,  656-057,  Oilman,  C.  H.

Jessop,  George  H.,  IV,  261,  Matthews.

Jessup,  Augustus  E.,  IV,  379,  Moore,  C.  J.

Jesuits,  the  first,  in  North  America,  IV,  236,  Martinez,  P. ;
at  Port  Royal,  249,  Masse  ;  V,  9,  Poutrincourt ;  in  Cana-
da, I,  569,  Champlain  ;  II,  554 ;  VI,  277,  Ventadour ;
their  property  talcen  in  Canada,  IV,  334,  Milne,  R.  S. ;
dissensions  with  the  Recollets,  314,  Michel ;  Indian  policy
of.  500,  Ormoncl ;  missionaries,  massacre  of,  1, 124,  Azeve-
do,  I. ;  accused  of  design  to  found  an  independent  state  in
Uruguay,  II,  586,  Gama,  J.  B.  da  ;  alleged  empire  of  the,
in  South  America,  IV,  493,  Nenguiru  ;  1, 522,  Cardenas,
B. ;  colleges  founded  in  Peru,  98,  Arriaya  ;  expulsion  from
Paraguay,  II,  190,  Dobrizhoffer  ;  expulsion  from  South
America,  IV,  32,  Lottensch  iold ;  509,  Ola  vide ;  573,  Olivares;
suppression  of,  I,  538,  Can-oil,  J. ;  IV,  22,  Lopez,  J.  F. ;
abolition  of,  II,  300,  Enriquez,  M. ;  troubles  of,  in  Mexico,
IV,  634,  Palafox  ;  in  the  U.  S.,  113,  McElroy,J.\  missions,
bankruptcy  of,  abolition  of,  in  France.  Ill,  634,  Lava-
lette  ;  expulsion  from  Belgium,  IV,  485,  Neale,  L. ;  work
on,  burned,  II,  353,  Emparan  ;  missions,  I,  58,  Allouez  ;
61,  Altham  ;  67,  Anchieta  ;  87,  Arce,  M.;  124,  Azevedo,
I.;  163,  Barcena,  A.  de  ;  254,  Biard;  363,  Brebeuf,
Breck  ;  368,  Bressani  ;  421,  Bruyas  ;  525,  Carheil ;  561,
Chabanel;  582,  Charlevoix  ;  592.  Chaumonot;  037,  Claver;
II,  51,  Dablon  ;  62,  Damen  ;  74,  Daniel :  146,  Dequen  ;
607,  Gamier,  C.  and  J.;  728,  Oravier ;  707,  Grillet ;  III,

II,  Guignas :  12,  Gumilla  :  118,  Havestad  ;  181,  Herdo-
nana  ;  183,  Hermstaedt ;  184,  Herran,  J.;  220,  Hoecken  ;
204,  Home  ;  II,  096,  Goupil ;  III,  342,  Igne-Chivre  ;  344,
Imhoffer  ;  345,  Inama  ;  346,  Ingenhous ;  300,  Isoart ;
396,  Jacome  ;  404,  Jarque  :  407,  Jaubert ;  435,  Jogues  ;
476,  Jouffroy  ;  572,  Konschak  :  577,  Kiihn  ;  596,  Lale-
mant ;  001,  Lamberville  ;  082,  Le  Jeune  ;  085,  Le  Mer-
cier,  F.  ;  087,  Le  Moyne,  S.  ;  713,  Lima,  M.  ;  IV,  8,
Lombard  ;  32,  Lottenschiold  ;  47,  Lozano,  P.  ;  53,
Lugo,  F.  de ;  199,  Marbau  ;  204,  Mareuil  ;  213,  Mar-
quette ;  229,  Martin,  F.  ;  249,  Masse  ;  250,  Mastrilli ;
295,  Menard,  R.  ;  290,  Mendes,  P.  ;  312,  Meyer,  B.  ;  318,
Miege;  884,  Milet  J  &35,  Minieure  ;  388,  Morand  ;  479,
Nasimben  ;  497,  Neumann,  J. ;  527,  Nobill ;  528-529,  No-
brega  ;  544,  Nunes  ;  547,  Nyel ;  572-573,  Oliva  Olivares  ;
592;  Oosz ;  594,  Ortega,  J. ;  III,  590,  Lalemant ;  IV,  010,
Oudin  ;  012,  OwZ/e  ;  704,  Pellepart ;  723,  Percheron  ;
725,  Pereira,  A.  ;  732,  Perre*  ;  740,  Petit ;  V,  10,  Pierron  ;
97,  Power,  M.  ;  148,  Quentin  ;  149,  Quickenborne  ;  156,
Quiros  ;  160,  Raqueneau  ;  182.  Ransonnier  ;  184,  Baste  ;
226,  #e#  ;  231,  tfVfoas,  v4.  P.  ;  221,  Renaud  ;  256,  Rincon  ;
305,  Roger  ;  363,  Saavedra,  H.  A.  de  ;  381,  Salvatierra  ;
3a5,  Sanchez,  L.  I. ;  395,  Santo  Crw«,  ft.  ;  453,  Seghers ;
455,  Segura ;  542,  Sistiaga  ;  610,  Soulabie ;  062,  Stein-
hefer  ;  VI,  34,  Taraval ;  74-75.  Theondechoren  ;  110,
r/iwri/ ;  124,  2"o6ar ;  127,  2'oi'c< ;  137,  Torres,  Z).  :  172,
Tsondatsaa  ;  205,  Uffenbach  and  Ugarte  ;  217,  C/r/e,  L.  i?. ;
223,  Valdivia,  L.  de  ;  202,  Vasconcellos,  S.  ;  271,  Fe/</i  ;
278,  Verden  ;  279,  Peraara  ;  290,  Ptei ;  303,  Virot ;  339,
WaMon. ;  467,  White,  Andrew  ;  655,  Zopata,  J.  O.

Jesuit  Relations,  the,  I,  254,  Biard  ;  303,  Brebeuf.

Jesuits-a-donn6,  II,  090,  Goupil.

Jet  aspirator,  invention  of,  V,  239,  Richards,  R.  H.

Jethro,  pen-name,  VI,  221,  Vaill.

Jetties,  the  Mississippi,  II,  287,  Eads.

Jewish  theological  seminary,  New  York,  rv,  386,  Morais.

Jewell,  Lyman  and  Charles.  Ill,  432,  Jewell,  M.

Jewell,  Pliny,  III.  431,  432,  Jewell,  M.

Jewell,  Thomas,  III,  431.  Jewell,  M.

Jewett,  C.  A.,  Ill,  433,  Jewett,  S.  W.

Jewett,  William,  VI,  322,  Waldo,  S.  L.

Jews,  asylum  for  Christianized,  II,  550,  Frey  ;  emigration
of,  from  Russia,  III,  644,  Lazarus ;  project,  for  gather-
ing, on  Grand  island,  IV,  526,  Noah  ;  persecutions  and
disabilities  of,  V,  183,  Raphall ;  of  Jerusalem,  fund  for,
542.  Simson.

Jimenez,  Cardinal,  IV,  173,  Magellan.

Jim  Lane's  army.  II,  49,  Cutter,  C.

Jintemal,  I,  123,"  Axicoat.

JoSo,  Prince,  IV,  698,  Pedro  I.

Jobero,  defence  of  the  bridge  of,  II,  297,  Echenique.

Jocelyn,  Nathaniel,  V,  332,  Rossiter  ;  706,  Stone,  W.  O.

Johannes,  Count,  I,  384,  Brooke,  A.  S.  J.

Johannisburg,  battle  of,  III.  701.  Levis.

John  IV.,  of  Portugal,  III,  204,  Home  ;  V,  362,  Sa,  S.  C.  de.

John  VI.,  Ill,  351,  Inhambupe  ;  IV,  310,  Mesquita,  J.  F.  de  ;
497,  Neuville  ;  698,  Pedro  I.  ;  his  return  from  Brazil  to
Lisbon,  V,  25,  Pinheiro.

John,  Mary,  V,  210,  Reed,  R.  T.

John  Adams,  the,  I,  381,  Brock  ;  its  destruction,  rV,  411,
Morris,  Charles.

John  ap  Rhydderch,  IV,  394.  Morgan.

John  Bull,  the  locomotive,  V,  674,  Stevens,  R.  L.

Johnness,  sobriquet.  VI,  642,  You.

John  of  the  Forest,  IV,  221,  Marshall,  T.

Johns,  H.  V.  I).,  II,  97,  Davis,  H.  W.

Johns  Hopkins  university,  II,  055,  Oilman,  D.  C. ;  founded,

III,  256,  Hopkins,  Johns.

Johnson,  Andrew,  his  shop,  illustration,  HI,  437.


Johnson,  Benjamin  F.,  pen-name.  V,  256,  Riley,  J.  W.

Johnson,  Christopher.  Ill,  451,  Johnson,  Sir  W.

Johnson,  Claude  M.,  Ill,  424,  Jeffrey.

Johnson,  David  B.,  II,  511,  Foster,  H.  R.

Johnson,  John,  III,  211.  Hilson,  E.  A. ;  440,  Johnson,  R.

Johnson,  J.  Augustus,  III,  450,  Johnson,  Sarah  B.

Johnson,  J.  Eastman,  III.  522,  Kent,  James.

Johnson,  John  Preston,  II,  488,  Floyd,  S.  B.

Johnson,  Laura  Winthrop,  VI,  577,  Winthrop,  L.

Johnson,  Louisa,  I,  24.

Johnson,  Neely,  I,  687,  Coleman,  W.  T.

Johnson,  Otis  C,  V,  108,  Prescott,  A.  B.

Johnson,  Reuben,  III,  447,  Johnson,  Rossiter.

Johnson,  Col.  Richard  M.,  VI,  58,  Tecumseh.

Johnson,  Robert,  III,  443,  Johnson,  James ;  448,  Johnson,

Samuel.
Johnson,  Samuel,  quoted,  II,  40,  Cushing.  T.;  393,  Ewing,

John  ;  703,  Graham,  J.  ;  III,  449,  Johnson,  W.  S.  ;  688,

Lennox  ;  his  visit  to  the  Hebrides,  rv,  145,  McLeod,  A. ;

505,  Oglethorpe.
Johnson,  Samuel,  Jr.,  II,  331,  Elliott,  John.
Johnson,  Sophia,  VI,  240,  Vanderbilt.
Johnson,  Thomas,  III,  445,  Johnson,  John  Milton.
Johnson,  Tiberius,  III,  402,  Jansen,  R.
Johnson,  William,  II,  57,  Dale,  W.  J.  ;  III,  453,  Johnson,

Sir  John.
Johnson,  W.  Templeton,  "VT,  577.  Winthrop,  L.
Johnson-Clarendon  treaty,  the,  447,  Johnson,  Reverdy.
Johnson  Hall,  illustration,  III,  452.
Johnson's  Island,  plan  to  capture,  I,  450,  Burley.
Johnson  the  Terror,  HI,  441,  Johnson,  Daniel.
Johnston,  Elizabeth  B.,  VI,  437,  Wertmuller.
Johnston,  Henry  Elliott,  III,  457,  Johnston,  H.  L.
Johnston,  Jane,  V.  425,  Schoolcraft,  H.  R.
Johnston,  Dr.  J.,  Ill,  454,  Johnston,  A.  S.
Johnston,  J.  E.,  his  surrender,  grounds  of  disapproval  of,

V,  649,  Stanton,  E-  M.
Johnston,  John  H.,  Ill,  456,  Johnston,  J.  S.
Johnston,  Dr.  Lewis,  HI,  155,  Heathcote.
Johnston,  Margaret,  I,  164,  Bard,  J.
Johnston.  Sarah  B.,  Ill,  715,  Lincoln.
Johnston,  W.  P.,  V,  339,  Rowson,  C.
Johnstone,  Sir  James,  III,  400,  Johnstone,  G.
Johnstown,  Johnson's  residence  near,  view  of,  settlement

of,  III,  452.
John  street  church,  New  York,  II.  341,  Embury,  P.
John  street  theatre,  New  York,  III,  171,  Henry,  John  ;  453,

Johnson,  Guy.
Joint-stock  companies,  act  of  parliament  on,  I,  29  ;  III,

332,  Hutchinson,  Thomas.
Joinville,  Prince  de,  IV,  589,  Orleans,  L.  A.  P.;  VI,  524,

Williams,  E.
Jones,  Arabella,  II.  488.  Floyd,  A.
Jones,  Arnold  E.,  II,  340.  Elzey.
Jones,  B.  Muse.  Ill,  252.  Hooper,  L.  H.
Jones,  Chilion,  VI,  681,  Fuller,  T.
Jones,  Judge  David,  II,  488,  Floyd,  A.
Jones,  David,  IV,  96,  McCrea,  J.
Jones,  Col.  Edward  F.,  VI,  389,  Walson,  B.  F.
Jones,  Eli,  691,  Jones,  S.
Jones,  Eliphalet,  V,  121,  Prime.
Jones,  Dr.  Evan,  III,  466,  Jones,  John.
Jones,  George,  I,  384,  Brooke,  A.  S.  J.
Jones,  Hannah,  II,  488,  Floyd,  W.
Jones,  Jacob,  medal  awarded  to,  illustration,  HI,  465.
Jones,  Jemima,  I,  745,  Cornivallis.
Jones,  John  Paul,  his  name.  Ill,  462,  Jones,  M.  M.
Jones,  Maj.  Joseph,  VI,  96,  Tlwmpson,  W.  T.
Jones,  Owen,  rv,  445,  Mould.
Jones,  Richard  B.,  quoted,  II,  413.
Jones,  Robin,  III,  462.  Jones.  Allen.
Jones,  Samuel  T..  VL  445,  Wetherill.  S.
Jones,  Stephen,  III,  462.  Jones,  A.  G.
Jones,  Thomas,  cited,  II,  255,  Dunbar,  M.;  Thomas,  488,

Floyd,  A.
Jones,  Rev.  Thomas,  VI,  690,  Jones,  S.
Jones,  Thomas  ap  Catesby,  IV,  129,  McKeever,  J.
Jones.  Thomas  D.,  Ill,  727,  Lincoln,  A.
Jones,  Thomas  P..  n,  384.  Evans,  O.
Jones,  William,  VI,  114,  Tilden,  S.  J.
Jonesboro.  battle  at,  V,  504  ;  VI,  80.
Jones's  Hill  Fort,  III,  471.  Jones,  T.
JonquiSres,  Marquis  de,  IV,  365,  Montcalm,  P.  F.  J.
Jordan,  Francis  H.,  in,  473,  Jordan,  C.  J.  M.
Jorullo,  volcanic  eruption  at.  I,  37,  Ahumada.
Josef  a,  Fernanda  Dona,  HI,  10,  Giiell,  Jose.
Joseph,  Chief,  IV,  323,  Miles,  N.  A.
Josephine,  Empress,  I,  209,  Beauharnais,  A.  de ;  VI,  35,

Tascher.
Josephist  Brothers,  the,  I,  330,  Bourget.
Joslyn,  Dr.  H..  II.  568.  Gage,  M.  J.
Josselyn,  Sir  T.,  III.  475,  Josselyn,  J.
Jossi,  engraver,  II,  313,  Edwin.
J.  O.  T.,  pen-name,  VI,  66,  Terry,  J.  O.
Jouffroy,  Francis,  pupils  of,  V,  370.  St.  Gaudens  ;  VI.  360,

Warner,  O.  L.
Journalism,  correspondence  in,  I,  386,  Brooks,  J.;  early,

V,  352,  Russell.  B. ;  imprisonment  of  a  journalist,  IV,  597,

Osborn,  Selleck.


750


JOUSTER


KEY


Jouster,  the,  IV,  697,  Pedrarias.

Joyce  children,  the,  I,  368.  Brent,  H.  J.

Joynes,  W.  T.,  Ill,  478,  Joynes,  L.  S.

J.  S.  of  Dale,  pen-name,  V,  691,  Stimson,  F.  J.

Juan  Fernandez,  island  of,  II,  436,  Fernandez,  J.;  illustra-
tion, V,  457.

Juarez,  Catalina,  I,  748,  Cortes.

Juazez,  tomb  of.  illustration.  III,  480.

Jubilee  college,  Illinois,  founded,  I,  585,  Chase,  P.

Jucherau,  John,  III,  481,  Jucherau,  N.

Juchi,  battle  near,  I,  476,  Bustamente,  A.

Judah,  the,  destruction  of,  I,  139,  Bailey  ;  V,  353,  Russell,
John  Henry.

Judaism,  reformed,  III,  491,  Kalisch.

Judge  of  the  first  instance,  II,  630,  Geary.

Judges,  act  regarding,  in  Massachusetts,  1. 16,  30  ;  salaries
of  colonial,  III,  333,  Hutchinson,  T. ;  IV,  574,  Oliver,  P.

Judiciary,  of  the  U.  S.,  I,  429.

Judith,  the,  destruction  of,  HI,  199,  Higginson,  F.  J.

Judith,  Esther,  and  other  poems,  I,  388,  Brooks,  M.  G.

Juet,  Robert  and  John,  III.  297.

Jugendfreund,  the,  magazine,  1, 38,  Brobst ;  V,  617,  Spaeth.

Julien,  M.,  art-school  of,  III.  33,  Hale,  E.  D.

Juliet,  Gustav,  V,  133,  Pulaski.

Jumanes,  the  tribe  of,  II,  373,  Espejo,  A.

Jumbo,  elephant,  I,  173,  Barnum,  P.  T. ;  VI,  351,  Ward,
Henry  A.

Jumel,  Stephen,  HI,  487,  Jumel,  E.  B. ;  the  house,  illustra-
tion, 487  ;  the  suit,  IV,  555,  O'  Conor,  C.

Jumping,  feats  of,  IV,  669,  Patch.

Juncal.  battle  of,  II,  542,  Fi-eites.

June,  Jennie,  pen-name,  II,  14,  Croly,  J.  C.

Juneau  statue,  illustration,  III,  488.

Juniata,  voyage  of  the.  II,  136,  De  Long.

Junin,  battle  of,  I,  306 ;  IV,  330,  Miller,  W. ;  hero  of,  V,
531,  Silva.

Junius,  discussion  with,  in,  666,  Lee,  A.;  letters  of,  I,  175,
Barre,  I. ;  452,  Burgoyne  ;  II,  524,  Francis,  T. ;  supposed
authors,  629,  Germaine ;  III,  661,  Lee,  Charles  ;  V,  100,
Poiunall ;  VI,  85,  Thomas,  P.  F. :  386,  Waterhouse.

Junius,  E.,  V,  335,  Rouquette,  A.  E.

Junius  Americanus,  pen-name,  II,  355,  Endicott,  C.  M.;
390,  Everett,  D. ;  III,  666,  Lee,  A.

Junius  Brutus,  pen-name,  III,  209,  Hilliard,  H.  W.

Junius  papers,  the,  I,  695,  Colton,  C.

Junkin,  Eleanor,  III,  392,  Jackson,  T.  J.

Junkin,  Margaret,  V,  113,  Preston,  M.  J.

Junot,  Gen.,  Ill,  406,  Jarvis,  W.

Junta  de  Santa  F6,  manifesto  of,  VI,  226,  Valenzuela,  C.

Junto,  the,  II,  528.

Jupiter  inlet,  Fla..  action  at,  III,  431,  Jesup,  T.  S.

Jurac  Guari,  the,  I,  302,  Bohorques,  P.

Jurisprudence,  American,  III,  521-522,  Kent,  J.;  authority
on,  V,  710,  Story,  J.

Jury,  rights  of  the,  established,  IV,  713.

Jussieu,  M.,  II,  177,  Diereville  ;  III,  169,  Henrion.

Jussieu,  Bernard  de,  II,  196.  Dombey.

Jussuf,  Caramalli,  II,  295,  Eaton,  W.

Jute,  introduction  of,  into  the  U.  S.,  H,  147,  Derby,  E.  H.,
3d  ;  manufacture,  IV,  57,  Lyall,  J.

Kaba-Rega,  King,  IV,  8,  Lonq.  C.  C.

Kadesh  Barnea,  site  of,  VI,  167,  Trumbull,  H.  C.

Kaercher,  Franklin  B.,  Ill,  490,  Kaercher,  G.  R.

Kahgegwagebow,  I,  736.  Copway.

Kalloch,  G.,  IV,  285.  Medberry.

Kalmia,  the  plant.  III,  492,  Kalm.

Kalorama,  I,  167,  Barlow,  J.

Kamehameha,  I.  718,  Cooke,  A.  S.;  HI,  490,  Kalakaua.

Kampa  Thorpe,  pen-name,  I,  228,  Bellamy,  E.  W

Kamtchatka,  settlement  in,  I,  245,  Bering.

Kane,  Dr.  E.  K,  II,  520,  Fox,  M.

Kane,  Robert,  H,  227,  Draper,  J.  W.

Kansas,  settlement  of,  II,  282,  Dwight.  Tlieodore  ;  coloni-
zation of.  III,  639,  Lawrence,  A.  A.;  free-soil  emigration
to,  VI,  72,  Thayer,  Eli  ;  gifts  to  colonists,  90,  Thompson,
E.\  troubles,  the,  I,  389,  Brooks,  P.  S.:  404,  405,  434  ;  III,
606,  Lane.  J.  H.;  IV,  68 ;  war  in,  369,  Montgomery,
James;  372,  Montgomery,  W.  R.\  V,  10;  211,  Reeder  ;
283,  Robinson,  C. ;  528  ;  report  on,  in  congress,  506,  Sher-
man, J. ;  admission  of,  II,  359,  English,  W.  H. ;  debates
on  admission  of,  V,  747-748.

Kansas  Hero,  the,  IV,  369,  Montgomery,  James.

Kansas- Nebraska  bill,  the,  I,  227,  Belt,  J.;  II,  215  :  I.  242 ;
II,  430,  Fenton  ;  444,  Fessenden,  W.  P.;  HI,  437  ;  V,  10,
Pierce  ;  747,  Sumner.

Kapiolani,  Queen,  III,  490,  Kalakaua.

Kaposia  Indians,  the.  HI.  739,  Little  Crow.

Karens,  conversion  to  Christianity,  III.  484 :  the  mission.
IV,  155,  Macomber ;  240.  Mason,  F. :  VI.  302.  Vinton,  J.
H.;  theological  school,  Burmah,  gifts  to,  V,  345,  Rug-
gles,  W.

Kars,  defence  of.  VI.  535,  Williams,  W.  F.

Kaskaskia,  missions  at,  I.  58,  Allouez  ;  IV,  214,  Marquette  ;
capture  of.  I,  627.

Kastner,  George,  pupil  of,  V,  264,  Ritter,  F.  L.

Kastos,  Emiro,  pen-name,  VI,  136,  Toro,  F.

Kaulbach.  Wilhelm  von,  pupils  of,  I,  584,  Chase,  H. ;  HI.
699,  Leutze  ;  VI,  542,  Wtlmarth.


Kaunameek,  I,  357,  Brainerd,  D.

Kavanagh,  James,  IH,  495,  Kavanagh,  E.

Kavanaugh,  Rev.  W.,  HI,  495,  Kavanaugh,  H.  H.

Kaya  Khor,  battle  of,  IV,  29,  Loring,  W.  W.

Kayhnatho,  II,  43,  Cusick.

Kearney,  David,  HI,  457,  Johnston,  D.  C.

Kearny  badge,  the,  II,  421,  Fasnacht.

Kearsarge,  fight  with  the  Alabama,  VI,  569,  Winslow,  J.  A.

Keating.  Baron  John,  III,  498,  Keating,  W.  H.

Kecongtau,  Va.,  V,  99,  Pocahontas.

Kecoughtan,  I,  620.

Keefer.  George,  HI,  498,  Keefer,  S.

Kegs,  battle  of  the,  I,  474,  Bushnell,  D.

Keith,  George,  II,  338,  Elphinstone.

Keith,  Rev.  James,  IV,  221,  Marshall,  T.

Keithians,  the,  III,  502,  Keith,  G.

Keller,  M.,  Ill,  112,  Hussler,  S.

Kellerman,  W.  A..  II,  390,  Everhart,  B.  M.

Kelley,  Abby,  II.  515,  Foster,  A.  K.

Kelley,  John,  III,  505,  Kelley,  W.  D.

Kellogg,  Mary,  VI,  652,  Yung  Wing.

Kellogg,  Miner  E.,  VI,  3,  Suydam,  J.  A.

Kellogg,  Spencer,  V,  475,  Seymour,  H.

Kellum,  C.  B.,  I,  455,  Burleigh.

Kelly,  Alfred,  VI,  6,  Sivayne,  N.  H.

Kelly,  Caroline  E.,  II,  93,  Davis,  C.  E.

Kelton,  James,  HI,  509,  Kelton,  J.  C.

Kemble,  Capt.  T.,  m,  563,  Knight,  S.

Kemble,  John  P.,  Ill,  510,  Kemble  C.

Kemble,  Margaret,  II,  570.  Gage.

Kemble,  Peter,  HI,  511,  Kemble,  G.

Kemper,  Mary  S.,  V,  152,  Quincy,  E.  S.

Kendall,  Amos,  his  influence  with  Jackson,  III,  380.

Kendall,  Francis,  HI,  513,  Kendall,  A.

Kendall  Green,  estate  of,  IH,  513,  Kendall,  A.

Kenesaw  Mountain,  battle  of,  rv,  158 ;  incident,  92,  McCook,

Daniel.
Kenmore  House,  HI,  703,  Lewis,  F.
Kennebec,  the,  war-ship,  IV,  76-77,  McCann.
Kennedy,  Capt.  Archibald,  II,  328,  Elliott,  A.;  VI,  395,

Watts,  John.
Kennedy,  Samuel,  III,  517,  Kennedy,  J.  C.  G.
Kennedy,  Thomas.  Ill,  516,  Kennedy,  A.
Kennedy,  Walter  S.,  in,  241,  Holmes,  O.  W.
Kensington,  Pa.,  IV,  636,  Palmer,  A.
Kent,  Duke  of,  H,  139,  Denaut.
Kent,  Elisha,  in,  521,  Kent,  James.
Kent,  Moss,  IH,  521,  Kent,  J.
Kent,  island  of,  I,  620,  621.
Kent  club,  the,  IH,  411,  Jay,  P.  A.
Kentish  guards,  the.  II,  750,  Greene,  N.
Kentucky,  first  settlement  of,  1, 315,  Boone ;  early  history  of,

IV,  2,  Logan,  B. :  first  white  child  born  in,  2,  Logan,  W.  •
pioneers  of,  I,  205,  Bean  ;  315,  Boone  ;  HI,  522,  Kenton  ;
567,  Knox,  James  ;  715,  Lincoln ;  TV,  66,  Lynn  ;  70.  Mc-
Afee ;  673,  Patterson,  R.;  V,  278,  Robertson,  J.;  VI,  126,
Todd,  J.  ;  329,  Walker,  T.  ;  constitution  of,  IV,  511,
Nicholas,  G. ;  pioneer  religious  work  in,  130,  McKendree  ;

V,  233,  Rice,  David  ;  purchase  of  land  in,  from  Indians,
III,  164,  Henderson,  R.;  Virginia  title  to  lands  in,  680,
Leigh,  B.  W. ;  first  printing-office  in.  IV,  67,  Lyon,  M. ;
attempt  to  force  into  alliance  with  Spain,  HI,  354,  Innes,
H;  V,  492,  Shelby  ;  attempt  to  separate  from  U.  S.,  VI,
511,  Wilkinson  ;  the  Revolutionary  war  in,  I,  626,  627,
Clark,  G.  R.;  famous  resolution,  III.  85,  Harney,  J.  H;
new  and  old  court  controversy  in,  IV,  70,  McAfee  ;  first
classical  school  in,  II,  460,  Finley,  R.  W. ;  Catholic  insti-
tutions in,  86,  David! ;  rv.  494,  Nerinckx  ;  V,  619,  Spald-
ing, M.  J. :  loss  of,  by  the  Confederates,  II,  600  ;  in  the
civil  war,  710  ;  IV,  174,  Magoffin  ;  V,  616,  Sowards ;  VI,
79,  Thomas,  G.  H;  465,  Whitaker,  W.  C;  raids  into,  IV,
402,  Morgan,  J.  H.\  the  "secession  juggle,"  V,  503  ;  at-
tempt to  force,  into  the  Confederacy,  625-626,  Speed.

Kentucky  resolutions  of  1798,  I,  364,  Breckenridge,  J.
Kenwatewenteta,  Mary  Ann.  VI,  524,  Williams,  E.
Kenvon  college,  founded,  I,  585,  Chase,  P. ;  gifts  to,  II,  134,
Delano;  HI.  638.  Lawrence,  A.;  IV,  688,  Peabody,  G.;

VI,  589,  Wolfe.  J.  D.
Keokuk,  Iowa,  m,  523.

Keokuk,  sinking  of  the.  V.  230,  Rhind.

Keporative,  society,  HI,  430,  Jequitinhonha.

Keppel.  Admiral.  IV,  596,  Orvilliers.

Keratry,  Count,  II,  167  ;  HI,  524,  Keratry,  E.  de.

Kernstown,  battle  at,  HI,  391  ;  I,  158,  Banks,  N.  P.

Kerosene,  first  obtained,  II,  220,  Downer  ;  first  made  in
America,  meaning  of  the  name,  633,  Gesner.

Kerr,  George,  IV,  436,  Mosler.

Kerr,  Orpheus  C.,  pen-name,  IV.  504,  Newell,  R.  H.

Ketchum,  Daniel,  III,  528,  Ketchum,  W.  S.

Ketchum,  Hiram.  II,  261,  Dunning,  A.  K.

Ketchum,  Leonidas,  III,  528,  Ketchum,  A.  C.

Kettle  Creek,  engagement  at,  IV,  768,  P/cArens,  A.

Key,  Alice,  rv.  709.  Pendleton,  G.  H.

Key,  Anne  P.  C,  VI,  29.

Key,  Francis  Scott,  monument  to,  HI,  709,  Lick  ;  illustra-
tion, 529.

Key,  John  Ross.  III.  529,  Key,  F.  S.

Key,  Philip  Barton,  V,  523,  Sickles.

Key,  a  screw-headed,  inventor  of,  IV,  576,  Oliver,  P.  A.


KEYES


LABOR


751


Keyes,  Dr.  J.  W.,  in,  179,  Hentz,  J.  L.

Keymis,  Capt.  Lawrence,  V,  163.

Key  West,  I,  489,  Cabell,  E.  C. ;  II,  3,  Craven,  T.  A.  M.

K.  H.,  pen-name,  VI,  418,  Webster,  R.

Khiva,  bombardment  of,  IV,  116,  MacGahan.

Kicab-Janub,  King,  VI,  58,  Tecum-Uman.

Kidd,  Capt.  William,  accusations  of  complicity  with,  1, 198,
Bayard,  N.

Kidder,  Isaac,  III,  532.  Kidder,  F.

Kidder,  Reuben,  in,  532.  Kidder,  F.

Kidneys,  theory  on  the,  V,  599,  Smyth,  A.  W.

Kiffen,  W.,  Ill,  564,  Knollys.

Kiliani,  Lilian  B.,  VI,  41.

Kill-Buck,  Chief,  II,  624,  Gelelemend.

Killingbeck,  Anthony,  VI.  497,  Wickersham.

Killingsworth,  grant  of,  VI,  23,  Talcott,  J.

Kilmainham  jail,  II,  349,  Emmet,  T.  A.

Kilmosey,  Earl  of,  IV,  486,  Needham.

Kimball,  Texas,  founded,  m,  537,  Kimball,  R.  B.

Kin-Chi,  Maya  priest,  II,  613,  Gasjpar.

Kindergarten  system,  introduction  of,  IV,  688,  Peabody,
Elizabeth  P.

Kinderhook  Roarer,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  243,  Vanderpoel,  A.

Kindler,  pupil  of,  IV,  436,  Mosler.

King,  proposal  to  make  Washington  a,  VI,  377.

King,  Capt.,  II,  510,  Foster,  Henry.

King,  Charles,  III,  522,  Kent,  James.

King,  Daniel,  III,  540,  King,  J.  G. ;  545,  King,  S.

King,  Elisha  W.,  Ill,  548,  King,  W.  8.

King,  George,  UI,  539,  King,  H.

King,  James,  of  William,  murder  of,  I,  687,  Coleman,
\Villiam  T

King,  John,  III,  546,  King,  T.  B.

King,  Joshua,  III,  545,  King,  R.  H.

King,  Leicester,  III,  33,  Hale,  J.  P.

King,  Richard,  ID.  542,  King,  Rufus.

King,  Samuel  W.,  II,  205,  Dorr,  T.  W.

King,  William,  III,  548.  King,  W.  R.

King  Beaver,  V,  510,  Shingask.

King  Caucus,  sobriquet,  V,  691,  Stilujell.

King  Fisher,  Chief,  VI.  471,  White,  H.  L.

King  of  the  lobby,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  354,  Ward,  S.

King  of  the  Quakers,  sobriquet,  IV,  706,  Pemberton,  I.

King  Philip's  war.  I,  612,  Church,  B.  ;  H,  322 ;  III,  700,
Leverett.  Sir  J. ';  IV,  32,  Lothrop,  T.  ;  756-757  ;  V,  145,
Pynchon,  John ;  VI,  23,  Talcott,  J.  ;  156,  Treat,  R.  ;  209,
Uncas  ;  poem  founded  on,  V,  389,  Sands,  R.  C.  ;  H,  290,
Eastburn,  J.  W.

King  Wampum,  sobriquet,  IV,  706,  Pemberton,  I.

King  William's  war,  III,  687,  Le  Moyne  ;  beginning  of,  IV,
171,  Madockawando.

Kinge,  William,  HI,  538,  King,  D.  P.

King's  Bridge,  engagement  at  (1779),  V,  334,  Rouarie.

King's  chapel,  Boston,  II,  540,  Freeman,  James  ;  illustra-
tion, IV,  474,  Myles,  S.

King's  college. See  Columbia  college.

King's  Farm,  the,  I,  301,  Bogardus,  E.  ;  II,  481,  Fletcher,
B.  ;  VI,  284,  Vesey,  W.

King's  Mountain,  battle  of,  I,  516,  Campbell,  W.  ;  744  ;  in-
cident, II,  145,  De  Peyster,  A.  ;  433,  Ferguson,  P.  ;  pow-
der for,  IV,  109,  McDowell,  G.  G.  ;  V,  467,  Sevier,  J.  ;  492,
Shelby.

King's  rangers,  the.  I,  414,  Browne,  T.

Kingsland,  N.  Y.,  Ill,  452.

Kingston,  Earl  of,  III,  548,  Kingsborough.

Kingston,  Canada,  founded,  V,  6,  Picquet ;  Catholic  insti-
tutions in,  IV,  105,  Macdonell,  Alexander ;  V,  124,
Prince,  J.  C.

Kingston,  N.  Y.,  destruction  of,  VI,  268,  Vaughan,  Sir  J. ;
S3i,  Wallace,  Sir  J.

Kinkel,  Gottfried,  V,  428,  Schurz.

Kinloch,  James,  III,  550,  Kinloch,  F.

Kinnear,  Mrs.,  II,  191,  Dodd,  M.  A.  H

Kinnersley,  Rev.  W.,  in.  550.  Kinnersley,  E.

Kinney,  Sir  Thomas,  UI.  551,  Kinney,  W.  B.

Kinney.  William  B.,  V,  658,  Stedman,  E.  C.

Kino. See  Kuhn,  III,  577.

Kiotsatou,  Chief,  V,  30,  Piskaret.

Kip,  Henry  and  Isaac,  III,  552,  Kip,  W.  I.

Kirbecan,  battle  of,  II.  141,  Denison,  F.  C.

Kirby,  Miss,  III.  121,  Hawks,  F.  L.

Kirby,  Frances  M.,  V,  576,  Smith,  J.  L.

Kirchenfreund.  the,  magazine.  V,  416,  Schaff.

Kirchhoff,  II.  227,  Draper,  J.  W.

Kirk,  George,  HI,  413,  Jay,  J.

Kirk,  Col.  G.  W.,  III.  526,  Kerr,  J.

Kirkbride,  Joseph,  III,  554,  Kirkbride,  T.  S.

Kirke,  Edmund,  pen-name,  II,  657,  Gilmore,  J.  R.

Kirke,  Gervase,  III,  554,  Kirke,  Sir  D.

Kirkham,  Henry,  III,  555,  Kirkham,  R.  W.

Kirkland,  Louisa.  VI,  152,  Tracy,  C.

Kirkland,  town  of,  III,  555,  Kirkland,  S.

Kirkpatrick,  Andrew,  HI,  556,  Kirkpatrick,  L.

Kirkpatrick,  Ann,  H,  377,  Este.

Kirkpatrick,  David,  HI,  556,  Kirkpatrick,  A.

Kirkpatrick,  Jane  E.,  I.  679,  Cogswell,  J.

Kirtland,  Rev.  Daniel,  HI,  555,  Kirkland,  S.

Kirtland,  Ohio,  Mormon  settlement  at,  V,  253,  Rigdon  ;
575,  576,  Smith,  Joseph.


Kirwan,  pen-name,  rV,  470,  Murray,  N.

Kisell,  Baron,  V,  570.

Kismet,  anonymous  novel,  II,  481,  Fletcher,  J.  C.

Kissam,  Benjamin,  HI,  408,  Jay.

Kissam,  Maj.  John,  IV.  663,  Parsons,  S.  H.

Kitchen  cabinet,  the,  III,  380,  382.

Kite,  Franklin's,  II,  528.

Kittanning,  destruction  of,  I,  92,  Armstrong,  John.

Kittery,  Pepperrell  house  at,  illustration,  IV,  722.

Kleeberg,  Dr.  L.,  HI,  559,  Kleeberg,  M.

Knapp,  Rev.  Frederick  N.,  V,  13,  Pierce,  J.

Knapp,  George.  HI,  560,  Knapp,  F.

Knapp.  John,  HI,  560,  Knapp,  J.  H.

Kneass,  William,  III,  561,  Kneass,  S.

Knickerbocker,  H.  J.,  IH,  561,  Knickerbocker.  J.

Knickerbocker  homestead,  the,  illustration,  HI,  562.

Knickerbocker  Magazine,  I,  629,  Clark.  Lewis  G. ;  H,  485,
Flint,  T.\  III.  228,  Hoffman,  C.  F.;  IV,  543,  Noyes,  J.  O.

Knife,  Detmold's,  II,  154,  Detmold.

Knight,  Charles,  II,  408,  Farley,  H

Knight,  Mrs.  H.  C,  III,  52.  Hallock,  W.  A.

Knight,  Jonathan,  VI,  463,  Whistler,  G.  W.

Knight,  Richard,  HI,  563,  Knight,  S.

Knight  of  St.  Gregory  the  Great,  m,  230,  Hoguet.

Knight  of  the  Order  of  Starvation,  etc.,  the,  III,  743,  Liv-
ingston, William.

Knight  Russ  Ockside,  pen-name.  VI,  99,  Thomson,  M.

Knights  of  Labor,  the,  VI.  697,  Powderly.

Knights  of  the  Golden  Circle,  IV,  432,  Morton,  O.  P.;  V,
386,  Sanderson,  J.  P. ;  VI,  333,  Wall.  J.  W.

Knights  of  the  Golden  Horseshoe,  V,  635,  Spotswood.

Knights  of  the  Round  Table,  the,  magazine,  V,  705,  Stone,
W  illiam  L.

Knitting-machines,  invention  of,  HI,  599,  Lamb,  I.  W. ;  VI,
614,  Work.

Knob  Gap,  engagement  at,  I,  527,  Carlin.  W.  P.

Knolles,  Rev.  T.,  II.  466,  Fisher,  P.

Knott,  Joseph  P.,  HI,  564,  Knott,  J.  P.

Knowledge,  magazine,  V,  127,  Proctor,  R.  A.

Knowless,  Mr.  Absurd,  HI,  563,  Knollys.

Kuow-Nothing  party,  the,  III,  636,  Law,  G. ;  IV,  357,  Monk  ;
riots,  1&55,  V,  742,  Sullivan,  P.  J.

Knox,  Rev.  J.  P.,  I,  298,  Blyden.

Knox,  Capt.  James,  V,  50,  Polk.

Knox,  J.  Amory,  VI,  7,  Sweet,  A.  E.

Knoxboro,  N.  Y.,  Ill,  567,  Knox,  J.  J.

Knox  college,  organized,  II,  574,  Gale,  G.  W.

Knox's  highland.  HI,  568,  Knox,  S.  R.

Knoxville,  111.,  IH,  567,  Knox,  James.

Knoxville,  Tenn.,  founded.  VI,  471,  White,  J. ;  siege  of,  I,
464  ;  U,  713  ;  Armstrong  house  at,  V,  494,  Shepard,  I.

Kobell,  Prof,  von,  I,  34.

Koekkoek,  Barend  C.,  pupil  of,  VI,  306,  Vollmering.

Kolapun,  insurrection  in,  I,  107,  Arthur,  G.

Koldewey,  Karl.  IV,  684.  Payer  ;  VI,  652,  Yver.

Kolno,  John,  VI,  16,  Szkolny.

Ko-mah-byn.  I,  299,  Boardman.

Kooskoosky  river.  Ill,  706,  Lewis.  M.

Kooweskoowe,  Chief,  V,  330,  Ross,  John.

Kopp,  Emile,  V,  707,  Storer,  F.  H.

Korponay,  Col.,  I,  196,  Bayard,  G.  D.

Kortright,  Lawrence,  TV,  361.

Kosciusko,  Thaddeus,  H,  615,  Gates ;  monument,  illustra-
tion, III,  573.

Kossuth.  Louis,  IV,  9,  Long.  J.  C. ;  V,  690,  Stillman,  W.  J. ;
reception,  at  New  York,  II,  625,  Genin  ;  proposal  to  con-
vey in  a  national  ship,  HI,  551,  Kinney,  W.  B.

Kossuth  hats,  II.  625,  Genin.

Kostering,  Rev.  J.  F.,  HI,  530,  Keyl.

Koszta,  Martin,  seized  by  Austrians,  I,  408,  Brown,  John  P. ;
IH,  a50,  Ingraham,  D.  N. ;  IV,  203,  Marcy,  W.  L.

Kotzebue,  murder  of,  H,  491,  Follen.

Kotzebue  sound,  HI,  574,  Kotzebue.

Kotzschmar,  Herman,  IV,  629,  Paine,  J.  K.

Kouron  city,  founded,  IV,  299,  Mentelle.

Kraft,  Col.,  HI,  100,  Harrison,  J.

Krebs,  Joseph,  pupil  of,  V,  698,  Stoeckel.

Krossarnes,  VI,  106,  Tfiorvald.

Krygier,  Capt.  Martin,  HI,  214,  Hinoyossa.

Ku-Klux,  the,  I,  607,  Chisolm  ;  HI,  233,  Holden,  W.  W. ;
outrages,  V,  439,  Scott,  R.  K

Kullak,  Theodore,  pupils  of,  IV,  693,  Pease,  A.  H. ;  V,  508,
Sherwood,  W.  H

Kuro  Shiwo,  the,  first  described.  H,  667,  Glynn.

Kyanizing  process.  HI,  579,  Kyan.

Kyn,  Joran,  III,  499.  Keen.  G.

Kype,  Ruloff  de,  in,  552,  Kip.

La  Arada,  battle  at,  I,  535,  Carrera,  R.

Labadists,  the,  1, 197,  Bayard.  J. ;  community  of,  HI,  188,
Herrman,  A.;  miracle  connected  with,  ibid.,  Hei-rman,
Ephraim  G.

Labatout,  Gen.,  VI,  135,  Torices.

La  belle  sauvage,  V.  99,  Pocahontas.

Laboissiere,  Alice.  II,  516,  Fouville.

Laboratory,  New  York,  for  navy  medical  supplies,  organ-
ized, I,  128,  Bache ;  first,  for  instruction,  316,  Booth,
James  Curtis.

Labor  bureau,  the,  created,  VI,  621,  Wright,  C.  D.


752


LABOR


LARREY


Labor  league,  the.  IV.  CI  5,  Otcen,  R.

Labor  party,  the.  II,  95,  Davis,  David  :  VI.  13,  Swinton,  J. ;

theory  of  reform,  VI,  306,  Warren,  Josiah  ;  riots,  V,  632,

Spies;  strikes,  1877,  the,  III,  138;  357,  Irons;  VI,  697,

Powderly  ;  unions,  defence  of,  V,  182.  Rantoul.
Labor-saving  machines,  opposition  to,  III,  279,  Howe,  E.
Labrador,  discovery  of,  I,  491,  Cabot ;  exploration  of,  748,

Cortereal.
La  Cabana,  fortress  of.  II,  458,  Fimes.
Lacandones,  the.  Ill,  315,  Infante,  H.
La  Carbonera,  battle  of,  II,  167.
Lacaze,  A.  de,  II.  439.  Ferrand.
Lac  des  Puants,  III,  461,  Jolliet.
La  Chaudiere  Noire,  VI,  265,  Vaudreuil,  P.  R.
Lachine,  origin  of  the  name,  n,  196,  Dottier  ;  HI,  621,  La

Salle.
Lachner.  Ignaz,  I,  557,  Cotenhusen.
La  Cleopatre,  capture  of  the  frigate,  II,  395,  Exmouth.
Laco,  pen-name,  III,  198,  Higyinson,  S.
La  Colle,  I,  209,  Beaujeu  ;  engagement  at,  V,  375,  Sala-

berry.
La  Condamine,  M.,  II.  669,  Oodin,  L.
Laconia,  tract  called.  IV.  247,  Mason,  John.
Lacordaire  of  America,  the,  n.  376,  Esquin.
La  Come  family,  the,  V,  372,  St.  Luc.
Lacroix,  Count  de,  II,  274,  Dusuan.
La  Crosse,  Wis.,  Catholic  institutions  in.  HI,  160,  Heiss  ;

gift  of  library  to,  VI,  372,  Washburn,  C.  C.
Lac  Saint  Sacrament. See  Lake  St.  S.
Ladd,  G.  W..  Ill,  584,  Ladd,  C.
Ladd,  W.,  Ill,  585,  Ladd,  J.  B.
Ladies'  light  infantry,  the.  VI,  116,  Tilghman,  T.
Ladies1  Magazine,  III,  35,  Hale,  S.  J. ;  316,  Hunt ,  F.
Ladies' Repository, III, 66,  Hamline ; IV, 276,  Mayo,

Sarah  C.  E.
Ladies1  Wreath,  magazine,  IV,  238,  Martyn,  S.  T.
La  Dow,  G.  A.,  Ill,  607,  Lane,  L.
Ladrone  islands,  the,  IV,  173,  Magellan.
Lady  Mary,  III,  744,  Livingston,  H.  W.
Lady  Rebecca,  the,  V,  99,  Pocahontas.
Lafayette,  liberation  of,  III,  301,  Huger,  F.  K.;  funeral  of,

II.  237,  Dubois,  H.  A. ;  vase  given  to.  illustration,  HI,

588  ;  his  castle,  589  ;  his  tomb,  590  ;  apostrophe,  II,  388.
Lafayette,  Madame  de.  III,  411,  Jay,  John  ;  imprisonment

of,  IV,  361,  Monroe,  E.  K.
Lafayette  college,  gifts  to,  I,  559,  Cattell,  W.  C. ;  IV,  143,

McLean,  D.  V.;  644  ;  VI,  348,  Ward,  C.  L.;  Pardee  Hall,

illustration.  644  ;  V.  72,  Porter,  J.  M.
Lafayette  theatre,  III,  239,  Holman,  J.  G.
Lafitte.  Baroness,  I,  39,  Albani.
Lafontaine  of  Canada,  the,  V,  675,  Stevens,  P.
L'Africaine,  floating  of  the,  IV,  661,  Parseval.
Lafuente,  IV,  552,  Ocampo.
Lagarde,  M.,  IV,  214,  Marquez.
Lago,  Willis,  VI,  30.
Lagos  bay,  battle  in,  I,  323.  Boscairen.
La  Grange,  H,  711 ;  castle  of,  illustration,  HI,  589.
La  Grange  institute,  Ind.,  endowed,  IH.  428.  Jenks,  E.  W.
La  Guaira,  Venezuela,  earthquake  at,  VI,  259,  Vargas.
Laguna,  Baron  de,  III,  186,  Herrera,  N.;  653,  Lecor.
Laguna,  Gen.,  IH,  634,  Lavalleja.
La  Harpe,  II,  270,  Dureau.
La  Haye,  Father,  IV,  451,  Moyse,  H.
Laicus,  pen-name,  VI,  363,  Warren,  I.
Laidlie,  Rev.  A.,  II,  237,  Du.  Bois,  G.
Laighton,  Thomas  B.,  VI,  71,  Thaxter,  C.
L'Aigle.  capture  of  the  frigate,  H,  338,  Elphinstone.
Laing,  II,  363.  Eric  the  Red.
Lake,  Capt.  Thomas,  IV,  254,  Mather,  I.
Lake  Borgne,  engagement  on,  IV,  129.  McKever,  I.
Lake  Champlain,  I,  568  ;  battle  on,  94  ;  n,  395,  Exmouth  ;

IV,  107  :  early  name  of,  VI,  239,  Van  Curler.

Lake  Erie,  battle  of,  I,  163,  Barclay,  R.  H.;  570,  Champlin,
S.;  V.  678,  Stevens,  T.  H;  TV,  735-736.

Lakes  Erie  and  St.  Clair,  first  sailed  through,  H,  196,
Dollicr.

Lake  George,  battle  of,  II,  177,  Dieskau  ;  IH,  452  :  IV,  61,
Lyman,  P. ;  V,  61,  Pomeroy,  S.  ;  name  of,  III,  435,
Joques ;  name  given  to,  452 ;  ambuscade  near,  VI,  521,
Williams,  Ephraim  ;  monument  at,  illustration,  621.

Lake  Hazen,  II,  741,  Greely.

Lake  Huron,  first  white  man  to  enter,  in.  651,  Le  Caron.

Lake  Mahopac,  Washington's  headquarters  at,  IV,  418,
Morris,  M.  P.

Lake  Michigan,  tide  in.  Ill,  616,  Lapham,  I.  A.

Lake  San  Martin,  discovery  of,  IV,  393,  Moreno,  F.

Lake  St.  Sacrament,  III,  435,  Jogues  ;  named  Lake  George,
452  ;  battle  on,  VI,  265,  Vaudreuil,  P.  F.  de  R.

Lake  Superior,  H,  252,  Du  Lhut ;  exploration  of  coasts,
IH,  271,  Houghton ;  mineral  resources  first  noted,  385,
Jackson,  C.  T. ;  mining  country,  exploration  of,  IV,  105,
Macdonell,  Allan  ;  region  taken  in  the  name  of  France,

V,  372,  St.  Lusson  ;  exploration  of,  425,  Sclioolcraft,  H.
R. ;  cession  of  Indian  lands,  ibid.

Lakes,  the  great,  exploration  of,  H,  209,  Doty,  J.  D. ;  sec-
ond map  of,  576,  Galinie.
Lake  Tanganyika,  exploration  of,  V,  645,  Stanley,  H.  M.
Lake-tides,  the,  IV,  214,  Marquette.
Lake  Winnipeg,  French  name  of,  III,  461,  Jolliet.


Lakey,  Charles  D.,  VI,  691,  Lakey.  E.  J.

Lalande,  M.,  H,  264  ;  585,  Gama.  A.  L.  de  ;  HI,  435.  Joaues.

La  Liloise,  loss  of  the,  V,  70,  Poret ;  VI,  217,  Urfe,  G.  J.

La  Llave,  IV,  552,  Ocampo.

Lally-Tollendal,  I,  308,  Bollman.

Lamarck,  II,  348  ;  V,  371,  Saint- Hilaire.

Lamartine,  A.  de,  III,  703,  Lewis,  Estelle.

Lamb,  Rev.  Aroswell,  HI,  599,  Lamb,  I.  W.

Lamb,  C.  A.,  IH,  600,  Lamb,  M.  J.

Lamb,  Hugh,  V.  237,  Rich,  C.  A.

Lambert,  Gustave,  IV,  683,  Pavy.

Lamberton,  colony  under,  V,  126.  Printz,  J.

Lambeth  conferences,  the,  HI,  705,  Lewis,  J.  T.

Lambinet,  Emile,  I,  401,  Brown,  H.  K.;  685,  Cole,  J.  F;  II,

733,  Greatorex,  E. ;  III,  209,  Hilliard,  W.  H. ;  287,  How-
land,  A.C.;  V,  482,  Shapleigh.
L'Ami  du  Noir,  journal.  II,  614,  Gastine.
Lamon,  Ward  H.,  TCI,  727,  Lincoln.  A.
Lamont,  D.  S.,  I,  655.
La  Montagne,  Johannes.  III.  533,  Kieft.
La  Mothe  mine,  I,  493,  Cadillac.
La  Motte,  HI,  168,  Hennepin.

L' Amour  de  la  Patrie,  captured,  V,  667,  Sterett,  A. ;  priva-
teer, destroyed,  H,  120,  Decatur.
Lamperti,  Francesco,  pupils  of,  VI,  108,  Thursby  ;  257,  Van

Zandt.
Lamplighter,  the,  n,  31,  Cummins,  M.  S.
Lamps,  improvement  for,  IV,  77,  McCarroll ;  clock-work

for  mechanical,  invention  of,  V,  531.
Lanaudiere,  M.  de,  VI,  278,  Vercheres.
Lancaster,  S.  C,  asylum  for  the  poor  in,  V,  541,  Sims,  J.  M.
Lancaster-Jones  family,  the,  HI,  603,  Lancaster,  Joseph.
Lancaster  sound,  IH,  603,  Lancaster,  Sir  J.
Lancewood,  Lawrence,  pen-name,  VI,  579,  Wise,  D.
Land,  property  in,  II,  627,  George,  H.
Land-bank,  the,  I.  29,  Adams,  S. ;  HI.  332.
Land-claims,  Spanish  and  Mexican,  II,  427,  Fetch.
Landfall,  site  of.  III.  266,  Horsford,  E.  N.
Landor,  Miss,  III,  130.  Hawthorne,  N.
Land-patents,  pistole  fee  on.  V,  175,  Randolph,  P.
Land-reform,  theory  of.  H,  382,  Evans.  G.  H.
Lands,  disposition  of  government,  I,  241.
Landsfeldt,  Countess  of,  IV,  368,  Montez.
Landskren,  battle  of,  V,  133.  Pulaski.
Land  we  Love,  magazine,  HI,  204,  Hill,  D.  H.
Lane,  Charles,  I,  40,  Alcott.
Lane,  Elliott  T.,  HI,  457.  Johnston,  H.  L.
Lane,  Harriet,  I,  432,  433.
Lane,  James  H.,  V,  212,  Reeder,  A.  H.
Lane,  Jesse  and  Joseph,  HI,  606,  Lane,  Joel.
Lane,  Louisa,  II,  232,  Drew.  L.
Lane  seminary,  founded,  I,  217  ;  anti-slavery  agitation  at,

136,  Bailey,  G. ;  217  ;  suppression  of  Anti-slavery  society

at,  VI,  425,  Weld  ;  gift  to,  32,  Tappan,  A.
Lang,  R.  J.,  II.  495,  Foote,  A.  W.
Langbanshyttan,  monument  at,  II,  365,  Ericsson.
Langdon,  Mary,  V,  19,  Pike,  M.  H.  G.
Langlade,  Augustin  de,  HI,  610,  Langlade,  C.  M.  de.
Langrage,  how  made,  IV.  735.
Langsyne  plantation,  IV,  94,  McCord,  L.  S.
Langtry,  Edward,  III,  612,  Langtry,  L.
Language,  a  universal,  I,  76,  Andreu-s.  S.  P.
Langworthy,  Edward,  HI,  661,  Lee,  Charles.
Langford,  Sarah,  IV,  641.  Palmer,  P.
Lanier,  Mary  Day,  III,  613,  Lanier,  S.
Lanier,  Robert  S.,  Ill,  613,  Lanier,  S.
La  Noria,  plan  of,  H,  167,  168.
Lansdowne,  country  seat  of,  rV,  717,  Penn,  J.
La  Paz,  battle  at,  IV,  292.  Melgarejo ;  siege  of  (1781),  V,

455,  Segurola  ;  capture  of,  IV,  459,  Munecas.
La  Perouse,  straits  of,  IH,  616.
Lapidary  machine,  the  first,  I,  441,  Buell,  A.
Laplace,  I,  334,  Bowditch,  N.
La  Plata,  Duke  of,  H,  85,  David,  E.;  IV,  482,  Navarra  ;  IH,

570,  Koenig,  J.  R.
La  Plata,  division  into  Buenos  Ayres  and  Paraguay  (1617),

V,  363,  Saavedra,  H.  A.  de.
La  Plata,  city  of,  founded,  II,  62,  D'Amico  ;  government

palace  at,  illustration,  III,  481.
La  Plata  river,  fort  on,  slaughter  of  Spaniards,  IV,  187,

Mangord.
La  Prairie,  mission  of.  II,  545,  Fremin  ;  Indian  colony  of,

588,  Ganneaktena  ;  mission  village,  608,  Garonhiague ;

III,  577,  Kryn.
La  Presentation,  V,  6,  Picquet.
La  Puerta,  battle  at,  I,  333,  Boves  ;  IV,  405,  Morillo.
Lara,  Gen.,  I,  306.
Lara,  Nufio  de,  TV,  187,  Mangore".
Larcombe,  Jane  E.,  in,  729,  Lincoln,  J.  E.
Lardner,  Dionysius,  II,  364.
Lardner,  Hannah,  IV,  716,  Penn,  R.
La  RenommSe,  wreck  of,  H,  7,  Crespel.
La  Reunion,  Texas,  colony  of,  rV,  531,  Noimand.
La  Riviere.  Marquis  de,  Hi.  586,  Lafayette.
Lamed,  William,  III,  619,  Lamed,  E.  C.
La  Rouerie,  in,  586,  Ixtfayette.
Larra,  the  poet,  VI,  663,  Zorrilla.
Larrey,  Baron,  pupil  of.  V,  671,  Stevens,  A.  H.
Larrey,  Dr.  F.  H.,  H,  242,  Dudley,  B.  W.


LARYNGOSCOPE


LEITCH


753


Laryngoscope,  claim  to  the  invention  of,  IV,  271,  Maxwell,
George  T.

Laryngotomy,  subhyoidean,  operation  of,  III,  677,  Lefferts,
George  M.

Las  Casas,  Francisco,  IV,  570,  Olid.

Las  Casas,  Count  de,  V,  158.  Radiguet.

Las  Cruces,  battle  at,  III,  197,  Hidalgo,  M.

La  Serena,  Chili,  destroyed,  I,  734,  Copano.

La  Serna,  Gen. See  Seena,  V,  463.

Las  Piedras,  battle  at,  II,  486,  Flores,  V.

Lasteyrie,  Count  de,  III,  590,  Lafayette.

Last  island,  III,  591,  Lafitte.

Last  of  the  Cocked  Hats,  sobriquet,  IV,  384,  Mease,  J.

Latham,  Samuel,  IV,  348,  Mitchill.

Lathes,  invention  of,  II,  52,  Daboll ;  feed-disks  for,  V,  458,
Sellers,  C.

Lathrop,  Amy,  VI,  361,  Warner,  A.  B.

Lathrop,  Harriet,  VI.  570,  Winslow,  H.  L.

Lathrop,  Mary  A.,  Ill,  52,  Hallock,  M.  A.

Latilla,  Horatio  A.,  II,  540,  Freeman.  H.  A.  L.

Latimer,  Martha,  IV,  92,  McCook,  D.

Latimer,  Randolph,  VI,  615,  Wormeley,  M.  E.

Latin,  Roman  pronunciation  of,  V,  243.  Richardson,  J.  F.

Latitude,  highest  northern,  reached,  I.  356,  Brainard,  D.  L.

Latitudes,  method  for  determining,  VI,  24,  Talcott,  A.

Latorre,  Gen.,  IV,  623,  Paez  ;  766,  Piar  ;  VI,  259,  Varela,  P.

La  Trinitaria,  secret  society.  II,  237,  Duarte,  J.  P.

Latrobe,  Henry  Bonival  de,  III,  626,  Latrobe,  B.  H.

Latter-Day  Saints,  church  of,  organized,  V,  576  ;  Smith,
Joseph.

Lattimer,  Miss,  III.  239,  Holman,  J.  G.

Latto,  Alexander,  III.  629,  Latto,  T.  C.

Laud,  Archbishop,  HI,  251,  Hooker,  T.\  VI,  566,  Winslow,
Edward  ;  573.

Lauder,  Edward,  V,  672,  Stevens,  I.  I.

Lauderdale,  Earl  of,  IV,  178,  Maitland,  J.

Laughton,  Frances  P.,  IV,  112,  Mace.

Launeau's  Ferry,  engagement  at,  VI,  468,  White,  A.  W.

Laura,  pen-name,  II,  433,  Ferguson,  E.

Laurance,  John,  IV,  108,  Macdougall,  E.

Laureal,  Madame  de<  trial  of.  II,  340,  Emangard.

Laureate  of  the  South,  the,  III,  145,  Hayne,  P.  H.

Laurel  Hill  cemetery,  Hull's  tomb  in,  illustration,  IH,  311.

Laurence,  Samuel,  IV,  15,  Longfellow,  H.  W.

Laurencez,  Gen.,  IV,  215,  Mdrquez,  L.

Laurencillo,  III,  631,  Laurent.

Laurens,  Harriet,  III,  350,  Ingraham,  D.  N.

Laurens,  J.  R,  pupils  of,  VI,  185,  Turner,  C.  Y.;  VI,  301,
Vinton,  F.  P.

Laurens,  Martha,  V,  166,  Ramsay,  M.  L.

Laurentian  rocks,  III,  319,  Hunt,  T.  S.

Laussat,  Pierre  A.,  Ill,  632,  Laussat.

Lautaro  secret  society,  the.  V,  301,  Rodriguez,  M.

Lauzon,  Francois  de.  III,  686,  Le  Moyne.

Lava  beds,  attack  on  the,  II,  650.  Gillem.

Laval  university,  gift  to,  II,  408,  Faribault,  G.  B.;  Ill,
635,  Laval,  F.  X.

Lavaux,  Gen.,  VI,  480,  Whitelocke  ;  145.

La  Vega,  Gen. See  Garcilaso  de  la  Vega.

La  Vega,  battle  of,  rv,  507,  Ojeda.

Laver,  Augustus,  VI,  681.  Fuller,  T.

Lavergne,  battle  of,  rv,  487,  Negley.

La  Victoria,  defence  of,  V,  531,  Silva.

Lavis,  Andrew,  III,  108,  Harvie.

Lavoisier,  M.,  II,  265.

Lavoisier,  Madame,  V,  346.

Law,  William,  V.  576,  Smith,  Joseph.

Law,  revision  of  the  code  of  practice  of  New  York,  n,  447,
Field,  D.  D.\  701,  Graham,  D.;  interpretations  and  defi-
nitions of  the.  Ill,  521-522,  Kent.  J.;  Pennsylvania  system
of  equity,  new  code.  III,  539,  King,  E. ;  first  code  in  New
England,  VI,  353,  Ward,  N. ;  reforms,  II,  447,  448,  Field,
D.  D.

Law-and-Order  party,  the,  II,  179,  Diman,  B.

Lawnfleld,  II,  381,  Evans,  D.  S.

Law  of  Planetary  Rotation,  V,  103,  Pratt,  O.

Lawrence,  Abraham  R.,  VI,  491,  Whitney,  W.  C.

Lawrence,  Cornelia,  III,  208,  Hdlhouse,  J.  A.

Lawrence,  Isaac,  HI,  641.  Lawrence,  W.  B.

Lawrence,  Judge  V.,  VI,  692,  Lawrence,  C.  B.

Lawrence,  Samuel,  III,  638,  Lawrence,  A.

Lawrence,  Sarah  T.  D.,  V,  283,  Robinson,  Sarah.

Lawrence,  Thomas,  V.  512,  Shippen,  E.

Lawrence,  the,  i:i  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie.  IV,  735.

Lawrence,  Kansas,  pillaged,  I,  405  ;  HI,  639,  Lawrence,  A.
A.;  burning  of,  V,  481,  Shannon.

Lawrence,  Mass..  IV,  495,  Nesmith.  J.

Lawrence  Hall,  Cambridge,  III,  639.  Lawrence,  A.  A.

Lawrence  monument,  illustration.  Ill,  640.

Lawrence  scientific  school,  III,  265,  Horsford,  E.  N.

Lawrence  university,  AVis.,  Ill,  639.  Lawrence,  A.  A.

Law  reports,  first  volume  of,  III,  553,  Kirby,  Ephraim.

Laws,  Victor  F.,  V/703,  Stone.  M.  E.

Lawson,  Mr.,  II,  700,  Graffenried.

Lawyers,  prejudice  against,  I,  15,  Adams,  John  ;  29.

Lazarists.  the,  IV,  63,  Lunch,  J.  J. ;  557,  Odin  ;  institutions
of,  V,  321,  Rosati  ;  VI,  121,  Timon.

Layagua  Indians,  the.  Ill,  342,  Igne-Chivri.

Lay  impropriations,  H,  83,  Davenport,  J.

VOL.  vi. — 48


Laying-on-of -hands  controversy,  I.  395,

Layman,  pen-name,  IV,  42,  Lowell.  J.

Lay  of  the  Scottish  Fiddle,  anonymous  poem,  rv,  679,
Paidding.

Lay  Preacher,  the,  II,  141,  Dennie.

Lay's  Ferry,  engagement  at,  VI,  7,  Sweeny.

Lea,  Anna  M„  IV.  308.  Merritt,  A.  L.

Leach,  Abisha,  III,  647,  Leach, S.

Leach,  Daniel,  VI,  4,  Swan,  W.  D.

Leach,  David  S.,  Ill,  647,  Leach,  W.  T.

Leach,  John,  II,  302.  Edes,  P.

Leach,  Rev.  Joseph  S..  HI,  646,  Leach,  J.  G.

Leach,  Samuel,  III,  646,  Leach,  D.  W.  C.

Lead,  first  American  cargo  of,  V,  517,  Shreve,  H.  M. ;  mines,
Chipil's,  III,  354,  Innes,  H. ;  mines  of  Iowa,  discovered,
IV,  733.  Perrot,  N.

Leade,  Jane,  III,  509,  Kelpius.

Leadville,  riots  at,  V,  33,  Pitkin,  F.  W.

League  of  Gileadites,  I,  405.

League  of  universal  brotherhood,  the,  I,  469,  Burritt.

Leake,  Isaac  Q.,  Ill,  599,  Lamb,  J.

Leake,  John  G.,  VI,  395,  Watts,  J.

Leake  and  Watts  orphan-house,  VI,  395,  Watts,  J.

Lean,  Francis,  IV,  216,  Marry  at,  F.

Lean  Jimmy,  sobriquet.  III,  466,  Jones,  J.  C.

Leao,  Honorio,  IV,  643,  Parana.

Leather,  inventions  for  making,  I,  341,  Boyden,  S.;  II,  311,
Edivards,  W.

Leaves,  development  of,  III,  202,  Hilqard,  T.  C.

Leavitt,  Mary,  III,  334,  Hutchinson,  Jesse.

Lebanon,  Ky.,  capture  of,  II,  248,  Duffield,  W.  W.;  engage-
ment at,  254,  Dumoni,  E.

Lebanon.  O..  normal  school,  III,  231,  Holbrook,  Alfred.

Le  Basque,  Michael,  III,  344,  Illigen.

Le  Berceau,  capture  of,  III,  738,  Little,  G.

Le  Blanc,  Jean,  VI.  27,  Talon.

Leboucher,  M.,  pupil  of.  V,  371,  Saintin.

Le  Breton,  Rev.  W.  C,  III,  612.  Langtry.

Leclercq,  Agnes,  V,  378,  Salm  Salm,  A.

Lecompton  constitution,  the,  II,  215  ;  444,  Fessenden,  W.  P.

Lecture  bureaus,  V,  206,  Redpath.

Lederer,  Baron,  collection  of,  V,  529.  Silliman,  B.

Ledyard,  Fanny,  III,  6,55,  Ledyard,  W.

Ledyard,  Mary  A.,  I,  680,  Cogswell,  M.  F.

Lee,  Alice  G.,  pen-name,  HI,  117,  Haven,  A.  B.

Lee,  Arthur,  H,  116.  Deane,  S.

Lee,  Gen.  Charles.  II.  765,  Griffith,  D.

Lee,  David,  VI,  321,  Waldersee.

Lee,  Eleanor  P.  W.,  VI,  358,  Warfleld.

Lee,  G.  G.,  Ill,  662.  Lee,  H.  F.  S.

Lee,  Gen.  John,  III,  657,  Lee,  C.

Lee,  Jonathan,  in,  661,  Lee,  Chauncey.

Lee,  Launcelot,  IH,  663,  Lee,  R.

Lee,  Lionel,  III,  663,  Lee,  R.

Lee,  Mary  A.,  VI,  678,  Demarest.

Lee,  Matilda,  III,  667,  Lee,  H.

Lee,  Philip,  V,  580,  Smith,  Meriwether.

Lee,  Robert  E.,  Gen.  Scott's  eulogy  on,  V,  356,  Ruther-
foord,  J. ;  statue  of,  illustration,  VI,  226.

Lee,  Thomas,  HI.  662,  Lee,  E.  B. :  IV,  712.

Lee  house,  the,  illustration,  IH,  664,  Lee,  T.

Lee,  the  schooner,  captures  by,  IV,  188,  Manley,  J.

Leech.  Hezekiah,  III,  675,  Leech,  D.  D.  T.

Leech,  John,  IV,  678,  Paid,  H.

Leech,  Maj..  H,  55,  Dakin.

Leeds,  Duchess  of,  I,  538,  Carroll,  C:  558.  Caton,  R.

Leeds  Manor,  grant  of  lands  in.  IV,  225,  Marshall,  J.  M.

Lee's  legion,  HI,  667,  668.  Lee,  H.

Lee-Sug,  Katherine,  III,  22,  23,  Hackett,  J.  H.

Leete  island.  Ill,  676,  Leete.

Lefebre,  pupils  of,  I,  530,  Carpenter.  E.  M.  ;  II,  597.  Gard-
ner, E.  J.  ;  V,  38,  Piatt,  C.  A.  ;  VI,  87,  Thompson,  A. ;
507,  Wiles,  I.  R.  ;  678,  Dewing,  T.  W.

Lefferts,  Leffert,  I,  309,  Brevoort,  J.  C.

Leffingwell,  Thomas,  VI,  209,  Uncus.

Le  Fort.  Robert,  pseudonvm.  IV.  590,  Oiieuns,  R.  P.  L.

Lefuel,  Hector,  III,  320,  Hunt,  R.  M.

Legal-tender  suits,  first.  V.  304,  Roelker  ;  562,  Smith,  E.  D.

Lagar6  college,  Iowa.  Ill,  678,  Legare.

Leggett,  Abraham,  III,  679,  Lcigvtt,  W.

Leggett,  A.  A.,  Ill,  679,  Leggett.  W.  H.

Legion  of  honor,  cross  of  the.  HI,  497,  Kearny,  P.

Legislative  teller,  inventor  of  a,  V,  676,  Stevens,  E.

Legros,  Gen.,  II,  623.  Geffrard.

Lehigh  universitv.  illustration,  IV,  620,  Packer.

Lehmann,  C.  E.  R.  H..  pupil  of,  VI,  71,  Thayer,  A.  H.

Lehre,  Thomas,  H,  634,  Gibbet,  W.  H.

Lehre  und  Wehre,  magazine,  VI,  343,  Walther.

Leibnitz,  II,  311,  Edwards,  J.

Leif,  n,  868,  Eric  the  Red  :  VI,  203,  Tyrker.

Leifsbudir,  VI,  106,  Thorvald.

Leigh,  Florence,  pen-name,  VI,  503,  Wilbur,  A.  T.

Leigh,  J.  M.,  H,  679.  Goodman,  W.

Leigh,  Stuart,  pseudonym,  I,  635,  Clarke,  M.  B.

Leigh,  Judge  William,  V,  179.  Randolph.

Leinster,  Duke  of,  II.  437.  Fitzgerald,  Ixird  E.

Leisler  troubles,  the,  I,  198,  Bayard,  N.  ;  party  of,  I,  221,
Beekman,  G.\  rebellion,  III,  681.  682,  Leisler.

Leitch,  Maj.,  HI,  565,  Knowlton,  T.


754


LEITE


LIMA


Leite,  Diogo.  V,  615,  Souza.

Leiva,  Ponciano,  V,  608,  Soto,  M.  A.

Leland  Stanford  university,  the,  V,  644.

Le  Leche,  John.  Ill,  647,  Leach,  L.

Le  Loup,  Chief,  IV.  97,  McCrea.

Le  Maire,  Isaac,  III,  684,  Le  Maire,  J.

Le  Maire,  strait  of.  III,  343,  Ihering.

Le  Marseillais,  pirate,  V,  609,  Soubin.

Lemcke,  Rev.  H.,  II,  581,  Gallitzin.

Le  Mesurier,  IV,  90,  MrClure,  Sir  R.

Lemmon,  Hannah,  I,  737,  Corcoran,  W.  W.

Lemmon,  Jonathau,  case  of  slaves  of,  I,  99,  Arthur ;  II.
385,  Evarts,  W.  M.

Le  Moine,  Benjamin,  III,  685.

Lemoine,  pseudonym,  II,  176,  Didier,  E.  L.

Lemos,  Count  de,  his  daughter,  I,  322,  Borja.  Ana  ;  II,
436,  Fernandez  de  Castro.

Lemos,  M.  G.  de,  VI,  396,  Watts,  S.

Le  Moyne,  Jean,  III.  685,  7>  Moine.

Lend  a  Hand,  periodical,  HI,  32,  Hale,  E.  E.

Length,  standards  of,  V,  311,  Rogers,  W.  A.

Lennox,  Lord  George,  V.  245,  Richmond.

Lenox,  Henrietta,  IH,  689,  Lenox,  J.

Lenox,  Robert,  III,  689,  Lenox,  J.

Lenox  library,  rare  books  in,  II,  323,  324  ;  illustration,  HI,
689  ;  collector  for,  V,  676,  Stevens,  H.

Lenude's  Ferry,  VI,  384,  Washington,  W.

Leo,  capture  of  the,  II,  52,  Dacres.

Leogane,  Hayti,  engagement  at,  VI,  298,  Vincent,  C.

Leonard,  Daniel,  I,  17.

Leonard,  Col.  Ephraim,  III,  691.  Leonard.  D.

Leonard,  Henry  and  James,  III,  691,  Leonard,  G.

Leonard.  Dr.  O.  L.,  III.  691,  Leonard,  A.

Leonard,  Stephen  B.,  III.  692,  Leonard,  W.  A.

Leonardson,  Samuel,  II,  274,  Dustin,  H.

Leonora,  opera  of,  II,  557-558,  Fry,  W.  H.

Leonowens,  Thomas,  III,  692,  Leonotcens.

Leopard,  the,  and  the  Chesapeake,  I,  25 ;  178,  Barron  ;
III,  310,  422.

Leopoldina,  Archduchess  of  Austria,  IV,  698,  Pedro  I.

Leopoldine  society  for  missions,  V,  229,  Reze.

Leow  bridge,  the,  on  Broadway.  II,  625,  Genin.

Le  Pays  de  Bourjolli.  Col.,  HI,  497,  Kearny,  P.

Le  Pesant,  VI,  27,  Talon.

Le  Picard,  Pierre,  III,  441,  Johnson,  Daniel.

Lepidoptera,  VI,  421,  Weidemeyer.

Le  Poitevin,  II,  68,  Dana,  W.  P.

Lerma,  Garcia  de,  IV,  460,  Muiioz  de  Collantes.

Le  Roy,  Caroline,  VI,  412.

Las  12  seigneurs.  Ill,  300,  Huet.

Les  amis  des  noirs,  club  called.  IV,  519,  Niel ;  563,  Oge  ;
V,  607,  Sonthonax  ;  VI,  75.  Thevenau.

Lesdiguiere,  Duchess  of,  I,  583,  Charlevoix.

Leseur,  Alexandre,  IV,  520,  Nieto,  J.  A.

Lesher,  John,  V,  328,  Ross,  J.

Leslie,  Col.,  incident  of  his  march  to  Salem,  n,  147,  Derby,  R.

Leslie,  Charles  R.,  quoted,  V,  404,  Saunders,  P.

Leslie,  Rev.  George,  VI,  72.  Thayer,  J.

Leslie,  Sir  John,  V,  173,  Randolph,  T.  M.

Leslie,  Madeline,  pen-name,  I,  143,  Baker.

Lesquereux,  Leo,  III,  17,  Guyot.

Les  Saintes,  island  of,  III,  305,  Hugues.

Lesser  Sun,  the,  of  the  Natchez.  V,  369.  St.  Come.

Lessing,  Karl  F.,  II,  619,  Gay.  E.;  Ill,  699,  Leutze.

Lester,  John  W..  stage-name,  VI.  336.  Wallack,  J.  L.

L'Estrange,  'Corinne,  pen-name,  III,  106,  Hartshorne,  H.

Lesueur,  M.,  II,  372,  Esmenard.

Letheon.  rv,  434,  Morton,  W.  T.  G.

Letrau,  literary  academy  of,  IH,  584,  Lacv-n  za,  J.  M.

Letter  from  a  Gentleman  in  Transylvania,  anonymous
pamphlet,  III,  317,  Hunt,  I.

Letter  G,  the,  I,  179.  Barrow,  F.  E.

Lettres  sur  les  colonies  Frangaise  de  TAmerique,  anony-
mous book,  VI,  660,  Zenon.

Lettsom,  Dr.,  I,  546,  Carver,  Jonathan :  VI,  386,  Water-
house.

Leupp,  C.  M.,  HI.  662,  Lee,  G.

Leutze,  III,  359,  Irving,  J.  B.;  642,  Laurie  :  VI.  396,  Way.

Levant,  capture  of  the,  I,  151,  Ballard,  H.  E.\  V,  684,
Stewart,  C.

Level,  invention  of  a.  I.  530,  Carpenter,  R.  C.

Leverett,  Thomas,  III.  700,  Leverett,  J.

Leverett.  William,  1.  281,  Blair,  H.  W.

Leverrier,  his  discovery  of  Neptune,  rV,  701,  Peirce.

Le  Vert,  Dr.  H.  S.,  HI,  700,  Le  Vert,  O.  W.

Le  Vice- Admiral  Martin,  capture  of,  VI,  255,  Vansittart.

Levis,  Canada,  founded,  II,  163,  Deziel.

Levy,  David,  VI,  651.  Yulee.

Lewes,  colony  at,  I,  295,  Blommaert.

Lewger.  John,  I,  621.

Lewis,  Eli,  m,  703,  Lewis,  Ellis.

Lewis,  Col.  George.  IV,  301,  Mercer,  H.

Lewis,  Hosea,  HI.  705,  Lewis,  Ida.

Lewis,  Rev.  I3aac,  IV,  245,  Mason,  T.  L.

Lewis,  John,  eviction  of,  III,  701,  Lewis,  Andrew.


Lewis  John,  VI.  634,  Wythe,  G.
Lewis,  John,  VI,  605,  Woods,  W.


Lewis,  Lawrence,  II,  45,  Cnstis  ;  III.  704,  Lewis,  E.  P.  C.
Lewis,  Sidney  ».,  HI,  703,  Lewis,  Estelie.


Lewis,  Ma.i.  Thomas,  V,  600,  Smyth,  J.  F.  D.

Lewis.  William,  VI,  395,  Watts,  D.

Lewis  and  Clark  expedition,  IH.  706,  Lewis,  M.;  I,  627,
Clark,  W.

Lewisberry,  Pa.,  Ill,  703,  Lewis.  Ellis.

Lewis  creek,  settlement  on,  II,  157.  De  Vries.

Lex,  Charles  E.,  VI,  448,  Wharton,  F.

Lexington,  Ky.,  first  house  on  the  site  of,  IV,  673,  Patter-
son, R.;  the  Sayre  institute,  V,  411,  Sayre,  D.  A.;  Clay's
tomb  at,  illustration,  I,  644 ;  medical  school  at,  403,
Brown,  S.

Lexington,  Mass.,  battle  of,  I,  629,  Clark.  Jonas ;  II,  108,
Dawes,  W. ;  570,  Gage  ;  IV,  725,  Percy,  H. ;  retreat  of  the
British  from,  V,  1,  Pickering,  T.:  31,  Pitcaim  :  Revere's
ride  to,  225-226  ;  its  consequences,  II,  388  ;  centennial  of,
I,  186,  Bartlett,  W.  F.

Lexington,  Mo.,  battle  of,  II,  745,  Green,  M.  E.;  defence
of,  IV,  458,  Mulligan  ;  capture  of,  V,  119,  Price,  S.

Lexington,  capture  by  the,  I,  180,  Barry,  J.;  capture  of
the,  II,  56,  Dale,  R.:  burning  of,  461,  Finn  ;  491,  Follen.

Leyden,  Puritans  at,  V,  286,  Robinson,  J.

L'Hermite.  Jacob,  VI,  283,  Verschoor ;  517,  Willekens.

L'Hommedieu,  Benjamin,  III,  709,  VHommedieu.

Liancourt,  Duke  de.  V,  293,  Rochefoucauld.

Liautard.  Abb6,  II,  274,  Dusuau.

Libby  prison,  escapes  from,  II,  340,  Ely,  W.  G.;  V,  323,
Rose,  T.  E. :  IV,  535,  Northrop,  L.  B.

Libel  suits,  II,  21,  Croswell,  H.\  65,  Dana,  C.  A.;  Til.  61.
Hamilton,  A.;  first  suit  against  a  vendor  of,  V,  481,
Shanks.

Liberal  party,  the,  III,  650,  Leavitt.

Liberal-Republican  party,  the,  H,  721,  740.

Liberator,  the,  I,  303,  Bolivar  ;  order  of  the,  304.

Liberia,  I,  111,  Ashmun,  J.;  boundary  dispute  of,  103;
name  of,  III,  627,  Latrobe.  J.  H.  B.;  Maryland  colony  in,
ibid.;  first  president  of,  V,  274,  Roberts,  J.  J.;  govern-
ment of,  341,  Roye  ;  concession  for  territory  of,  694,
Stockton,  R.  F. ;  college  of,  gift  to,  II,  423,  Fearing.

Liberty,  debate  on  the  influence  of  churches  on,  I,  365.

Liberty,  seizure  of  the  sloop.  Ill,  71,  Hancock,  J.

Liberty  Bell,  the  periodical,  IV.  40.

Liberty  boys,  the,  I,  360,  Brasher.

Liberty  Enlightening  the  World,  statue,  illustration.  I,  183.

Liberty  hall,  estate  of,  V,  663,  Stephens  ;  IH,  742  ;  illustra-
tion, 743  ;  rv,  519,  Niemcewicz.

Liberty  party,  the.  III.  236,  Holley,  M. ;  first  candidates  of,
HI,  687,  Le  Moyne,  F.  J.

Liberty-tree,  the,  III,  330,  Huske,  J.

Libraries,  Canadian,  destroyed.  H,  407,  408,  Faribault,
G.  B.\  parish,  I,  362,  Bray  ;  care  of.  II.  159,  Dewey,  M.\
VI,  301,  Vinton,  F.;  cataloguing  of.  V,  65,  Poole,  W.  F;
methods  of  librarians,  433,  Schwartz  ;  law  for  school,  VI, ,
312,  Wadsworth,  J.  and  J.  S. ;  economy,  HI,  432-433.  Jew-
ett,  C.  C;  works  on,  IV,  50,  Ludewig  ;  first  public,  in  the
west,  II,  46,  Cutler,  Ephraim  ;  Mexican  national,  I,  523,
Cardoso,  J.  J. ;  valuable  colonial,  486,  Byrd,  W.

Lichenology.  VI,  176.  Tuckerman.

Lichfield,  Earl  of,  I,  506.  Calvert,  E.  H. ;  III,  663.  Lee.  R.

Lick  observatory,  the,  III,  232,  Holden,  E.  S.;  illustration.
709,  Lick,  James.

Liderer,  Baron  de,  II,  221,  Downing,  A.  J.

Lieb,  Michael,  I.  762,  Coxe,  T.

Lieber,  W.,  III.  709,  Lieber.  F.

Liebig,  Baron  Justus,  pupils  of.  II.  638,  Gibbs,  O.  W. ;  III,
15,  Guthrie,  S.;  211,  Himes;  V,  77,  Porter,  J.  A.;  573,
Smith,  J.  L.

Liebreich,  Dr.  V.,  224.  Renting.

Lienard,  Michel,  V,  38.  Plassmann.

Lier,  Adolph,  pupils  of,  IV,  325,  Miller,  Charles  H. ;  VI,  20,
Tait,  J.  R.

Life-boats,  invention  of,  II,  524,  Francis.  J. ;  V,  484,  Shaver.

Life  before  Him.  anonymous  book,  I,  448.  Bunce,  O.  B.

Life-saving  appliances,  invention  of,  II,  524,  Francis,  J.

Life-saving  service,  a  pioneer  of  the,  HI,  279,  Hotcard,
W.  A.:  537,  Kimball,  S.  I.

Life-saving  stations,  forerunner  of.  III.  685,  Le  Mercier,  A.

Liga-liberal-maranheuse,  the,  II,  526.  Franco  de  Sd.

Light,  researches  on,  II,  227,  Draper,  J.  W. ;  velocity  of,
IV,  315,  Michelson  ;  406,  Morley,  E.  W.

Light,  invention  of  a.  V,  522,  Sickel.

Light-horse  Harry,  III,  667,  Lee,  H.;  667.  Lee,  R.  E.

Light-houses,  improvement  in,  I,  128,  Bache,  H. ;  III,  707,
Lewis,  Winslow  ;  VI,  548,  Wilson,  G.  F.;  IV,  737,  Perry,
M.  C;  first  iron-pile,  VI,  11,  Swift,  W.  H.\  454,  Wheel-
er. Samuel.

Lightning,  Franklin's  experiment,  II,  528.

Lightning-rods,  I,  380,  Brittan.

Lillibridge,  James,  IV,  468,  Murray,  James.

Lillie,  Theophilus,  V,  603.  Snyder,  C.

Lillington,  George,  III,  712,  Lillington,  J.  A.;  TV,  636,
Pfdmer,  A.

Lillington,  N.  C,  III,  712,  Lillington.

Lily  of  Quito,  the,  IV.  205,  Marianna.

Lima,  city  of,  founded,  II.  169,  Diaz.  R.;  V,  36.  Pizarrox
evacuation  of,  I,  306  :  colleges  founded  in,  II.  22.  Cruce  ;
320,  Elias  ;  fortification  of,  ni.  570,  Koenig,  J.  R. :  earth-
quakes in,  714,  Liiian  ;  (of  1687),  IV.  482.  Navarro  :  196,
Manso  de  Velasco  ;  rebuilding  of.  569,  Olavide  :  V,  82.
Portocarrero  ;  water-supply,  IV,  22,  Lopez  de  Zuiiiga  ;


LI-MA-HON


LOMAS


755


park  around,  287,  Meiggs  ;  hospital  for  Indians,  III,  750,
Loayza  ;  insurrection  in,  II,  486,  Flutes,  J.  J. ;  miracles
in,  canonization,  V,  70,  Porrez  ;  cathedral,  1, 212,  Becerra;
TV,  197  ;  437,  Fernandez  de  Cordova  :  197 ;  illustration,
551,  Ocampo,  G.  de  ;  temple  of  Los  Desamparados.  II,
436,  Fernandez  de  Castro  :  university,  endowment  to,  I,
232.  Benavides  ;  VI,  128,  Toledo,  G. ;  Roeafuerte's  tomb,
illustration,  V,  291.

Li-Ma-Hon,  the  corsair.  III,  581,  Labezares.

Limbs,  artificial,  invention  of.  III.  433.  Jevcett,  G.  B.

Lime-kilns,  construction  of,  II,  127,  Delafield,  Joseph.

Lilian,  Gen.  Pascual,  III,  368.

Linares,  city  of,  founded,  IV,  237,  Martinez  de  Rosas.

Lincoln,  Abraham,  his  journey  to  Washington,  II,  429  ;
Greeley's  share  in  the  nomination  of,  739  ;  letter  of,  III,
250  ;  home  of,  illustration,  717  ;  statues  of.  718,  720.  721  :
life-mask,  723  ;  monument  to,  726  ;  fac-simile  of  letter
by.  724  ;  house  where  he  died,  722  ;  arrest  for  complicity
in  his  murder,  II,  500,  Ford,  J.  T.

Lincoln,  Earl  of,  III.  443,  Johnson,  A.

Lincoln,  John,  III.  715.  Lincoln,  A.

Lincoln,  Josiah,  III.  715,  Lincoln,  A.

Lincoln,  Mordecai,  III,  715,  Lincoln,  A.

Lincoln,  Samuel,  III,  715,  Lincoln,  A.  ;  IV,  750,  Phelps,
Almira  H.  L.

Lincoln,  Thomas.  Ill,  715,  Lincoln,  A.;  728,  Lincoln,  B.

Lincoln  Tower,  III,  43,  Hall,  Newman.

Lincoln  university,  II.  170,  Dickey,  J.  M.

Lind,  Jenny,  II,  194,  Dodge,  O.  E.\  first  seat  for  her  first
concert,  625,  Genin.

Lindau,  W.  A.,  III.  322,  Hunter,  J.  D.

Lindenschmidt,  William,  pupils  of,  V,  514,  Shirlaw  ;  VI,
207,  Ulrich.

Lindenwald,  estate  of,  VI,  232.

Lindenwood  college.  Mo.,  founded,  V,  520,  Sibley,  G.  C.

Lindl,  Ignatius,  V,  417,  Schauffler.

Lindsey,  T.  N.,  in,  731,  Lindsey,  D.  W.

Lingg,  Louis,  V,  632,  Spies.

Liniers,  Gen.,  V,  362,  Saavedra,  C;  VI,  480.  Whitelocke.

Linna?an  society,  the  New  England,  V,  3,  Pickering,  O.

Linna;us.  I,  684,  Colden,  C:  II,  177,  Diereville  ;  IV,  1,  Loc-
king ;  3,  Logan,  J.;  V,  311.  Rolander.

Linnet,  the,  and  the  Eagle,  fight  of,  V,  125,  Pring.

Linsly,  Noah,  III,  733,  Linsly,  Jared.

LTnsurgente,  the,  capture  of,  I.  22  :  VI,  170,  Trvxtun.

Lion,  explosion  of  the  steamboat,  III,  456,  Johnston.  J.  S.

Lioness,  burning  of  the  steamer,  VI,  469,  White,  E.  D.

Lion  of  Belfort,  the,  I,  183,  Bartholdi.

Lippett,  Col.,  Ill,  473,  Jones,  W.

Lippincott.  Leander  K.,  Ill,  735,  Lippincott,  S.  J.

Lippincott's  Magazine,  III,  554,  Kirk,  J.  F.\  734,  Lippin-
cott, J.  B. ;  V,  587,  Smith,  L.  P.

Lipscomb,  Joel,  III,  735,  Lipscomb,  A.  S.

Liquids  and  solids,  equivalent  volumes  of,  III,  319,  Hunt,
T.  Sterry.

Lisbon  earthquake,  the,  II,  526,  Frankland.

Lisburne,  Viscount,  VI,  268,  Vaughan,  Sir  J.

Lisgar,  Baron,  VI,  648.  Young,  Sir  J.

Lisle,  Baron  de,  II,  482,  Fleurieu.

Lisle,  Bridget,  VI,  219,  Usher,  H

Lisle,  John,  III,  220,  Hoar,  L.

Lislet.  Louis  Moreau,  III,  746  ;  V,  611.

Lispenard  meadows,  the,  III,  737,  Lispenard.

Liston,  I,  473,  Burton.

Liszt,  Franz,  II,  63,  64,  Damrosch  ;  III,  228.  Hoffman,  R.
H. ;  IV,  248,  Mason,  W.

Litchfield,  Conn.,  law-school,  V,  213,  Reeve,  T.

Litchfield,  N.  H.,  Indian  grant  at,  IV,  668.  Passaconaway.

Literary  America,  projected  magazine,  V,  46.

Literary  leather-dresser,  the.  sobriquet,  II,  222,  Dowse.

Literary  Life,  magazine,  I,  656.

Literary  Magazine  and  American  Register,  the,  I,  397.

Literature  lotteries,  VI,  638,  Yates,  J.  B.

Lithography,  introduced  into  the  U.  S.,  Ill,  353,  Inman,
H. ;  IV,  604,  Otis  ;  drawings  for,  506,  Newsam.

Lithotomy,  II,  242,  Dudley,  B.  W.

Lithotrity,  introduction  of,  I,  403,  Brown,  S.

Litterateur,  first  professional,  I,  397,  Brown,  C.  B.

Littell,  Malvina  Pray,  II,  485,  Florence,  W.  J.

Little,  Grace  A.,  IV,  575,  Oliver,  G.  A.

Little.  William,  III,  738,  Little,  S.  L.

Little  Academy  club,  the,  I,  34.

Little  Beard's  town,  III,  424,  Jemison,  M.

Little  Belt,  capture  of  the,  I,  570.  Champlin,  S.

Little  Ben,  sobriquet.  VI,  685,  Harrison.

Little  Big  Horn,  battle  of  the,  II,  6,  Crazy  Horse  •  44  ;  V,
543,  Sitting  Bull  ;  controversy  on,  VI.  492,  Whittaker,  F.

Little  David,  the,  torpedo  cigar-boat,  V,  187,  Ravenel,  St.
Julien.

Little  Egg  Harbor,  shipping  destroyed  at,  II,  433,  Ferguson,
P.;  engagement  at,  V,  133,  Pulaski.

Littlefield,  Catherine,  II,  753.  Greene,  iV.

Little  Giant,  the.  sobriquet,  II.  213,  Douglas,  S.  A.

Little  Holland  House.  London,  IV,  122,  McHenry.

Little  Magician,  the,  sobriquet,  VI.  233.

Little  Missenden  Abbey,  I,  96,  Arnold,  E.  G.

Little  Mountain,  fight  at,  III,  359,  Irvine.  W.

Little  Phil,  sobriquet.  V,  500,  Sheridan.

Little  Pilgrim,  the,  magazine,  HI,  735,  Lippincott,  S.  J.


Little  Pittsburg  mine,  the.  VI,  17,  Tabor.

Little  Rock,  battle  of,  IV,  306.  Merrill,  L.

Little  Six,  Chief,  IV,  140,  MacLaren,  R.  N.

Live-Oak  George,  III,  636,  Late,  G.

Liver,  the  glycogenic  function  of  the,  II,  484,  Flint,  A.

Livermore,  Rev.  Daniel  P.,  Ill,  740.  Livermore,  M.  A.

Liverpool,  gifts  to,  I,  394,  Brown,  W.

Living  Age,  Littell's,  III,  737.

Livingston,  Catherine,  II,  608,  Garretson.  F.

Livingston,  Cora,  I,  188,  Barton,  T.  P.;  V,  606,  Somerville.

Livingston,  Cornelia.  IV,  555.  CConor.

Livingston,  Crawford,  VI,  429,  Wells,  H.

Livingston,  Edwin  Brockholst,  III.  747.

Livingston,  Eliza,  III,  744.  Livingston,  J.  W.

Livingston,  Elizabeth,  III,  638,  Laicrance  ;  V,  583,  Smith,
Peter.

Livingston,  Gertrude.  Ill,  705,  Lewis.  M.

Livingston,  Gilbert,  III,  741,  Livingston,  R.;  747,  J.  H.

Livingston,  Janet,  III,  744,  Livingston.  R.  R.

Livingston,  Joanna,  VI.  237.  Van  Cortlandt,  Pierre.

Livingston,  Rev.  John,  III,  741,  Livingston,  R.

Livingston,  Lewis.  Ill,  746.

Livingston,  Margaret,  V,  737,  Stuyvesant,  N.  W.;  VI,  284,
Vetch.

Livingston,  Maria  C,  V,  674,  Stevens,  J.  C.

Livingston,  Sarah  V.,  Ill,  411,  Jay,  John  ;  742,  Livingston,
William.

Livingston  house  in  Brooklyn,  illustration,  HI,  742 ;  near
Elizabeth,  743.

Livingston  Manor,  the,  III,  741,  Livingston,  R.

Livingstone,  Dr.  David,  search  for,  V,  645,  Stanley,  H.  M.;
657,  Stearns,  W.  F.

Livius  of  Anahuac,  the,  III,  372,  Ixtlilxochitl.

Lizano'.  H,  436,  Fernandez,  P.

Llai-llai  valley,  battle  in,  I.  734,  Copahue.

Llano,  Gen.,. til,  367,  Iturbide.

Llano  Estacado,  the,  V,  68,  Pope.  John.

Llewellyn  Park,  N.  J.,  Ill,  110.  Haskell,  L.  S.

Lloque  Yupanqui,  inca,  IV,  178,  Maita  Capac.

Lloyd,  Ann6,  VI,  116,  Tilghman,  M.

Lloyd,  Elizabeth,  V,  257,  Ringgold.  S.

Lloyd,  Fanny,  II,  610,  Garrison,  W.  L.

Lloyd,  Grace,  III,  7,  Growdon,  G.

Lloyd,  Mary.  IV,  532,  Norris.  I.

Lloyd,  Miss,  IV,  28,  Loring,  Joshua.

Lloyd,  Rachel,  IV,  70,  Mabery.

Lloyd,  Capt.  Thomas,  IV,  323,  Miles,  S.

Lloyd's  Neck,  L.  I.,  capture  of  Tories,  at,  VI,  25,  Tall-
madge.

Loaiza,  Garcia.  II.  318,  Elcano.

Loarte,  Gabriel.  VI,  180,  Tupac-Amaru.

Lochiel,  Cameron's  residence,  illustration,  I.  509.

Locke,  Jane  E.,  II.  510,  Foster.  Hannah.

Locke,  John.  II,  311,  Edwards,  J.;  philosophy  of ,  344  ;  IV,
714,  Penn,  W.

Locke,  John  G.,  Ill,  751,  Locke,  J.  E.

Locke,  Joseph,  IV,  599.  Osgood,  F.  S.

Locke,  Michael,  VI,  227,  Valtrianos-.

Locker,  Frederick,  III.  602,  Lampson.

Lockridge,  II,  210.  Doubleday.  C.  W.

Locks,  etc.,  invention  of,  I,  283,  Blake.  E.  W.;  inventor  of
time  and  other,  V,  397,  Sargent,  J.:  combination,  inven-
tion of  a,  560,  Smith,  D.  M.:  invention,  VI,  636,  Yale,  L.;
clock,  double,  and  combination,  637.

Lock  wood.  Dr.  Ezekiel,  III,  751,  Lockwaod,  B.  A.  B.

Lock  wood  island.  III,  752,  Lockteood,  J.  B.

Lockyer,  Miss,  III.  414,  Jefferson,  J.

Loco-foco  party,  the,  I,  417,  Brownson,  O.  A.

Locomotive  Chase,  the,  IV,  342,  Mitch  el,  O.  M.

Locomotives,  improvements  in,  I.  149,  Baldwin,  M.  W.\
the  first,  in  America,  731  ;  inventions,  II.  364  :  improve-
ments in,  III,  213,  Hinkley,  H.\  IV,  248,  Mason,  M.  W.\
differential  pulley,  a,  V,  409,  Saxton.

Locust  Grove,  TV,  427.

Lo  de  Ovejo,  battle  at.  I,  493.  Cadena  ;  II,  167,  Diaz.

Lodging-houses,  model,  III,  639,  Lawrence,  A.

Lodowick,  Lieut.-Col.  C,  I,  198,  Bayard,  N.

Loefftz,  Ludwig,  pupils  of,  III,  569,  Koehler,  R. ;  VI,  190,
Twacht)nan  ;  207,  Ulrich.  '

Loeschhorn,  II,  300.  Eddy,  H.  C.

Loessing,  Herman,  III,  342.  Ignacio.

Logan,  Hannah,  V,  586,  Smith,  J.

Logan,  Hart,  IV.  7,  Logan,  Sir  W.  E.

Logan,  James,  IV,  7,  Logan.  Sir  W.  E.

Logan  act,  the,  IV,  4,  Logan,  G.

Loganian  library,  Philadelphia,  IV,  4,  Logan,  James  and
William  ;  gift  of  rare  books  to,  134,  Mackenzie,  W.

Logan's  Cross-Roads,  VI,  79.  Thomas,  G.  H.

Logan's  Fort,  Ky.,  Indian  attack  on,  IV.  2,  Logan,  B.

Log-cabin  and  hard-cider  campaign,  the,  I,  '643  ;  III,  98  ;
songs  of,  288,  Hoxie,  J.;  V.  327.  Ross,  A.  C.

Log  college,  the,  I,  208.  Beatty  ;  VI,  62.  Tennent,  W.

Logias  Yorkinas.  the,  I,  60,  Alpuche  e  Infante.

Logroflo,  Spain,  church  in.  I,  488,  Cabaliero.

L<v-scale,  the  Spaulding.  V,  624,  Spaulding,  N.  W.

Lok,  Michael.  Ill,  28,  Hakluyt.

L'Olonnais,  pirate,  IV.  315,  Michel,  J.  L.\  481,  Nau.

Lomaeo,  battle  of,  I.  694,  Colocolo.

Lomas  de  Tecoac,  battle  of,  II,  676,  Gonzalez,  M.


756


LOMENIE


LUMSDEN


Lomenie,  M.  de.  papers  discovered  by.  III.  606,  Lee,  A.

London,  lodging-houses  for  the  poor.  IV,  688,  Peabody,  G.

London  Assurance,  authorship  of,  I,  392.  Brougham.

London  Company,  the,  II,  687-688,  Gorges.

Londonderry,  Mass.,  founded,  IV,  120.  MacGreggor.

London  lawyer,  the.  III.  80,  Hard;/.  E.

Long,  Prof.  G.,  Ill,  99,  Harrison,  Gessner.

Long,  Lucy.  I,  612.  Christy.  G.  N.

Long,  Peter  B.,  VI,  592,  W 'nod.  E.  B.

Long,  Maj.  S.  H..  exploring  expedition  of.  Ill,  397,  James,  E.

Long  Cane,  battle  of.  III.  387,  Jackson,  J.

Longchamp,  Dr..  II,  522,  Francia.

Longfellow,  William.  IV,  10.  Longfelloir.  S.

Longfellow,  H.  W.,  his  birthplace,  illustration,  IV,  11  ;  his
home,  12  ;  fac-simile  of  his  handwriting.  15  :  his  bust  in
Westminster  Abbey,  14  ;  original  of  a  character  in  The
Wayside  Inn,  372.  Monti  ;  subjects  of  poems  by.  V.  188,
Pulaski;  225,  Revere,  Paul;  644,  Standish,  M.;  VI,  435,
Wentworth,  B.

Longford,  Earl  of.  IV,  888,  Pakenham.

Long  hair,  society  to  protest  against.  IV,  542,  NoweU,  I.

Long  hunters,  the.  III.  567,  Knox,  James.

Long  Island,  battle  of,  II.  188,  De  Lancey,  O.;  I,  48.  Alex-
ander,  ir.;  III.  852.  Inman,  G.;  IV,  324,  Miles ;  V,  141  ;
491,  Shelby,  I. :  VI,  377.

Long  Island,  ranger  general  of,  III,  471,  Jones,  Thomas ;
Fort  Neck  house,  illustration.  471.

Long  Island  historical  society,  IV,  466,  Murphy,  H.  C. ;  gift
to.  V.  461,  Seney,  Q.  I.:  634,  Spooner,  A.  J.

Longitude,  first  determined  by  lunar  observations,  I,  135,
Baffin;  measurements,  II.  693,  Gould,  B.  A.;  observa-
tions on,  IV,  18,  Loomis.  E.

Long  John,  sobriquet.  VI,  436,  Wentworth,  J.

Long"s  Peak,  IV,  10,  Long,  S.  H.

Longstreet.  Judge,  original  of  a  character  of,  1, 131,  Bacon,
Edmund.

Longueuil,  Sie»r  de.  III.  686,  Le  Moyne.

Longwood.  church  at.  III.  639,  Lawrence.  W.  R.

Loo  Choo  islands,  dispute  concerning,  II,  723  ;  IV,  77,
McCartee,  D.  B.

Loockermans,  Govert.  VI,  236,  Van  Cortlandt,  O.

Lookout  Mountain,  battle  on,  II,  330,  Elliott,  G.  M.;  Ill,
251.  Hooker,  J.

Look-up  Legion,  the.  III.  32.  Hale,  E.  E.

Looms,  invention  of,  I,  260,  Bigelow,  E.  B. ;  II,  14,  Comp-
ton  ;  111,564-565,  Knowles  :  IV.  377.  Moody,  P.;  693,  Pease,
J.  I. :  first  broadcloth,  in  Mass.,  II.  147,  Derby,  E.  H.,  Jr. ;
Lyall  positive-motion,  IV.  57,  Lyall.

Lopez,  Miguel,  II.  370.  Escobedo.  M. ;  TV,  269.

Lopez,  Pancho.  IV.  21,  Lipez.  F.  S.

Lord,  Daniel,  II.  385.  Evarts,  W.  M.

Lord.  Samuel.  II,  682,  Goodwin,  I.

Lord  Dunmore's  war.  I,  315.

Lord  Sydenham,  the  boat,  III,  64,  Hamilton,  John.

Loretto,  Pa.,  village  of.  II,  580,  Gallitzin.

Loretto,  sisterhood  of.  IV.  494,  Nerinck.v.

Lorgnette,  the.  IV.  346.  Mitchell.  D.  G.

Lorillard.  Dorothea  A.,  VI.  589.  Wolfe,  J.  D.

Loring,  Edward  G.,  IV.  190.  Matin,  H.

Losada,  I,  560,  Ceballos  ;  745.  Corona, ;  the  bandit,  II.  167.

Los  Adobes,  battle  at.  III,  341,  Igtesias,  J.  M.

Los  Altos,  battle  at,  I,  535.  Carrera,  R.

Los  Angeles,  projected  Polish  colony  near,  IV,  351,  Mod-
jeska  ;  capture  of,  V.  695,  Stockton,  R.  F.

Losantiville,  II,  457,  Filson.

Los  Dolores  islands,  discovered.  VI,  34,  Taraval.

Los  Reyes  islands,  discovered,  III.  343,  Ihering.

Los  Reyes.  Lima,  founded,  V,  36,  Pizarro.

Los  Rios,  Francisco  de,  II.  267,  Duran.

Los  Rios.  Pedro  de,  V,  35.  Pizarro.

Lossing.  B.  J.,  quoted,  III.  309,  Hull,  W.

Lostaguenas.  battle  of,  I.  304.

Lothrop.  Daniel,  IV,  32.  Lothrop.  H.  M.

Lothrop.  Rev.  John,  HI,  625,  Lothrop,  John  ;  IV,  438,  Mot-
ley. John  L.

Lotta,  I,  763,  Crabtree.

Lotteries,  I.  389,  Brooks,  P.  C:  established  to  publish  a
book  in  Brazil.  II.  586.  Gama,  J.  B.  F.:  Massachusetts
land.  IV,  592,  Orr.  H.  ;  for  Union  college,  539,  Xott,  E.  ;
Louisiana,  I,  211,  Beauregard  ;  II,  290,  Early,  J.  A.

Lotus,  the,  magazine.  III.  528,  Ketchum,  A.  C.

Louera,  Seixasy,  III,  620.  Laroche.  A.  de.

Loughborough.  Baron,  VI,  418,  Wedderburn.

Louillier.  Louis.  III.  39.  Hall,  D.  A.

Louis  of  Bavaria,  abdication  of.  IV,  368.  Montez.

Louis  XIII..  grant  by,  III.  300.  Hue t :  IV.  309.  Mesnard.

Louis  XIV..  II,  888,  Emparan;  482,  Flcury ;  554;  705,
Grandmont.

Louis  XVI.,  II.  163.  Dexter.  T.  ;  264  ;  escape  of,  I.  329,
Bnuille  :  II,  443.  Fersen ;  incident  at  the  execution  of,
485,  Flohr:  507,  Gardner,  C.  :  761,  Grellet ;  III,  586,
Lafayette  :  589  :  plan  to  take  him  from  Paris,  imprison-
ment, 589  ;  manifesto  of,  VI.  279.  Vev-nnes.

Louis  XVII.,  claimant  to  be.  VI.  524.  Williams,  Eleazar.

Louis  XVIII..  restoration  of,  IV.  497.  Neuville;  plot,  V,  611.

Louis.  Dr..  II.  698,  Gerhard,  W,  W.

Louisburg.  expedition  to.  first  suggestion  of,  VI,  269,
Vaughan  :  capture  of,  I,  323.  Boteaxoen  :  II.  680,  (iil>-
son;  IV,  721,  Pepper rell ;  VI,  367,  Warren,  Sir  P.;  at-


tack on,  II,  279,  Dwight,  Joseph  ;  general  thanksgiving
for,  324,  Eliot,  Jared  :  fortress  restored  to  France.  III.
332  ;  compensation  for  expenses,  ibid.  ;  destruction  of
fortifications  of,  I,  487,  Byron  ;  French  victory  off.  IV.
445,  Motte,  E.  A.

Louise,  Princess,  IV,  29,  Lome.

Louise  Home,  the,  I,  737.  738.  Corcoran,  W.  W.

Louise  King  home,  the,  Augusta,  III,  541,  King,  L.  W.

Louisiana,  founded,  IU,  339,  Iberville  ;  first  French  settle-
ment in,  IV,  525,  Nivelles  ;  colonization  of,  III,  637,  Law,
John  ;  exploration  of,  IV,  302,  Mercier.  C.  L.  A.  ;  Span-
ish missions  in,  205,  Margil  ;  conspiracy  to  take  from
Spain  for  England.  I,  297,  Blount,  W.  ;  V.  315.  Romeyu.
N.  ;  cession  of,  to  France,  rv,  201,  Marchal ;  to  the  United
States,  I.  24  ;  IV,  199,  Marbois ;  II.  482,  Fleurieu  :  III,
421-422  ;  745,  Livingston,  R.  R.  ;  IV,  359  ;  I,  365  ;  pro-
posed retrocession  of,  to  France  (1798).  IV,  601,  Os-
mond ;  debate  on  the  admission  of,  V.  152  ;  admission
of,  II,  146,  Derbigny ;  conspiracy  in,  I,  297,  Blount.  II".  :
laws  of,  in  1804-,5,  UI,  746 :  revision  of  code,  ibid.  ;
Catholic  institutions  in,  IV,  723.  Perche  ;  party  contest
in.  II,  721  :  electoral  contest  in.  IH,  137,  138  ;  320.  Hunt,
W.  H.  ;  disputed  election  in,  507,  Kellogg.  W.  P.  ;  the
MacVeagh  commission,  IV,  162,  MacVeooh  ;  swamp-
lands given  to,  V,  192,  Ray,  J.  ;  political  compromise  in,
VI,  455.  Wheeler,  W.  A.

Louisiana,  the.  defeat  of  the  Yorktown  by,  IV,  467,  Mur-
ray, A.  ;  at  Fort  Fisher,  V,  230,  Rhind.

Louisiana,  the  ram,  blown  up,  VI,  310,  Waddell,  J.  I.

Louis  Napoleon,  I,  478,  Butler.  B.  F.

Louis  Philippe,  I,  466  ;  III,  590,  Lafayette  ;  IV,  589,  Or-
leans.

Louisville,  Ky.,  site  of,  I,  627  :  Catholic  institutions  in,  ni,
635,  Lavialle;  Baptist  orphan  home  of.  V.  573.  Smith,
J.  L.  ;  university,  medical  department  founded,  V,  516,
Short,  C.  W.

Louisville  Medical  Review,  the,  HI,  5,  Gross,  S.  D.

Lourdes,  pilgrimage  to,  II,  219,  Dowd.

Louvain,  American  college  in,  V.  619,  Spalding,  M.  J.

L'Ouverture,  origin  of  the  name,  VI,  145.

Lovat  family,  the,  H,  537,  Fraser,  S.

Love  Lane,  N.  Y.,  II,  299.  Eckford.

Lovell,  Gen.  Solomon,  V,  380,  Saltonstall,  D.

Lovewell's  Pond,  centennial  of  the  fight  at,  III,  730.  Lin-
coln. E.

Low,  Mr.,  IV,  488,  Neil  son,  L.  A.

Lowe,  Rev.  Charles.  IV.  38.  Lowe.  M.  A.

Lowe,  Sir  Hudson,  II.  133,  De  Lancey,  W.  H.

Lowe.  William  M..  VI,  454.  Wheeler,  J.

Lowell,  James  Russell,  quoted,  n,  514,  515,  Foster ;  IV,
760  ;  his  house,  illustration,  IV,  40.

Lowell,  John,  II,  707,  Grant.  Anne.

Lowell,  Mary  T.  S.,  V,  143.  Putnam,  M.  T.  S.  L.

Lowell,  Miss,  II,  707,  Grant.  Anne.

Lowell,  Percival.  IV,  42,  Lowell,  J.

Lowell,  R.  R.,  HI,  389,  Jackson,  P.  T.

Lowell.  Mass..  site  of,  suggested,  VI,  617,  Worthen  ;
founded,  I,  85.  Applet  on,  N.;  TV.  42,  Ix>well,  F.  C;  cot-
ton-mills of,  III,  638-639,  Lawrence  ;  389,  Jackson,  P.  T. ;
TV,  495,  Nesmith,  J.

Lowell  institute,  the  Boston,  IV,  43,  Lowell,  J.

Lowland  Beauty,  the.  III.  667,  Lee,  H.

Lowrey,  James,  HI,  6,  Grow.

Lowrie,  Matthew  B..  IV,  46,  Lovrrie,  J.  M.

Lowth.  Dr.  Robert,  II,  466,  Fisher,  N.;  IH,  317,  Hunt,  I.

Lowville,  N.  Y..  IV,  38.  Low,  N.

Loyal  Foresters,  the,  I,  708,  Connolly.

Loyal  Hanna,  engagement  at,  I,  329,  Bouquet.

Loyall,  Virginia,  II,  414.

Loyall,  William,  II,  414.

Loyal  publication  society,  the,  V,  142,  Putnam,  G.  P.

Loyola  college,  Md..  gift  to,  V,  359,  Ryan,  A.  J.

Lozier,  Abraham  W.,  IV,  48,  Lozier,  C.  S.

Lozier,  Chevalier  de.  II.  146.  Derbigny.

Lualaba  river,  the,  V,  646,  Stanley.

Luard,  John.  IV,  48,  Luard,  R.  G.  A.

Lubricants,  invention  for  testing,  VI,  110,  Thurston.

Lubricating-oil,  discovery  of.  IV.  39,  Lowe,  W.  W.

Lubricator  for  machinery,  invention  of,  V,  531,  Silver.

Lucas,  Alexander,  pupil  of,  VI,  402,  Webb,  G.  J.

Lucas,  Frederick.  AT.  49,  Lucas,  T.  J.

Lucas,  William  and  Edward.  IV.  48,  Lucas,  D.  B.

Lucius  Crassus,  pen-name,  HI,  59.

Luckner,  M.,  II,  379.  Eustace.

Luck  now.  siege  of,  HI,  349,  Inglis,  J.  E.  W.

Lucky  Hill,  IV.  282,  Meade,  R.  K.

Ludlow,  Rev.  H.  G..  IV.  50,  Ludlow,  F.  H.

Ludlow,  Israel,  n.  457.  Filson.

Ludlow,  Lieut..  HI.  640,  Lawrence.  J.

Ludlow,  Richard.  IV.  51.  Ludlow.  J.

Ludlow,  Samuel  B..  IV.  543,  Noyes,  W.  C.

Ludlow,  Thomas  W.,  II.  888,  Goodwin,  W.  W.

Ludwell.  Col.  Philip.  HI.  664.  Lee.  T.

Lui?o,  Alonso  Luis,  V,  148,  Quesada,  G.  J.

Lukcns.  Isaiah.  A'.  100.  Sa.rlon.

Lumarraga,  Archbishop.  II.  135,  Delgadillo.

Luminais.  F.varisti'.  pupil  of.  V.  402.  Sartain,  E.

Lumniis.  Dr.  W.  N..  II.  327.  Ellet.  E.  F.

Lumsden,  Francis  A.,  HI,  513,  Kendall,  G.  W.


LUNALILO


McNEIL


757


Lunalilo,  William,  III,  400,  Kalakaua,.

Lunatics,  confinement  of  alleged,  V,  526,  Silkman.

Lundy,  Benjamin,  II,  610,  Garrison,  W.  L.

Lundy's  Lane,  battle  of,  I.  401,  Brown,  J.  ;  615,  Cilley.

Joseph  ;  II,  234,  Drummond,  Sir  G.  ;  IV,  326,  Miller,

James  ;  V,  440,  Scott,  W.
Lunenburg,  N.  S.,  German  riots  at,  IV,  356,  Monckton,  R.
Lurton.  Rev.  John,  I,  544,  Cartwright,  JR.
Lusk,  Dianthe,  I,  404.

Luska,  Sidney,  pen-name,  III,  84,  Harland,  H.
Lutheran  church,  the,  VI,  343,  Walther  ;  use  of  English  in,

III,  578,  Kunze  ;  in  Pennsylvania,  IV,  453,  Muhlenberq  ;

first  synod,  453 ;  general  council  of,  191,  Mann,  W.  J.  ;

institutions  founded,  413,  Morris,  J.  G. ;  controversy  on

predestination,  V,  421,  Schmidt,  F.  A.  :  missions,  II.  314,

Egede  ;  III,  103,  Heyer  ;  theology,  575,  Krauth.
Luther  of  the  temperance  reform,  the,  III,  191,  Hewit,  2V.
Lutz.  Mr.,  Ill,  500,  Keene.

Liitzow,  Countess  v.,  Ill,  16,  Yutierrez  de  Estrada.
Luzerne,  Chevalier  de  la,  I,  19  ;  II,  533  ;  597,  Gardner,  C.
Luzerne,  M.,  Ill,  409.

Luzon  island,  discovery  of,  VI,  293,  Villalobos.
Lyall,  William,  IV,  57,  Lyall,  J.
Lybrand,  Elizabeth,  V,  511,  Shippen.
Lydia,  Princess,  III,  490,  Kalakaua.
Lyford,  Rev.  John,  VI,  566,  Window,  E.
Lying  Gazette,  the,  V,  268.  Rivington.
Lyman,  Azel  S.,  VI,  687,  Haskell.
Lyman,  Judge  Joseph,  III,  606,  Lesley,  S.  I.
Lynch,  Anne  Charlotte,  I,  325,  Botta.
Lynch,  Judge  James,  IV,  571,  Olin,  J.  M.
Lynch,  Mrs.,  IV,  21,  Lopez,  F.  S.
Lynchburg,  Va.,  founder  of,  IV,  62,  Lynch,  C;  Hunter's

repulse  at,  II,  714  ;  III,  321,  Hunter,  D.
Lynch  law,  II. 117,  Dearing  ;  origin  of  the  term,  IV,  62,

Lynch,  C.
Lyndhurst,  Lord,  I.  736,  Copley.
Lynn  Bard,  the,  III,  701,  Lewis,  Alonzo.
Lynn,  Eliza,  III,  734,  Linton.
Lynn,  Ethel,  pen-name.  I,  222,  Beers,  E.  L.
Lynn,  Mass.,  iron  at,  I,  373,  Bridges,  R.  ; St.  Stephen's

church  at,  IV,  452,  Mudge,  E.  R.
Lyon  Legion,  the,  I,  341,  Boyd,  S.  H.
Lyonnais,  Le,  VI,  39,  Tavernier.
Lyons,  Mrs.  Jane,  III,  245,  Home.
Lyons,  William,  I,  275,  Blaine.
Lyra,  Nicolas  de,  II,  627-628,  Geraldini.
Lytle,  Robert  T.,  IV,  69,  Lytle,  W.  H.
Lyttleton,  Sir  G.,  IV,  69,  Lyttleton,  W.  H.
Lytton,  Lord,  I,  448,  Bulwer  ;  II.  211,  Dougherty,  D.
Lytton,  Miss,  III,  55,  Hamilton,  A.

M.,  pen-name,  IV,  312,  Metcalfe,  S.  L.

Maberley,  W.,  III.  226,  Hoe,  R.

Macacheek  Press,  the,  IV.  766,  Piatt,  A.  S.

Macacona,  battle  of,  I,  534,  Carratald.

MacAdam,  W.,  IV,  70,  MacAdam,  J.  L.

Macadamizing,  invention  of  process,  IV,  70,  MacAdam.

McAfee,  J.  J.,  IV,  227,  Marshall,  N.  N.

Macalester  college.  Minn.,  founded,  IV.  71,  Macalester,  C.

McArone  papers,  the,  I,  96,  Arnold,  G.

Macaronis,  the  Maryland,  V,  141.

Macaulay,  pen-name,  II,  556,  Frothingham,  W.

Macaulay,  Lord,  II,  388  ;  charges  of,  against  Penn,  IV,

714  ;  quoted,  VI,  489.  Whitney,  E.
Macaulay,  Zachary,  quoted,  III,  208,  Hillhouse,  J.  A.
McBride,  Dr.  James,  II,  883,  Elliott,  Stephen.
Maccabaeus  of  Montreal,  the,  III,  686,  Le  Moyne.
McCall,  Archibald,  IV,  75.  McCall,  G.  A.
McCardle,  Eliza,  III,  436,  439.  Johnson,  Andrew.
McCardle  case,  the,  I,  531,  Carpenter.  M.  H.
McCarte  mansion,  the,  illustration,  III,  376.
McCauley,  Catherine,  III,  262,  Horan,  M.  A.
McCay,  Spruce,  III,  373,  Jackson,  Andrew.
McClellan,  Dr.  Ely,  IV,  743,  Peters,  J.  C.
McClellan,  G.  B.,  criticism  of,  II,  327,  Ellet,  C.
McClellan  saddle,  the,  IV,  84,  McClellan,  G.  B.
McClelland,  John,  IV,  86,  McClelland,  R.
McClenachan,  Rev.  W.,  III.  518.  Kennedy,  S.
McClennaghan,  Blair,  III.  648,  Learning,  T.
McClung,  Judge  W.,  IV,  89,  McClung,  J.  A.
McConkey.  Rebecca,  IV.  397,  Morgan,  D.
McConnel,  Murray.  IV,  91,  McConnel,  J.  L.
McCook,  George. 'IV.  02,  McCook,  D.
McCorkle.  William.  II,  340,  Ely,  E.  S.
McCoy,  JettT.,  VI.  147,  Towles.
McCracken,  Cornelia  L.,  IV,  555,  O'  Conor.
McCrae,  the,  III,  301,  Huger,  T.  B.
McCrea,  Rev.  James,  IV,  96,  McCrea,  Jane.
McCrea,  John,  IV,  97,  McCrea,  Jane.
McCrea,  William,  IV,  96,  McCrea,  Jane.
McCulloch.  Lieut.  Alexander,  IV,  97,  McCulloch,  B.
McCurdy,  Evelyn,  V.  377.  Salisbury.
McCutcheon,  Peter,  IV,  118.  McGill,  P.
McDaniel,  Ira  O.,  IV.  99.  McDaniel,  H.  D.
McDonald.  Allan,  IV.  101.  McDonald,  F.
MacDonald,  Hugh.  IV,  102,  MacDonald,  Sir  J.  A.
MacDonald,  Gen.  John.  IV.  101,  MacDonald,  J.  M.
McDonald,  Lieut.-Col.  John,  IV,  101,  McDonald,  F.


McDonald,  Randolph,  IV.  70,  MacAdoo.

McDonald.  Ronald,  IV,  101,  McDonald,  F.

MacDonald.  Sergeant,  IV,  208.

Macdonell,  Col.  John,  IV,  106,  Macdonell,  M.

Macdonnell,  Rev.  G.,  IV,  106,  Macdonnell,  D.  J.

McDonogh  labor-schools.  Mel.,  IV,  106,  McDonogh.

McDonoghville.  La.,  IV,  106,  McDonogh.

Macdonough,  Lieut..  II,  235,  Drummond,  W.

Macdougall,  John.  IV,  108.  Macdougall,  W.

Macdougall.  Ronald,  IV,  107,  Macdougall,  A.

McDougall.  W.  C,  II,  748,  Greene,  F.  H.

McDowell,  Elizabeth,  I,  243.  Benton,  T.  H.

McDowell,  Dr.  Ephraim,  IH,  5,  Gross,  S.  D.;  IV,  111,  Mc-
Dowell, James.

McDowell,  Joseph,  IV,  109,  McDowell,  C.

McDowell,  W.  Va..  engagement  at,  V,  418,  Schenck.  R.  C.

Mace,  Benjamin  H.,  IV,  112,  Mace,  F.  P.  L.

Mace,  Capt.  Samuel,  V,  163.

Macedonian,  the,  captured,  II,  121  ;  taken  to  Ireland  with
supplies.  126.

McElrath,  Thomas,  II,  736,  737.

McElroy.  John  E.,  IV,  114,  McElroy,  M.  A.

McEnery,  John,  II,  721.

McFarland,  Daniel,  V,  241,  Richardson,  A.  D.

McFarland,  Rev.  D.  F.,  IV,  114,  McFarland,  A.  R.

McFarland  home,  the,  IV,  114,  McFarland,  A.  R.

Macgeorge,  Andrew,  IV,  117,  Macgeorge,  R.  J.

McGhie.  IV,  38,  Lowe,  J.

McGill,  Andrew,  IV,  117.  McGill,  J.

McGill,  Dr.  John  D.,  VI.  390.  Watson,  B.  A.

McGill  university,  III,  241,  Holmes,  A.  F.;  IV,  117,  McGill,
J.;  course  for  women  in,  V,  561,  Smith,  Sir  D.  A.

McGillivray,  Lachland,  IV,  118,  McGillivray,  A.

McGregor,  Capt.,  II,  326.  Ellery,  F.

MacGregor,  David,  IV.  120,  MacGregor,  J.

McGregor,  Gregor,  IV,  766,  Piar.

McGuire,  J.  F.,  IV.  257,  Mathew,  T.

Machado,  Barbosa,  II,  674,  Gomez,  E.

Machault,  Capt.  de,  II,  625,  Gennes.

McHenry,  Fort,  defence  of,  I,  00,  Armistead.

Macie,  Elizabeth,  V,  597.  Smithson.

Maciejowice,  battle  at,  III,  573.

Mcintosh,  Caroline  C.  II.  457.  Fillmore.

Mcintosh,  Gen.,  VI,  344,  Walton,  G.

Mcintosh,  J.  Mor,  IV,  124,  Mcintosh,  L.

Maclver,  Mary  A.,  V.  360,  Ryan.  W.  T.

Mack,  Alexander,  III,  509,  Kelpius.

Mack,  Mrs.  R.  E.,  II,  327,  Ellet,  E.  F.

Mack,  Rev.  Sanders,  V,  617,  Sower,  C.

McKay,  Donald,  III,  210,  Hoadley,  J.  C.

Mackay,  John,  I,  602.  Chickering.  Jonas.

McKean,  Amy  E.,  VI,  613,  Worcester,  J.  E.

McKean,  Susannah  S.,  II,  402,  Folsom,  S.  S.

McKee,  Robert  J.,  VI,  687,  Harrison.

McKeen,  Joseph,  II,  181,  Dinsmoor.

Mackemie,  Rev.  Francis.  IV,  136,  Mackie.

MacKenna,  Vicuna,  III,  315.  Hunneus.

Mackenzie,  Alexander,  IV,  133,  Mackenzie,  H.

Mackenzie,  Daniel,  IV.  134,  Mackenzie,  W.  L.

McKenzie,  John,  III,  552,  Kinzie.

McKenzie,  Rev.  J.  G.  D.,  II,  185.  Dixon,  Alexander.

Mackenzie,  Capt.  Kenneth,  IV,  134,  Mackenzie,  R.  S.

Mackenzie,  Col.  Roderick.  XI,  35,  Tarleton.

Mackenzie  rebellion,  the,  II,  474.  Fitzgibbon.

Mackenzie  river,  the,  IV,  131.  Mackenzie,  Sir  A.

Mackinaw,  blockade  of,  I,  570,  Champlin,  S.;  capture  of,
II,  180,  Dobbins  ;  fall  of.  Ill,  308,  Hull,  W.\  mission  at,
IV,  213,  Marquette  ;  supposed  plot  to  give  up,  V,  310,
Rogers,  R.

Mackintosh,  Angus,  II.  537,  Fraser,  S.

Mackintosh,  Sir  James,  II,  537,  Fraser,  S.;  quoted,  311.

MacKnight,  Lieut.  Stephen  D.,  V.  74.  Porter,  D.

McLachlan,  Charles,  IV,  138,  McLachlan,  A.

McLandburgh,  John,  IV,  138,  McLandburgh,  F.

McLane,  Louisa,  III,  460,  Johnston,  I.

McLaren.  D.,  V,  233,  Rice.  Daniel.

Maclay  college,  Canada,  IV,  141,  Maclay,  A.

McLean,  David,  V,  100.  Prescott,  Robert.

Maclean,  Sir  Lochlan,  I,  206,  Beard,  J.  H.

McLean.  Neil,  IV,  142.  McLean,  A.

McLean.  William.  VI,  534.  Williams,  W.

McLean  asylum.  Somerville.  IV,  143,  McLean,  John.

McLean  house  at  Appomattox,  illustration,  II,  716.

McLellan,  Angus,  I,  607,  Chisolm.

McLeod,  George.  II.  459,  Fink,  A.

McLeod,  Mary.  III.  123.  Hawley.  J.  R.

McLeod,  Rev.  Neil,  IV,  145,  McLeod,  A.

Macleod,  Norman.  III.  404.  Jardine.

McLeod  trial,  the.  II,  763.  Gridley,  P.

McLung,  Col.,  II.  4">.  Fitzpatrick.  B.

Maclurian  lyceum.  Philadelphia,  the.  II,  652,  Gilliams.

McMin,  Joseph,  IV.  304,  Meriwether,  D.

McMurdo,  Mr..  VI.  103.  Tyler,  J.

MacXab,  Lieut.  Allan,  IV.  151.  MacXab,  A.  N.

MacNab,  Capt.  Robert,  IV.  151.  MacNab,  A.  X.

McNair,  John.  VI.  028.  Wright,  J.  M.

MeXall,  Uriah  H..  Ill,  751,  Lockwood,  B.  A.  B.

McNeil,  Gen.  J.  H..  V.  11.  Pierce.  F.

McNeil,  Mrs.,  IV,  97,  McCrea.


758


MACXEVIN


MARGARITA


MacNevin.  Baron  O'Kellv,  IV.  154.  MacNevin,  W.  J.
McXiel,  Capt.  Hector,  IV,  189.  Manley.  J.
Macomb,  Capt.  J.  N.,  IV,  501,  Newberry,  J-  S.
Macomb's  purchase,  IV,  155;  Macomb,  A.;  V,  15,  Pierre-

pont,  H.
Macon,  Col.  John.  IV,  156,  Macon,  N.;  VI,  180,  Turner,  J.
Maconaqua.  V.  551.  Slocuin.  F.
McQueen,  Mr.,  II,  122,  De  Coudres.
Macready.  II,  504,  Forrest.
McTavish.  John,  I,  558,  Caton,  R.
MaeVicar,  Duncan.  II,  707.  Grant,  Anne.
MacVicar,  Rev.  John,  II,  704.  Griffin,  Edmund  D.;  HI,  411,

Jay,  W.
McVicker,  Mary,  I,  319.
MaeVickar.  Augusta.  Ill,  411,  Jay.  W.
Mc Willie,  Col.  Adam,  IV,  163,  McWillie.  W.
Madagascar,  rendezvous  for  buccaneers,  III,  531,  Kidd.
Mad  Anthony  Wayne,  VI.  399.
Madden,  Mary  A..  V,  305,  Sadlier,  M.  A.
Madeira,  island  of.  III,  300.  Huclva.
Madiana,  pen-name,  V,  247,  Ricord,  J.  B.
Madison,  Ambrose,  IV.  165.
Madison,  Capt.  Isaac,  IV,  165.
Madison,  John,  IV,  165.

Madison,  Conn.,  gift  of  sehool  to,  VI.  684,  Hand.
Madison,  N.  J.,  convent  founded  at,  I,  200,  Bayley,  J.  R.
Madison,  Virginia,  pen-name.  V,  143,  Putnam,  S.  A.  B.
Madison.  Wis.,  founded.  II,  209,  Doty,  J.  D.
Madison's  home,  illustration,  IV.  169.
Madison  university,  gifts  to.  1, 689,  Colgate  :  II.  293,  Eaton,

G.  W.:  Ill,  109,  Hascall,  D.;  514,  Kendrick,  C;  515,  Ken-
drick, N.;  VI,  49,  Taylor,  S.  W.
Mad  Jack,  sobriquet,  IV,  724.  Perciral,  J.
Madoc,  Prince,  supposed  descendants  of,  III,  521,  Ker.
Madrid,  Fernandez,  IV,  178,  Maitin.
Madrid,  insurrection  in,  V,  611.
Magazine  of  American  History,  the,  III,  600,  Lamb,  M.  J. ;

founder  of,  V,  671.  Stevens,  J.  A.
Magdalen,  Earl  of,  I,  677.  Coffin,  I.
Magdalen  island,  grant  of,  II,  762,  Gridley,  R.
Magdalena,  Indian  woman,  I,  518,  Cancer.
Magdeburg,  IU,  589.
Magellan,  records  of  his  expedition,  1, 62,  Alvaro  ;  original

account  of,  V.  17,  Piyafetta.
Magellan,  straits  of,  attempt  to  found  a  colony  at,  V,  737,

Suarez,  Juan  ;  expedition  to  explore,  VI,  586,  Woert.
Magendie,  Francois,  II,  484,  Flint,  A.
Magicien,  Le,  I,  409,  Brown.  Moses.
Magic  squares.  Ill,  652.  Le  Conte,  L.
Magill.  Dr.  Alfred  T..  IV.  174,  Marjill,  M.  T.
Magill,  Juliette  A.,  VI,  691,  Kinzie,  J.  A.
Magnesium  burning-lamp,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  110,  Thurston.
Magnetic  needle,  instrument  for  measuring  inclination  of,

I.  320.  Borda.

Magnetic  pole,  the  northern.  V,  330,  Ross,  Sir  J.  C.

Magnetic  survey,  U.  S.,  III.  201,  Hilaard,  J.  E.

Magnetic  telegraph  company,  the,  IV,  427.

Magnetism,  terrestrial,  researches,  V,  364,  Sabine,  Sir  E. ;
435,  Scoresby.

Magneto-electric  machine,  a,  V,  409,  Saxton.

Magnus.  G.,  I,  316,  Booth,  J.  C.

Magri,  Count  Primo,  V.  717,  Stratton,  M.  L.  B.

Mahn,  Admiral,  III.  371.  lire  it.

Mahn,  Jacobus.  VI,  586,  Woert.

Mahomet  Tewfik,  II,  689.  Gorringe.

Mahon,  Lord,  on  the  case  of  Major  Andrfi,  I,  258,  Biddle,
Charles  J.;  V,  622.

Mail-catcher,  invention  of  a,  V,  484.  Shaver.

Mailing-machine,  invention  of  a,  II,  170,  Dick,  R.

Maillebois,  Count  de,  II,  370.  Estaing.

Mail-service,  improvements  in  the,  I.  105.

Maine,  first  settlement  in,  V,  69,  Popham  ;  patent  for  land
in,  IV,  207,  Maverick.  S.:  early  settlements  in.  II,  687,
Gorges  ;  colony  at  Phippsburg,  646.  Gilbert,  R. ;  Indian
hostilities  in,  IV,  171,  Madockawando  ;  colony  in  Bidde-
ford,  VI,  300,  Vines  ;  the  French  and  English  in,  V,  368,
St.  Castin ;  tax  for  church  support  in,  IV,  452,  Mudge,
E.;  early  survey  of.  Ill,  235,  Holland.  S.;  project  for
loyalist  colony  in,  569.  Knox ;  separation  of.  from  Massa-
chusetts. 543,  King,  W. ;  rights  in,  sold  to  Massachusetts,

II,  688,  Gorges,  P.:  boundary,  578;  IH,  639,  Lawrence,
A.;  election  of  1840  in  ("Have  yon  heard  the  news
from  Maine  ?"),  520,  Kent,  E.:  political  disturbance  in,
1.505.  Chamberlain,  J.  L.;  college  of  agriculture,  gifts
to,  I,  670,  Coburn,  A.

Maine,  the  U.  S.  cruiser,  illustration,  VI,  556.

Maine,  Henry  Sumner,  II,  888,  Dwight,  T.  W.

Maine  law,  the,  II,  219.  lhnr,  X.

Maipo,  canal  of,  Chili,  II,  397,  Ei/zaguirre,  Domingo  ;  bat-
tle at,  V,  392,  San  Martin,  Jose  de  ;  IV,  602,'  Otorio,
Manuel.

Mair,  James,  IV,  177,  Mair,  C.

Maitland,  (Jen.,  VI,  145.

Maitland,  pen-name,  I,  184.  Bartlett,  J.

Major  Spencer,  sobriquet.  V.  (WO.  Spencer,  W.  L.

Makeath.  Miss.  VI,  840.  Vnndcnhoff.

Making'  of  a  Man,  the,  anonymous  book,  I,  146,  Baker,
William  M.

Mala  Entrada.  the,  III,  354,  Irala.


Malarial  poisoning,  discovery  in,  IV,  227,  Marshall,  W.

Malbone,  John,  IV.  180,  Malbone,  E.  G.

Maiden,  Canada,  III.  97.

Malebranche,  II,  311.  Edwards,  J.

Malekadhel,  the,  brig.  III.  311.  Hull,  J.  B.

Malespina.  Marquis  de,  II,  620,  Gazzaniga.

Malibran,  Eugene,  IV,  181,  Malibran,  M.  F.

Malintzin.  IV,  206,  Marina.

Mallarino,  president  of  Colombia,  IV,  545,  NuAez,  R.

Mallory,  Charles.  IV,  183,  Mallory,  S.  R.

Malmedy,  Col.,  Ill,  164,  Henderoon,  Pleasant.

Malmsbury,  Lord,  III.  41.3.  Jay,  W.

Maloden,  M.,  II,  691.  Gottschalk.

Malone,  Edmond,  IH,  088,  Lennox.

Malta,  capture  of,  II.  338.  Elpliinstone.

Malte  Brun.  quoted,  II,  374,  Espeleta.

Malvern  Hill,  battle  of.  II.  763,  Griffin ;  HI,  249.  Hooker,

J.;  302,  Huger,  B.;  6(59  ;  IV,  82  ;  234,  Mart  indole,  J.  H.
Mamalucos,  the,  VI.  157,  Trejo.
Mama  Oello,  Empress,  III,  291,  Huayna.
Mameluke  grip  sword,  the,  IV,  736,  Perry,  M.  C.
Manassas,  battle  of,  III,  459 ;  second  battle  of,  670 ;  392,

Jackson,  T.J.;  IV,  110  ;  16,  Longstreet,  J.
Manassas,  the  ram,  H,  416  ;  destruction  of,  V,  580,  Smith,

Melancton.
Man  at  Home,  the,  I,  397,  Broun,  C.  B.
Manbourg,  Charles  de  Latour,  in.  590,  Lu/ayette.
Mancera,  Marquis  de,  VI,  127,  Toledo.
Manchester,  Duke  of,  II,  762,  Grevyle.
Manchester,  Mass.,  IH,  647,  Leach.  R.
Manchester,  N.  H.,  V,  653,  Stark,  J.  and  W.
Manchonat  island,  II,  595,  Gardiner.
Manhattan,  pen-name,  V,  442,  Scoville.
Manhattan  island,  purchase  of.  IV,  338,  Minuit.
Manida,  II,  687,  Gorges.
Manila,  city  of,  founded, III, 678,  Legaspi  : expedition

against,  I,  765,  Craig,  J.  H.;  capture  of,  HI,  581,  Labeza-

res,  Guido  de.
Manilla  box  envelope,  invention  of  the,  V,  614,  Southwortit,

Emma  D.  E.  N.
Man  in  Claret,  the,  pen-name,  II,  694.  Gould.  E.  S.
Manitoba,  Indian  land-titles  in,  IV,  127,  McKay.  J.
Mankind,  controversy  on  the  origin  of,  IV,  432.  Morton,

S.  G. ;  unity  of  the  race,  theory  of.  IV,  540,  X'ott.  J.  C.
Manley.  Dr.  James  R.,  II,  341,  Embury,  E.  C.
Mann.  Emily,  I,  607',  Chisolm.
Manners,  Capt.,  I,  287,  Blakeley.
Manners,  Mrs.,  pen-name,  V,  240,  Richards,  C.  H.
Manning,  Anstiss,  IV.  193.  Manning,  R.
Manning.  Elizabeth.  IV,  193,  Manning,  R.
Manning,  Elizabeth  C,  III,  125.
Manning,  Jeffrey,  IV,  193,  Manning,  R.
Manning,  Lieut.  Lawrence,  IV,  193.  Manning,  R.  I.
Manning.  William.  VI,  266,  Vaughan.
Man  of  Ross,  the,  III,  198,  Higginson,  S.
Man  of  truth,  the,  VI,  97,  Thomson.  C.
Manometer,  water,  invention  of  a,  V,  530,  Silliman,  J.  M.
Mansfield,  John  M.,  VI.  684,  Hall,  G.  S.
Mansfield.  Margaret,  I,  94.

Mansion  House,  the.  Ill,  313,  Humphreys,  Charles.
Manual  training,  gift  for  school  of,  VI,  700,  Williamson.
Manufactory  scheme,  the,  I,  29.
Manuscript  Found,  The,  V,  624,  Spanlding,  S.
Maple  Leaf,  the,  magazine,  IV,  78,  McCaul.
Mapoche,  lord  of  the  heavens.  III.  307,  Huitziton.
Maps,  stereotype.  III.  31.  Hale,  N.
Map-type,  invention  of,  II,  195,  Doe,  C.  H.
Maracaibo, battle  of,  I,  306 ;  taken  by  pirates,  II,  705,

Grandmont :  besieged  by  buccaneers,  III,  344.  Illigen  :

captured,  IV,  481,  Nau ; pillaged,  V,  609,  Soubin  ; IV,

567.  Ojeda.
Marajo  island,  colony  on,  VI,  652,  Yves.
Maranhao.  French  colonv  at.  III,  617,  La  Ravardiere.
Marble  Faun,  the,  VI.  88.'  Thompson,  C.  G.  ;  I,  38,  Akers.
Marblehead.  bequest  to  churches  of,  V,  211,  Reed,  W.
Marbury,  Rev.  Francis.  Ill,  331,  Hutchinson.  Anne.
Marbury,  Katherine,  V,  438,  Scott,  R.
Marcellus,  pen-name,  I,  24.
March,  Major,  pen-name,  VI,  517,  Willcox.
Marchant,  Jordan.  II.  414.
Marchant,  Susan  C,  H,  414.
Marchena,  Juan  Perez  de,  II.  368,  Escandon.
Marches!,  Madame.  IV,  498,  Nevada.
Marck,  Prof.  John,  VI,  254,  Van  Santvoord,  C.
Marco  Bozarris.  poem,  where  written,  III,  487,  Jumel.
Marco,  Count,  IV.  211,  Markoe,  A.
Marcos,  Fray,  I,  490.  Cabeza.
Marcy,  W.  L..  HI,  380.
Mar  del  Sur,  I,  147,  Balboa.
Mare.  Christianeum,  IV.  459j  Munk.
Mare  island  navy-yard,  II,  415.
Ma iv- Mount,  "mine  host  of."  IV.  433.  Morton.  T.
Marengo  colony,  Ala.,  the,  III,'597,  Lallemand.
Mare  Novum,  IV,  459.  Munk.

Margaret,  the  orphans'  friend.  III.  115.  Haughery.
Margaret  Oakley,  wreck  of  the,  VI,  608,  Wo'odxrorth,  S.  E
Margaretta.  capture  of  the.  IV.  550,  O'Brien,  Jere.
Margarita,  Queen,  II,  759,  Gregori.
Margarita,  battle  at,  I,  378,  Brion.


MARGARITA


MATAMORAS


759


Margarita,  the  island  of,  1, 304  ;  attacked  by  Spanish  forces,
IV,  405,  Morillo.

Marggravia,  the  plant,  IV,  205,  Marggrof.

Margravate  of  Azilia,  the,  IV,  372,  Montgomery,  B.

Margry,  Pierre,  III.  461,  Jolliet.

Maria  da  Gloria,  II,  567,  Gabriac  ;  IV.  698,  Pedro  I.

Maria  del  Oceidente,  pseudonym,  I, -388,  Brooks,  M.  G.

Maria  Louisa  Victoria,  Princess.  Ill,  521,  Kent,  Duke  of.

Maria  Luz,  coolies  from  the,  IV,  77,  McCartee,  D.  B.

Mariames,  tribe  of  the,  I,  489,  Cabeza.

Mariana,  tract  called,  IV,  246,  Mason,  J.

Marianist  nuns,  the,  I,  330,  Bourget.

Marica,  Marquis  of,  II,  494,  Fonseca,  M.  J.  P.  da.

Maricourt,  Sieur  de.  III,  687,  Le  Moyne,  P.

Marie  Antoinette,  II,  376,  377,  Estaing  ;  III,  586,  Lafay-
ette ;  589.

Marie-Galante,  island  of,  III,  305,  Hugues.

Marie-Garrison  lawsuit,  the,  II,  610,  Garrison,  C.  K.

Marie  Leczinska,  Queen,  III,  586,  Lafayette.

Marietta,  Ohio,  founded,  II,  47,  Cutler,  M.;  V,  142,  Put-
nam, B. ;  settlement  of,  640,  Sproat ;  first  frame  house
on  the  site  of,  IV,  272,  May,  J. ;  college  founded,  II,  548,
French,  M.

Mariguefiu,  III,  9,  Guanoalca.

Marin,  Luisa,  V,  203,  Becabarren. '

Marin,  Mercedes,  V,  604,  Solar.

Marina,  III,  434,  Jicotencal.

Marine  governor,  for  engines,  V,  531,  Silver.

Mariners'  children,  asylum  for,  V,  486,  Shaw,  B.  G.

Marine  Turtle,  the,  III,  662,  Lee,  Ezra.

Marion,  anonymous  poem,  II.  733,  Grayson,  W.  J.

Marion,  Benjamin,  IV,  207,  Marion,  F.

Marion's  grave,  illustration,  IV,  209.

Marion,  Gabriel,  IV,  207,  208,  Marion,  F.

Marion  of  the  Mexican  army,  the.  III,  607,  Lane,  Joseph.

Marion  college,  Mo.,  gift  to,  U,  340,  Ely,  E.  S.\  IV,  491,
Nelson,  D.

Mariposa  estate,  the,  II,  546,  Fremont.

Mariquita,  city  of,  founded,  IV,  546,  Nunez- Pedroso.

Maritime  law,  the  French,  adopted  in  South  America,  n,
567,  Gabriac.

Marius,  pen-name,  VI,  431.  Wells,  W.  C.

Markham,  Albert  H..  IV,  210,  Markham,  C.  B.

Markham,  Sir  Robert,  IV,  210,  Markham,  J.  C.

Markland,  II,  363,  Eric  the  Bed  ;  VI,  101.  Thorfinn.

Markman,  Arthur  H..  IV,  598.  Osborn,  S.

Marl,  discovery  of  fertilizing  qualities  of,  V,  342,  Buffln,  E.

Marlborough,  Duchess  of,  I,  591,  Chatham.

Marlborough  free  library,  II,  555,  Frost,  B.  S.

Marmontel,  II,  270,  Dureau  ;  403,  Fairlamb.

Maroncelli,  Signor,  III,  162,  Hempel.

Maroni  river,  exploration  of,  VI,  221,  Vaillant.

Maroons',  the,  II,  641,  Giddings.

Marquesas  islands,  IV,  294,  Melville,  H.;  discovered,  295,
Mendana  ;  V,  74,  Porter,  D.

Marquette  river,  IV,  214,  Marquette.

Marquiegui,  Gen.,  II,  000,  Gorriti.

Marquis  of  the  Royal  Defence,  II,  371,  Eslaba.

Marr,  Lieut.  R.  A.,  IV,  265.

Marriage,  sect  repudiating,  III,  656,  Lee,  Anne  ;  with  a  sis-
ter-in-law, in  Canada,  H,  661,  Girouard,  Desire  ;  VI,  500,
Wiggins.  S.  A.  S.

Married  for  Fun,  anonymous  book,  III,  262,  Hoppin,  A.

Marrin,  Dr.,  II,  212,  Douglas,  J.

Mars,  moons  of.  discovered,  III,  37,  Hall,  A.

Marschalk,  Andrew,  I.  619,  Claiborne,  J.  F.  H.

Marsh,  Rev.  Joseph,  IV,  652,  Parker,  P.  J.  M.

Marshall,  Alexander  J.,  IV,  225.  Marshall,  C.

Marshall,  Col.  C,  III,  674,  Lee.  B.  E.

Marshall,  Capt.  Christopher,  IV,  227,  Marshall.  T.

Marshall,  Humphrey-,  his  defeat  by  Garfield,  II,  600  001.

Marshall,  John,  II,  702,  Graham,  /.;  IV,  221,  Marshall,  T.

Marshall,  Dr.  J.  E.,  IV.  221,  Marshall,  O.  H.

Marshall,  Joseph  M.,  IV,  227,  Marshall,  W.  B.

Marshall,  Thomas.  IV,  220,  Marshall,  E.  C.

Marshall  college,  Mich.,  II,  333,  Ellis,  J.  M.

Marshall  college,  Pa..  IV,  500,  Nevin,  J.  W.\  V,  186,  Bauch,
F.  A.;  united  with  Franklin,  80,  Porter,  T.  C.

Marshallton,  Pa.,  botanic  garden  at,  IV,  221,  Marshall,  H.

Marshpee.  I,  331,  Bourne,  B.

Marshfleld,  Mass.,  VI,  412 :  Webster's  home  at,  illustra-
tion. 411  ;  his  grave.  413  :  Winslow  family-seat  at,  567.

Marshfleld  club,  the.  III,  108,  Harvey,  P.

Marston,  Matthew  R.,  IV,  228,  Marston.  J.

Marston,  Philip  B.,  III.  145,  Hayne,  P.  H.

Martel,  pen-name,  II,  556,  Frothingham,  W.

Martel  papers,  anonymous  book,  II,  556,  Frothingham.  W.

Martha's  Vineyard,  grant  of,  Indian  mission,  IV,  275,  May-
hew,  Thomas.

Martha  Washington,  burning  of  the,  VI,  6,  Swayne,  N.  H.

Martin,  Abraham,  V,  157,  Bacine.

Martin,  Dom  Claude,  III,  714,  U Incarnation.

Martin,  Edward  Winslow,  pen-name,  IV,  74,  McCabe,  J.  D.

Martin,  Enrico,  IV.  880,  Martinez,  E.

Martin,  Martha,  II,  215.

Martin,  Morgan  L.,  III.  488,  Juneau.

Martin,  Rev.  Thomas.  IV,  165. .

Martin,  Rev.  W..  IV,  233.  Martin,  M.  M.

Martin,  William  Bend,  IV,  233,  Martin,  B.  N.


Martineau,  Harriet,  quoted,  III,  513,  Kendall,  A.

Martineau,  James,  II,  649,  Giles,  H.

Martinez,  Gen.,  Ill,  480,  Juarez,  B.  P.;  IV,  21,  Lopez,  F.
S. ;  statue  of,  illustration,  236.

Martinique,  conquest  of,  I.  214,  Beckwith,  G.\  672,  Cock-
burn,  G.\  Dutch  colonists  in,  II,  263,  Duparquet ;  HI,
395,  Jacobsen,  S. ;  invaded  by  the  English,  II.  567,  Caba-
ret ;  proposal  for  gradual  emancipation  in,  567,  Cabaret;
emancipation  in,  5:>2,  France;  captured  by  British  forces,
V,  109,  Prescott,  Bobert  ;  island  of,  H,  762,  Grey ;  build-
ings in,  IH,  344,  Imfreville ;  475,  Josephine  ;  public
works  in,  IV,  299,  Menier  ;  French  naval  victories  off,
444,  Motte,  E.  A.;  445,  Motte,  G.  T.;  rebellions  in.  III,
270,  Houdetot  ;  IV,  704,  Pilage  ; VI,  269,  Vangiraud  ;

IV,  495,  Nesmond,  L.  F.
Martins,  Prof.,  I,  34.

Martinsburg,  Va..  taken  by  Early,  II,  714.

Martlett,  pseudonym,  H,  107,  Davis,  B.  B.

Martyn,  Rev.  Job  H.,  IV,  238,  Martyn,  S.  T.

Martyr  of  Charity,  the.  Ill,  571,  Kohlmann.

Martyr,  Peter,  I,  78,  Anghiera.

Marvel,  Ik,  pen-name,  IV,  347,  Mitchell,  D.  G.

Marvel],  Andrew,  pen-name,  IV,  317,  Middleton,  A.

Marvin,  Judge  W.,  IV,  183,  Mallory,  S.  B.

Marye's  heights,  capture  of,  V,  450.  Sedgwick,  J. ;  I,  464.

Mary  Immaculate,  arch-confraternity  of,  I,  330,  Bourget.

Maryland,  colony  founded,  I,  506,  Calvert,  L. ;  grant  and
settlement  of,  154,  Baltimore :  insurrections  in,  ibid.  ;
the  evil  genius  of,  619.  Claiborne,  W.;  early  troubles  in,
620  ;  rebellion  in,  HI,  349,  Ingle  ;  under  the  Long  Parlia-
ment, I,  237,  Bennet,  B. ;  first  chapel  in,  61,  Altham  ;
Puritan  colony  in,  V,  704,  Stone,  W. ;  at  the  Revolution,
I,  537;  joins  the  confederation,  IH,  450,  Johnson,  T.;
boundary  of,  IV,  239,  Mason,  C. ;  Catholic  institutions  in,

V,  619,  620,  Spalding,  M.  J.;  VI,  481,  482,  Whitfield,  J.;
prevented  from  joining  the  confederacy,  II,  184  ;  bonds
of,  gift  to,  IV,  688,  Peabody,  G.;  historical  society
founded.  273,  Mayer ;  college  of  medicine  founded,  V,
90,  Potter,  N. ;  attempt  to  evade  the  emancipation  act,
693,  Stockbridge,  H. :  patriarch  of,  VI,  116,  Tilghman,  M.

Marysville,  Cal.',  II,  448,  Field,  S.  J.
Maryville,  Tenn.,  seminary,  founded,  I,  69,  Anderson,  I.
Masaya,  volcano  of,  discovered,  IV,  523.  Nino,  A.
Mascarenhas,  Fernando  de,  VI,  290,  Vieira,  A.
Mashonda,  capture  of  the,  II,  121.
Mason,  Col.  David,  V,  572.  Smith,  S.  M.
Mason,  Ebenezer,  IV,  246.  Mason,  J.  M.
Mason,  Roswell,  IV,  240,  Mason,  E.  G.
Mason,  Gen.  Samson,  V,  493,  Shell Hharger.
Mason  and  Dixon  line,  the,  I,  26  ;  IV,  239,  Mason,  C.
Mason  homestead,  the,  illustration,  IV,  241.
Masonian  proprietors,  the,  IV,  247,  Mason,  John.
Masonic,  vessel,  claim  for  the,  I,  103.
Masonic  excitement,  the,  VI,  419,  Weed,  T.
Masonry,  VI,  404,  Webb,  T.  S.

Massachusettensis,  pen-name,  I,  17  ;  V,  469,  Sewall,  Jona-
than ;  III,  691,  Leonard,  D.
Massachusetts,  pen-name,  II,  147,  Derby,  E.  H,  3d.
Massachusetts,  withdrawal  of the colonial charter  of,

IV,  253 ;  new  charter,  254  ;  religious  intolerance  in,  VI,
247,  Vane ;  prejudice  against,  I,  17  ;  letters  on  the  colo-
nists of,  308,  Bollan  ;  archives  of,  II,  428,  Felt ;  boundary
dispute,  517,  Fowler,  O. ;  salaries  of  crown  officers,  529,
530  ;  Hutchinson  letters,  529.  530  ;  act  for  remodelling  the
government  of,  580 ;  constitution  of,  IV,  42,  Lowell,  J. ;
664,  Parsons,  T.;  abolition  of  slavery  in,  ibid.;  revision
of  the  code,  190,  Mann,  H. ;  school  system  of,  reformed,
ibid.;  land  ceded  to,  by  New  York,  752,  Phetys,  O.;  II,
688,  Gorham,  N.;  towns  in  western,  laid  out,  V,  145,
Pynchon,  John  ;  charter  declared  forfeited,  172,  Ban-
dolph,  E. ;  pamphlets  burned  by  order  of  the  legislature,
309,  Bogers,  J.;  charities  of,  384,  Sanborn,  F.  B.;  rebell-
ion in,  487-488,  Shays  ;  contest  between  the  governor  and
assembly,  520,  Shute,  S.;  revision  of  the  charter  of,  VI,
408  ;  first  printed  account  of,  598,  Wood,  W :  Bible  so-
ciety, the,  V,  18,  Pierce,  J. ;  company,  the,  IV,  570,  Old-
ham, J.;  grantees  under  charter  of  Charles  I.,  V,  379,
Saltonstall ;  transference  of  the  government  to  Ameri-
ca, VI,  573  ;  fields,  V,  643,  Standish  ;  historical  society,
bequest  to,  II.  222,  Dowse ;  III.  94,  Harris,  T.  W. ;  hos-
pital gift  to,  VI,  179,  Tufts,  Q. ;  institute  of  technology,

V,  307,  Bogers,  W.  B.;  reform-school,  gift  to,  IV,  61,
Lyman,  T.

Massachusetts  Lawyer,  pen-name.  IV.  42,  Lowell.  I.

Massachusetts  Magazine,  the.  VI.  83.  Thomas.  Isaiah.

Massachusetts  Quarterly  Review,  the,  H,  345  ;  IV,  655.

Massacre  island.  Ill,  339,  Iberville.

Masset,  M.,  n,  403,  Fairlamb.

Massev,  Capt.,  IV,  46,  Lowther.

Massillon,  Ohio,  farm-school  near,  founded,  V,  333,  Botch,

Charity  B.
Massow,  Frederica  von.  V,  251,  Biedesel,  F,  C.  L.
Massue,  Aime,  IV,  250.  Massue,  L.  H.
Masterman,  G.  F.,  IV.  21,  Lopez,  F.  S.
Masters,  Mary,  IV,  717,  Penn.  B.
Mastodon,  skeleton  of  a,  VI.  366,  Warren,  J.  C.
Mata  de  la  Miel,  battle  of,  IV.  022.  Paez.
Matagorda  bay,  colony  on.  Ill,  622.
Matamoras,  capture  of,  HI,  607,  Lane,  Joseph  ;  VI,  53.


760


MATERIA


MERLIN


Materia  medica  and  mineralogy,  first  professor  of,  in  U.  S.,
I,  418,  Bruce,  A.

Mathematical  Monthly,  the,  V,  348,  Runkle,  J.  D.

Mathematics,  III,  55,  Hoisted,  G.  B.\  inventions,  607,
Lane,  J.  H;  teaching  of,  IV,  702,  Peirce,  B.;  difficult
solutions  in,  V,  724,  Strong,  T.

Mather,  C,  quoted,  II,  295,  Eaton,  N.

Mather,  Increase,  descendants  of,  V,  559.

Mather,  Robert  J.,  V,  050,  Stanton,  F.  P.

Mather,  Thomas,  IV,  251,  Mather,  R.

Mather,  Timothy.  IV,  254,  Mather,  S.\  256,  Mather,  W.  W.

Mather  tomb,  the,  illustration,  IV,  255.

Matheson,  Rev.  James,  V,  207,  Reed,  A.

Mathews,  Charles,  I,  392,  Brougham.

Mathews,  W.  S.  B.,  IV,  248,  Mason,  W.

Mathewson,  Thomas,  IV.  869,  Matlieuson,  E.

Matienzo,  Ortiz  de,  II.  135,  Delgadillo.

Matlack,  Rev.  L.  C.  V.  438,  Scott,  O.

Matlazahual,  epidemics,  I.  492,  Cabrera,  Q. ;  H,  360,  Enri-
quez,  M.

Matoaka.  V,  99,  Pocahontas.

Matouchin,  battle  at,  I,  48,  Alexander,  W.

Matthew  Caraby,  pseudonymous  novel,  I,  5,  Abbott,  A.

Matthews,  Edwin,  III,  473,  Jordan,  C.  J.  M.

Matthews,  George  W.,  I,  687,  Colfax.

Matthews,  Rev.  Lyman,  V,  80,  Porter,  E.

Matthews,  Robert,  IV,  262,  Matthias.

Matthieu,  II,  421,  Fassett,  C.  A.

Maturin,  Rev.  0.  R,  IV,  263,  Maturin,  E.

Mauch  Chunk  and  Carbon  Co.,  Pa.,  IV,  620,  Packer  ;  rail-
way, the.  V,  276,  Roberts,  S.  W.

Maud,  the  Empress,  V,  299,  Rodney.

Maumee  Rapids,  battle  of,  VI,  253,  Van  Rensselaer,  S. ;  560,
Winchester,

Maurepas,  Gen.,  II,  154,  Dessalines  ;  264.

Mauritius,  decree  freeing  blacks  in  (1795),  V,  462,  Sercey  ;
bay,  discovered.  III,  343,  Ihering.

Maury,  James,  IV.  266.  Maury,  A.

Maury,  M.  F.,  II,  653,  Gilliss.

Maury,  Richard,  IV,  264,  Maury.  J.  M.

Maury,  Walker,  V,  178,  Randolph,  J.

Maury,  William,  IV,  266,  Maury,  S.  M.

Mauvaises  Terres,  Nebraska,  fossils  in,  II,  383,  Evans,  J.

Maverick,  Rev.  J.,  IV,  266,  Maverick,  S.

Maxey.  Rice,  IV,  267,  Maxey,  S.  B.

Maximilian.  Emperor  of  Mexico,  II,  370,  Escobedo,  M.

May,  Dorothy,  I,  349.

May,  Edith,  pen-name.  II,  232,  Drinker.

May.  George,  IIL  345,  Imlay.

May,  Lemuel,  IV,  273,  May,  J.  W.

May,  Sophie,  pen-name,  VI.  675.  Clarke.

Maya  language,  books  in,  1, 231,  Beltran  ;  writing,  inventor
of,  VI,  654,  Zamna.

Mayapau,  empire  of,  VI,  654,  Zamna.

Mayfleld,  Millie,  pen-name,  III,  246,  Homes,  M.  S.  S.

Mayflower,  the,  illustration,  I,  42  ;  company,  last  survivor
of,  57,  Allerton;  II,  43,  Cushman,  R.;  relic  of  the,  V,
270,  Robbins,  T. ;  landing  from  the,  643,  Standish.

Mayflower,  the,  sloop,  I,  451,  Burgess,  E.

Mayflower,  Minnie,  pen-name,  III,  585,  Ladd,  C.

Mayham,  Maj.,  IV,  209,  Marion.

Mayhew,  Rev.  Jonathan,  suggestion  of  committees  of  cor-
respondence bv.  III,  664,  Lee,  R.  H.

Maynard.  Lieut.^  II,  301,  Eden,  C.

Mayo,  Col.,  II,  525,  Francisco.

Mayo,  Maria,  IV,  277.  Mayo,  John.

Mayo,  Miss,  V,  440,  Scott,  Winfield.

Mayo.  Maj.  Thomas.  I,  487,  Byrd.

Mayo  bridge,  the,  IV,  277,  Mayo,  John.

Mayor,  Francois,  I,  34.

Mayor,  Rose.  I,  34,  Agassiz,  J.  L.  R.

May-pole  of  Merry  Mount,  the,  IV,  433,  Morton,  T.

Maza,  Manuel  V.,  V,  320,  Rosas.

Mazatlan.  capture  of.  V,  518,  Shubrick,  W.  B. ;  646,  Stanly,  F.

Mazzey,  William,  V,  194,  Raynal.

Mead,  Elinor  G.,  Ill,  287,  Howells.

Mead,  James  H.,  VI.  443,  Western.

Meade,  Mariamne,  III,  302,  Huqcr,  T.  B.

Meade,  Bishop  William,  quoted,  I,  406.

Meade  claim,  the,  rv,  279,  Meade,  R.  W.

Meadow  Bridge,  engagement  at.  in.  202,  Hill,  A.  P.

Meadville,  Pa.,  seminary.  III,  306,  Huidekoper,  F.

Mears,  Rev.  D.  O.,  III.  554,  Kirk,  E.  N.

Mease,  Frances  E.,  1, 179,  Barrow.

Meat-biscuit,  invention  of  the.  I,  321,  Borden,  G.

Meat-packing  industry,  the,  IV,  219,  Marsh,  Sylvester.,

Mechanic  governor,  the.  III.  137.

Mechanicsville,  battle  of,  rv.  75,  McCall,  G.  A.;  82.

Mecliecunnaqua.  Ill,  739.  Little  Turtle.

Mecklenburg  declaration,  the,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Abraham  ;
BOB,  Brevard  :  IV.  888,  Martin,  Josiah  ;  V,  56,  Polk,  T.

Med,  case  of,  IV,  27,  Lorinq,  E.  G.

Medal.  Harrison,  III.  98  ;  awarded  to  Com.  Jones,  illustra-
tion, 465  :  presentation  of  a,  to  Washington,  VI,  376  ;  rul-
ing-machine, invention  of  a,  V,  409,  Saxton.

Medberry.  Rev.  Nicholas.  IV,  285.  Medberry,  R.  B.

Medical  association,  the  first.  I.  403,  Brown.  S.

Medical  college,  New  York,  II,  203,  Doremus.  R.  O.  ;  IV,
154,  MacNevin  ;  first,  in  America,  VI,  396,  Watts,  S.


Medical  instruments,  inventor  of,  II,  747,  Green,  W.  A. ;
V,  876.  Sajous. See  Surgery.

Medici  family,  researches  in  the  history  of,  III,  551,  Kin-
ney, W.  B.

Medicine,  first  U.  S.  journal  of.  III.  370.  Ives,  L.  ;  IV.  326,
Miller,  E.  ;  original  method  in,  III,  256,  Hopkins  F.  I'.  ;
discovery  of  anaesthetics,  385,  Jackson,  C.  T.  ;  IV,  434,
Morton  ;  VI,  430,  Wells,  Horace  ;  eclectic  practice  of,  422,
Morrow,  T.  V.  ;  electricity  in  the  practice  of,  V,  294-295,
Rockwell,  A.  D.  ;  new  methods  in,  349,  Rush  :  VI.  42.
Taylor,  I.  E.;  Thomsonian  system,  99,  Thomson,  S.;  use
of  the  spectroscope,  387.  Waterman,  S.  ;  first  woman
practitioner,  III,  316,  Hunt,  H.  K.  ;  first  woman  in  the
ficole  de,  394,  Jacobi,  M.  P.

Medicine  Hat,  Chief,  rv,  140,  MacLaren,  R.  N.

Medina,  robber-band  of.  HI,  690,  Leon,  Antonio.

Meeker,  Nathan  C,  IV,  611,  Ouray.

Megaphone,  the,  H.  304.  Edison.

Meigs,  W.  M.,  IV,  289,  Meigs,  J.

Meikleham,  Septimia  R.,  ill,  424,  Jefferson.

Meissonier,  M.,  HI,  562,  Knight.  D.  R.

Mellen,  W.  H.,  I,  618,  Claflih,  H.  B.

Mello,  Col.,  IV,  236,  Martines.

Melnekoff,  Col.,  HI,  100,  Harrison,  J.

Memorial  movement,  the,  I,  451,  Burgess,  G.

Memory,  a  remarkable,  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  Aaron.

Memphis,  surrender  of,  H,  94,  Davis,  C.  H. ;  battle  near,
327,  Ellet,  C.  ;  under  Sherman's  administration,  V,  503 ;
naval  fight  at,  VI,  324,  WaUoe.

Melvill,  Maj.  T.,  IV,  293,  Melville,  H.

Melville,  Allan,  IV,  294,  Melville,  H.

Melville  peninsula,  exploration  of,  IV,  66,  Lyon.  G.  F.

Member  of  the  Vermont  bar,  a,  pen-name,  VI.  89,  Thomp-
son, D.  P.

Menard,  Bierra,  IV,  295.  Menard,  M.  B.

Mencos,  Gen.  Melchorde,  VI,  293,  Villagutierrez.

Mendelssohn,  III,  266,  Horsley.

Mendelssohn  glee  club,  N.  Y.,  I,  339,  Bowman,  F.  C.  ;  IV,
436,  Mosenthal.

Mendez,  Gen.,  H,  167.

Mendinneta,  viceroy,  IV,  472,  Mutis.

Mendiola,  Gen.  Gregorio,  V,  604,  Solchaga.

Mendoca,  Diego  de.  III.  159,  Hein.

Mendon,  Mass.,  declaration  of,  1, 45,  Alexander,  Abraham  ;
369,  Brevard.

Mendoza,  Cardinal,  II,  627,  Geraldini.

Mendoza,  Don  Cristobal  de,  IH,  408,  Jaureybo,  I.

Mendoza,  Fernando,  H,  165,  Diaz  Melgarejo.

Mendoza,  Francisco  de,  H,  202,  Dorantes  ;  IV.  298,  Men-
doza, A.  de.

Mendoza,  Luis  de.  IV,  173,  Magellan.

Mendoza,  founded,  III,  329,  Hurtado,  G'.  ;  earthquake  at,
IV,  31,  Los  Santos.

Menefee,  Richard  J.,  m,  476,  Jouett,  M.  H.

Menendez,  Pedro,  destruction  of  a  colony  by,  II,  697,
Gourgues  ;  IH,  366  ;  629,  Laudonniere  ;  V,  232,  Ribaut.

Menken,  Alexander  I.,  IV,  299,  Menken,  Adah  I.

Menno,  I,  300,  Boehm.

Mennonites,  colony  of.  IV,  668,  Pastorius.

Men  of  Gore.  IV.  152,  MacNab.

Menomenee  Indians,  treaty  with,  VI,  669,  Baird,  H.  S.

Menorah,  the,  magazine,  IV,  704,  Peixotto.

Menotomy  (Arlington),  Mass.,  VI.  365.  Warren,  Joseph.

Mensel,  historicalcollections  of,  HI,  335,  Hutten.

Mentz,  William,  V,410,  Say,  T.

Merced,  military  religious  order  of,  VI,  20,  Talamantes.

Mercedes,  Maria  de  las,  V,  395.  Santa  Cruz,  Maria.

Mercedes,  loss  of  the  frigate,  IV,  366,  Montero.

Mercer,  John  C.  IV,  300,  Mercer,  A.  J.

Mercer,  Silas,  IV,  301,  Mercer.  Jesse.

Mercersburg  theology,  the,  IV,  500,  Nevin,  J.  W.

Mercer  university,  gifts  to,  IV,  301,  Mercer,  Jesse.

Merceur,  Duke  de,  V,  292,  Roche,  E.

Merchant  adventurers,  the,  of  London,  V,  643,  Standish.

Merchant,  George.  IV,  301,  Merchant,  C.  S.

Merchants,  home  for  superannuated.  II.  8.  Cresson,  E.

Merchants'  Magazine,  the,  HI,  316,  Hunt,  F.

Mercie,  M.  J.  A.,  pupil  of,  VI,  19,  Taft,  L.

Mercur,  Henry.  IV,  302.  Mercur,  V.

Mercurial  horizon,  invention  for,  III,  607,  Lane,  J.  H.

Mercury,  the,  II,  571,  Gaine  ;  capture  of,  by  the  Vestal,
III.  630,  Laurens.

Meredith,  Margaret,  I,  488,  Cabell.

Meredith,  Owen,  pen-name,  I.  448,  Bulwer.

Meredith,  Rees.  IV,  303.  Meredith.  8.

Meredith,  Rev.  Thomas,  IV.  303,  Meredith.  Sir  W.  C.

Mergentheim,  castle  of,  IV.  678,  Paid,  F.  W.

Merian.  Matthew.  IV.  304.  Merian.

Merida.  blown  up  by  pirates,  II,  705,  Grandmont.

Meridian,  Miss.,  supplies  destroyed  at,  n.  713.

Meridian,  the.  III.  448.  Johnson,  H.  K.

Merim6e,  Prosper,  quoted,  V,  112.  Prescott,  W.  H.

Merino  sheep,  introduction  of,  I.  240,  Benton,  J.  G.  ;  U,
1 17.  Derby,  E.  H,  Jr.  ;  III,  406.  Jarvis,  W.  ;  IV,  279,
Meade.  R.  W.  :  V.  185,  Prince,  W.  R.

Merion,  Pa.,  IV,  614.  Owen,  a.

Meriwether.  Elizabeth  A..  IV,  304,  Meriwether,  L.

Merle,  n.  597.  Gardner,  E.  J.

Merlin,  Countess  of,  V,  395,  Santa  Cruz,  Maria.


MERMAID


MEXICO


761


Mermaid  club.  the.  V,  163.

Merode,  Monsignor  de,  II,  759,  Gregori.

Merrick,  Thomas,  IV,  305,  Merrick,  P.

Merrick,  T.  B.,  Ill,  110,  Haskell,  L.  S.

Merrill,  Joshua.  II,  220,  Downer.

Merrill.  Orsamus  C,  IV,  182,  Mallary.

Merrimac,  Mass.,  gift  of  library  to,  IV,  513,  Nichols,  J.  R.

Merrimac  river,  water-power  of  the,  I,  227,  Bell,  James.

Merrimack,  the,  vessel.  I,  409,  Brown,  Moses  ;  428.  Buchan-
an, F. ;  II,  365,  Ericsson  ;  destruction  of  the,  VI,  38,  39.

Merritt,  Henry,  IV.  308,  Merritt,  A.  L.

Merry,  Robert,  IV,  309,  Merry,  A.

Merry,  Robert,  pen-name,  V,  656,  Stearns,  J.  N.

Merryman,  John,  VI,  30.

Merry  Mount,  IV,  433,  Morton  ;  438,  Motley.

Merry's  Museum  and  Parley's  Magazine,  II,  680,  Goodrich,
S.  G.;  V,  656,  Stearns,  J.

Merson,  Olivier,  pupil  of,  VI,  641,  Yelland.

Mesdag.  pupil  of,  I,  584,  Chase,  H.

Meshboha,  the,  capture  of,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,  W. ;  IV,  106,
Macdonough.

Mesia  de  la  Cerda,  Don  Pedro,  IV,  472,  Mutts.

Mesquida,  Juana,  II,  412,  Farragut.

Mestayer,  Charles,  VI,  520,  Williams,  M.  P.

Meta,  province  of,  II,  435,  Fernandez,  J.

Metacomet,  IV,  755,  Philip.

Metacomet,  the,  vessel,  II,  18,  Crosby,  P. ;  III,  476,  Jouett,
J.  E.

Metallic  shelving,  invention  of,  V.  207,  Reed,  H.

Metallic  tractors,  invention  of,  IV,  728,  Perkins,  E.

Metals,  invention  of  anti-friction,  I,  125,  Babbitt,  I. ;  refin-
ing of,  III,  132,  Hayes,  A.  A.;  plan  to  use  the  expansive
force  of,  V,  200,  Read,  N.

Metaphysical  club,  Boston,  III,  284,  Hoive,  J.  R.

Metastasis,  II,  91,  Davies,  C.

Metcalfe,  Dr.  J.  T.,  IV,  312,  Metcalfe,  H.

Meteorgraph,  the,  VI.  416,  Webster,  N.  B.

Meteorites,  VI,  619,  Wright,  A.  W.  ;  cabinet  of,  V,  494,
Shepard,  C.  U.  ;  Harvard  collection  of,  573,  Smith,  J.  L.

Meteorology,  III,  172  ;  theory  of  cycles  of  phenomena,  IV,
304,  Meriam  ;  system  of  observations,  473,  Myer ;  stations
in  South  America,  II,  693,  Gould,  B.  A. ;  observations  in,

I,  2,  Abbe  ;  rV,  18, 19,  Loomis,  E.;  instruments,  invented,

II,  228,  Draper,  D.  ;  III,  271,  Hough,  G.  W.  ;  18,  Guyot ;
discoveries  m,  187,  Herrick,  E.  C. ;  researches,  IV,  265 ;
studies  in,  296,  Mendenhall,  T.  C.  ;  577,  Olmsted,  D.  ;
prophecies,  VI,  500,  Wiggins,  E.  S.

Meteors,  theory  of,  VI,  192,  Twining,  A.  C. ;  medal  for  in-
vestigations on,  V,  574,  Smith,  J.  L. ;  researches  on,  IV,

507,  Newton,  H.  A.

Methfessel,  A.  G.,  pupil  of,  VI,  121,  Timm.

Methodism,  apostle  of.  III,  663,  Lee,  J. ;  rise  of,  in  America,
I,  108,  Asbury  ;  VI,  438,  Wesley  ;  477,  Whitefield  ;  I,  300,
Boehler  and  Boe.hm  ;  foundress  of  American,  II,  341,  Em-
bury, P. ;  mother  of  American,  III,  156,  Heck,  B. ;  pioneers
of,  1, 754,  Coughlan  ;  IV,  407,  Morrell,  T. ;  VI,  327.  Walker,
Jesse  :  403,  Webb,  T. :  530,  Williams,  R. ;  establishment  of,
449,  Whatcoat ;  first  native  itinerant,  394,  Waiters,  W. ;
Calvinistic  and  Arminian,  438,  Wesley  ;  478,  Wliitefield  ;
patriarch  of  Missouri,  IV,  357,  Monroe  :  established  in
Pennsylvania,  V,  20,  Pilmore  ;  missions  in  Texas.  355,
Ruter  ;  in  the  southwest,  II,  641,  Gibson,  T.  ;  in  the
south,  HI,  308,  Hull,  Hope  ;  in  the  West  Indies.  II,  646,
Gilbert,  N.  ;  name  of  church  adopted,  171,  Dickins,  J.  ;
first  society  and  chapel  of,  in  America,  V,  718,  Straw-
bridge  ;  first  conference  in  America,  180,  Rankin,  T.  ;
general  conference  inaugurated.  IH,  663,  Lee,  J.  ;  di-
vision of,  663,  Lee,  L.  M.  and  Luther ;  IV,  568,  O'Kelly  ;
first  "pewed"  church  in  New  York,  III,  40,  Hall,
Francis  ;  first  church  of,  in  New  Orleans,  II,  223,  Drake,

B.  M.  ;  separation  of  the  African  branch,  V,  351,  Rush,

C.  ;  question  of  appointment  of  presiding  elders,  610,
Soule,  J.  ;  a  rule  of,  VI,  400,  Weakley ;  position  on
slavery,  IV,  262,  Mattison  ;  division  of,  IH,  66,  Hamline  ;

IV,  17,  Longstreet ;  colleges,  HI,  621.  Larrabee,  W.  C.  ;
institutions,  gifts  to,  290,  Hoyt,  O. ;  V,  738,  Suckley,  T.
H.  ;  missions,  I,  483,  Butler,  W.  ;  550,  Case,  W.  ;  589,
Chase,  Squire  ;  759,  Cox,  M.  B.  ;  III,  607,  Lane,  John  ;
VI,  48,  Taylor.  C.  ;  50,  Taylor,  William  ;  76,  Thobum  ;

508,  Wiley,  I.  W.

Methodist  church  south,  I,  72,  Andrew,  J.  O.  ;  190,  Bas-
com,  H.  B.;  publishing  house,  III,  82,  Hargrove;  V,
595,  Smith,  W.  A.;  610,  Soule,  J.;  centennial  of,  VI,  687,
Hendrix.

Methodist  Protestant  church,  the,  HI,  429,  Jennings,  S.  K. ;

V,  212,  Kee.se,  L.  H. ;  275,  Roberts,  R.  R. ;  602,  Snethen.
Methodist  Quarterly  Review,  the,  II,  352,  Emory,  J.;  IV,

87.  McClintock  J.

Metis,  the,  VI,  18,  Tache,  A.  A.:  rebellion,  V,  252,  Riel.

Metis,  wreck  of  the  steamer,  V,  261,  Ritchie.  D.

Metric  system,  device  for  teaching,  invented,  I,  346,  Brad-
bury, W.  F. ;  in  arithmetics,  IV,  507,  Newton,  H.  A.

Metronome,  invention  of  the,  IV,  171,  Maelzl.

Metropolitan  bank,  failure  of,  V,  461,  Seney,  G.  I.

Metropolitan  Magazine,  the,  HI,  324,  Huntington,  J.  V.;
IV,  466,  Murphy,  J.

Metropolitan  museum  of  art,  the,  IV.  175,  Magoon  ;  gifts
to,  213,  Marquand,  H.  G.;  402.  Morgan.  J.  S.;  765,  Phie-
ni.c;  V,  461,  Seney,  G.  I.;  682;  VI,  212,  Vanderbilt.  C;


298,  Vincent,  Frank  ;  590,  Wolfe  ;  collections  in,  699,
Steams.

Metz,  retreat  from,  I,  202,  Bazaine.

Mexican  history  and  philology,  collections,  V,  557,  558,
Smith,  Buckingham.

Mexican  school  of  mines,  founded,  VI,  274,  Velasquez  Car-
denas.

Mexican  thinker,  the,  II,  438.  Fernandez  Lizardi.

Mexican  war,  the,  I,  242  ;  431  ;  II,  415,  559,  Fuero,  J.;  709  :
HI,  479  ;  V,  8,  118-119.  Price,  S.;  394,  Santa-Anna  ;  441  ;
VI,  53,  54  ;  causes  of,  I,  76,  Andrews,  S.  P. :  outbreak  of
the.  V.  53  ;  loan  for,  253,  Riggs,  G.  W. ;  naval  operations
in,  n,  265  ;  III.  311,  Hull,  J.  B. ;  701,  Levy  ;  IV,  737,  Perry,
M.  C;  V,  337f  Rowan,  S.  C;  695,  Stockton.  R.  F;  VI,  38,
51,  Taylor.  W.  R.;  incident  of  the,  I.  583.  Chase  ;  Cal-
houn on,  502  ;  Gallatin  on,  II,  578-579  ;  the  "  Malek  Adel,"
V,  158,  Radford  ;  satire  on.  Biglow  Papers,  IV,  40.

Mexican  Washington,  the.  Ill,  480,  Juarez,  B.  P.

Mexicans,  a  god  of  the,  III,  307,  Huitziton.

Mexico,  discovery  of,  I,  738,  Cordova,  F.  F.  de  ;  VI,  273,
Velasquez  ;  early  civilization  of,  140,  Totepehn  ;  ancient
empire  in,  308,  Votdn  ;  traditions  of,  63,  Tenoch  ;  pro-
phetic tradition,  rV,  369,  Montezuma  ;  early  kings,  VI,
68,  Tetzotzomoc  ;  Tepanec  kings  in,  IV,  270,  Maxtla ;  king-
dom of  Texcoco,  495^196,  Netzahualcoyotl ;  last  king  of,

II,  24,  Cuauhtemotzin  ;  invasion  of  Sonora,  I,  329,  Botd-
bon  ;  the  Spanish  in,  510,  Caminatzin  ;  conquest  of,  554,
Castillo ;  748,  749,  Cortes ;  III,  18,  Guzman,  N.  B.  de  ;
186,  Herrera  y  Tordesillas  ;  434,  Jicotencal ;  V,  82,  Por-
tillo  ;  363,  Saavedra  Guzman ;  387,  Sandoval,  G.  de ;
incident  of  the  conquest,  IV,  206,  Marina  ;  internal
improvements  in,  368,  Montezuma  I.  and  II.  ;  de-
feat of  Narvaez  by  Cortes,  478,  Narvaez  ;  treatment
of  Indians  in.  II,  591,  Garces ;  emancipation  of  slaves
in  (1550),  VI,  272,  Velasco,  L.\  capture  of  treasure  from,
IV,  618,  Pacheca  ;  VI,  282,  Verrazaro  ;  seizure  of  funds
in,  IV,  214,  Marquez ;  revolutions  in,  II,  166,  Diaz,
Porfirio  ;  four  presidents  in,  at  once.  167  ;  missions
to,  I.  251,  Betanzos  ;  II.  135,  Delgado  ;  166,  Diaz,  Pedro  ;

III,  577,  Kiihn  ;  IV,  440,  Motolinia  ;  V,  155,  Quiroga,  V.;
rebellion  against  Spanish  rule  in  (1810),  III,  197,  Hidalgo,
M.\  movements  in,  when  Napoleon  ruled  in  Spain,  369,
Iturrigaray  ;  declaration  of  independence  of,  II,  573,
Gainza ;  independence  of,  predicted,  353,  Emparan  ;
war  for  independence  in,  I,  57,  Allende  ;  III,  10,  Guer-
rero ;  197,  Hidalgo  ;  367,  Iturbide  ;  IV,  392.  Morelos  ;
558,  &Donojii  ;  plan  of  Iguala,  III,  368  ;  declaration,
368 ;  690,  Leon,  Antonio ;  IV,  250,  Matamoros ;  335,
Mina ;  V,  195,  Raymi ;  declarations  of  independence
(1813),  154,  Quintana ;  (1821),  IV,  558,  WDonoju  ;  war
with  Spain  (1827),  operations  of  the  navv,  V.  74,  76,
Porter,  D.  H. ;  treaty  of  Cordova,  III,  368  ;  Iturbide  de-
clared emperor,  368  ;  republic  proclaimed,  368  ;  republic
recognized  by  the  pope  (1828),  VI.  263,  Vasquez,  F.  P.;
republic  proclaimed  (1822),  revolutions,  federal  system
abolished,  separation  of  Texas,  war  with  Texas,  French
invasion  (1838),  military  dictatorship,  war  with  U.  S.,
president  for  life,  revolts,  revolution  of  Ayutla,  con-
spiracies against  the  empire,  V,  393-394,  Santa-Anna  ;
revolutions  in,  I,  122,  Avezzana  ;  476,  Bustamente,  A.  ;
493,  Cadena  ;  II,  124,  Degollado  ;  189.  Doblado ;  reform
laws,  190  ;  369,  370,  Escobedo  ;  438,  Fernandez,  Lizardi  ;

IV,  8,  Lombardini ;  executions  in  Vera  Cruz,  H,  168 ;
plan  of  Tuxtepec,  167,  168  ;  public  debt  of,  168  ;  revolts,
168  ;  execution  of  rebels,  168  ;  case  of  Mr.  Cutting,  168  ;
revolt  of  the  Tepehuan  Indians,  II,  437,  Fernandez  de
Cordova  ;  the  French  in,  369  ;  republic,  370  ;  (1810),  559,
Fuero,  J.  :  592,  Garcia-Conde ;  674,  Gomez-Farias ;
675-676,  Gonzalez,  M.;  Ill,  10,  Guerrero  ;  I,  361,  Bravo  ;
III,  16,  Gutierrez  de  Lara ;  87,  Haro  y  Tamariz ;  403,
Jarauta ;  593,  Lafragua  ;  185,  Herrera,  J.  J.  de  ;  first
peaceful  change  of  administration  in,  ibid. ;  IV,  290-291,
Mejia  ;  300,  Mercado,  J.  M.:  339,  Miramon  ;  645-646,  Pa-
redes  y  Arrilaga  ;  V,  290,  Robles  ;  VI.  123,  Tlalhuicole  ;
124,  Tlaxpanquizmii  ;  276,  Venegas,  F.  J. ;  bandit  tribe
in,  Indian  revolt,  IV,  30,  Losada,  M. ;  reactionary  move-
ment in,  the  empire,  214-215,  Marquez,  L.\  the  empire
of  Maximilian  in,  339,  Miramon  ;  French  invasion  of,
26.  Lorencez  ;  1, 202,  Bazaine  ;  745,  Corona  ;  II,  502,  Forey,
E.  F. ;  VI,  655,  Zaragoza  ;  the  empire  in,  IV,  268-270,
Maximilian  ;  the  French  empire  in,  III,  721  ;  withdrawal
of  the  French  from,  its  cause,  II,  717  ;  first  constitutional
president  of,  abolition  of  slavery  in,  VI,  288,  Victoria.
G.\  Spanish  invasion  of  1829,  I,  174,  Barradas;  V,  393,
Santa-Anna  ;  charge  by  Diaz  against  Bazaine.  H,  168 ;
counter-charge  against  Diaz,  168  :  third-term  movement,
168  ;  religious  toleration  under  the  empire,  IV,  268  ;  law
forbidding  the  church  to  hold  landed  estate,  HI,  841,
Iglesias,  J.  M. ;  693,  Lerdo  ;  religious  orders  abolished,
church  property  confiscated,  alliance  of  intervention,
rupture  of  the  tripartite  convention.  479  :  law  forbidding
the  clergy  and  public  corporations  to  hold  landed  prop-
erty, 693,  Lerdo;  "  three  -  years1  war,"  580.  Labas-
tida  ;  dissolution  of  monastic  orders.  National  library
and  academy  of  art,  V,  165,  Ramirez,  I.;  mines  of,
II,  339,  Eluyor ;  III,  .338,  Ibarra  ;  VI,  296-297,  Ville-
raye  :  worship  of  Cortes's  horse  in.  293,  Villagutierrez  ;
the  "bases  organicas,"  IV,  386,  Morales,  J.  B.;  bound-
ary of,  I,  103  ;  II,  334,  Ellis,  P.;  352,  Emory,  W.  Hr,  568,


762


MEXICO


MINOTS


Gadsden,  James  ;  V,  9  :  benefactions  in,  1, 488,  Cabellero
y  Ocio  ;  outrages  against  U.  S.  citizens  in,  433  ;  first
journalist  of,  555,  Castorena  ;  plan  for  colony  of  south-
erners in.  Ill,  30.  Gicin ;  IV.  365  ;  colonization  in,  II,
584,  Gdlvez,  J.  de ;  first  newspaper  in,  584,  Gdlvez,  M. ;
expedition  to  aid  insurgents  in.  III,  512,  Kemper,  R.;
American  prisoners  in,  II,  204,  Dornin  :  improvements
in,  585,  Gdlvez.  B.;  III,  10,  Giiemes;  V.  265,  Riva  I'ula-
cio  :  public  works  in.  VI.  273,  Velasco,  L.\  philanthropic
institutions  in,  II,  399,  Fagoaga  ;  attempt  to  divide,  VI,
289-290,  Vidaurri ;  removal  of  the  republican  capital,
290  ;  proposed  railway  in,  V,  325,  Rosecrans.  W.  S. :  first
telegraph  in,  II,  706,  Granja  ;  historical  documents  of,
452,  Figueroa,  F.\  III,  339,  Icazbalceta  ;  ^arly  history  of,
372,  IxtlilxoChitl  ;  V,  526,  Sigiienza  ;  exploration  of,  I,
39.  Alareun  ;  745,  Coronado  :  VI.  207,  Ulloa  ;  archaeologi-
cal expedition  to,  IV,  26,  Lorillard,  P. ;  V,  233,  Rice,  A.  T. ;
VI,  674,  Chaiiiay,  Desire  ;  II,  398,  Fabert ;  scientific
mission  to,  III,  179.  Herauld  :  antiquities  of,  342,  Jgnacio,
Igolino  ;  VI,  320,  Waldeck  ;  III,  548,  Kingsborough.

Mexico  city,  sieges  of,  II,  24.  Cuauhtemotzin  ;  TV,  568,
Ojeda,  A.  de  ;  statue  in,  illustration,  II,  24,  167,  709  ;  epi-
demic in,  I,  492,  Cabrera,  Q. ;  secret  societies  in,  library
of,  523,  Cardoso,  J.  J. :  Columbus  monument  in,  illustra-
tion, II,  368  ;  statue  of  Charles  IV.  in,  illustration,  VI,
129  ;  inundations  in,  IV,  236,  Martinez,  E. ;  statue  in,
illustration,  236  ;  cathedral  of,  VI,  128,  Toledo,  A.  S.;
illustration,  III,  580,  Labastida.

Mexico,  valley  of,  inundations  of  the,  IV,  298,  Mendoza  y
Luna  ;  496.  Netzahualcoyotl ;  V,  400,  Sarmiento  de  Soto-
mayor  ;  IV.  618,  Pacheca  ;  canal  of  Huehuetsca,  ibid.;
aqueduct  of.  II,  437.  Fernandez  de  Cordova  ;  attempts
to  drain.  IV,  236,  Martinez,  E.\  VI,  273,  Velasco,  L.;
railway  through,  IV.  236,  Martinez,  E.

Mey,  Cornelius  J.,  Ill,  295,  Hudde  ;  IV,  338,  Minuit.

Meyer,  Dr..  V,  224,  Reuling.

Meyer.  Julius,  pupil  of.  VI,  108,  Thursby.

Meyerheim,  Paul,  III.  206,  Hill,  T.

Mezy,  Augustine  de,  III,  635.  Laval,  F.  X.

Miami  Indians,  the,  I,  493,  Cadillac  ;  VI,  68,  Tetinchoua  ;
432,  Wells,  W.

Miami  river,  battles  with  Indians  on  the,  HI,  103,  Hart,
Jonathan  :  96.

Miami  villages,  Indian  fight  at  (1791),  V.  369,  St.  Clair.

3Iiantonomo's  monument,  illustration,  IV,  313.

Miantonomoh,  the,  II,  520,  Fox,  G.  V.

Michael  Angelo  of  America,  the,  I,  492,  Cabrera,  M.

Michael  Beer  prize,  the,  II,  397,  Ezekiel.

Michaelis,  Prof.,  I.  34.

Michelena.  Gen.,  V,  290,  Rocafuerte.

Michelet,  M.,  Ill,  162,  Hempel.

Michener,  Dr.  Ezra,  III,  105.  Hartman,  W.  D.

Michigan,  peninsula  of,  missionary  labors  in  the,  I,  160,
Baraga;  early  settlement  of ,  552,  Cass,  L.;  emigration
to,  II,'  410,  Farmer,  J. ;  lumber  interest  of,  443,  Ferry,  W.
M.;  orphan  asylum,  the,  III,  116,  Haveland,  L.  S.:  first
mission  to,  435,  Jogues  ;  Catholic  institutions  in,  677,  Le-
fevre  ;  V,  238,  Richard,  G.;  boundary  dispute  of,  with
Ohio,  TV,  243,  Mason,  S.  T;  first  printing-press  in,  V,
237,  Richard  ;  university,  gift  to,  367,  Sager ;  admission
of  women  to.  656,  Stearns,  S.  B. ;  historical  society.  425,
Schoolcraft,  H.  R.

Michigan,  man-of-war,  the,  interception  of  Fenians  by,
IV,  582,  O'Neill,  J.

Michigan,  brig,  sent  over  Niagara  falls,  IV.  669,  Patch.

Michigan  Journal  of  Education.  II,  760,  Gregory,  J.  M.

Michimalonco.  Chief,  III,  295.  Huden.

Michipicoton  island.  Indian  belief  of,  IV.  594,  Orry.

Michlenberg,  Rev.  H.  E.,  II.  a56,  Endress.

Michler,  John  Wolfgang,  IV,  315,  Michler,  N.

Michoacan,  state  of.  III.  580.  Labastida.

Micklejohn.  Rev.  Mr.,  IV,  739,  Person.

Micmac  Indians,  the,  IV,  177,  Maillard  ;  294.  Membertou  ;
language  and  legends  of,  V.  169,  Rand,  S.  T.

Microlite,  discovery  of  a  species  of,  V,  494.  Shepard,  C.  U.

Micrometer  spider-webs,  V,  311,  Rogers,  W.  A.

Microscope,  improvements  to  the,  I,  137,  Bailey,  J.  W.;
384.  Brom field.  E. ;  inventor  of  a,  V,  248,  Rid'dell  ;  the
inverted,  573,  Smith.  J.  L.;  inventor  of  an  oxhydrogen,
VI,  12.  Swift,  L. ;  inventor  of  appliances  for,  355,  Ward,
Richard  H.

Microscope,  the,  magazine,  V,  715,  Stowell ;  II,  284,  Dwight,
Henry  E.

Microscopy,  I,  308,  Bolles,  Edwin  C.  ;  III.  187,  Hei-rick,  S.
M.  B.  ;  VI,  355,  Ward,  Richard  H.  ;  improvements  in,
607,  Woodward,  J.  J.

Mierotasimeter.  the.  II,  304,  Edison.

Microtome,  invention  of  a,  V,  224,  Reuling.

Middlebury  college,  gifts  to,  II,  450,  Field,  M.;  IV,  633,
Painter,

Middle  Creek,  battle  of,  II.  (501.

Middleton,  Gen.  Charles.  IV.  318,  Middleton,  Sir  F.  D.

Middleton.  Harriet,  V,  &58.  Rutledge,  E.

Middletown,  Weslevan  university.  I,  629,  Clark,  L.

Midnight  judges,  the.  IV.  225.  Marshall,  J.  M.

Midway,  plantation  of.  Ill,  301.  Huger,  F.

Mier.  attack  on.  II.  717.  Green,  T.  J.

Mifflin.  Daniel.  IV.  819.  Mifflin,  W.

Mignon,  sobriquet  of  Penri,  IV,  714.


Mihahuatlan,  battle  at,  II,  166,  Diaz,  Porfirio.

Milan  decree,  the,  I,  25.

Milbourne,  Capt.,  III.  681.  682.  Leisler.

Milburne,  Jacob,  VI.  251.  Van  Rensselaer,  N.

Mildmay,  Sir  Thoma3.  VI.  572,  Winthrop.

Mileage  abuse,  the,  II,  7:38.

Milford,  Mo.,  action  at,  II,  102,  Davis,  J.  C.

Milfort,  III,  651,  Le  Clerc.

Military  adventurers,  company  of,  IV,  61.  Lyman,  P.

Military  Countryman,  a,  signature.  III.  154,  Heath,  W.

Military  discipline,  books  of,  V.  1.  Pickering,  T.

Military  instruction,  scheme  for,  VI.  496,  Whittlesey.  J.  H.

Military  Monitor,  the,  IV7,  554,  O'Conor,  T.

Military  officers,  in  civil  trusts,  I,  432.

Military  schools,  founder  of.  IV,  666.  Partridge.

Milk,  adulteration  of,  I,  572,  Chandler,  C.  F.\  condensed,
320,  Borden,  G.

Milk-sickness,  the,  III,  445,  Johnson,  John  Milton.

Milky  Way,  theory  of  the,  I,  335,  Bowdoin.

Mill,  invention  of  a,  I,  301,  Bogardus,  J.

Mill,  John  Stuart,  quoted,  I,  504,  Calhoun.

Millard,  Nathaniel,  IV,  324,  Millard,  D.

Millard,  Phoebe.  II,  452,  Fillmore.

Mill-dam  troubles,  II.  722.  Graydon,  W.

Milledgeville,  Ga.,  name  of,  IV,  324,  Milledge,  J.

Millennial  Star,  the,  V,  102.  Pratt,  P.  P.

Millennium,  the,  prophecies,  1, 120,  Austin,  D. ;  theories  of,
IV,  253.

Miller,  Dr.  Edward,  IV,  533,  North,  E.

.Miller,  Judge  Eliiah,  V,  470,  Seward,  W.  H.

Miller,  Frances  A.,  V.  470,  Seward,  W.  H.

Miller,  Joaquin,  IV.  325,  Miller,  Cincinnati  H.

Miller,  Melchior,  rv,  329,  Miller,  S.

Miller,  Phineas,  VI,  488,  Whitney,  E.

Miller,  Dr.  Samuel.  II,  311,  Edicards,  J.;  quoted,  312.

Millerites.  the,  IV,  329,  Miller.  W.

Millet,  J.  F.,  Ill,  320,  Hunt.  W.  M.

Mill  Grove,  Pa.,  I,  117,  Audubon.

Milliken's  Bend,  Sherman  at,  II,  Til.

Millions  for  defence,  etc.,  IV,  223  ;  author  of,  V,  22,  Pinck-
ney,  C.  C.

Mills,  invention  of  machinery  for,  II,  384,  Evans,  O.

Mills,  Charles  C,  V,  663,  Stephens.

Mills,  G.  F,  III,  612,  Langtry.

Mills,  Nathaniel,  III,  196,  Hicks,  J.

Mills,  Ruth,  I,  404.

Mill  Spring,  Ky.,  battle  of.  II.  10,  Crittenden,  G.  B.:  001 ;
IV,  92,  McCook,  R.  L.\  V,  423.  Schoepf;  VI,  79,  80.

Milne-Edwards,  I,  35.

Milnes,  Sir  Robert  S.,  V.  109,  Prescott,  Robert.

Milton,  Mass.,  in,  332,  333.

Milton,  John.  II,  262,  Dunster,  H.;  Ill,  129.

Milton,  Rev.  William,  VI,  161,  Trollope.

Milwaukee,  Wis.,  first  white  settler  in,  III,  488,  Juneau  ;
Catholic  institutions  in,  160,  Heiss  ;  169,  Henni ;  debt  of,
railroad  interests,  IV,  342,  Mitchell,  A.  ;  riots  in,  V,  351,
Rush,  J.  M.

Minardi,  Tomaso,  II,  759,  Gregori.

Minas  Gieraes,  gifts  to  hospital  of,  IV,  310,  Mesquita,  Jose"
Francisco  de.

Mind  reading.  I,  205,  Beard.

Miner,  Mrs.,  IV,  330,  Miller,  W.

Mineralogy,  II,  637,  Gibbs ;  researches  in,  V.  528,  529  ;  573,
Smith,  J.  L.  ;  collection,  VI,  162,  Troost ;  III,  267,  Ho-
sack,  D.  :  VI,  449,  Wheatley.  discovery  of  new  minerals,
628-629,  Wurtz.

Miners,  law  governing,  II,  448,  Field,  S.  J.

Minerva,  the,  VL  417,  Webster,  N.

Mines,  first  worked  by  Europeans  in  America,  II,  166,  Diaz,
M.  ;  gold  and  silver,  II,  400,  Fair  ;  U.  S.  system  of  sub-
marine, I,  4,  Abbott,  H.  L.  ;  hydraulic  mining,  VI,  61,
Temple,  J.

Mines,  Rev.  John,  TV,  336,  Mines,  F.  S.

Mingoes,  war  with  the,  IV.  5,  Logan,  John.

Miniature-painting,  IV.  180,  Malbone.

Minisink,  massacre  at,  I.  359,  Brant.

Ministers'  libraries,  fund  for,  III.  306,  Huidekoper,  F.

Minister's  Wife,  a,  pen-name,  I.  220.

Minister's  Wooing,  the,  original  of  a  character  in,  III,  258,
Hopkins,  S.

Minneapolis,  Minn.,  school  of  fine  arts,  VI.  306,  Volk.  S.  A.
D.  ;  flour-mills  of,  VI,  371,  Washburn,  C.  C.  ;  orphans'
home  at,  371,  Washburn,  C.  C.

Minnesota,  Catholic  colonies  in,  III,  355,  Ireland.  John  :
Catholic  institutions  in,  V,  456,  Seidenbush  ;  railroads  of.
Ill,  293,  Hubbard,  L.  F.  ;  Episcopalian  institutions  in,
562,  Knickerbocker,  D.  B.  ;  exploring  expedition.  V,  OS.
Pope,  John  ;  Sioux  lands  in,  168,  Ramsey,  A.  :  cession  of
Indian  lands  in.  235.  Rice,  H.  M.  ;  territory  formed.
railroad  bonds  of.  Sioux  rising  in,  pioneer  of.  522.  Sib-
ley, H.  H.  ;  purchases  from  the  Chippewas,  598,  smith.
W.  R.  ;  pioneer  of,  VI,  692.  Le  Due.

Minnesota,  the,  burning  of,  II,  540,  Freeman,  F.

Minniesland,  I.  118.

Minon,  Gen.,  III.  403.  Jarauta.

Minor,  Francis,  rv.  337.  Minor,  V.  L.

Minorca,  capture  of,  by  the  French,  IV,  468.  Murray,  James.

Minot's  Ledge  light-house,  I,  46,  Alexander,  B.  S.  ;  VI,  11,
Swift,  W.  H.


MINT


MONTEIL


763


Mint,  the  U.  S.,  first  gold  coined  at,  II,  150,  De  Saussure.

Minthorne  farm,  the,  V,  171,  Randall,  R.  R.

Minute  Philosopher,  the,  II,  445,  Fessenden,  T.  G.

Mirabeau,  1, 454,  Burke,  A.  ;  author  of  his  works  on  finance,
638,  Claviere.

Miracles,  I,  250,  Bertrand  ;  reported,  III,  629,  UAuberi-
viire  ;  IV,  497,  Neumann  ;  VI,  59,  Tegakouita.

Miraflores,  battle  of,  III.  594,  Lagos  ;  617,  La  Puerta.

Miranda,  Pedro  de,  III,  295,  Huden.

Mirepois,  Duke  of,  III,  219,  Hjorn.

Mischianza,  the,  I,  557,  Cathcart,  W.  S.  ;  III,  280,  Howe,
W.  ;  of  1778,  the,  VI,  447,  Wharton,  Joseph.

Mis-kwa-bun-o-kwa,  VI,  32,  Tanner,  J.

Missionary,  the,  IV,  068,  Pasmvant.

Missionary  Herald,  the,  IV,  424,  Morse,  J.

Missionary  Register,  the,  III,  708,  Lewis.

Missionary  society.  American,  gift  to,  V,  319,  Root,  D.

Mission  Ridge,  battle  of,  II,  394,  Ewing,  H.  B.  ;  V,  191,
Rawlins  ;  498,  504  ;  VI,  343,  Walthall.

Missions,  American  board  of,  IV,  333,  Mills,  S.  J.  ;  540,
Nott,  S.  ;  formation  of,  504,  Newell,  S. ;  Protestant  Epis-
copal, 563,  564,  Ogilvie  ;  685,  Payne,  J.  ;  V,  419,  Scheres-
chewsky ;  445,  Seabury ;  613,  Southgate  ;  685,  Stewart,
J.  C.

Missions,  to  Asia,  II,  115,  Dean,  W.  ;  to  Indians,  116,
Deane,  James ;  231,  Dreuiilettes ;  Moravian,  III,  157,
Heckewelder  ;  Spanish,  I,  596,  Chavez.  See  also  under
names  of  religious  denominations  and  orders.

Mississippi  bubble,  III.  637,  Law,  John.

Mississippi  company,  IV,  542,  Noyan  ;  VI,  660,  Zenon.

Mississippi  river,  the,  American  rights  on,  IV,  165  ;  closing
of,  by  Spain,  VI,  511,  Wilkinson  ;  defences  of,  II,  416;
discovery  of,  153,  De  Soto  ;  590,  Garay,  F.  de  ;  III,  168,
Hennepin  ;  621,  La  Salle  ;  IV,  213-214,  Marquette  ;  294,
Membre.  ;  discovery  of  the  sources  of,  422,  Morrison,  W.;
exploration  of  the  upper,  I,  9,  Accault ;  V,  425,  School-
craft, H.  R.;  VI,  89,  Thompson,  D.;  engagements  on,
II,  94,  Davis,  C.  H.  ;  delta,  survey  of,  III,  314,  Hum-
phreys, N.  A.;  expedition  to  the  mouth  of,  339,  Iber-
ville ;  exploration  of,  461,  Jolliet  ;  477,  Joutel  ;  contro-
versy on,  ibid. ;  exploration,  V,  19,  Pike,  Z.  M. ;  improve-
ment of,  II,  287,  Ends ;  V,  277,  Roberts,  W.  M.;  attempt
to  turn  the  course  of,  II,  712,  opened  to  the  National
forces,  713  ;  missions  on,  IV,  373,  Montigny,  F.  J.

Mississippi  scheme,  the,  V,  221,  Renault.

Mississippi  state,  grant  and  settlements  in,  claims  of  set-
tlers, "IV,  542,  Noyan  ;  territory  of,  state  constitution,  V,
48,  Poindexter  ;  colony  of  military  adventurers  in,  IV,
61,  Lyman,  P.;  grant  of  land  in,  VI,  285,  Veuillot ;  riots
in,  I,  64,  Ames,  A. ;  repudiation  by,  V,  107,  Prentiss,  S.  S. ;
decision  regarding  liability  of,  435,  Scott,  C.

Mississippi  valley,  exploration  of,  supposed  Mexican  tribe
in,  V,  367,  Sageau  ;  claims  to,  III,  409,  410  :  taken  pos-
session of,  for  France,  622  ;  French  settlements  in,  IV,
529,  Nogaret ;  proposal  to  divide  between  Spain  and
England,  II,  532.  533  ;  rights  of  United  States  in,  I,  19  ;
secured  to  the  United  States,  III.  377  ;  first  church  and
college  in,  II,  640,  Gibson,  R.  L.;  scientific  exploration
of,  IV,  517,  Nicollet.

Mississippi,  the,  steamer,  II,  416,  417 ;  burned,  V,  580,
Smith,  M.

Mississippi,  the,  transport,  II,  666.  Glisson. ■

Miss  Malony  on  the  Chinese  question,  II,  194,  Dodge,  M.  M.

Missouri  compromise,  the,  I,  26 ;  271,  Bissell,  W.  H. ;  641  ;
II.  98,  Davis,  J. ;  214,  215  ;  VI,  84,  Thomas,  J.  B. ;  194, 199  ;
Calhoun's  view  of.  I,  501,  504;  repeal  of.  586;  II,  513,
Foster,  L.  S. ;  III,  716  ;  effect  of  repeal,  I,  434  ;  proposed
restoration  of,  435.

Missouri  Pacific  railroad,  the,  II.  610,  Garrison,  C.  K.

Missouri  river,  head-waters  of.  Ill,  706,  Lewis,  M.

Missouri  state  and  territory,  admission  of,  I,  241  ;  debate
on  the  admission  of,  V,  274,  Roberts.  Jonathan  ;  III,  706,
Lewis,  M.\  Catholic  institutions  in,  160,  Helias  ;  229,  Ho-
gan.  J.  J.;  VI,  694,  Menard,  B.;  educational  institutions
in,  II,  239,  Dubourg  ;  242,  Duchesne ;  first  public  school
in,  I,  91,  Armstrong,  D.  H;  old  land-titles  in,  III,  732,
Linn,  L.  F.;  saline  and  mineral  lands  of,  I,  241  ;  slavery
abolished  in,  II,  482,  Fletcher,  T.  C. ;  botanical  garden,
V.  1S5,  Shaw,  H. ;  capture  of  state  troops  of,  1. 280,  Blair,
F.  P. ;  in  the  civil  war,  II,  547,  Fremont ;  587,  Gamble,  H.
R. ;  III,  49  ;  385,  Jackson,  C.  F.;  IV,  68;  V,  40,  Pleason-
ton.  A.;  69,  Pope,  J.;  524  ;  state  university,  313,  Rollins,
J.  8. :  Mormon  war  in,  576,  Smith,  Joseph.

Mitchel,  Frederick  A.,  IV,  342,  Mitchel,  O.  M.

Mitchell,  Mt.,  II,  323.

Mitchell,  Charles  S..  IV,  225.  Marshall,  T.

Mitchell,  John,  V,  490.  Sheppard,  M.

Mitchell,  Louis,  IV,  347,  Mitchell,  D.  G.

Mitchell,  Dr.  S.  L.,  IV.  326.  Miller,  E.

Mitchell,  Samuel  S.,  VI,  694,  Mitcliell,  L.  M.

Mitchell,  Mai.  W.  G..  Ill,  73.

Mitchell's  High  Peak,  his  grave  on,  illustration,  IV,  343,
Mitchell,  E.

Mitl,  King,  VI,  635,  Xiutlaltzin.

Mitlatoyuca,  ruins  of.  II,  592,  Garcia-Cubas.

Mitrailleuse,  the,  I,  638,  Claxton.  F.  S.

Mnacedeus,  the,  tribe  of.  III.  524,  Kcr.

Moab,  Bedawins  of,  V,  191.  Rawson.  A.  L.

Mobile,  I,  259,  Bienville  ;  III,  339,  Iberville  ;  engagement


at,  between  Indians  and  Spaniards,  II,  153,  De  Soto  ;  re-
moval of  colony  to,  IV,  525.  Nivelles  ;  capture  of  (1780),
II,  585,  Gdlvez,  B.;  occupied  by  Jackson,  III,  376  ;  move-
ment against,  proposed  by  Grant,  II.  713  ;  Banks  to  oper-
ate against,  713  ;  Canby  sent  to,  715  ;  surrendered,  717  ;
VI,  71.  Thatcher,  H.  K. ;  medical  college  at,  IV,  540,  Nott,
Josiah  C.

Mobile  bay,  removal  of  torpedoes  in,  II,  18,  Crosby,  P.;
defences  of,  and  battle,  11,417  ;  3,  Craven,  T.  A.  M.;  Ill,
538,  Kimberly  ;  IV,  457,  Mullany,  J.  R.  M.;  639,  Palmer,
James  C.

Mobley's  meeting-house,  engagement  at,  IV,  90.  McClure,  J.

Modocs,  treachery  of  the,  I,  518,  Canby  ;  surrender  of  the,
H,  103,  Davis,  J.  C;  war  with.  650,  Gillem.

Moffat,  Rev.  John,  IV,  351.  Moffat,  J.  D.

Moffatt.  Dr.  Thomas.  V,  461,  Senter.

Moffette,  Margaret,  III,  274,  Houston,  S.

Mohawks,  the,  III,  165,  Hendrick;  II,  481,  Fletcher,  B.;
war  with  the  French  and  Hurons,  III,  435,  Jogues  ;  II,
696,  Goupil ;  missions  to  the.  545,  Fremin  ;  IV,  58,  Lydius,
J.;  287,  Megapolensis  ;  461,  Munro,  H.;  563-564,  Ogilvie,
J.;  language,  books  in,  I,  421,  Bruyas  ;  translations  into,

II,  539,  Freeman,  B. ;  castle,  taken,  589,  Gansevoort,  P.
Mohawk  Dutch  language,  the,  IV,  692,  Pearson,  J.
Mohegans,  the,  II,  471,  Fitch,  James  ;  war  with  the  Narra-

gansetts,  IV,  313,  Miantonomo  ;  VI,  208,  Uncas.
Moina,  pseudonym,  II,  180,  Dinnies.
Moira,  Earl  of.  III,  144,  Hayne,  I.;  V,  188,  Rawdon.
Mojonera,  battle  at,  I,  745,  Corona  ;  IV,  30,  Losada,  M.
Molang,  Capt.,  V,  140.
Molineux,  map  by,  III,  297.

Molino  del  Rey,  battle  of,  Grant  at,  H,  709  ;  V,  441.
Moll,  John,  III,  188.  Herman,  E.  G.
Mollie  Maguires.  the,  II,  699,  Gowen  ;  HI,  490,  Kaercher ;

V,  26,  Pinkerton.
Molson,  Thomas,  IV,  354,  Molson,  W.
Molybdates,  H,  638.  Gibbs,  O.  W.
Mompesson,  Rev.  W.,  IV,  354,  Mompesson,  R.
Monarchy,  preferences  for,  in  America,  III,  420.
Monastic  orders,  abolished  in  Honduras,  IV,  389,  Morazan.
Moncada,  Marquis  of,  IV,  335,  Mina.
Monclova,  Count  of,  IV,  482,  Navarra  ;  city  of,  V,  82,  Por-

tocai~rero.
Moncrieff,  Rev.  A.,  HI,  164,  Henderson,  M.
Moncure,  Rev.  John,  VI,  594,  I^ood,  J.  M.
Mondelet,  Dominique,  IV,  356,  Mondelet,  C.  J.  E.
Monell.  Joseph  D.,  IV,  356,  Monell,  C.  L.
Money-makers,  anonymous  novel,  IH,  500,  Keenan,  H.  F.
Monglave,  M.  de,  H,  270,  Durao.
Mongroveio,  T.  A.,  VI.  1&5,  Toribio.
Monitor,  the,  illustration,  H,  365,  Ericsson  ;  building  of  the,

III,  3,  Griswold,  J.  A.;  VI, 570,  Winslow,  J.  F.;  fight  with
the  Merrimac,  II,  749,  Greene,  S.  D. ;  VI,  614,  Worden  ;
incident  on,  IV,  507,  Newton,  I. ;  foundering  of,  I,  158,
Bankhead,  J.  P.

Monitor's  Letters,  the,  III.  666,  Lee,  A.

Monitors,  plates  for,  I,  6,  Abbott.  H. ;  revolving  turrets  and
lift  for,  invention  of,  VI,  543,  Wilmarth,  S.

Monk,  Gen.,  I,  95,  96.

Monk  Lewis,  sobriquet,  HI,  706,  Lewis,  M.  G.

Monk,  Lord,  IV,  104,  Macdonald,  J.  S.

Monklands,  II,  319,  Elgin.

Monk's  Corner,  battle,  IH,  300,  Huger,  I.  ;  V,  &5,  Postell.

Monmouth,  battle  of,  I,  48,  Alexander,  W.\  662.  Clinton,
H;  II,  174,  Dickinson,  P.;  708,  Grant,  J:  751  ;  165,  Hen-
derson, T. ;  587  :  660  ;  IV.  325,  Miller,  H ;  V,  166,  Ramsay,
N. ;  669  ;  VI,  398,  Wayne  ;  incident  of,  695,  Molly  ;  monu-
ment, III,  507,  Kelly,  J.  E.

Monmouth  college,  gift  to,  III,  79,  Harding,  A.  C.

Monocacy,  battle,  II,  290.  Early,  J.  A.;  VI,  334,  Wallace,  L.

Monod,  Rev.  Frederic,  IV,  357,  Monod,  T.

Monongahela,  floating  of  the,  II,  87,  Davidson,  T.

Monroe.  Andrew,  IV,  362,  Monroe,  James.

Monroe,  James,  home  at  Oak  Hill,  illustration,  IV,  359  ;  his
tomb,  361.

Monroe,  Spence,  IV.  358,  Monroe,  J.

Monroe,  Mich. See  Frenchtown.

Monroe  doctrine,  the.  I,  26.  103.  481  ;  HI,  377 :  IV,  360  ;  V,
472  ;  VI,  231  ;  violated  in  Mexico,  II,  717.

Monrovia,  site  of,  chosen.  IV,  736,  Perry,  M.  C.

Monroy,  Alonso  de,  I,  734,  Copailo  ;  HI,  295,  Huden  ;  300,
Huepon.

Monroy,  Col.,  II,  370,  Escobedo,  M.

Monsieur  Tonson,  III.  22,  Hackett,  J.  H.

Monsignori,  Dean  of,  V,  465,  Seton,  R.

Monster  of  Monsters,  the.  pamphlet,  II,  516,  Fowle.  D.

Monsters,  moral,  etc.,  famous  saying,  I,  451,  Burges.

Montagnais,  the  tribe  of,  I,  568,  Champlain.

Montaigne,  IV.  447,  Mountain.  J.

Montalban.  J.  P.  de,  II,  362,  Eranzo.

Montana,  gold  discovered  in,  V.  137,  Purple,  E.  R.

Montcalm,  monument  to,  II,  408.  Faribault,  G.  B.

Montclair,  John  W..  pen-name,  VI,  421,  Weidemeyer.

Montclova,  Count  of,  IV,  199.  Marbau.

Monte  Caseros,  battle  of,  II,  550,  Frias,  Felix;  V,  321,
Rosas  ;  VI,  218,  Urquiza.

Monte  de  las  Cruces,  battle  at,  II,  124,  Degollado.

Montefiore,  Moses  V..  IV,  365.  Montejiore,  J.

Monteil,  Amans,  quoted,  IV,  646,  Parent,  P.


764


MONTE


MORTLAKE


Monte  Pinto,  battle  at,  I,  694,  Colocolo.

Montepio,  the,  I,  428,  Bucareli.

Monterey,  battle  of,  II,  98,  Davis,  J. ;  V,  156,  Quitman,  J.
A.;  585,  Smith,  C.  F:  VI,  54;  598,  Wood,  W.  M.;  616,
Worth,  W.  J. ;  capture  of,  II,  369,  Escobedo ;  taken  by
Com.  Sloat,  546,  Fremont.

Monterey,  Count  of,  III,  306,  Hiihne.

Montes,  I,  616,  Cinque.

Montesclaros,  Marquis  de,  II,  361  ;  IV,  298,  Mendoza  y
Luna  ;  VI,  273,  Velasco.  L.

Montesdoca,  Francisco,  IV,  392,  Morelos.

Montespan,  Madame,  II,  554.

Montevideo,  the  British  at,  II,  135,  Deliniers  ;  engagement
near,  I,  412,  Brown,  W.  ;  siege  of,  476,  Bustamente  y
Guerra  ;  IV,  235,  Martin  de  Moussy ;  (1843),  V,  266,
Rivera  ;  IV,  687,  Paz  ;  (1814),  I,  107.  Artigas  ;  (1811  and
1814),  V,  316,  Rondeau  ;  (1843-,51),  321,  Rosas  ;  capture  of
(1817)  and  revolt  in,  III,  653.  Lecor ;  occupation  of,  by
the  English,  IV,  267,  Mawe  ;  (1807),  V,  362,  Saavedra,  C;
return  of,  Vl,  480,  Whitelocke  ;  observatory,  IV,  2.35.

Montezuma,  Counts  of,  IV,  369,  Montezuma  ;  V,  400,  Sar-
miento  Valladares.

Montezumas,  the,  palace  of,  II,  585,  Odlvez,  B.

Montford,  Col.  Joseph,  III,  462,  Jones,  M.  M.

Montgomery,  James,  II,  575,  Gales,  J.

Montgomery,  James  E.,  II,  419,  Farragut.

Montgomery,  Maj.,  Ill,  654,  Ledyard,  W.

Montgomery,  Thomas,  IV,  370,  Montgomery,  R.

Montgomery,  the.  III,  324,  Hunter,  W.

Montgomery  charter,  the,  II.  129,  De  Lancey,  J.

Montgomery's  hill,  skirmish  on,  IV,  134,  Mackenzie,  W.  L.

Monthly  Abstract  of  Medical  Science,  the,  III,  146,  Hays,  I.

Monthly  Anthology,  the,  II,  343,  Emerson,  R.  W.  ;  349,
Emerson,  W. ;  386,  Everett :  V,  405,  Savage.  J.

Monthly  Magazine  and  American  Review,  the,  I,  397.

Monthly  Military  Repository,  the,  V,  558,  Smith,  C.

Monthly  Register,  Charlestown,  I,  532,  Carpenter,  S.  C.

Monthly  Religious  Magazine,  IV,  406,  Morison,  J.  H.  ;  V,
447,  Sears,  E.  H.

Monthly  Review,  the,  VI,  628,  Wright,  W.

Monticello,  Ga.,  school  founded  at,  II,  332,  Elliott,  Stephen;
raid  upon,  VI,  35,  Tarleton  :  capture  of,  in  the  Revolu-
tion, III,  418  ;  confiscation  of,  701,  Levy  ;  view  of,  Jeffer-
son's house  at,  419.

Montmorency-Laval,  Duke  of,  III,  586,  Lafayette.

Montoneros,  the,  II,  206,  Dorrego.

Montpelier,  Madison's  house  at,  illustration,  IV,  169.

Montpensier,  Mdlle.de,  II,  554.

Montreal,  Indian  attacks  on,  I,  662,  Closse ;  attempted
capture  of,  52,  Allen,  Ethan  ;  charities  in,  II,  219.  Dowd  ;
Iroquois  attack  on,  253,  Du  Lhut ;  threatened  by  the
Iroquois,  554  ;  attacked  in  the  war  of  1812,  III,  69,  Hamp-
ton; benefactions  to,  IV,  117,  McGill,J.;  founded,  178,
Maisonneu've ;  hospital  founded,  and  island  ceded,  185,
186,  Mance  ;  capture  of,  371  ;  gifts  to  institutions  of,  408,
Morrice  ;  siege  of  (1760),  468,  Murray,  James  ;  purchase
and  colonization  of,  571,  Olier ;  Catholic  institutions  in,

V,  124.  Prince,  J.  C.  ;  expedition  against,  430,  Schuyler,
P. ;  scholarship  of  music,  561,  Smith,  Sir  D.  A. ;  gift  to,

VI,  291,  Viger,  D.  B.

Montreal,  the  steamer,  burning  of,  IV.  763,  Phillips,  S.  C.

Montreal  Literary  Magazine,  the,  V,  201,  Reade.

Montressor,  Col.  John,  V,  339,  Rowson,  S.

Montressor's  island,  III,  167,  Henley,  T.

Montrose,  marquises  of,  II,  703,  Graham,  J.

Montserrat,  Eugene  de,  VI,  297,  Villermet.

Montserrat,  island  of,  capture  of  the,  I,  174,  Barras,  L.

Moodie,  Benjamin,  IV,  375,  Moodie,  J.  W.  D.

Moodie,  Mai.  James,  IV,  375,  Moodie,  J.  W.  D.

Moody,  Caleb,  IV,  377.  Moody,  S.

Moody,  Rev.  Samuel,  II,  343,  Emerson,  R.  W.

Moody.  William,  IV,  376,  Moody,  G.

Moon  Hoax,  the.  III,  751,  Locke,  R.  A.

Moor,  Joshua,  III,  678,  Legge;  VI,  455,  Wheel ock.  E.;  his

charity  school,  I,  359,  Brant ;  VI,  455,  Wlieelock,  E. ;  464,

Whitaker  N.
Moore,  Bloomfleld  H.,  IV,  379,  Moore,  C.  J.
Moore,  Elizabeth,  VI,  330,  Walker,  Thomas.
Moore,  Sir  Francis,  IV,  382,  Moore,  John.
Moore,  Sir  J.,  IV,  382,  Moore,  John.
Moore.  Joseph,  IV,  379,  Moore,  C.  L.
Moore,  Lindlev  M.,  IV,  379,  Moore,  E.  M.
Moore,  Mary  E.,  Ill,  192,  Hewitt,  M.  E.
Moore,  Robert,  IV,  384,  Moore,  W.
Moore,  Roger,  IV,  381,  Moore,  James.
Moore,  Samuel  H.,  VI,  607,  Woodward,  A.  A.
Moore,  Thomas,  II,  246.  Duff,  M.  A.;  memorial  to,  I,  605,

Childs,  G.  W.  ;  poem  attributed  to,  IV,  458,.  Muller,  A.

A.;  quoted,  VI,  498,  Wickham,  J.
Moore,  Gov.  Thomas  O.,  V,  611.
Moore,  Capt.  Walter,  IV,  46,  Lowther.
Moore,  Judge  William,  II,  366,  Erskine,  F.
Moore,  William,  III,  532,  Kidd.

Moorefield,  Va.,  engagement  at,  III,  504,  Kelly,  B.  F.
Moore  Hall.  Pa.,  IV.  383,  Moore,  W.
Moore  House,  the.  at  Yorktown.  illustration,  I,  71.").
Moore's  Creek,  battle  of,  I,  557,  Casicell ;  III,  712.  Lilting-

ton  ;  IV,  382,  Moore,  James.
Moor's  Corner,  fight  at,  II,  267,  Duquet ;  570,  Gagnon.


Moos,  Prof.,  Ill,  560.  Knapp.  J.  H.

Moose,  the  steamer,  II,  472,  Fitch,  L.

Moot  club,  the.  III,  743,  Livingston,  William.

Morales,  Bolivian  statesman,  H,  114,  Daza.

Moralist,  the,  V,  389,  Sands,  R.  C.

Moravian,  the  periodical,  V,  434,  Schweinitz,  E.  A.

Moravians,  the,  I,  212,  Bechler  :  settlements,  IV,  216,  Mar-
schall;  489,  Neisser ;  V,  214,  Reichel,  W.  C;  sus-
pected, during  the  French  wars,  towns  of,  founded,  IV,
125-126,  Mack  ;  missions,  I,  300,  Boehler  ;  IU.  7.  Qrube  :
157,  Heckewelder ;  IV,  524,  Nitschmann,  D.;  569,  Olden-
dorp  ;  V,  83,  Post ;  145,  Pyrlmus  ;  333,  Roth  ;  348,  Rundt :
417,  Schebosh  ;  455,  Seidel  ;  466,  Seuseman  ;  475,  Seyffert  ;
514,  Shober ;  519,  Schultz,  T. ;  621,  Spangenberg  ;  massacre
of  converts,  HI,  488,  Jungman.

More,  Sir  Thomas.  VI,  388,  Waterton.

Moreau,  Father,  II,  651,  Gillespie^  E.  M.

Moreland,  manor  of.  Pa.,  IV,  389,  More.

Morelia,  city  of,  founded,  IV,  298,  Mendoza,  A.  de ;  393,
Morelos.

Morelos,  I,  59,  Almonte.

Moreno,  F.  A.,  II,  314,  Egano.

Moreton,  Clara,  pen-name,  IV,  379,  Moore,  C.  J.

Morey,  Israel,  IV.  393.  Morey,  S.

Morgan,  Rev.  Abel,  III,  464,  Jones,  D.

Morgan,  Abner,  IV,  400,  Morgan,  J.  A.

Morgan,  Catherine.  II,  184.

Morgan,  Daniel,  his  home,  illustration,  IV,  397.

Morgan,  Eliza  C,  HI,  166,  Hendricks,  T.  A.

Morgan,  Esther,  III,  464,  Jones,  D.

Morgan,  Evan,  IV,  401,  Morgan,  John.

Morgan,  Col.  G.  N.,  IV,  399.  Morgan,  G.  W.

Morgan,  John,  IV,  395,  Morgan,  C.

Morgan,  Dr.  John  G.,  III.  63,  Hamilton,  F.  H.

Morgan,  John  Pierpont,  VI,  152,  -Tracy,  C.

Morgan,  Nathan,  IV,  398,  Morgan,  E.  D.

Morgan,  Peyton  R.,  IV,  400,  Morgan,  J.  A.

Morgan;  the  privateer,  II,  436,  Fernandez  de  Castro  ;  438,
Fernandez  de  Piedrahita.

Morgan  ap  Rhydderch,  III,  464,  Jones,  D.

Morgan  art  collection,  the.  IV,  395,  Morgan,  C.

Morgan  case,  the,  trial  of  Mather,  II,  764,  Griffin,  E.

Morgan  City,  La..  IV.  395.  Morgan.  C.

Morgan's  raid,  III,  223,  Hobson,  E.  H.;  605,  Landram.

Morghen,  Raphael,  H,  73,  Danforth.  M.  I.

Morison,  Rev.  John,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archibald.

Moriyama  Yenosuke,  II,  667,  Glynn.

Morley,  Samuel,  III,  14.  Gustafson.

Morlot,  A.,  quoted,  II,  96,  Davis,  E.  H.

Mormon,  book  of. See  Book  of  Mormon.

Mormonism,  the  Edmunds  act,  II,  305,  Edmunds.

Mormons,  colony  of,  I,  359,  Brannan,  S.;  in  Missouri,  II,
200,  Doniphan  ;  trial  of  Joseph  Smith,  213,  Douglas.  S.
A.;  question,  in  Utah,  215  ;  their  first  idea  of  settling  in
Utah,  545,  Fremont ;  III,  13,  Gunnison  ;  revolt  of,  455  ;
troubles  of,  493,  Kane,  T.  L. ;  apostle  of  the,  536,  Kim-
ball, H.  C. ;  proclamation  of  pardon  to,  V,  95,  Powell,  L.
W.;  the  Isaiah  of.  102-103,  Pratt ;  252-253,  Rigdon  ;
first  miracle  of,  575,  Smith,  Joseph ;  VI,  45-46,  Taylor,
John  ;  486,  Whitmer ;  removals  of,  645  ;  doctrine  or
polygamy  first  proclaimed,  645  ;  outrages  by,  645,  646.

Morna,  pen-name.  III,  585,  Ladd,  C.

Morning  Star,  the,  Karen  magazine,  IV,  240,  Mason,  F.

Morocco,  French  attack  on,  IV,  5S9,  Orleans,  F.  F.

Moroni,  angel  named,  V,  575,  Smith,  Joseph.

Morphy,  Ernest,  IV,  407,  Morphy,  P.

Morrell,  Abram.  IV,  407,  Morrell,  I.  R.

Morrin  college,  Canada,  IV.  409.  Morrin.

Morris,  Amherst,  IV,  418,  Moi-ris,  M.  P.

Morris,  Caspar,  IV,  301,  Mercer,  M.

Morris,  Capt.  C.  M.,  IV,  172,  Maffitt.

Morris,  Edmund,  IV,  419,  Morris,  T.  A.

Morris,  Elizabeth,  VI,  468,  White,  A.  W.

Morris,  Henry  Gage,  IV,  418,  Morris,  M.  P.

Morris,  Hester,  IV,  225,  Marshall,  J.  M.

Morris,  Isabella.  VI,  510,  Wilkins,  I.

Morris,  John,  IV,  419.  Morris,  T.  A.

Morris,  Lewis,  IV,  613,  Owen,  G.

Morris,  Gen.  Louis  M.,  Ill,  497,  Kearny,  P.

Morris.  Louise  A.,  I,  737.  Corcoran,  W.  W.

Morris,  Margaret,  IV.  556,  Odell,  J.

Morris,  Maria.  IV.  526,  Nixon,  J.

Morris,  Richard,  IV,  414,  Mot-ris,  L.

Morris,  Col.  Roger,- his  house,  illustration,  III,  487.

Morris.  Thomas,  IV,  417,  Morris,  H  W.

.Monis.  William,  in,  624,  Lathro/i.  F.

Morrisania,  the  Morris  house  at,  illustration,  IV.  415.

Morris  island,  operations  on,  II,  654,  Gillmore  ;  capture  of,
IV,  133,  Mackenzie,  R.  S.

Morrison,  Hugh,  IV,  421,  Morrison,  J.  C.

Morrison,  John,  IV,  421.  Morrison,  J.  W.

Morrison,  Mary  A.,  Ill,  392,  Jackson,  T.  J.

Morristown,  N.  J.,  gifts  to,  I,  666.  Cobb.  G.  T.;  Washing-
ton's headquarters  at,  III,  53,  Halsey  ;  the  Minard  home
at,  IV,  335,  Minard.

Morro  Castle,  bombardment  of.  VI,  273,  Velasco,  L.  V.

Morse,  Dr.,  Ill,  94.  Harris,  T.  M.

Mortimer,  John  Hamilton.  V.  24.  Pine.

Mortlake  manor.  Conn.,  V,  139,  Putnam,  I.


MORTON


NANCY


765


Morton,  Eliza  S.,  V,  151-152,  Quincy.

Morton,  John,  V,  152,  Quincy,  E.  8.

Morton,  Samuel,  IV,  432,  Morton,  R.

Morton,  Thomas,  IV,  429,  Morton,  C.

Morven,  estate  of,  V,  693,  Stockton,  R.

Mosandrum,  discovery  of,  V.  573,  Smith,  J.  L.

Mosby,  John  Garland,  IV,  435,  Mosby,  M.  W.

Moscheles.  1, 269,  Bishop  ;  437,  Buck,  D. ;  III,  228,  Hoffman,

R.  H;  IV,  248,  Mason,  W.;  II,  664,  Gleason.
Moscow,  the  retreat  from,  I,  167,  Barlow,  J.
Moscow,  the  pirate-ship,  capture  of,  V,  720,  Stringham.
Moseley,  Rev.  Mr.,  II,  116,  Deane,  James.
Mosely,  Edward,  II.  301,  Eden,  C.
Musi's,  sobriquet,  VI,  172,  Tubman.
Mosher.  Mrs.,  Ill,  163,  Hendee.
Mosquito  fleet,  the.  I,  147,  Batch  ;  V,  74,  Porter,  D.
Mosquito  Indians,  British  protectorate  over,  I,  431.
Mosses,  study  of. See  Bryology.
Mossop,  George,  U,  232,  Drew,  L.

Moss-type  process,  the,  invention  of,  IV,  437,  Moss,  J.  C.
Mossy  Creek,  Tenn.,  action  at,  II,  881,  Elliott,  W.  L.
Mother's  Magazine,  the.  VI.  495,  Whittlesey,  A.  G.
Motherwell.  W.,  Ill,  518,  Kennedy,  W.
Motion,  primitive  atomic,  III,  499,  Keely.
Motors,  rotary,  patent  for,  II,  255,  Du  Motay  ;  Keely's,  III,

499,  Keely  ;  a  new,  VI,  672,  Buchanan.
Mott,  Abigail,  IV,  379,  Moore.  E.  M.
Mott.  Capt.  Joan,  IV,  440,  Mott,  Gershom.
Mott,  Samuel  F.,  IV,  444,  Mott,  W.  F.
Motte,  Jacob,  IV,  445,  Motte,  I.
Mouchy,  Duke  de.  IV,  463,  Murat.
Moulton,  Sarah,  VI,  609,  Wool.
Moulton,  W.  U.,  IV,  446,  Moulton,  L.  C.
Moultrie,  Dr.  John,  IV.  446.  Moultrie,  W.
Moultrie,  Col.,  banners  given  to,  II,  33.2,  Elliott,  Susannah.
Mound-builders,  relics  of  the.  II,  95,  Davis.  E.  H. ;  works

of  the,  VI,  496,  Whittlesey.  C.
Mound  City,  the  gun-boat.  III,  535,  Kilty.
Mountain  of  Wealth,  the,  VI,  305,  Vogue.
Mt.  Alexander,  V,  635,  Spotswood.
Mount  Arthur,  LT,  741,  Greely.
Mount  Auburn  cemetery,  founded,  I.  260.  Bigelow,  J. ;  first

burial  in,  14,  Adams,  H ;  Sumner  "s  tomb  at,  illustration,

V,  747  ;  statue  in,  illustration,  VI,  573.
Mt.  Carmel,  111.,  I,  209,  Beaucluimp.
Mt.  Chalten,  discovery  of,  IV,  393,  Moreno,  F.
Mount  Desert  island,  grant  of,  I,  247,  248,  Bernard  ;  colony

on,  254,  Biard  ;  lord  of ,  493,  Cadillac  ;  mountain  railway,

IV,  219,  Marsh,  Sylvester  ;  Jesuit  mission,  249,  Masse.
Mount  Etna,  survey  of,  IV,  741,  Peters,  C.  H.  F.
Mt.  Fujiyama,  expedition  to,  VI,  125,  Todd,  D.  P.
Mt.  George.  V,  635,  Spotswood.
Mount  Hamilton,  Cat.,  observatory  on.  III,  709.
Mount  Holyoke  seminary,  founder  of,  IV,  67,  Lyon,  M.\

gifts  to  VI,  541,  Williston.S.
Mount  Hope,  R.  I.,  IV,  756.  757.
Mount  Kosciuszko.  name  of.  Ill,  573.
Mt.  Loquillo,  IV,  23,  Loquillo.
Mount  Loretto  farm,  H.  224,  Drumgoole.
Mt.  McGregor,  N.  Y.,  house,  illustration.  II,  721.
Mount  Morris,  Jane  Grey  school  at,  II,  535,  Franklin,  T.  L.
Mt.  Orizaba,  eruption  of,  V.  82.  Portocarrero.
Mount  Pinto,  battle  at,  I,  560,  Caupolican.
Mount  Pitt,  HI,  471,  Jones,  T.
Mt.  Rigi,  railway  on,  IV,  219,  Marsh,  Sylvester.
Mt.  St.  Mary's  of  the  West,  seminary,  V,  136.  Purcell.
Mount  Sinai  hospital,  founder  of,  V,  542,  Sirnson.
Mt.  Tepeyac,  appearance  of  the  Virgin  on,  VI,  226,  Vale-

riano.
Mt.  Vernon,  name,  VI.  280.  Vernon,  E. ;  374  ;  purchase,  V,

367,  Sage,  R.;  VI,  382,  385,  Washington,  J.  A.;  H,  387,  388.
Mt.  Washington,  first  ascent  of.  H,  47.  Cutler,  M. ;  meteoro-
logical station  on,  III,  217,  Hitchcock,  C.  H. ;  railway,  IV,

219,  Marsh,  Sylvester  :  illustration,  219.
Mt.  Wollaston.  IV,  433,  Morton,  T. ;  V,  150,  Quincy,  E.
Moura,  Caetano  L.  de,  pen-name,  IV,  20,  Lopes.
Mourt,  George,  IV,  429,  Morton,  G.
Moustier,  Count,  quoted,  VI,  380.
Mowat,  John,  IV,  449,  Mowat,  O.
Mo  watt,  James,  IV,  450.  Mowatt,  A.  C.
Mowers,  invention  of,  I,  151,  Ball,  E.\  n,  52,  Daboll :  HI,

425,  Jenckes,  J. ;  602,  Lamson,  D.  L. ;  VI,  597,  Wood,  W.  A.
Moxo,  H.  542,  Freites.
Moxon,  Rev.  George,  V,  144,  Pynchon.
Moxos  Indians,  HI,  713,  Lima,  M.;  IV,  199,  Marbau.
Moynette,  Anne,  I,  117.  Audubon.

Mrs.  Limber's  Raffle,  anonymous  novel,  1, 477,  Butler,  W.  A.
M'Tse,  King.  IV,  8,  Long,  C.  C.
Mucke,  pupil  of.  IV.  430,  Hosier.
Mucuritas,  battle  of,  IV,  623.  Paez.
Mudge,  Lewis  G.,  Ill,  218,  Hitchcock,  R.  D.
Mudge,  Samuel.  IV,  452.  Mudge  A.
Mudsill  Hammond,  sobriquet,  III.  67,  Hammond,  J.  H.
Mudwall  Jackson,  I,  122,  Averell.  W.  W.
Muhlenberg,  Dr.  Gotthilf.  III.  579,  Kurtz,  J.  D.
Muhlenberg,  Henry  W..  IV,  455,  Muhlenberg,  W.  A.
Muhlenberg,  Nicholaus.  IV,  452.  Muhlenberg.  H.  M.
MUhlenberg  college. 1. 381 .  Brobst :  IV, 455, Muhlenberg, F.  A.
Muirson,  Rev.  G.,  HI,  155,  Heathcote.


Mulberry  grove  plantation,  n,  753.

Muldor,  Carl  de,  pen-name,  IV,  325,  Miller.  Charles  H.

Mullens,  Priscilla,  I,  42,  Alden,  John  ;  V,  644,  Standish,  M.

Muller,  Alfred  J.,  VI,  396,  Way.

Muller,  Bernard,  V,  184,  Rapp.

Muller,  Johann,  I,  222,  Behaim.

Muller,  Johannes,  I,  35.

Muller,  John  von,  HI,  550,  Kinloch.  F.

Mulligan,  J.  W.,  Ill,  204,  Hill,  Frances  M.

Mulligan  letters,  the,  I,  277.

Mullins,  Rosina  E.,  HI,  692,  Leprohan.

Multitubular  boiler,  the,  V,  199,  Read,  N.

Mumford,  Anna,  H,  323.

Mumford,  William,  I,  478,  Butler,  B.  F.;  hanging  of,  II,  100.

Munck,  Ernst  de,  IV,  674,  Patti,  C.

Mundo  Nuevo,  El,  review,  V,  25,  Piileyro.

Mundy,  Gen.  Godfrey  B.,  V,  301,  Rodney.

Munford,  Col.  Robert,  IV,  459,  Munford,  W.

Munguia,  Bishop,  HI,  580,  Labaatida.

Munkacsy,  M.,  picture  by,  HI,  689,  Lenox,  J.;  pupil  of,  VI,
185,  Turner,  C.  Y.

Munon,  Domingo,  I,  606,  Chimalpain.

Munoz,  viceroy  of  Mexico,  IV,  722,  Peralta,  G.

Munson,  Dr.  Eneas,  quoted,  III,  30,  Hale,  N.

Munson,  Henry  A.,  IV,  428,  Morse,  S.  E.

Munson,  Margaret  E.,  V.  391,  Sangster,  M.  E.

Munson,  Rev.  Samuel,  IV.  60,  Lyman,  H.

Mur,  M.,  II,  242,  Ducrue.

Murat,  Joachim,  king  of  Naples,  IV,  462,  Murat,  N.  A.

Muratori,  Ludovico,  IV,  481,  Navailles.

Murchison,  Sir  Roderick,  H,  241,  Du  Chaillu.

Murdaugh,  John  W.,  II,  221,  Downing,  F.  M.

Murdoch,  Beamish,  I,  38.  Akin.

Murdock,  Rev.  George,  IV,  464,  Murdoch,  W.

Murfree.  William,  IV,  464,  Murfree,  H.

Murfreesboro,  Tenn.,  IV,  464,  Murfree,  H.;  battle  of,  VI,
80. See  also  Stone  river.

Murietta,  Joaquin,  IV,  325.  Miller,  Cincinnatus  H.

Murillo  of  Mexico,  the,  III,  338,  Ibarra,  J.

Murphy,  Tim,  II,  537,  Fraser,  S.

Murphy,  Thomas  T„  IV,  465,  Murphy,  B.

Murray,  Anthony,  of  Crieff,  IV,  467,  Murray,  A.

Murray,  Augustus  C,  VI,  321,  Waldersee.

Murray,  John,  price  paid  for  Irving's  books,  HI,  361.

Murray,  J.  A.  H.,  IH,  40,  Hall,  F.

Murray,  Robert,  IV,  470.  Murray,  L.

Murray,  William,  IV,  468,  Murray,  John.

Murrell,  John  A.,  V,  687,  Steivart,  V.  A.

Murrey,  Humphrey,  IV,  408,  Morrey.

Murthley  castle,  Indian  paintings  at,  IV,  325,  Miller,  A.  J.

Muscipula,  anonymous  book,  V,  122,  Prime,  B.  Y.

Muscovy  company,  the,  HI,  296,  Hudson,  H.

Museum  of  foreign  literature,  in,  737,  Littell,  E.

Museum  of  natural  history,  New  York,  zoological  collec-
tion in,  IV,  498,  Neu-wied.

Musgrove,  Mary,  I,  323,  Bosomworth.

Musgrove  Mill,  engagement  at,  IV,  109,  McDowell,  C. ;  V,
492,  Shelby.

Mushet,  Robert,  H.  272,  Durfee,  Z.  8.

Mushir,  rank  of,  IH,  221,  Hobart,  A.  C.

Music,  teaching  of.  IV.  247,  Mason,  L. :  first  printed  with
movable  types,  III,  233,  Holden,  O.;  VI,  82,  Thomas,  T;
books,  controversy  on,  HI,  248,  Hooker,  E.  W. ;  prodigy
in,  VI,  129,  Tom  ;  tonic  sol-fa  system,  V,  470.  Seivard,  T.
F. ;  festivals,  n, 63,  Dam rosch ;  fund  society,  127,  Delafield,
John ;  instruments,  first  dealer  in,  in  A  menca,  1, 112,  Astor;
invention  of,  automatic.  H.  582,  Gaily  ;  IV,  171,  Maelzl ;
VI,  672,  Buchanan  ;  institutes,  V,  320.  Root,  G.  F. ;  jour-
nals, establishment  of,  470,  Seward,  T.  F. ;  notation,  pro-
posed system  of,  in,  636,  Law,  A.;  inventor  of  a  system
of.  V,  676,  Stevens,  E.

Musical  Magazine,  the,  HI,  112,  Hastings,  T.

Musical  periodical,  the  first,  III,  636,  Law,  A.

Musical  Year-Book,  VI,  548,  Wilson,  G.  H.

Music  of  light,  the,  VI,  672,  Buchanan.

Musket,  invention  of  a  breech-loading,  n,  433,  Ferguson,  P.

Muspratt,  Dr.  J.  S.,  H,  42,  Cushman,  8.  W.

Mussel  bay.  HI,  371,  Iwert.

Mussey,  John,  Vl,  6,  Sweat,  M.  J.  M.

Mustapha,  III,  363,  Irving,  William.

Muter,  George,  V,  492,  Shelby.

Muzo,  city  or,  founded,  HI,  603,  Lauchcro.

Myer,  Elizabeth,  V,  218.  Reily.  J.

Myers,  Dr.  Theodore,  IV,  474.  Myers,  S.  A.

Myles's  garrison,  IV,  474,  Myles,  J.

Myroxylum,  the,  IV,  472,  Mutts.

Myrtle,  Minnie,  pen-name,  IV,  325.  Miller,  M.  D.

Mystic  river,  Pequot  forts  on  the,  IV,  214,  Mason,  John,

Nacaxoe.  King.  VI.  140.  Totepehu.

Naehan,  ancient  city  of.  VI.  308.  Votdn.

Nahant,  the  iron-clad.  in.  84.  Harmony.

Nails,  machines  for,  I.  341,  Boyden,  8.  ;  III,  536,  Kimball,
I.  ;  V,  200,  Read,  N.  ;  invention  of.  I.  670.  Cochran,
James  ;  process  for  making,  IV.  729,  Perkins,  Jacob.

Nain,  Pa.,  founded.  IV,  126,  Mack.

Nairne.  Baroness,  III,  614,  Lansdowne.

Namozine  Church,  fight  at.  II.  45.  Custer.

Nancy,  the  brig,  capture  of,  IV,  188,  Manley,  J.


766


NANTUCKET


NEPTUNE


Nantucket,  founded,  I,  677,  Coffin,  T. ;  II,  490,  Folger,  P.  :
purchase  of,  III,  330,  Hussey.

Napier,  Capt.  W.,  IV,  151,  MacNab.

Naples,  spoliation  claims  paid  by,  IV,  736,  Perry,  M.  C.

Napo  river,  IV,  588,  Orellana  ;  V,  36,  Pizarro,  G.

Napoleon  I.,  II,  439,  Ferrand  ;  II,  264  ;  designs  to  rescue,
from  St.  Helena,  III,  676,  Lefebvre  ;  745,  Livingston.  R.
R. ;  offers  of,  to  Lafayette,  III,  589  ;  proposal  to  liberate,
597.  Lallemand  :  IV,  390.  Moreau  ;  at  Elba,  IV,  497.  Ne.u-
ville  ;  bequests  by,  V,  252,  Rigaud,  A.

Napoleon  III.,  gift  from,  II,  524,  Francis,  J.  ;  his  interven-
tion in  Mexico,  IV,  268,  Maximilian  ;  his  sympathy
with  the  southern  confederacy,  II,  422,  Faulkner ;  IV,
403.  Murat,  N.A.;  V,  117,  Prevost-Paradol.

Napoleon,  Prince,  I,  311,  Bonaparte,  Jerome.

Napoleon  of  retreat,  I,  305  :  of  the  stump,  the,  V,  51.

Napoleonic  wars,  the,  naval  operations,  V,  245,  Richery.

Narborough  island,  IV,  478,  Narborough.

Narragansett,  St.  Paul's  church  at,  illustration,  IV.  162.

Narragansett  Indians,  the,  I,  520,  Canonicus :  III.  538,
King.  D. ;  VI,  532  :  relations  with  the  English,  war  with
the  Mohegans,  IV,  313,  Miantonomo  ;  slaughter  of,  IV,
756-757 ;  defeat  by  the  Mohegans,  VI,  209,  Uncos  ;  a
captive  of  the,  V,  338,  Rowlandson.

Narvaez.  robber-band  of,  III,  690,  Leon,  Antonio.

Nasby,  Petroleum  V.,  pen-name,  III,  750,  Locke,  D.  R.

Nash,  Arvin,  III.  599,  Lamb,  Martha  J.  R.  N.

Nashotah  seminary.  Wis.,  founded,  I.  33,  Adams,  W.;  363,
Breck  :  gift  to,  III,  249,  Hooker,  Herman.

Nashville,  Tenn.,  battle  of,  II,  715  ;  III,  293,  Hubbard.  L.  F.  ;
IV.  73,  McArthur,  J.  ;  VI,  81  :  Polk's  home  at,  illustra-
tion, V,  53  ;  site  of.  56,  Polk,  W.  ;  founded,  besieged,  279,
Robertson,  J.  and  C.  ;  Vanderbilt  university  at,  illustra-
tion, VI,  241  ;  gifts  to,  polytechnic  institution  founded
in,  VI,  388,  Watkins.  S.

Nashville,  the.  II,  266,  Du  Pont ;  VI,  614,  Worden.

Nason,  Elias,  II,  526,  Frankland.

Nassau  hall,  II,  174,  Dickinson.  J.  ;  illustration,  II.  310.

Nassau  island,  discovery  of,  VI,  587,  Woert ;  ranger-gen-
eral, III,  471,  Jones,  Thomas.

Nassau,  N.  P.,  capture  of,  I,  495,  Cajigal  y  Monserrate.

Nata,  city  of,  founded,  II,  374,  Espinosa,  G.

Natchez  Indians,  the,  I,  493,  Cadillac  ;  IM,  482,  Jucherau,
L. ;  defeat  of,  699,  Le  Sueur  ;  war  with,  IV,  33,  Loubois  ;
wars  with  the  French,  IV,  529,  Nogaret ;  V,  369,  St.  Com  e  ;
slaughter  by,  381,  Salvert ;  expedition  against,  ibid.;  re-
volt against  the  French,  733,  Stung  Serpent.

Natchitoches,  fort  at.  I.  493,  Cadillac.

Natick  cobbler,  the,  VI.  548,  Wilson,  H.

National  academy  of  design,  founded,  IV,  425  ;  bequest  to,
VI,  3,  Suydam,  J.  A.

National  academy  of  sciences,  III,  314,  Humphreys,  A.  A.

National  American  party,  IV.  227.  Marshall,  H.

National  bank,  the,  I,  642,  643  ;  III,  57.  58  ;  V,  507.

National  cemeteries,  at  Arlington,  II,  45,  Custis ;  on  the
Little  Big  Horn,  44  ;  198,  Donaldson,  J.  L.

National  debt,  the,  I,  332,  Boutwell ;  increase  of,  in  Bu-
chanan's time,  V,  507.  .

National  hotel  poisoning.  Ill,  7,  Grow  ;  34,  Hale,  J.  P.

National  Liberty  party,  III,  S3,  Hale,  J.  P.

National  museum,  the,  bequest  to,  V,  185,  Rau.

National  Philanthropist,  the,  I,  691,  Collier,  W.

National  Quarterly,  the,  V,  448,  Sears,  E.  I.

National  Republican  party,  the,  dissolution  of,  V,  470,
Seward,  W.  H.

National  Republicans,  the,  I,  429,  430.

National  Union  Republicans,  the,  II.  143.  Dent,  L.

National  university,  bill  for  a,  III,  290,  Hoyt,  J.  W.

Native  Canadian,  the,  V,  242,  Richardson,  John.

Native  of  Algiers,  a,  pen-name,  IV,  211,  Markoe,  P.

Native  of  America,  a,  pen-name,  IV,  649.  Parke,  John.

Native  of  Virginia,  a,  pen-name,  I,  712,  Conway,  M.  D.

Natividad,  V,  29,  Pinzon,  V.  Y.

Natural  and  chartered  rights,  n,  73,  Dan  forth,  T.

Natural  history,  New  York  museum  of,  gifts  to,  III,  431,
Jesup,  M.  K.

Naturalized  citizens,  rights  of,  I,  103 ;  155  ;  abroad,  pro-
tection of,  277  ;  408,  Brotcn,  J.  P. ;  papers,  frauds  in,  742,
Cornell.

Natural  science,  cabinets  of,  VI,  351,  Ward  H.  A.:  fauna
of  Canada  classified,  V,  327,  Ross,  A.  M.\  New  York
lyceum  of.  m,  413,  Jay,  J.;  societies  of,  335-336,  Hyatt ;
work  of,  652-653,  Le  Conte  ;  654,  Ledru,  A.  P.

Natural  selection,  principle  of.  first  recognized,  VI,  431,
Wells.  W.  C;  theory  of,  333,  Wallace,  A.  R.

Nangatuck,  construction  of  the,  V,  675,  Stevens.  E.  A.

Naughty  Girl's  Diary,  the,  anonymous  book,  VI,  287,  Vic-
tor, M.  V.

Naumkeag.  I.  703.  Conant,  R.;  II,  355,  Endicott,  J.

Naushon  island,  I.  886.  liuu-doin,  J.

Nautilus,  the,  II,  564,  Fulton.  R.

Nauvoo,  Mormons  at,  V,  253,  Rigdon  ;  576,  Smith.  Joseph.

Naval  academy,  U.  S.,  established,  I,  155  ;  essays  leading
to  the  founding  of  a.  IV.  MB,

Naval  action,  first,  of  the  civil  war,  II,  287,  Eagle.

Naval  asylum,  the,  site  of,  IV,  706,  Pemberton,  James.

Naval  code.  American,  I.  17.

Naval  signals,  invention  of  a  system  of,  IU,  625,  Latimer,  C.

Naval  war  college,  U.  S.,  rv,  50,  Luce.


Naval  warfare,  rv,  735 ;  practice  and  principles  of,  737,
Perry,  M.  C.

Navall.  Edward,  VI,  367,  Warren,  M.

Navarrez,  Marshal,  I,  448,  Bnlucr.

Navarro,  battle  of,  II,  206,  Dorrego.

Navigation  acts,  the,  III,  333,  Hutchinson,  T.;  enforce-
ment of,  IV,  606  ;  internal,  control  of.  V,  675,  Stevens,  J.
A. ;  invention  to  improve  shallow  rivers.  673.

Navy,  U.  S.,  laws  for  improvement  of,  I,  104 ;  commis-
sioners for,  141  ;  early  operations  of,  III,  254,  Hopkins,
E.;  reduction  of,  under  Jefferson,  421  :  creation  of,  de-
partment. V,  698,  Stoddert ;  VI,  122,  Tingey  ;  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war,  142.  Toucey  :  reorganization  of,
170,  Truxtun  ;  increase  of,  in  the  civil  war.  negroes  en-
listed in,  427,  Wells,  G.;  in  the  Revolution.  497.  Wicket.

Navy  island,  n,  763,  Gridley,  P. ;  Canadian  rebels  on,  IV,
135,  Mackenzie,  W.  L.

Navy-yard  frauds,  I,  574,  Chandler,  W.  E.

Nazareth,  Barony  of,  I,  116,  Aubrey,  L.

ITazareth.  community  of,  founded,  I,  300,  Boehler.

Nazareth  Hall,  III.  685.  Lembke.

Nayarit  Indians,  the,  V,  604,  Solchaga.

Neal,  Anne,  I.  651,  Cleveland,  G.

Neal,  Rachel,  IV,  484,  Neal,  J.

Neal,  Rev.  Samuel,  VI,  514,  Willard,  Samuel.

Neale,  Col.  William,  V,  752.

Neander,  August,  I,  686,  Coleman.  L.\  HI.  262,  Hoppin,  J.
M.;  his  works  translated,  VI.  138.  Torrey.

Neave,  Sir  Richard,  V,  198,  Read,  G.

Nebraska,  bill  admitting,  III,  439;  in  the  civil  war.  addition
of  territory  to.  V,  403-404,  Saunders ;  Catholic  institu-
tions in,  IV,  565,  CGorman.

Nebulae,  discoveries  of,  V,  366,  Safford.  T.  H. ;  I,  167,  Bar-
nard, E.  E.;  VI,  11,  Swift,  L.\  ring,  theory  of,  III,  465,
Jones,  G.

Neckar,  Madame,  quoted.  IV,  495,  Nesmond,  J.  B.

Necker,  M.,  VI,  279,  Vergennes.

Neculguenu,  capture  of,  II,  26.  Cuientur.

Ned  Brace,  original  of.  I,  131.  Bacon,  E.

Ned  Buntline's  Own,  III,  485,  Judson.  E.  Z.  C.

Nedham,  Marchmont.  pen-name,  V,  151,  Quincy,  J.

Nee,  Louis,  IV,  356.  Mondesir.

Neebe,  Oscar,  V,  632,  Spies.

Needle-gun,  invention  of  an  improved.  IV,  434.  Morwitz.

Needle-women,  bequest  to.  VI,  95,  Thompson,  T.

Neff,  Mary,  II,  274,  Dustin,  H.

Negrete,  Gen.,  n,  168 ;  IV,  291,  Mejia.

Negroes,  prediction  by  Calhoun  concerning.  I,  503 ;  educa-
tion of,  313,  Bond,  H.  L.\  405;  768,  Crandall;  n.  217,
Douglass.  M.  C;  V,  492,  Sheldon,  S.\  first,  to  graduate
from  Harvard,  II,  755,  Greener ;  first  college  to  admit,
IV,  25,  Lord,  N. ;  normal  school  for,  336.  Miner,  M.\  colo-
nization of  in  Africa,  II.  8,  Cresson,  E. :  26.  Cuffee  :  IV,
736,  Perry.  M.  C;  colony  of,  in  New  York.  V,  583,  Smith,
G.;  conspiracies  of,  III,  64,  Hamilton,  James  ;  in  New
York.  266.  Horsmanden  ;  expelled  from  Georgia  legisla-
ture. I,  447,  Bullock,  R.  B.;  insurrection  of.  VI,  187,  Tur-
ner, N.;  enlistment  of,  for  the  Revolutionary  war.  261,
Varnum,  J.  M.:  first  proposal  to  enlist.  Ill,  195,  Hick-
man, J. ;  employment  of,  on  military  works,  V,  12,  Pierce,
E.  L.\  first  proposal  to  arm.  II,  271,  Durfee,  W.  F.:  IV,
751,  Phelps,  J.  W.;  V,  248,  Riddle,  A.  G.;  first  order  of
U.  S.  for  troops,  VI,  206,  Ullmann  ;  first  regiment  in  the
National  service,  III,  321,  Hunter,  D. ;  II,  444,  Fessenden,
J.  D. ;  V.  655,  Stearns,  G.  L. ;  first  regiment  from  a  free
state,  486,  Shaw,  R.  G.;  enfranchisement  of,  IV,  761;
rights  of,  I,  101  ;  suffrage,  416,  Brown  low  :  right  of  suf-
frage of  free,  in  Tennessee,  V,  666.  Stephenson  ;  constitu-
tional amendments  relating  to,  freedmen's  bureau,  III,
438,  439;  rights  to  ride  in  street-cars,  I,  99,  Arthur;
vote  to  expel  free.  II,  450,  Field,  N. :  first,  to  hold  execu-
tive office,  260,  Dunn,  O.  J. ;  the  only  colored  justice  of
New  England,  V.  342,  Ruffin,  G.  L. ;  first  senator,  224,
Revels  ;  first  made  commander  of  the  Bath,  HI,  474,
Jordan  :  gift  to  normal  school  for,  687,  Le  Moyne,  F.  J. ;
church  of  St.  Benedict  the  Moor.  II.  420  :  first  Catholic
church  for,  I,  454,  Burke,  J.  E.;  first  priest.  VI,  28,  Tal-
ton;  sculptors,  IH,  702.  Lewis,  E.\  654,  Ledru,  H.  P.;
a  slave-poet,  VI,  449,  Wlieatley,  P.

Negro  minstrelsy,  pioneer  of,'  H,  186,  Dixon,  G.  W. ;  V,
236,  Rice,  T.  D.

Neill,  Dr.  Henry,  IV,  487,  Neill.  J.

Neilson,  Samuel.  IV.  488,  Neilson.  J.

Nelson.  Lord,  gift  of  a  coffin  to.  I,  523,  Careiv  ;  quoted.  II,
56,  Dale,  R. ;  VI.  296,  Villeneuve,  Pierre.

Nelson,  Capt..  V,  570.

Nelson,  Annette.  I,  392,  Brougham.

Nelson,  Annie.  I.  410.  Brown,  G.

Nelson.  David.  V.  328,  Ross,  F.  A.

Nelson,  Joseph.  Ill,  444.  Johnson,  W.  L.

Nelson,  Lucy.  IV.  625,  Page.  Carter.

Nelson,  W..  Ill,  264,  Hornblower.  J.

Nelson,  William.  Ill,  413,  Jay.  W.\  IV,  493,  Nelson,  W.

Nelson  House,  the,  illustration,  IV,  491.

Nelson  river,  I.  484.  Button.

Nemesis,  pen-name,  IV.  539.  Norwood.

Neo-Lamarckianism,  IV,  620.  Packard,  A.  S.

Nephites,  record  of  the,  VI,  486,  Whitnur.

Neptune,  discovery  of  moon  of,  I,  313,  Bond,  W.  C.


NEPTUNE


NEW  ORLEANS


767


Neptune,  sobriquet,  II,  258,  Dunlap,  James.

Neptune,  the,  engagements  of,  III,  525,  Kerlerec.

Nereyda,  capture  of  the  privateer,  V,  73,  Porter,  D.

Nerva,  pen-name,  II,  574,  Gale,  S.

Nervous  system,  the.  experiments  and  discoveries,  II.  484,
Flint,  A.;  I,  416,  Brown-Sequard  ;  IV,  608,  Ott ;  theory
of  the,  II,  220,  Dowler.

Neshoba,  Tenn.,  colony  at,  VI,  622,  Wright,  F.

Nesmith.  Gh  W.,  V,  18,  Pike,  A.  F.

Nesselrode,  Count,  I,  429.

Nestorians,  mission  to,  II,  708,  Grant,  A . ;  IV,  730,  Perkins.  J.

Nestor  of  American  science,  the,  IV,  349,  Mitchill  ;  V,  529.
Silliman,  B.

Netawatwes,  Chief,  III,  572.  Koquethagachton.

Netherlands,  king  of  the,  II,  581,  Gallitzin.

Netzahual  Coyotl,  literary  society,  I,  10,  Acurla,  M.

Neufville,  Jan  de.  III,  666,  Lee,  W.

Neuter  Indians,  the,  I,  363,  Brebeuf.

Neutrality,  rules,  II,  721  ;  violation,  V,  216  ;  armed,  I,  18.

Neutrals,  rights  of,  V,  472.

Neuville,  Hyde  de,  IV,  321,  Milbert.

Neuwied,  Prince  of,  IV,  268,  Maximilian,  A.  P.

Neva  bridge,  the,  III,  100,  Harrison,  J.

Nevada,  mining  in,  VI,  2,  Sutro  ;  Catholic  institutions  in,
IV,  553,  O'Connell,  E.;  194,  Manogue.

Nevada  City,  orphan  asylum  in.  IV,  127,  Mackay,  J.  W.

Nevis,  island  of,  captured,  III,  339,  Iberville.

Nevers,  C.  O..  pen-name,  I,  711,  Converse,  C.  C.

New  Albion,  111.,  founded,  I,  266,  Birkbeck.

New  American  Cyclopaedia,  the,  V,  259.

New  Amstel,  colony  named,  V,  736  ;  III,  214,  Hino^oisa.

New  Amsterdam,  Dutch  church  in,  illustration,  IV,  287  ;
improvements  in,  III,  533,  Kieft ;  Indian  uprising  at,
VI,  245,  Van  Dyke,  H. ;  named,  255,  Van  Twiller  ;  poems
on,  V.  661,  Steendam.  "

Newark,  Canada,  burning  of,  IV,  90,  McClure.  G.

Newark,  N.  J.,  founded,  VI,  156,  Treat,  R.

New  Berne,  surrender  at,  IV,  93,  McCook,  R.  S. ;  occupation
of,  I,  463.

Newberry  library,  the,  Chicago,  IV,  502,  Newberry.  W.  L.

New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  gift  of  church  in,  III,  401,  Jane-
way,  J.  J.;  seminary,  gifts  to,  VI.  229,  Van  Bunschoot-
en  ;  V,  367,  Sage,  G.  A.;  grant  of,  I,  48,  Alexander,  W.\
province,  created.  Ill,  569,  Knox  ;  reforms  in,  VI,  544,
Wilmot,  L.  A.

Newburg  addresses,  the,  VI,  377.

Newburg  letters,  the,  I,  92,  Armstrong,  John  ;  III,  566.

Newburg,  Washington's  headquarters,  illustration,  VI,  378.

Newbury,  Mass.,  founded,  IV,  656,  Parker,  Thomas.

Newburyport,  scientific  school,  VI,  457,  Wheelwright,  W.

New  Caledonia,  colony  of,  IV,  670,  Paterson,  W.

Newcastle,  fort  at,  II,  383.  Evans,  J.

New  Castle,  Pa.,  gifts  to,  V,  392,  Sankey,  I.  D.

Newcomb,  Sarah,  I,  394,  Brown,  Buckminster.

New  Connecticut,  I,  647,  Cleavetand,  M.

New  Covenant,  the,  periodical,  III,  740,  Livermore,  M.  A.

New  Dorp,  S.  I.,  church  at,  VI,  242,  Vanderbilt,  W.  H.

New  Edinburgh,  town  of,  IV,  670,  Paterson,  W.

Newell,  Kate,  H,  195,  Doggett,  K.

Newell,  Ursula  S.,  II,  343,  Emerson,  J.  S.

New  England,  alleged  secession  sentiment  in,  in,  171,  Hen-
ry, John  ;  colonies,  confederacy  of  (1643),  II,  688,  Gorges,
T. ;  explorations  of,  674,  Gomez,  E. ;  first  birth  and  first
marriage  in,  VI,  474,  White,  Peregrine  ;  first  English
settlement  in,  V,  69,  Popham  ;  historic-genealogical  so-
ciety, gift  to,  466,  Sever  ;  historical  MS.  of,  124,  Prince,
T. ;  map  of  the  coast  of,  571  ;  projected  colony  in,  admi-
ral of,  571  ;  scheme  to  take,  out  of  the  union,  I,  27  ;  old-
est church,  illustration,  IV,  537  :  relief,  from  customs,
741,  Peters,  H.;  hospital  founded,  VI,  653.  Zakrzewska.

New-Englander,  the,  magazine,  VI,  610,  Woolsey,  T.  D.;
201,  Tyler,  E.  R.

New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical  Register,  III,
289,  Hoyt,  A.  H.

New  England  Journal  of  Medicine,  VI,  366,  Warren,  J.  C.

New  England  Magazine,  the,  I,  438.  Buckingham,  J.  T.

New  England  Meridian,  the,  IV,  195,  Mansfield,  J.  B.

New  England  Offering,  the,  II,  408,  Farley,  H.

New  England  Repertory,  the,  IV,  648,  Park,  John.

New  England's  Memorial,  IV.  429,  Morton,  N. ;  supplement
to,  V,  614,  Southworth,  C.

New  England  Tale,  A,  anonymous  book,  V,  451,  Sedgwick,
Caroline  M.

New  England  Weekly  Review,  the,  VI,  493,  Whittier.

New  Engleberg.  monastery  of,  I,  710.  Conrad,  F.

New  Era,  the,  magazine,  HI.  701,  Lewin.

Newfane,  the  hermit  of.  I,  397,  Brown,  D.

New  Florence.  I,  521,  Canot.

Newfoundland,  discovery  of,  I,  492,  Cabot ;  748,  Cortereal ;
American  claim  to  fisheries  of,  19  ;  apostle  of,  IV,  557,
O'Donnel,  J.  L.\  association  against  levellers,  V.  213.
Reeves,  J. ;  capture  of  St.  John  (1762),  VI,  65,  Ternay  ;
French  colonies  in,  IV.  511,  Nourrisson  ;  colony  planted
in.  II.  645.  Gilbert,  Sir  H.\  destruction  of  French  posts
in.  V,  336,  Rous ;  destruction  of  the  fisheries,  245,
Richery  ;  expedition  to  expel  the  English  from,  738,
Subercase  :  famine  in.  scene  of  a  novel,  IV,  43,  Lowell,
R.  T.  S. ;  French  captures  in,  373.  Montigny,  J.  T.  de  ;
VI,  516,  Willametz;  grant  of,  III,  554,  Kirke,  Sir  D.;


ravaged,  339,  Iberville  ;  Catholic  church  in.  V,  412,  Seal-
tan  ;  settlement  of,  VI,  268,  Vaughan,  Sir  W. ;  supposed
discovery  of.  IV,  646,  Parent,  P.

New  France,  H,  554  ;  I,  568-569,  Champlain  :  development
of,  VI,  27-28,  Talon,  J.  B. ;  history  of,  HI,  695,  Lescarbot ;
invasion  of,  554,  Kirke,  Sir  D.

New  Granada,  II,  426,  Federmann  ;  ancient  dialects  of,  V,
534,  Simon,  P.  A.;  bombardment  of  Carthagena,  IV,  126,
Mackan  ;  conquest  of,  III,  186,  Herrera  y  Olalla  ;  IV,
460,  Muiioz  de  Collantes  ;  V.  290,  Robledo  ;  descent  upon,

II,  222,  Drake,  Sir  F. ;  early  events  in,  181,  Heredia,  P.
de  ;  explorations  in,  I,  10,  Acosta,  Joaquin  ;  V,  148,
Queseda,  G.  J. ;  first  governor  in,  HI,  682,  Leiva  :  first
newspaper,  V,  301,  Rodriguez,  M.  del  S.;  gold-mines  of,

IV,  194,  Manosalvas ;  revolution  in,  I.  303-307  ;  war  in,
738,  Cordova,  J.  M. ;  war  for  independence  of,  II,  486,
Flores,  J.  J. ;  508,  Fortoul.

New  Gospel  of  Peace,  anonymous  book,  VI,  474,  White,  R.  G.

Newhall,  James  R.,  III.  701,  Lewis.  Alonzo.

New  Hampshire,  the  Allen  claim  in,  I,  55,  Allen,  Samuel ;
disputed  titles  to  lands  in,  55,  Allen,  S.\  IV,  247,  Mason,
John  ;  first  church  in,  III,  563,  Knollys  ;  founder  of,  IV,
246,  Mason,  J.;  grants,  I,  51,  Allen,  Ethan;  VI,  360,
Warner,  Seth  ;  435,  Wentworth,  B.;  H,  589,  Gansevoort,
P.;  gifts  to  charities  of,  V.  347,  Rumford,  S.;  at  the
opening  of  the  Revolution,  VI,  435,  Wentworth,  J. :  re-
ligious test  in,  V,  9  ;  senatorial  contest  in,  18,  Pike,  A.  F.;
conflicting  grants  in,  VI,  330,  Walker,  Timothy.

New  Harmony.  Ind.,  community  at,  IV,  615,  Owen.  R.  and
R.  D. :  V,  184,  Rapp  ;  project  for  school  in,  IV,  147,
Maclure.

New  Haven,  II,  83,  Davenport,  J. ;  founded.  I,  596,  Cheever  ;
attack  on,  II,  53,  Daggett.  N. ;  colony.  294,  Eaton,  T. ;
East  Rock  park,  IV,  347,  Mitchell,  D.  G. ;  Franklin  Hall
in,  V,  494,  Shepard,  C.  U. ;  I,  371.  Brewster,  James  ;  gifts
to,  371,  Brewster,  J. ;  military  hospical  in,  III,  563,  Knight,
Jonathan.

New  Hebrides,  discovery  of  the,  I,  715 ;  Erromanga,  II,
686,  Gordon,  J.  D.

New  Helvetia,  Cal.,  VI,  2,  Sutter.

New  Inlet,  N.  C,  blockade  of,  I,  550,  Case,  A.  L.

New  Jersey,  Catholic  institutions  founded  in,  I,  746,  Corri-
gan  ;  200,  Bayley,  J.  R. ;  VI,  499,  Wigger  ;  college  of,  be-
quest to,  I,  48,  Alvord,  J. ;  declaration  of  independence
in,  III,  648,  Learning,  T.;  naval  enlistments  from,  390,
Jackson.  J.  C. ;  proprietary  rights  in,  1, 485,  Byllynge  ;  the
Revolutionary  war  in,  III,  102.  Hart,  J. ;  school  fund  of,
VI,  683,  Gilchrist ;  war  debt  of,  IV,  652,  Parker,  Joel.

New  Jerusalem,  Pa.,  founded,  V,  184,  Rapp.

New  Jerusalem  Magazine,  the,  H,  122,  De  Charms  ;  V,
208,  Reed,  C.

New  Kingdom  of  Granada,  conquest  of,  II,  164,  Diaz  de
Pineda.

New  Lights,  the,  I,  357,  Brainerd,  D.  ;  VI,  478,  Wliitefield.

New  London,  attack  on,  I,  96,  Arnold,  B. ;  bishop's  palace
at,  illustration,  V,  446  ;  British  attack  on,  and  massacre
at.  III,  654-655,  Ledyard,  W.\  founded,  VI,  574  ;  destruc-
tion of.  Ill,  214,  Hinman.

New  Lusitania,  V,  615.  Souza.

Newman,  Mark  H.,  Ill,  370,  Ivison  ;  IV,  505,  Newman,
Samuel  P.

Newmarket,  Va.,  V,  466,  Sevier  ;  engagement  at,  V.  524.

New  measures,  the,  religious  movement  (1836),  IV,  217,
Marsh,  James.

New  Melleray,  monastery  of.  Iowa,  V,  599.  Smyth,  C.

New  Mexico,  Catholic  institutions  founded  in,  IH,  602,
Lamy  ;  disturbances  in,  140  :  early  exploration  in,  II,
373,  Espejo,  A.  ;  expeditions  to,  VI.  656,  Zarute,  G.;  ex-
pedition to  conquer,  VI,  665,  Zuniga.  G.  ;  invasion  of.  I,
517,  Canby  ;  mines  of,  cities  in.  Ill,  338,  Ibarra.  F.  de  ;
movement  for  admission  of,  II,  325,  Elkins,  S.  B.  ;  pro-
posed conquest  of,  VI,  653,  Zaldivar,  V.

New  Netherlands,  first  white  girl  born  in,  V,  183,  Rapaelje  ;
first  governor  of,  IV,  338,  Minuit ;  improvements  in,  dis-
sensions, boundaries,  fall  of.  V,  735, 736,  Stuyvesant ;  loss
of.  by  the  Dutch,  II.  222.  Downing,  Sir  G.  ;  reforms  in,

III,  533-534  :  first  representative  assembly  in,  534,  Kieft :
surrender  of,  to  the  English,  IV,  518,  Nicolls,  Sir  R.

New  Netherlands  Mercury,  pen-name,  VI,  250,  Van  Rens-
selaer, J.

New  Norfolk,  discovery  of,  I,  245,  Bering.

New  Orange,  II,  391,  Evertsen.

New  Orleans.  II.  271,  Durell  ;  battle  of.  1. 481 .  Ilutler,  W.  O. ;
III,  377  ;  IV,  633  ;  Pakenham,  HI,  470,  Jones,  T.  Ap  C. ;

V.  465,  Servoss  ;  first  packet  line  to  New  York  from,  V,
465,  Servoss  :  aid  of  pirates.  III.  591.  La  fit  I  e  ;  bequest  to,
II,  660,  Girard,  S.  ;  British  fleet  intended  for,  V,  216  ;
Butler's  administration  in,  I,  478  ;  capture  of  (Farra-
gut's),  IV,  728,  Perkins,  G.  H.  ;  centennial  exposition  of,
V,  241,  Richardson,  E.  ;  claims  against  the  government
in.  192,  Ray,  J.  ;  conspiracy  to  give  up,  I.  297,  Blount,
W.  ;  expedition  to  capture,  II.  415-416  ;  taken,  417 ;  ex-
position. 293,  Eaton,  J.  ;  first  building  at,  VI,  143,  Tour,
L.  B.  ;  first  northern  railroad  in.  V,  269,  Robb,  J.  :  first
Presbyterian  church  in,  III,  619,  Larned,  S.  ;  first  steam
ferry  at,  II,  146,  Derbigny :  founded,  I,  259.  Bienville  ;
fr*ee  library,  gift  to.  11,548,  French,  B.  F;  gifts  to,  V,  100,
Poydras  :  IV,  106.  McDonogh  ;  lyceum  and  library  found-
ed in,  742,  Peters,  S.  J.  ;  named,  IH,  637,  Law,  John ;


768


NEW  ORLEANS


NICOLAO


oldest  building  in,  VI,  154,  Tranche-pain  ;  plot  to  seize,  I.
708,  Connolly,  J.  :  project  for  canals  at.  IV,  543,  Noyes.
J.  O.  ;  riots  in,  in,  27,  Hahn  ;  II,  209,  Dostie  :  school  of
medicine,  V,  6,  Picton,  J.  M.  W. ;  view  of  Tulane  uni-
versity, VI,  179.

New  Orleans  Medical  Journal,  III,  100,  Harrison,  J.  H.

Newport.  R.  I.,  I,  368,  Brenton,  W.  ;  memorial  to  Berkeley
at,  I,  246  ;  French  and  English  fleets  at,  II,  376,  Estaing  ;
proposed  attack  on,  751  ;  American  retreat  from.  III,
587  ;  bequest  to  the  poor  of,  II,  2,  Cranston,  R.  B.  ;  rescue
of  the  French  fleet  from  the  blockaded  harbor,  II,  597,
Gardner,  C.  ;  settlement  of,  I,  634,  Clarke,  John  ;  first
house  in,  II,  292,  Easton,  N.  ;  Coddington's  house  at,
illustration,  I,  673  ;  founded,  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  Anne  ;
free  library  in.  738,  Little.  S.  L.  ;  treatment  of  a  heretic
in.  II,  690,  Gorton  ;  old  mill  at,  illustration,  V,  160  ;  Red-
wood library  in,  I,  246,  Berkeley,  G. ;  illustration.  V,  200  ;
gift  to,  in,  538,  King,  C.  B.

New  Princeton  Review,  the.  V,  550,  Sloane,  W.  M.

New  Providence,  capture  of,  I,  256,  Biddle,  N. ;  capture  of
forts  at,  III,  254,  Hopkins,  Esek.

Newsboys,  home  for,  III,  431,  Jesup,  M.  K. ;  lodging-house,
VI,  590,  Wolfe.

New  Smyrna,  Fla.,  VI,  184,  Turnbull,  R.  J.

New  Somersetshire,  II,  688,  Gorges,  W.

New  Spain,  II,  558,  Fuenleal ;  name  of,  II,  767,  Grijalva.

Newspaper,  first  daily,  in  U.  S.,  II,  258,  Dunlap,  John  ;  V,
92.  Poulson  ;  first  permanent  in  North  America,  I,  513,
Campbell,  J.  ;  first  religious,  V,  562,  Smith,  Elias  ;  obli-
gation to  divulge  names  of  writers  for,  V,  481,  Shanks  ;
folding-machine  for,  inventor,  V,  561,  Smith,  D.  M.

Newspaper  addressers,  inventor  of,  VI,  626,  Wright,  R.  M.

New  Stockbridge,  N.  Y.,  removal  of  Indians  to,  V,  462,
Sergeant,  J.

New  Sweden.  Ill,  238,  Campanius  ;  capture  by  the  Dutch,
V,  260,  Rising,  J.  C.  ;  736.

New  Testament,  the,  first  printed  in  America,  II,  516,
Foivle,  D.

Newton,  Abner,  IV,  507,  Newton,  I.

Newton,  Edward.  IV.  506,  Newton,  G.  S.

Newton,  Jared,  IV,  509,  Neioton,  R.  C.

Newton,  Mass.,  Eliot  memorial  at,  II,  322  ;  seminary,  gifts
to,  I,  668,  Cobb,  N.  R.  ;  I,  683,  Colby,  G.  ;  VI,  215,  Upton,
J.  ;  605,  Woods,  A.  ;  IV,  175,  Magoon.

Newton  Falls.  Ohio,  II,  237,  Dubois,  H.  A.

Newtonia,  battle  of,  III,  212,  Hindman.

Newtown,  battle  at,  V,  741,  Sullivan  ;  I,  659.  Clinton,  J.

New  Ulm,  battle  of,  II,  479,  Flandrau,  C.  E.

New  Utrecht,  church  at,  illustration.  V,  420  ;  pioneer  of,
history,  527.  Sille.

New  Wales,  III,  399,  James,  T.

New  York  city,  in  1705,  illustration,  I,  301  ;  taken  by  the
English,  534,  Carr ;  historical  society,  199,  Bayard,  S.;
gift  to,  421,  Bryan,  T.  J. ;  bequest  for  a  public  library  in,
261,  Bigelow  ;  in  1842,  392,  Brougham  ;  buildings  in  old,
198,  Bayard,  N. ;  municipal  corruption  in,  II,  240,  Ducey  ;
university,  127,  Delafield,  John  ;  oldest  building  in.  illus-
tration, 129  :  university,  442,  Ferris.  I.  ;  gift  to,  703.  Gra-
ham, J.  L. ;  benevolent  societies  in,  702,  Graham,  I. ;  Acad-
emy of  medicine,  the,  523,  Francis,  J.  W.\  bequest  to,
III,  267,  Hosack,  A.  E. ;  taken  by  the  Dutch,  H,  391,  Evert-
sen  ;  recommended  purchase  by  the  French,  143,  Denon-
ville  ;  Catholic  institutions  in,  431,  Fenwick,  E.  D.;  Ill,
571,  Kohlmann ;  230,  Hoguet ;  592,  Lafonte  ;  IV,  88,
McCloskey  ;  charter  to.  II,  200,  Dongan  ;  struggle  over
the  appointment  of  collector,  603  ;  reform  movement  in,
III,  116.  Havemeyer  ;  city  hall  in,  745,  Livingston,  E. ;  col-
lege of  the  city  of,  508.  Kelly,  R. ;  troubles  in,  after  the
English  revolution,  681,  Leisler  :  custom-house,  the.  1, 100,
101,  Arthur  ;  III,  140,  Hayes  ;  names  of  streets,  737,  Lis-
penard  :  draft-riots.  721  ;  conspiracy  in.  during  the  Revo-
lution, first  military  execution  in,  195.  Hickey  ;  hospital,
founders  of,  466.  Jones,  John  ;  commission  to  reduce  the
Dutch  at,  IV,  267,  Maverick,  S.;  public-school  system,  141,
Maclay,  W.  B. :  pathological  society,  the,  742.  Peters,  J.
C. ;  cathedral,  the.  88,  McCloskey  ;  captured  by  the  Dutch,
35,  Lovelace ;  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  349,
Mitchill :  Lyceum  of  natural  history,  349.  Mitch  ill  ;  train-
ing-school for  nurses,  332,  Mills,  D.  O. ;  University  medi-
cal college,  442  ;  gift  to  German  hospital  and  dispensary,
608,  Ottendorfer,  A  ;  historical  society,  gift  to,  765,  Phoe-
nix ;  510,  Niblo  ;  V,  28.  Pintard  :  police  contest,  IV,  200,
Mat  sell ;  view  of  old  Dutch  church  in  Garden  street.  259  ;
taken  from  the  Dutch  and  renamed,  518.  Nicolls.  Sir  R.\
Y.  M.  C.  A.,  gift  of  library  to.  510,  Niblo  :  the  Duke's  laws,
517,  Nicolls,  M.\  518,  Nicolls,  Sir  R.;  free  library  given
to,  608,  Ottendorfer.  O.;  colonial  documents  of,  I,  383,
Brodhead,  J.  R. ;  V,  705,  Stone,  W.  L. ;  Gramercy  park,
344,  Ruggles.  S.  B.;  chamber  of  commerce?  37,  Pintard,
L.\  colony  of.  first  church  charter,  459.  Sclyns  :  riots  in,
389,  Stanford ;  archives  of  the  Dutch  governors  of,  172,
Randolph,  E.\  anthropological  institute,  641,  Souicr,  K.
G. ;  alleged  bribery  of  aldermen,  482.  Sharp,  J. ;  children's
home,  rounded  in,  467,  Sevilla  ;  first  savings-bank  in,  28,
Pintard  ;  St.  Patrick's  cathedral,  illustration,  223  ;  be-
nevolent institutions  in,  founded,  246,  Richmond,  S.  A.  A. ;
Catholic  institutions  in,  146,  Quarter  ;  gifts  of  land  in.  to
charities,  855,  Rutgers  ;  St.  Paul's  church,  illustration,
129  ;  St.  Peter's  cathedral, 154, Quinn  ;  historical  so-


ciety, gift  to,  91.  Potter,  P. ;  Woman's  hospital  of,  541,
Sims,  J.  M. ;  Episcopal  institutions  in,  88,  Potter,  H. :  the
old  Park  theatre,  illustration,  536  ;  genealogical  and  bio-
graphical society,  688,  Stiles,  H.  R. ;  College  of  physicians,
first  president,  315,  Romeyn,  N. ;  gifts  to  charities  of,  818,
Roosevelt,  T. ;  319,  Roosevelt,  J.  H. ;  the  Stewart  house,  il-
lustration, 682  ;  proposed  university  for  artist  artisans.
691,  Stimson,  J.  W. ;  Friendly  club,  the,  562.  Smith,  E.  H. ;
gift  to  Presbyterian  hospital,  733,  Stuart,  R.  L. ;  the  Great
Bouwerie,  Whitehall,  the  old  Stadt  Huys,  illustration,
Stuyvesant's  tombstone,  illustration.  736;  Farragut  statue
in,  illustration,  VI,  475,  White,  Stanford  :  founder  of  tem-
perance and  charitable  societies.  Ill,  687,  Hartley.  R.  M. :
collision  between  police  forces,  592,  Wood,  F. ;  recommen-
dation of  secession,  VI,  592,  Wood,  F. ;  7th  regiment  ar-
mory, illustration,  675  ;  Worth  monument  at,  illustration,
616  ;  gift  to  charities  of,  699,  Sherred  ;  Wood  museum,
595,  Wood,  J.  R.;  gift  to  St.  Luke's  hospital,  589,  Wolfe,
C.  L. ;  Trinity  church,  reredos  in,  illustration,  584 ;  vol-
unteer institute,  established,  651,  Young,  W.  H.  H.;
Academy  of  design,  illustration,  502 ;  infirmary  founded
in,  653,  Zakrzewska  ;  frauds  in,  191,  Tweed  ;  C.  L.  Tif-
fany's house,  illustration,  113  ;  evacuation  of,  the  British
flag,  228,  Van  Arsdale  ;  Vanderbilt  houses  in,  illustra-
tion, 242  ;  the  obelisk  in,  242  ;  preservation  of  records  of,
238,  Van  Cortbandt,  A.;  surrender  of  (1664),  236,  Van
Cortlandt ;  new  park  of,  238.  Van  Cortlandt,  J. ;  gift  of
libraries,  etc.,  242,  Vanderbilt,  F.  W.  and  C. ;  Episcopal
cathedral,  242,  Vanderbilt,  C;  draft  riots,  244,  Vander-
poel ;  memorial  building  of  St.  George's  church,  illus-
tration, 152  ;  evacuation  of,  378  ;  bequest  for  public  libra-
ry, 115  ;  view  of  the  Belvedere,  270 ;  view  of  Trinity
church,  302.

New  York  state,  first  white  child  born  in,  II,  595,  Gardiner ;
public  works  in,  V,  475,  Seymour,  H. ;  political  factions
In,  VI,  230.  232  ;  sale  of  lands  in,  V,  580.  Smith,  Melanc-
ton  ;  public  works  in,  471 ;  bar  association,  the,  494,
Shepard,  E.  F. ;  proposed  negro  colony  in,  I,  405 ;  rec-
ords of,  383,  Brodhead,  J.  R. ;  Central  railroad,  limita-
tion of  fare  on,  630,  Clark,  M.  H. ;  constitution  of,  III,
744,  Livingston,  R.  R.;  constitution  adopted  by  the  con-
vention, 409  ;  new  constitution,  411,  Joy,  W.;  abolition  of
slavery  in,  413,  Jay,  W. ;  classical  names  in,  II,  160,  Be
Witt,  S.;  land  deeded  by  Indians  in,  136,  Dellius  ;  sur-
vey of  central,  163,  De  Zeng  ;  taxation  in,  IV,  35,  Love-
lace ;  grant  from  James  I.,  58,  Lydius,  J.  H. ,  land  ceded
to  Massachusetts,  752,  Phelps.  O.;  II,  668,  Gorham,  N;
claim  to  New  Hampshire  grants,  II.  235,  Duane  ;  claim
to  Vermont,  VI,  435,  Wentivorth,  B.;  proposed  seizure,
by  the  French,  28,  Talon,  J.  B.;  first  printed  description
of,  II,  143,  Denton,  D.

New  York  Gazetteer,  in,  572,  Kollock,  S.

New  York  Medical  Journal,  VI,  392,  Watson,  John.

New  York  Musical  Review,  V,  475,  Seymour,  C.  B.

New  York  Review,  UI,  122,  Hawks,  F.  L. ;  170,  Henry,  C.  S.

New  York  Review  and  AthenBeum  Magazine,  I,  425.

New  Zealand,  discovery  of,  U,  436,  Fernandez,  J.

Nez  Perce  Indians,  mission  among,  V,  618,  Spalding,  H.  H. ;
expedition  against  the,  IU,  278,  Howard,  O.  O. ;  capture
of,  IV,  323,  Miles, 'N.  A.

Niagara,  C.  W.,  burning  of,  IV,  90,  McClure,  G.

Niagara  falls,  canal  at,  II,  111,  Day,  H.  H.

Niagara  river,  first  accurate  measurement,  II.  327,  Elli-
cott :  international  bridge,  III,  20,  Gzowskie  ;  suspension-
bridge,  498,  Keefer,  S. ;  V,  303,  Roebling  ;  international
park  at,  II,  247,  Dufferin.

Niantic  Indians,  the,  war  of,  IV,  523,  Ninegret.

Niblo's  garden,  IV,  510,  Niblo.

Nicaragua,  empire,  proposed,  V,  178,  Randolph,  E.;  revo-
lution in,  I.  568,  Chamono  :  difficulty  with,  III,  237,  Hol-
lins  ;  Grey  town  harbor,  IV,  348,  Mitchell.  H.;  invasions
of,  II,  378,  Estrada  ;  436,  Fernandez,  P.;  III.  169.  Hen-
ningsen  ;  VI,  331,  Walker,  W.;  revolution  of  1869,  II,  378,
Estrada  ;  filibustering  expeditions  to,  IV,  572.  Oliphant ;
V.  9  ;  Kinney  colony  in,  VI,  651,  Young,  W.  H.  H.:  pro-
posed canal,  I,  605,  Childs.  O.  W.;  V,  21,  Pirn  ;  arbitra-
tion, 608,  Soto,  B.

Nicaragua  correspondence,  the.  Ill,  53,  Halpine.

Nicaragua  lake,  discovery  of,  IV,  523,  Nirlo,  A.

Nice,  proposal  concerning,  II,  75,  Daniel,  J.  M.

Nichan  Iftabar,  order  of,  v.  573,  Smith,  J.  L.

Nichol,  Prof.  John,  quoted,  VI,  577.  Winthrop,  T.;  IU.  C82,

Nicholas,  Jane  H.,  V,  178.  Randolph,  T.  J.

Nicholls,  Capt.  Richard,  V.  786.

Nicholls.  Thomas  C,  IV,  512,  Nicholls,  F.  T.

Nichols,  Col.  Richard.  IV,  267.  Maverick,  S.

Nichols.  Dr.  T.  L.,  IV.  513,  Nichols.  M.  S.  G.

Nichols,  Willard,  IV,  513.  Nichols,  R.  S.  R.

Nicholson,  Frances,  V,  461,  Seney,  J.

Nicholson,  Hannah,  II.  577,  Gallatin.

Nicholson,  John,  IV,  515,  Nicholson.  James  B.

Nicholson,  Nathaniel  D.,  IV,  515,  Nicholson,  J.  W.  A.

Nicholson  letter,  the,  IV,  514,  Nicholson,  A.  O.  P.

Nickajack  expedition,  the,  UI,  374.

Nickel,  first  suggested  for  small  coins,  n,  445,  Fcuch-

twanger  ;  production  of,  VI.  448,  Wharton,  J.
Nicola,  Col.  Lewis.  VI,  281,  VerpUmck,  D.  C;  377.
Nicoiao  I.,  of  Paraguay,  IV,  493,  Nenguiru.


NICOLINI


NULLIFICATION


769


Nicolini,  Ernesto,  IV,  675,  Patti.

Nicoll,  Margaret.  II,  488,  Floyd,  R. ;  IV,  70.  Mac  Adam.

Nicolls,  Margaret,  IV,  517,  Nicolls,  M.

Nicolson  pavement,  the,  IV,  518.  Nicolson,  S.

Nierker,  Ernest,  I,  41,  Alcott,  M.

Niernsee,  J.  R.,  V,  117,  Price,  B.

Nieuer  Amstel,  colony  of. See  New  Amstel.

Nieva,  Count  of,  IV,  22,  Lopez  de  Zuniga.

Nightingale,  case  of  the,  IV,  135,  McKeon.

Nightingale  of  the  Twrch,  the,  II,  306,  Edtvards,  John.

Nigromante.  El,  pen-name,  V,  165,  Ramirez,  I.

Niles's  Register.  IV,  520,  Niles,  H.

Niles,  W.  O..  IV,  521,  Niles,  H.

Nillo,  pen-name,  II.  37,  Curtiss,  A.  A.

Nina,  the,  caravel,  I,  697.

Ninde,  Rev.  W.  W  ,  IV,  522,  Ninde,  W.  X.

Nineteenth  century  club,  the,  IV,  637,  Palmer,  C.

Ninety-Six,  S.  C,  defence  of,  II,  23,  Cruger,  J.  H. ;  incident
of  the  retreat  from,  623,  Geiger ;  IV,  209,  Marion  ;  en-
gagement at,  V,  56,  Polk,  T.

Ninicapua.  Indian  town  of,  IV.  54,  Luna.

Nipmuck  Indians,  the,  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  E.

Niquihao,  engagement  at,  I,  304.

Nisan  Iftiehar,  decoration  of,  IV,  427.

Nisbet,  Dr.  James,  IV,  524,  Nisbet,  E.  A.

Nissage-Saget,  Gen.,  V,  378,  Salnave.

Nissonaquet,  III.  610,  Langlade. ■

Nitric  oxide,  discovery,  V,  120,  Priestley.

Nitrogen,  determinations  of,  V,  132,  Pugh,  Evan  ;  dis-
coverer of,  356,  Rutherford,  F.  S.

Nitrous  oxide,  discovery  of,  III,  385,  Jackson,  C.  T.  ;  first
use  of,  in  dentistry,  VI,  430,  Wells,  H.

Nivison,  Dr.  Nelson,  II,  465,  Fisher,  G.  J.

Nixon,  Richard,  IV,  525,  Nixon,  J.

Nixon,  Henry,  IV,  526.  Nixon,  J.

Noailles,  Due  de,  III,  586,  Lafayette.

Noble,  Rev.  Samuel,  II,  122,  De  Charms.

Noche  triste  tree,  the,  illustration,  I,  749.

Nocton,  capture  of  the  packet,  V,  73,  Porter,  D.

Noddle's  island,  grant  of,  IV,  266,  Maverick,  S.

No  Flint  Grey,  sobriquet,  II,  762,  Grey.

Nolin  river,  name  of,  IV,  66,  Lynn.

Nollet,  Abbe,  IIIj  550,  Kinnersley.

No  Man's  Land,  island,  II,  691,  Gosnold.

Nombre  de  Dios,  founded,  IV,  519,  Nicuesa  ;  V,  82,  Por-
tillo  ;  colony  at,  737,  Suarez,  Juan.

Nonantum,  town  of,  II,  322  ;  memorial  at,  illustration,  322.

None,  Noirot  de  la,  VI,  277,  Ventadour.

Non-importation  agreement,  the,  I,  281,  Blair,  James  ;
324,  Botetourt ;  V.  447,  Searle,  J;  603,  Snyder,  C;  reso-
lutions, I,  255,  Biddle,  C.\  IV,  241,  Mason,  G.

Non-intercourse  act,  the,  IV,  170.

Nonpareil  of  Virginia,  the,  V,  570.

Nootka,  discovery  of,  III,  87,  Haro,  G.  L.  de ;  dispute
concerning,  VI,  238,  Vancouver.

Nootka  sound,  exploration  of,  IV,  284,  Meares.

Nopal-plant,  the.  III,  327,  Huon.

Nordenskiold,  II,  137,  De  Long.

Norfolk,  Va.,  burned,  II,  260,  Dunmore  ;  navy-yard,  burn-
ing of,  VI,  159,  Trenchard,  8.  D. ;  seizure  of  press  at.  III,
244,  Holt,  John ;  capture,  VI,  291,  Viele,  E.  L.;  blockade
of  United  States  ships  at,  IV,  708,  Pendergrast.

Norfolk,  the,  ship,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,  W.

Norma,  pen-name.  I,  386,  Brooks,  J.  G.

Normal  schools,  idea  of,  I,  541,  Canter,  J.  G.  ;  first,  in
United  States,  III,  44.  Hall,  S.  R.

Normanby,  Viscount,  IV,  456,  Mulgrave,  H.  P.

Norodom,  King,  III,  29,  Haider-man.

Noronha  Freire,  Joao  de.  Ill,  475,  Jose  de  Santa  Theresa.

Noros,  Louis  P.,  IV,  522,  Nindemann.

Norridgewock,  Me.,  destruction  of.  IV,  446,  Moulton,  J.  ;
mission  at,  V,  184-185,  Rasle.

Norris,  Isaac,  II,  501,  Ford,  P.

Norris,  Thomas.  IV,  532,  Norris,  I.

Norris,  W.,  II,  766,  Griffiths,  J.  W.

Norris  party,  the,  V,  43,  Plumsted.

North,  farthest  point  reached,  HT,  752,  Lockwood,  J.  B.

North,  Lord,  quoted,  IV,  371.

North,  William  Steuben,  VI,  443,  Weston,  M.  C.  N.

North  America,  exploration  of  the  coast  of,  VI,  282,  Ver-
razano  ;  scientific  exploration  of,  IV,  732,  Perrein  ;  I,
546,  Carver,  Jonathan  ;  549,  Casanate  ;  568,  Champlain  ;
exploration  of  the  western  coast,  III,  616,  La  Perouse  ;
discovery,  I,  491,  Cabot ;  discovery  of  islands,  492,  Cabril-
lo  ;  plan  to  explore  western  coast,  III,  655,  Ledyard,  J.

North  American  club,  the,  I,  424.

North  American  Review,  I,  577  :  II,  70.  Dana,  R.  H.\  343,
Emerson,  R.  W.;  386,  Everett ;  387  ;  702,  Graham,  G.  R.;
Ill,  31,  Hale,  N ;  IV,  1 Lodge,  H.  C:  V.  233.  Rice,  A.  T.

Northampton,  Mass.,  college  founded  at,  V,  582,  Smith,  S.;
free  library  of,  II.  498,  Forbes,  C.  E.

North  Anna  river,  engagements  on  the,  II,  714.

North  Bend.  Ohio,  VI,  16,  Symmes,  J.  C.

North  Carolina,  atrocities  of  Tories  in,  II,  406,  Fanning,
D.  and  E. ;  coast  explored,  I,  166,  Barlow,  A.;  colonies
II,  667,  Glover,  W. ;  V,  162-163  :  VI,  640,  Yeamans  ;  con
tests  of  Anglicans  and  Quakers  in.  Indian  murders.  III
336,  Hyde,  E.:  discovery  of  minerals  in,  II,  51,  Dalmey
C.  W.;  disturbances  in,  III,  233,  Holden,  W.  W.;  High

VOL.  VI. — 49


landers  in,  IV,  101,  MacDonald,  F.  :  mines  in,  I,  059,
Clingman  ;  Catholic  institutions  in,  IV,  553,  O'Connetl,
J.  J.;  Revolutionary  movements  in.  III,  282,  Hone,  R.;
rice-culture  in,  I,  87,  Archdale  ;  Royalist  movements  in,
during  the  Revolution,  IV,  232-233,  Martin,  Josiah  ;  set-
tlement of,  II,  234,  Drummond,  W.  ;  700,  Graffenried  ;
Washington  district  of,  V,  466,  Sevier.

North  Carolina,  the  war- ship,  IV,  736,  Perry,  M.  C.

North  Carolina  university,  gifts  to,  IV,  739,  Person  ;  V,
557,  Smith,  Benjamin.

Northeastern  boundary,  discovery  of  map  giving  the,  V,
622  ;  VI,  413.

Northeast  passage,  a,  II,  534,  Franklin,  Sir  J. ;  search  for,
III,  296.  297  ;  574.  Kotzebue  :  IV,  180,  Malaspina.

Northern  Lights,  magazine,  IV,  51,  Ludlow,  F.  H.

Northern  Light,  the,  filibustering  ship.  IV,  135,  McKeon.

Northmen,  discovery  of  America  by,  U,  363,  Eric  the  Red  ;
V,  160,  Rafn  ;  in  America,  VI.  106,  Thorfinn  ;  660,  Zeno  ;
106,  Thorvald  ;  ship  of,  illustration,  102.

North  Middleborough  academy,  V,  102.  Pratt,  E.

North  Pownal,  Vt.,  academy  at,  I;  99,  Arthur.

North  Star,  the,  periodical,  II,  217,  Douglas,  F.

Northumberland,  Duke  of,  IV,  725,  Percy,  H. ;  Earl  of,  III,
90,  Harriot.

Northumberland,  Pa.,  V.  121,  Priestley.

Northwest,  college  at,  IV,  457,  Mullen.

Northwest,  rebellion  in  the,  V,  252,  Riel.

Northwest,  the,  accession  of,  II.  634,  Gibault.

Northwest,  the,  magazine,  V,  553,  Smalley,  E.  V.

Northwest  boundary,  dispute  over  the,  V.  5,  Pickett.  G.  E.

Northwestern  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,  V,  511,  Shipman.

Northwestern  Presbyterian  seminary,  gift  to,  IV,  95,  Mc-
Cormick,  C.  H.

Northwest  passage,  a,  I,  715 ;  search  for  a,  II,  103 ;  333,
Ellis,  H.  ;  520,  Fox,  L.  ;  534-535,  Franklin  ;  search  for,
553,  Frobisher  ;  Dobbs,  Arthur  ;  559.  Fuentes,  B.  ;  (545,
Gilbert,  Sir  H  ;  674,  Gomez,  E.  ;  III.  296.  Hudson,  H.  ;
297  ;  603,  Lancaster,  Sir  J.;  IV.  459.  Muvk  ;  626,  Pages  ;
V,  330,  Ross.  Sir  James ;  537,  Simpson,  T.  :  VI,  277,  Ve-
randrye  ;  282,  Verrazano ;  discovery  of,  IV,  90,  McClure,
Sir  R.

Northwest  territory,  cession  of  Virginia's  claim  to,  rv,  358,
Monroe,  J. ;  V,  369,  St.  Clair.

North  Wollaston,  Mass.,  Ill,  431,  Jewell,  M.

Norton,  Ichabod,  IV,  535,  Norton.

Norton,  Mrs.  Perez,  I,  9,  Acland.

Norton,  Seth,  V.  284,  Robinson,  E.

Norton,  W.  E.,  III.  53,  Halsall.

Norton,  Rev.  William,  IV,  536,  Norton,  J.

Norumbega,  II,  645,  Gilbert,  Sir  H. ;  site  of,  III,  266,  Hors-
ford,  E.  N.

Norwalk,  Conn.,  engagement  at,  rv,  663,  Parsons,  S.  H.

Norway  House,  the,  IV,  146,  McLeod,  J.

Norway,  movement  to  restore  the  old  language  of,  in  lit-
erature, IH,  402,  Janson,  K.

Norwich,  Conn.,  academy,  II,  513,  Foster.  L.  S.  ;  V,  548,
Slater  ;  deed  of  land  in,  VI,  209,  Uncas  ;  monument  at,
illustration,  208.

Norwich,  Vt.,  university,  IV,  606,  Partridge.

Norwood,  Prof.  Joseph  G,  V,  630,  Spencer.  J.  W.

Nossa  Senhora  do  Rozario,  city  of,  founded,  IV,  198,  Ma-
ranhdo.

Notes,  Queries,  and  Answers.  VI,  417.  Webster,  N.  B.

Note-wheel,  invention  of  a,  VI,  506,  Wilder,  B.  G.

Nothing  to  Wear,  anonymous  poem,  I,  477,  Butler,  W.  A.

Notre  Dame,  congregation  or,  I,  329,  Bourgeois  ;  sisters
of,  IV,  497,  Neumann,  J.  N.

Nott,  Rev.  Handel  G.,  IV,  540,  Nott,  R.  M.

Nott,  Dr.  Josiah  C,  II,  665,  Gliddon,  G.  R.

Nott,  Samuel,  VI,  424,  Welch,  M.  C.

Nottingham,  John  H.,  VI,  214,  Upshur,  J.  H.

Nova  Albion,  II,  224.  Drake,  Sir  F.

Nova  Anglia,  Latin  poem.  IV,  391,  Morell,  W.

Novanglus,  pen-name,  I,  17  ;  III.  691,  Leonard,  D.

Novanglus  letters,  the,  II,  302,  Edes,  B.

Nova  Scotia,  admission  of,  to  the  Dominion.  IH,  281,  Howe,
Joseph ;  capture  of,  VI,  285,  Vetch  ;  the  French  in,  III,
593,  La  Gallissoniere  ;  capture  of  French  posts  in,  IV,
356,  Monckton,  R.;  colonization  of,  374,  Monts;  churches
founded  in,  V,  525,  Sigogne  :  grant  of,  I.  48,  Alexander
W.  :  reform-party  in,  VI,  647,  Young,  W.  ;  union  with
the  Dominion,  V,  323,  Rose,  Sir  J. See  Acadia.

Nova  Scotia,  the.  packet,  HI,  312,  Humphrey,  J.

Novella,  Gen.,  III.  368.

Novello,  Clara,  III,  506,  Kellogg,  C.  L.

Novelty,  the,  steam-carriage.  II,  364.

Noyes,  Joseph,  I.  623,  Clap.  T.

Nueva  Andalucia.  IV.  567,  Ojeda  :  588,  Orellana.

Nueva  Segovia,  piratical  expedition  to,  IV.  50,  Lnssan.

Nueva  Vizcaya,  II,  166,  Diaz,  Melgarejo  ;  IH,  338,  Ibarra-
Francisco  de.

Nugent,  Sir  George.  V,  544.  Skinner,  C.

Nullification,  resolutions  of  1798-'9, 1,  23.  242.  365.  500,  503  ;
first  advocated,  III,  144.  Hayne,  R.  Y.;  242,  Holmes,  I.
E.;  301,  Huger,  A.;  test-oath,  315,  Hunt,  B.  F.\  first  at-
tempt at,  381  ;  proclamation,  Jackson's,  supposed  au-
thor of,  746  :  IV,  112.  McDuffie  ;  first  mention  of.  Madi-
son on,  170  ;  768.  Pickens,  F.  W.\  movement,  V,  49.  Poin-
sett ;  VI,  184,  Turnbull,  R.  J.;  195  ;  debates,  410,  411,413..


770


NULLIFIER


OLIVER


Nullifler,  a,  signature,  III,  209.  Hilliard.  H.  W.

Numancia,  voyage  of  the,  IV,  545,  Au/iez,  C.  M.

Numantinos,  society  of,  VI,  271,  Vega,  V.

Number  8.  gun-boat,  V,  627,  Spence.  B.  T.

Numismatic  and  archaeological  society,  the,  IV,  536,  Nor-
ton, F.  H.

Nunez,  Albert  A.,  V,  630,  Spencer,  W.  L.

Nunez,  Vela,  II,  165,  Diaz  de  Pineda  ;  190,  Decampo.

Nun  of  Kenmare,  the,  II,  38,  Cusack.

Nun  of  Mexico,  the,  II,  24,  Cruz.

Nuremberg,  ancient  globe  at,  I,  222,  Behaim.

Nurse,  Francis,  IV,  546,  Nurse,  B.

Nursing,  New  Haven  school  of,  I,  130.  Bacon,  B.  T.

Nutt,  Rodney,  IV,  547,  Nutt,  G.  W.  M.

Nyack,  college  at,  II,  238,  Dubois,  J.

Nye,  Bill,  pen-name,  IV,  547,  Nye,  E.  W.

Nym  Crinkle,  pen-name,  VI,  452,  Wheeler,  A.  C.

Nymphe,  capture  of,  II,  395,  Exinouth  ;  VI,  102,  Thorn-
borough.

O,  signature,  II,  312,  Edivards,  J.

Oajaca,  founded,  II,  135,  Delgadillo ;  administration  of
Juarez  in,  III,  479  ;  storming  of,  IV,  392,  Morelos  ;  capt-
ure of,  I,  202,  Bazaine  ;  siege  of,  II,  166,  Diaz,  Porflrio.
Oajaca,  Marquis  of,  I,  749.
Oakey,  Maria  R.,  VI,  678,  Dewing,  M.  B.
Oak  Hill,  IV,  221,  222,  Marshall.

Oak  Hill  cemetery,  Washington,  I,  738,  Corcoran,  W.  W.
Oak  Hill,  Va.,  view  of  Monroe's  residence  at,  IV,  359.
Oak  Hills,  battle  of. See  Wilson's  Creek.
Oak  Knoll,  Danvers,  illustration,  VI,  494.
Oakland  college,  Miss.,  I,  565,  Chamberlain,  J.;  gift  to, 583,

Chase,  B.
Oakland  County  Farmer,  I,  530.  Carpenter,  C.  K.
Oaklands,  Geneva,  II,  127,  Delafleld,  John.
Oak  Lawn,  La.,  V,  71,  Porter,  Alexander.
Oakleaf ,  Simon,  pen-name,  V,  255,  Biley,  H.  H.
Oaks,  the,  S.  C,  IV,  316,  Middleton,  E.
Oaths,  opposition  of  Methodists  1o,  I,  108,  Asbury.
Oats  lodge,  London,  IV,  122,  McHenry.
Obando,  J.  M.,  V,  739,  Sucre,  A.  J.
Obelisk,  the,  II,  409,  Farman.
Obelisk,  Egyptian,  its  removal  to  New  York,  II.  C89,  Gor-

ringe  :  its  history,  690  ;  copy  of,  illustration,  689.
Oberholtzer,  John,  IV,  549,  Oberholtzer,  S.  L.
Oberlin  college,  founded,  I,  217  ;  gifts  to,  III,  501,  Keep.  J.;

VI,  32,  Tappan,  A.;  colored  students  admitted,  III,  501.
Oberlin  Evangelist,  the,  II,  462,  Finney.
Object-teaching,  introduction  of,  V.  492,  Sheldon,  E.  A.
Oblate  Fathers,  missions  of,  HI,  12,  Guigues  :  VI,  17,  Taba-

ret ;  18,  Tache,  A.  A.;  college  of,  IV,  197,  Manucy.
O'Brien,  Father,  III,  86,  Haro,  A.  N.  de.
O'Brien,  John,  IV,  550,  O'Brien,  Jere.
O'Brien,  John,  V,  194,  Baymond,  J.  T

O'Brien,  Morris,  IV,  550,  O'Brien,  Jeremiah.

O'Brien,  Smith,  H,  178,  Dillon,  J.  B.

Ocampo,  Melchor,  II,  124,  Degollado.

Ocampo,  Ortiz  de,  IV,  23,  Lopez  y  Planes.

Ocana,  congress  of,  I,  307  :  college  at,  H,  135,  Delgado.

O'Carroll  family,  the,  I,  536.  Carroll.

Occident,  the,  magazine,  III.  676.  Leeser.

Occultator,  invention  of  an.  III,  206,  Hill,  T.

Ocean  cable,  the,  direct,  II,  291,  Eastman,  M.  E.

Oceanica,  discovery  of  islands  of,  V,  148,  Queiros.

Ocean  island,  VI,  21,  Talbot,  J.  G.

Ocean  Queen,  interview  on  board  the,  illustration,  V,  505.

Ochre  Point,  Newport,  III,  641,  Lawrence,  W.  B.

Ochus,  discovered,  II,  153,  De  Soto.

O'Connor,  Agnes,  III,  262,  Horan,  M.  A.

O'Connor,  Joseph,  III,  448,  Johnson,  E.  M.

O'Connor,  W.  D.,  I,  51,  Allen,  E.  A.

Octoroon,  the,  play  of,  V,  733,  Stuart,  W.

Oculists,  invention  of  instruments  for,  V,  224,  Beiding.

Ocumare,  battle  near,  I,  304.

Odd-Fellows,  founded  in  U.  S..  VI,  507,  Wildey,  T.

Odell,  William,  IV,  .556,  Odell,  J.

Odometer,  the,  III,  419.

O'Donnell,  Gen.,  I,  305.

O'Donnell,  Marshal,  II,  252,  Didce.

Odontornithes,  discovery  of,  IV,  218,  Marsh.  O.  C.

QEdipus  Tyrannus,  music  for  the,  IV,  629,  Paine,  J.  K.

Oella  Huacco,  IV,  186,  Manco  Capac.

Oello,  Mama  Chimpu,  VI,  180,  Tupac  Inca.

Oersted,  Hans  Christian,  IV,  559,  Oersted,  A.  S.

Oexmelin.  A.  O.,  V.  419,  Schimmelin.

O'Fallon,  James.  IV,  559,  O'Fallon,  John.

Offensive  partianship,  I,  655.

Offley.  Mr.,  II,  2.  Crane,  W.  M.

Offord.  Rev.  R.  M.,  IV,  74.  McAidey.

Offutt.  Denton,  in,  715,  Lincoln.

O'Flaherty.  Edmund,  V,  733,  Stuart,  W.

Ogden,  Catherine,  IV,  679,  Paulding ;  VI,  237,  Van  Cort-
landt,  Philip.

Ogden,  Samuel  G.,  IV,  450,  Mowatt.

Ogden  land  company,  the,  VI,  85,  Thomas,  P.  E.

Ogdensburg,  founding  of,  IV,  560,  Ogden,  A. ;  R.  C.  institu
tions  at,  VI,  812,  Wadhams.

Ogilvie,  Earl  of  Finlater,  V,  448,  Seaton.

Oglethorpe,  James,  charge  against,  VI,  20,  Tail/er,


Oglethorpe,  Sir  Theophilus,  IV,  564,  Oglethorpe,  J.  E.

O'Hara.  James,  HI.  254,  Hopkins,  J.  H.

O'Hara.  Kane,  IV,  565,  O'Hara,  T.

Ohio  river,  discovery  of.  III,  621,  La  Salle  :  Indian  fight

on,  294,  Hubbell,  W. ;  French  possession  of  the  valley,  I,

560,  Celoron  ;  boundary  dispute  of,  with  Michigan,  IV,

243,  Mason,  S.  T.
Ohio,  state,  in  the  civil  war,  I,  391,  Brough  ;  discharge  of

debt  of,  HI,  504,  Kelley,  A.; first  white  boy  born in,

V,  333,  Both,  J.  L.\  land  grants  to.  I,  458,  Burnet,  J.;

pioneers  of,  IV,  72.  McArthur,  D. :  288,  Meigs  ;  VI,  16,

Symmes,  J.  C;  344.  Walworth,  J.:  R.  C.  institutions  in,

V,  136,  Purcell :  184,  Bappe  ;  VI,  76,  Thienpont ;  Indian

treaties  in,  IV.  72,  McArthur,  D.
Ohio,  the,  vessel,  II,  299,  Eckford.
Ohio  canal,  subsidy  to,  IV.  144,  McLean.  W.
Ohio  company,  the,  VI,  447,  Wharton,  S.
Ohio  Gong.  the.  I,  56,  Allen,  W.
Ohio  Idea,  the,  I,  56,  Allen,  W.
Ohio  land  company,  the,  1, 166,  Barlow,  J.
Ohio  Wesleyan  university,  gift  to,  VI,  533.  Williams,  S.
O'Horan,  Gen.,  II,  124.  Degollado  ;  execution  of,  HI,  4C0,

Juarez,  B.  P. ;  IV.  270,  Charlotte.
Oil- lands  of  Asia,  IV,  59,  Lyman.  B.  S.
Oil,  transportation  of,  in  pipes.  III,  116,  Haupt,  H.
Oil-wells,  machinery  for,  I,  528,  Curll.
Ojibways,  language,  boo*ks  in  the,  1, 160,  Baraga  :  missions

for,  the,  II.  8.  Cretin  :  translation  of  the  New  Testament

for.  III.  397,  James,  E.
6  Joven  Pernambucano,  pen-name,  IV,  609,  Ottoni.
Okeechobee,  battle  of,  Vt  53.
Okey,  Col.,  II,  222,  Downing.  Sir  G.
Okie,  A.  H.,  I,  721,  Cooke,  N.  F.
Olaguibel,  Francisco  M.,  IV,  739,  Pesado.
Olalla's  Leap,  III,  186,  Herrera  y.Olalla.
Olando.  Francisco,  III.  605,  Lando.
Olano,  Lope,  IV,  519,  Nicuesa.
Olcott,  F.  P.,  I,  291,  Blavatsky.
Olcott,  Helen,  I,  609,  Choate.  B.
Old  Abe,  war-eagle,  II,  487,  Flower,  F.  A.
Old  and  New.  magazine,  III,  32,  Hale,  E.  E.
Old  Blizzard,  sobriquet,  IV,  28,  Loring,  W.  W.
Oldboy,  Felix,  IV,  336,  Mines,  J.  F.

Old  Brick  church.  Isle  of  Wight.  Va..  illustration,  III,  291.
Oldbuck.  Jonathan,  pen-name,  V,  691,  Stilwell.
Oldbug,  Jonathan,  pen-name,  VI,  586,  Withington.
Old  Bullion,  I,  242.

Old  Catholics,  HI,  609,  Langdon,  W.  C.
Old  Colony  club,  VI,  568.  Winslow.  E.
Old  Denmark,  sobriquet,  II,  424,  Febiger.
Old  Dominion,  origin  of  the  name,  HI,  663,  Lee,  B.
Olden  Barneveldt.  Ill,  306,  Huidekoper,  H.  J.
Old-field  schools,  III,  373,  Jackson,  Andrew  ;  V,  173,  Ban-

dolph,  T.J.:  VI,  373.
Old  Folks  at  Home,  song,  n,  514.  Foster,  S.  C.
Old  Fort  Wayne,  battle  of,  I,  298.  Blunt.  J.  G.
Oldham.  John.  II.  581,  Gallop  ;  VI,  566,  Winslow,  E.
Old  Hickory.  III.  376.  ^  .  .

Old  Ironsides,  III,  240,  Holmes,  O.  W.  ;  sobriquet,  V,  684,

Stewart,  C. :  the  frigate,  illustration,  V,  684.
Old  Landmarkism.  II.  728,  Graves,  J.  B.
Old  Man  of  the  Mountain,  pen-name,  V,  309,  Bogers,  N.  P.
Old  Manse,  the.  of  Concord,  II,  344.
Old  Master  Leavitt,  III,  649,  Leavitt,  D.
Old  Pete,  sobriquet,  IV,  16,  Longstreet,  J.
Old  Samm,  I,  591,  Chatham.  n^

Oldschool,  Oliver,  pen-name,  II,  141,  Dennie  ;  V,  397,  Sar-
gent. N.
Old  Side  party,  the.  II.  248.  Duffield.  G.
Old  Smithfield  church,  illustration.  III,  291.
Old  South,  pseudonym,  I,  120,  Austin,  B.  _

Old  South  church,  the,  I.  67,.Amory,  T.  C:  organized.  II,
83,  Davenport,  J.  ;  historical  work,  IV,  279,  Mead,  E.  D. ;
communion-service.  VI.  569,  Winslow,  J.
Old  Stars,  sobriquet,  IV.  342,  Mitchel,  O.  M.
Old  Stone  Hammer,  sobriquet,  IV,  312,  Metcalfe,  T.
Oldstyle,  Jonathan,  pen-name,  in,  360.
Oldstyle.  Oliver,  pen-name.  IV,  679,  Paulding.
Old  Swedes'  church,  Philadelphia,  illustration.  VI,  618.
Old  Swedes'  church,  Wilmington,  illustration,  VI,  208.
Old  Temple,  the,  HI.  566.
Old  Un,  pen-name,  H,  272,  Durivage.

Old  Wheel-horse  of  Democracy,  sobriquet.  TV,  285,  Medary.
Oldys,  Francis,  pen-name,  I,  564,  Chalmers,  G.
Oleana,  colony  of,  I,  445.  Bull,  O.  B.
Oleomargarine,  manufacture  of,  IV,  444,  Mott,  H.  A.
Olibahali  river,  discovery  of,  IV,  54,  Luna.
Oliff,  Mr.,  HI,  47.

Olinda,  founded,  II,  237,  Duarte  Coelho.
Oliphant,  I^dy,  HI,  94,  Harris,  T.L.
Olive  Branch,  the,  tract,  II,  51,  Dabney,  B. ;  1, 524.  Carey,  M.
Olive-oil,  inventions  for  making,  I.  724,  Cooper,  E.
Oliver,  Andrew,  quoted,  II,  302,  Edes,  B.

Oliver,  Daniel,  IV.  573,  Oliver,  A.

Oliver,  Dr.  J.  P..  TV.  575.  Oliver,  G.  A.

Oliver,  Col.  Robert.  II,  389,  Everett,  E.

Oliver,  Rev.  T.  F.,  IV,  574,  Oliver,  D.

Oliver,  Thomas,  rV,  573,  Oliver,  A.

Oliver  Optic,  pen-name,  I,  33,  Adams,  W.  T.


OLIVETO


OVEJO


771


Oliveto,  Count,  IV,  482,  Navarro  y  Prado.

Olivier,  M.,  II,  428,  Feller.

Ollantaitamba,  fortress  of,  IV,  576,  Ollantai.

Olmecos,  the,  VI,  654,  Zamna.

Olmstead,  Edward,  VI.  448,  Wharton,  H.

Olmtitz,  fortress  of.  Ill,  301,  Huqer,  F.  K.  ;  589.

Olney,  Ellen  W.,  Ill,  554,  Kirk,  E.  W.  O.

Olustee,  battle  of,  UI,  124,  Hawley,  J.  P..;  53,  Hallowell,
E.  N. ;  V,  479,  Seymour,  T.

Olympic  theatre,  New  York,  III,  500,  Keene  ;  IV,  348,
Mitchell,  W.

Omaha,  gift  to,  cathedral,  IV.  562.  Ogden,  W.  B.

Omnibus  bill,  I,  644  ;  Clay's,  II,  454.

Onas.  sobriquet  of  Penn,  IV,  714.

Onate,  Juan,  VI,  273,  Velasco,  L.  ;  293,  Villaqra.

Onea,  anonymous  poem,  V,  533,  Simmons,  W.  H.

Oneco,  VI,  209,  Unc.as.

Oneida,  the,  in  the  fight  of  Mobile  bay,  IV,  457,  Mullany,
J.  R.  M.  ;  destruction  of,  VI,  521.  Williams,  E.  P.

Oneida,  destruction  of,  II,  555,  Frontenac.

Oneida  Circular,  the,  IV,  543,  Noyes,  J.  H.

Oneida  college,  III,  555,  Kirkland,  S.

Oneida  community,  the,  IV,  543,  Noyes,  J.  H.  ;  efforts  to
overthrow,  IV,  284,  Mears.

Oneida  manual-labor  institute,  the,  II,  574,  Gale,  G.  W.

Oneidas,  missions  to  the,  II,  498.  Forbes,  Eli  ;  607,  Gar-
nier,  J.  ;  IV,  331,  Millet,  P.  ;  invasion  of  Seneca  coun-
try by,  II,  608,  Garonhiague  ;  chief  of  the,  V,  543,  Ske-
nando  ;  in  the  Revolution.  VI,  456,  Wheelock,  E.  ;  re-
moval of,  524,  Williams,  E.

O'Neil,  Arthur,  IV,  118,  McGillivrav.

O'Neil,  Capt..  IV,  101,  McDonald.  F.

O'Neill,  Margaret  L.,  II,  294,  Eaton,  M.  L.

Only  Waiting,  anonymous  poem,  IV,  112,  Mace.

Onondaga  lake,  settlement  on,  V,  143,  Puys.

Onondaga  martyr,  II,  675,  Gonannhatenha.

Onondagas,  missions  to,  II,  590,  Garakonthie  ;  608,  Gar-
nier  ;  destruction  of  settlements,  IV,  122,  Machin  ;  VI,
255,  Van  Schaick.

Ononthio.  IV,  611,  Oureohare.

Onslow,  Speaker,  quoted,  II,  457,  Fillmore.

Ontario,  art  schools  of.  IV,  273,  May,  S.  P.  ;  Catholic  in-
stitutions in,  63,  Lynch,  J.  J. ;  Catholic  league,  II,  537,
Fraser,  C.  F.

Ontiveros,  founded,  III,  354,  Irala.

On  to  Richmond,  II,  739.

Onwanonsyshon,  III,  445,  Johnson,  G.  H.  M.

Onward,  magazine,  V,  215,  Reid,  M.

Opdyke,  Gisbert,  IV,  583,  Opdyke.

Opeidoscope,  invention  of,  II,  195,  Dolbear.

Opelousas,  loss  of  the,  III,  64,  Hamilton,  James.

Opequan,  battle  of,  II,  352,  Emory,  W.  H. ;  V,  499.

Ophir  farm,  III,  237,  Holliday,  B.

Ophthalmic  institute.  New  York,  III,  560,  Knapp.  J.  H.

Ophthalmology,  new  methods  in,  VI,  97,  Thomson,  W.

Ophthalmometer,  invention  of  a,  V,  480,  Shakespeare.

Ophthalmoscopes,  invention  of,  V,  261,  Risley  ;  323,  Rose-
brugh ;  480,  Shakespeare.

Opido,  Michael,  IV,  350,  Modjeska.

Opimius,  pen-name,  II,  475,  Fitzhugh,  W.  H.

Opium,  smuggling  of,  III,  496,  Kearny,  L.

Oporto,  revolution  of,  IV,  698,  Pedro  I.

Optometer,  invention  of  a.  V,  261,  Risley.

Orakter  Amphibolos,  II,  384,  Evans,  O.

Orange,  O.,  Garfield's  birthplace  at,  illustration,  n,  599.

Orangeburg,  taken,  II,  752.

Orange  riots,  V,  173,  Randolph.  T.  F.

Oratorio,  first,  in  New  York,  III,  206,  Hill,  U.  C.

Oratorio  society,  II.  63,  Damrosch.

Orbeliani.  Princess  Maria,  IV,  463,  Murat.

Orchard  Knob,  V,  498.

Orchards,  first  in  Mass.  and  R.  I.,  I.  274,  Blackstone.

Orchestrion,  invention  of  an,  IV,  171,  Maelzl.

Orchestrone,  the,  II,  582,  Gaily.

Orchids,  V,  424,  Schomburgk  ;  545,  Skinner,  G.  U.

Order  No.  28, 1,  478.  Butler.  B.  F.

Order  of  American  knights,  the,  V,  386,  Sanderson,  J.  P.

Order  of  the  Southern  Cross,  the,  I,  648.  Cleburne.

Ordnance,  U.  S..  II,  54 ;  in  the  civil  war.  V.  408,  Saun/er,  S. ;
inventions  in.  I,  240,  Benton,  J.  G.\  III,  595,  Laid'ley ;  V,
515,  Shock ;  III.  269,  Hotchkiss,  B.  B. :  V,  298-299,  Rodman.

Ordonez,  Gen.,  IV,  335,  Mina ;  567.  CHiggins.

Ordonez  y  Aguiar,  Ramonde,  VI,  308,  Voidn.

Oregon,  exploration,  II,  522,  Franchere  ;  VI,  227,  Valeria-
nos ;  expedition  to.  III,  505,  Kelley,  H.  J.  ;  Americans
expelled  from,  ibid.  :  pioneers  of,  VI,  485,  Whitman,
M. ;  700.  Thornton  ;  foundation  of  British  claim  to,  IV,
284,  Meares;  the  boundary,  I,  56,  Allen,  W.;  242;  501  ;
II,  77,  Dargan,  E.  S.;  214,  215  ;  464,  Fish,  H;  579,  Gal-
latin ;  642,  Giddings,  J.  R.;  720  ;  III.  86.  Harney,  W.  S.;
IV,  615,  Owen,  R.  D.;  V,  53  ;  VI,  198-199  ;  413-414  ;  trans-
portation lines,  294,  Villard.

Oregon  escort,  the,  II,  196,  Dolph,  J.  N.

Oregon  university,  gifts  to,  VI,  294,  Villard.

O'Reilly,  Miles,  pen-name,  III,  53,  Halpine  ;  quoted,  V,
298,  Rodgers,  G.  W.

Orellana,  Francis,  I,  545,  Carvajal,  G. ;  II,  165,  Diaz  de  Pi-
neda.

Orellana  river,  IV,  588,  Orellana.


Ore-separator,  invention  of,  V,  239,  Richards,  R.  H.

Oreto,  seizure  of  the,  IV,  172,  Maffltt.

Orfila,  V,  573.  Smith,  J.  L.

Orford,  Lord,  III,  531-632,  Kidd.

Organ-pipe  sonometer,  invention  of,  V,  679,  Stevens,  W.  L.

Oribe,  Gen.,  V,  266,  Rivera  ;  321,  Rosas  ;  VI,  218,  Urquiza  ;
258,  Varela,  F.

Orihueha,  Gen.,  IV,  339,  Miramon.

Orinoco,  the,  discovery  of,  I,  697  :  exploration  of,  connec-
tion with  the  Amazon,  II,  652,  Gilli  :  and  Amazon,  grant
of  the  land  between,  IV,  309,  Mesnard  ;  III,  300,  Huet ;
discovery  of.  IV,  5&5,  Ordaz  ;  V,  633,  Spire ;  explora-
tion, 163  ;  VI,  688,  Humboldt.

Oriskany,  battle  of.  Ill,  182,  Herkimer.

Orizaba,  capture  of.  III,  607,  Lane,  J. ;  IV,  392,  Morelos.

Orleans,  territory  of,  II,  146,  Derbigny.

Orleans  princes,  the,  II,  476,  Flaget.

Ormachea,  Bishop,  III,  580,  Labastida.

Ormond,  dukes  of,  I.  480,  Butler,  P.

Ormuz,  siege  of,  I,  135,  Baffin.

Orne,  Mary,  pen-name,  IVT  Nichols,  M.  S.  G.

Ornithology,  discoveries,  IV,  549,  Ober ;  work  in.  V,  250,
Ridgway  ;  VI,  546,  Wilson,  Alexander  ;  222,  Vaillant ;
388,  Waterton  ;  American,  V,  606,  Sonnini.

Orphan  homes,  IV,  453,  Muhlenberg.

Orphans,  college  for,  II,  661,  Girard,  S.

Orpheus,  Jr.,  pen-name,  VI,  268,  Vaughan,  Sir  W.

Orr,  Rev.  W.,  II,  594,  Garden.

Orrantia,  Gen.,  IV,  335,  Mina.

Orrery,  construction  of  an,  V,  263.

Orsainville,  Count  d\  VI,  28,  Talon,  J.  B.

Ortal,  Geronimo,  V,  449,  Sedeno.

Ortez,  Juan,  poem  suggested  by,  VI,  505,  Wilde,  R.  H.

Ortega,  Eulalio,  IV,  269.

Ortega,  Gen.  Gonzalez,  m,  479  ;  IV,  339,  Miramon  ;  552,
Ocampo.

Orth,  Balthazar,  IV,  594,  Orth,  G.  S.

Orthopedy,  hospital  in  New  York,  III,  563,  Knight,  James  ;
inventions  for.  VI,  43,  Taylor,  C.  F.

Ortiz,  Juan,  II,  153,  De  Soto.

Ortiz  de  la  Vega,  Francisco,  II,  202,  Dorantes.

Osage  Indians,  mission  to,  first  book  for,  IV,  372,  Mont-
gomery, W.  B.

Osawatomie,  I,  405,  406.

Osborne,  Sir  Danvers,  V.  99,  Pownall.

Osborne,  Sherard,  rv,  90,  McClure,  Sir  R.

Osceola,  capture  of,  II.  616,  Gates,  W.

Osgood,  Charles,  III,  129.

Osgood,  James  R.,  VI,  112,  Ticknor.  W.  D.

Osgood,  John,  IV,  599,  Osgood,  D. ;  600,  Osgood,  S.

Osgood,  Miss,  II,  624.  Genest.

Osgood,  S.  S.,  IV,  599,  Osqood,  F.  S.

Os  Guarapes,  battles  of,  VI,  290.  Vieira.  J.  F.

Oshkosh,  gift -to  Y.  M.  C.  A.  of,  V,  408,  Sawyer.

Osollo.  Gen.,  IV,  339,  Miramon.

Osorio,  Juan  de,  IV,  298.  Mendoza,  P.  de.

Osorio,  Gen.  Venegas,  III,  570,  Koenig,  J.  R.

Osorno,  founded,  III,  329,  Hurtado,  G. :  siege  of,  300,  Huelen.

Ossernenon,  site  of.  pilgrimages  to,  III,  435,  Jogues.

Osset.  Gillis,  III,  269,  Hosset.

Ossoli,  Marquis,  II,  561,  562,  Fidler,  S.  M.

Ostend  manifesto,  the,  V,  10,  611.

Ostermann,  Count,  II,  69,  Dana,  F.

Ostinelli,  Louis,  I,  269,  Biscaccianti.

O  Subtil,  sobriquet,  IV,  481,  Natividade.

O'Sullivan.  Mr.,  I,  417,  Brownson,  O.  A.

Oswald,  Richard,  1, 19.

Oswego,  fort  at,  I,  457,  Burnet :  capture  of.  II,  234,  Drum-
mond,  Sir  G.;  IV,  364;  VI,  641,  Yeo,  J.  L.;  defence  of,
III,  29,  Haldimand.

Otalora,  Jos6  E.,  IV,  545,  Nunez,  R.

Otey,  Isaac,  IV,  604,  Otey,  J.  H.

Otis,  James,  eloquence  of,  I,  16.

Otis,  James,  pen-name,  III,  491,  Kaler.

Otis,  John,  IV,  605,  Otis,  James  ;  VI,  370,  Washburne,  E.  B.

Otis,  Merc}*,  VI,  364,  Warren,  M.

Otis,  William  Foster,  IV,  221,  Marshall,  Emily.

Otomi  apostle,  the,  V,  179,  Rangel.

Otsego  hall,  I,  725,  730  ;  illustration,  727.

Ottawa,  illustration,  VI,  681  ;  university,  17,  Tabaret.

Ottawa  river,  expedition  up  the,  I,  174,  Barre,  A.  J.  L.

Ottawa  Indians,  plan  for  exterminating,  III,  572,  Kondia-
ronk  ;  mission  to,  IV,  452,  Mrak  ;  V,  64,  Pontiac  ;  484,
Shaubena  ;  language,  books  in  the,  1, 160,  Baraga.

Otto,  Dr.  Bodo,  IV.  609,  Otto,  J.  C.

Otumba,  Mexico,  battle  at,  I,  749 ;  aqueduct,  VI,  61,  Tern-
bleque.

Ouithlacoochee.  battle  of.  I.  505,  Call,  R.  K.

Ould,  Robert,  IV.  303,  Meredith,  S.  A.

Ounawaterika,  III,  657,  Lee,  C.

Our  Continent.  V,  402,  Sartain,  E.

Our  Lady  of  Charity  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  I,  330,  Bourget,

Our  Lady  of  Guadalupe,  image  of,  VI,  664,  Zumdrraga.

Our  Mary,  sobriquet,  II,  392,  Ewen,  M.  C.

Our  Monthly,  magazine.  VI.  88,  Thompson,  C.  L.

Ouro  Preto,  city  of,  II,  164,  Diaz,  C.  A.

Our  Young  Folks.  Ill,  617,  Larcom.

Outoutaga.  VI,  27,  Talon.

Ovejo,  battle  at,  II,  167  ;  I,  493,  Cadena.


772


OVERBROOK


PARKERS


Overbrook,  Pa.,  seminary  at.  VI,  595,  Wood,  J.  F.

Overland  Monthly,  the.  III.  104,  Harte,  F.  B.

Overton,  Edward,  IV,  302,  Mercur,  U.

Oviedo.  Signor,  I,  1R5,  Bartlett,  W.  A.

Owen,  Hannah.  I,  404.

Owen.  Prof.  Richard,  II,  241,  Du  Chaillu.

Owenites,  the,  IV,  615,  Owen,  R.

Owl,  the,  magazine,  V,  65,  Poole,  W.  F.

Oxy-carbureted  light,  the,  II,  255,  Du  Motay.

Oxygen,  discovery  of,  V,  120,  Priestley  ;  centennial  of,

121  ;  discovery  of,  in  the  sun,  II.  228,  Draper,  H.
Ozone,  connection  of,  with  pneumonia,  II,  228.  Draper,  D.;

inventor  of  apparatus,  VI,  619,  Wright,  A.  W.

Pachacamac.  IV,  186.  Manco  Capac.

Pachacutic,  Inca.  IV.  576,  Ollantai.

Pacific,  steamer,  loss  of  the,  I,  691,  Collins,  E.  K.;  IV,  586,
O'Reilly,  B.

Pacificator,  the  great,  I,  641.

Pacificator  of  the  Occident,  n,  676,  Gonzalez,  M.

Pacific  mail  steamship  company,  the,  I,  719,  Cooke,  H.  D. ;
II,  610,  Garrison,  C.  K.

Pacific  navigation  company,  VI,  457,  Wheelwright,  W.

Pacific  ocean,  discovery  of  the,  I,  147,  Balboa ;  seen  by
Drake,  II,  224,  Drake,  Sir  F.

Pacific  railways,  I,  241 ;  route  of,  predicted,  IV,  51,  Lud-
low, F.H.;  proposed,  106,  McDonell,  Allan  ;  projects  for,
147,  McLeoa,  M. ;  first  suggestion  of.  654,  Parker,  S. ;  bill
for,  V,  313,  Rollins,  J.  S.

Paciflcus,  pen-name,  II,  642,  Giddings,  J.  R. ;  HI,  58,  59 ;
VI,  380.

Packard,  Rev.  Asa.  IV,  618,  Packard,  F.  A.

Packard,  S.  B.,  Ill,  138.

Packard,  Samuel,  IV,  618,  Packard,  F.  A.

Packard's  Monthly,  IV,  620,  Packard,  S.  S.

Packet,  the  Pennsylvania.  II.  258,  Dunlap,  John.

Pack-saddle,  invention  of  a,  II,  13,  Croghan,  G.  S.  J.

Pacolet  river,  engagement  on  the,  IV,  109,  McDowell,  C.

Pacte  de  famine,  the,  IV,  199.  Marbois.

Paddles,  system  of  feathering,  V,  544,  Skene,  A.  M.

Paddock,  Henry,  IV,  345,  Mitchell,  M.  J.

Paddock,  Rev.  Seth  B..  IV,  621,  Paddock,  J.  A.

Padilla,  Gen.,  executed,  I,  307.

Page.  Abraham,  III,  244.  Holt,  J.  S.

Page  house,  the,  Virginia,  illustration,  IV,  624.

Pagerie,  Josephine  de  la,  I,  209,  Beauhamais,  A.  de.

Paget,  Lord,  III,  108.  Harvey,  Sir  J.

Pah  Ute  Indians,  attack  by,  HI,  604,  Lander,  F.  W.

Paige,  Rev.  Reed,  IV,  627,  Paige,  L.  R.

Pailleterie,  Marquis  de  la.  H,  253,  Dumas.

Paine,  Edward,  IV,  627,  Paine,  B.

Paine,  Dr.  Horatio,  IV,  711,  Penington,  M.  R.

Paine,  James  Harvey,  IV,  627,  Paine,  B.

Paine,  Robert  Troup.  IV,  628,  Paine,  M.

Paine,  Thomas,  II,  431,  Fenwick,  B.  J.;  his  death,  in,  571,
Kohlmann.

Paine,  Rev.  Thomas,  rv,  630,  Paine,  R.  T.

Paine,  William,  IV,  419,  Morris,  T.  A.

Painesville,  Ohio,  rv,  627,  Paine,  B.

Paintings,  American  historical,  HI,  699,  Leutze.

Paisley  Magazine,  the,  518,  Kennedy,  W.

Paititi,  the,  I,  302,  Bohorques,  P.

Pakanke,  Chief.  VI,  303,  Virot.

Palace,  the  white.  I,  302,  Bohorques,  P.

Palacios,  Marquis  de,  I,  303,  Bolivar.

Palaklaklaha,  battle  of,  VI,  616,  Worth,  W.  J.

Palan,  Marquis  de,  HI,  654,  Ledru,  H.  P.

Palatines,  the,  in  Ireland,  IH,  155,  Heck,  B. ;  settlements  of
in  North  Carolina,  II,  700,  Graffenried.

Palaeontologist,  the,  HI,  398,  James,  J.  F.

Palaeontology,  III,  41,  Hall.  J.;  studies  in,  TV.  217,  Marsh,
D. ;  218,  Marsh,  O.  C. ;  286,  Meek,  F.  B. ;  VI,  477,  Wlut-
eaves  ;  482,  Whitfield,  R.  P.;  H,  567,  Gabb.

Palaeozoic  rocks,  the,  IV.  7.  Logan,  Sir  W.  E.

Palenque,  fired,  HI,  345,  Infante,  H. ;  ruins  at,  V,  257.  Rio.
A. ;  VI,  320,  Waldeck ;  ancient  city  on  the  site  of,  308,
Votdn.

Palestine,  exploration  of,  V,  284,  Robinson,  E.;  IV,  65,
Lynch,  W.  F.\  307,  Merrill.  S.\  629,  Paine,  J.  A.;  prepa-
ration of,  for  the  millennium,  330,  Miller,  W.;  Hebrew
colonies  in,  572,  Oliphant.

Palfrey,  Peter,  IV,  634,  Palfrey,  Warwick.

Palisada,  capture  of,  I,  550,  Case,  A.  L.

Pallas,  the,  ni,  468.

Palma,  battle  of,  II,  320,  Elias.

Palmer.  Courtland,  II,  228,  Draper,  H.

Palmer,  Rev.  Edward,  IV.  637,  Palmer,  B.  M.

Palmer,  Edward  H.,  Ill,  683.  Leland,  C.  G.

Palmer,  Henry,  IV,  641.  Palmer,  W.  H.

Palmer,  Katherine  H.,  V,  142,  Putnam,  K.  H.

Palmer,  Mary  A.,  II,  228,  Draper,  H.

Palmer,  Robert  M..  VI,  77,  Thomas,  M.  L.  P.

Palmer,  Judge  S.  N..  VI,  77,  Thomas.  M.  L.  P.

Palmer,  Dr.  W.  C,  IV.  640,  Palmer,  P.

Palmer,  Mr.,  painter,  I,  663,  Clough,  G.  L.

Palmer's  island,  I,  620.

Palmetto,  textile  fabric  from,  IV,  19,  Loomis,  S.  L.

Palm-leaf  fibre,  in  paper,  II,  11,  Crocker,  A.

Palo  Alto,  Cal.,  university  at,  V,  644,  Stanford.


Palo  Hincado,  battle  at,  II,  439.  Ferrand.

Pamlico  sound,  explored,  I,  166,  Barlow.  A.

Panama,  Isthmus  of,  discovery  of.  I,  289,  Balasco  ;  in  pos-
session of  Gonzala  Piazarro  (1545),  III,  214,  Hinojosa ;
Panama,  city  of,  founded,  H,  374,  Espinosa,  G. ;  IV,  897,
Pedrarias  ;  site  of,  V,  35,  Pizarro  :  congress  at,  I,  307 ;
riots  in,  139,  Bailey  ;  massacres,  751,  Corwine  ;  capture
and  plunder  of,  U,  436,  Fernandez  de  Castro  ;  437,  Pie-
drahita  ;  capture  of,  by  pirates.  IV,  400,  Morgan,  Sir  H. :
mission,  celebrated  report  on,  VI,  56,  Tazewell ;  first
steamship  line  to.  Ill,  636,  Law,  G.\  first  idea  of  a  ship-
canal  across,  I,  568,  Champlain  ;  III.  697-698,  Lesseps ;
canal,  V,  457,  Selfridge  ;  I.  279  ;  neutrality  of,  103.

Panama  railroad,  the,  112,  Aspinwall;  HI,  636,  Law,  G.',
V,  666,  Stephens,  J.  L. ;  VI,  140,  Totten,  G.  M.

Pancarpata,  peace  of,  V,  395,  Santa  Cruz,  A.

Pandrita,  pirate  brig,  II,  760,  Gregory,  F.  H.

Panet,  Monseigneur,  II,  261,  Dunn,  T.

Panharmonicum,  invention  of  the,  IV,  171,  Maelzl.

Panic  of  1837,  the,  IH,  383.

Panizzi,  Sir  Anthony,  V,  676,  Stevens,  H.

Panoplist,  the,  journal,  IV,  424,  Morse,  J.

Panorama  of  Life  and  Literature.  Ill,  737,  Littell,  E.

Panorama  of  the  Mississippi,  a,  1, 159,  Banvard.

Pansy  books,  the,  I,  42,  Alden,  Isabella.

Panther,  the,  vessel.  III,  133,  Hayes,  1. 1.

Pantograph,  the,  V,  372,  Saint  Mhnin.

Paoli,  battle  of,  VI,  398,  Wayne  ;  IV,  533,  North,  C;  II,  762,
Grey.

Papal  zouaves,  the  Canadian,  n.  151,  Desjardins.

Paper,  invention  of  boiler  for  manufacture  of,  VI,  548.  Wil-
son, G.  F. ;  machine  for  making,  II,  659,  Gilpin,  T. ;  mak-
ing from  wood,  HI,  499,  Keen,  M.  L. ;  manufacture  of,
HI,  80,  Hardina.

Paper- bags,  machine  for  making,  VI,  590,  Wolle,  F.

Paper-mill,  first,  in  America,  V,  262,  Rittenhouse.

Paper-money,  III,  636,  Law,  John  ;  craze  for,  IV,  166  ;  fa-
mous case,  VI,  119,  Tillinghast.  T.\  issue  of.  in  Mass.,  I,
29  ;  question  of  issuing  of,  in  Penn.  colony,  H,  529 ;
schemes  in  the  colonies,  1, 22,  Adams.  S. ;  HI,  332,  Hutch-
inson, T.\  redemption  of,  in  Mass.,  332.

Pappegoya,  Armagot,  V,  126,  Pi-intz,  J.

Pappenheim,  Madame,  IV,  496,  Neuendorff.

Papyrus  club,  the.  II,  194,  Dodge,  N.  S.

Paradoxes  of  a  Philistine,  VI,  341,  Walsh,  W.  S.

Paraguay,  attempt  of  Buenos  Ayres  to  annex,  I,  224,  Bel-
grano  ;  American  claims  against,  434 ;  exploration  of,
490,  Cabeza  ;  III,  685,  Leme  ;  II,  165,  Diaz,  Melgarejo  ;
settlement  of,  202,  Dorantes  :  III,  480.  Justiniano  ;  con-
quest of,  H,  367,  Escalera  ;  triple  alliance  against,  486,
Flores,  V. ;  administration  of  Francia,  522  ;  colonization
of,  515,  Foucher ;  revolution  in,  522,  Francia ;  reign  of
terror  in,  ibid.  ;  Indian  colonies  in,  676,  Gonzalez  de
Santa  Cruz  ;  colonization  of,  591,  Garay  ;  revolutions  in,
III,  354,  Irala  ;  slave-hunting  in,  403,  Jaray ;  war  with
Brazil,  352,  Inhauma  ;  714,  Lima  ;  dictator  in,  improve-
ments, IV,  20,  Lopez  ;  war  against  allies,  conspiracy  in,
executions,  seizure  of  Americans,  21.  Lopez,  F.  S.;  at-
tempted conquest  of,  298,  Mendoza,  P.  de  ;  suppression
of  slavery,  V,  362,  Saavedra,  H.  A.  de  ;  factions  in,  376,
Salazar  de  Espinosa  ;  expedition  to,  642,  Staden  ;  sup-
posed conspiracy  of  foreigners' in,  VI,  372,  Washburn,  C.
A. ;  conquest  of,  665,  Zurilla.

Paraguay  river,  tributaries  of  the,  exploring  expedition  to,
II,  114,  Daza  ;  a54,  Irala  ;  591,  Garcia,  A.  and  D. ;  342,
Igne  Chivre.

Paravicino.  Tomas,  H,  85,  David,  E.

Pardee  Hall,  Lafayette  college,  view  of,  IV,  644.

Pardon,  the  prerogative  of,  I,  286,  Blake,  E.

Paredes,  Luis,  I,  517,  Campeche.

Parestrello,  Felipa,  I,  697.

Pareus,  David,  VI,  353,  Ward.  N.

Paris,  American  chapel  in.  Ill,  554,  Kirk,  E.  N. ;  VI,  589,
Wolfe,  C.  L.;  Count  of,  IV,  589,  Orleans,  L.  A.  P.:  mania
in,  for  speculation,  III,  637,  Law,  John  ;  rule  of  the  Com-
mune in,  VI,  371,  Washburne,  E.  B.;  siege  of.  1, 464  ;  wa-
ter-supply of,  210,  Beaumarchais  ;  treaty  of,  H,  531. 533.

Paris  island,  S.  C,  H,  568,  Gage,  F.  D.

Park,  Dr.  James,  III,  42,  Hall,  J.  L.  J.  P.

Park,  Mungo,  III,  751,  Locke,  R.  A.

Park,  William,  VI,  665,  Zuniga.  G.  ,

Parke,  John,  II,  548,  French,  D.

Parke,  Lucy,  I,  487.  Byrd.

Parker,  Amos  G.,  V,  578,  Smith,  J.  E.

Parker,  Charles,  IV,  652,  Parker,  Joel.

Parker,  Rev.  Daniel,  IV,  649,  Parker,  A.  J.

Parker,  Edmund,  H,  62,  Damon,  D. ;  V,  7,  Pierce,  F.

Parker,  George  T.,  IV,  652,  Parker,  P.  J.  M.

Parker,  James,  III,  243,  Holt.

Parker,  Capt.  John.  IV.  654,  Parker,  T.

Parker,  Joseph  E.,  II,  668,  Goddard,  P.  B.

Parker,  Mrs.  Leroy,  I,  573,  Chandler,  R.

Parker,  Rev.  Nathan,  IV,  687,  Peabody.

Parker,  Rev.  Robert,  IV,  656,  Parka;  Tliomas.

Parker,  Samuel  H.,  II,  183,  Ditson,  O.  ;  IV.  654,  Parker,
James  C.  D.

Parker,  Theodore,  his  grave,  illustration,  IV,  655.

Parker,  Judge  W.,  IV,  653.  Parker,  S.

Parker's  Ferry,  S.  C,  engagement  at,  IV,  209,  Marion.


PARKMAN


PENDLETON


773


Parkman,  Dr.  G..  murder  of,  VI,  416,  Webster,  J.  W.

Parks,  designing  of,  IV,  578.  Olmsted  ;  VI,  270,  Vaux,  C.

Parley,  Peter,  books  of,  III,  528,  Kettell ;  pen-name,  680,
Goodrich,  S.  G.

Parley's  peak  and  canon,  discovered,  V,  102,  Pratt,  P.  P.

Parmelee,  Mary  L.,  IV,  699,  Peebles,  M.  L.

Parnell,  Charles  S.,  V,  685,  Stewart,  C.

Parola.  Dr..  I,  325.  Botta.

Parr,  Maud,  III.  607.  Lane,  Sir  R.

Parr,  Dr.  Samuel,  II,  596,  Gardiner,  J.  S.  J.

Parras,  Eulogio.  II,  369,  Escobedo.

Parri,  Sian,  IV,  613,  Owen,  G.

Parrish  will  case,  the,  II,  385,  Evarts,  W.  M.

Parrott  cannon  and  projectiles,  the,  IV,  660,  Parrott,  R.  P.

Parry  sound,  IV,  661,  Parry,  Sir  W.  E.

Parson,  the.  fighting,  I,  415,  Brownlow.

Parson's  cause,  the,  III,  173,  Henry,  P.

Parsons  college,  Iowa,  founded,  IV,  664,  Parsons,  L.  B.

Parsons,  Albert  R.,  V.  632,  Spies.

Parsons,  Eli,  V,  488,  Shays.

Parsons,  Rev.  Moses,  IV,  664,  Parsons,  T.

Parthenon,  the,  periodical,  VI,  608,  Woodworth,  S.

Parties,  political,  VI,  233,  234  ;  first,  in  the  U.  S.,  VI,  380.

Partington,  Mrs.,  V,  510,  Shillaber.

Partridge,  Alden,  I,  699,  Colvocoresses.

Pascagoula,  bay  of,  expedition  to,  II.  413.

Pascagoula  river,  the,  discovered,  III,  339,  Iberville.

Pasealis,  Dr.  Felix,  I,  519.  Canfield.

Pasini,  Albert,  pupil  of,  VI,  87,  Thompson,  A.  W.

Pasqualigo,  Lorenzo,  I,  491,  Cabot.

Pasquin,  Anthony,  pen-name,  III,  60  ;  VI,  526,  Williams,  J.

Passionists,  first,  in  U.  S.,  IV,  553,  O'Connor,  M.

Pasterne,  Signor.  Ill,  295,  Huden.

Pasteur,  Louis,  IV,  444,  Mott,  V.

Pastor  Antimio,  pen-name,  IV,  552,  Ochoa.

Pastorate,  the  longest  on  record,  I,  38,  Ainsworth.

Patagonia,  boundary  question  of,  II,  137,  Delvalle  ;  III,  356,
Irigoyen  ;  claims  to,  338,  Ibaiiez,  Ibercourt  ;  colony  in,
II,  625,  Gennes  ;  Spanish  colony  in,  III,  344,  Imecourt ;
exploration  of,  IV,  540,  None.

Patagonians,  the,  VI,  338,  Wallis,  S.  ;  II,  374,  Espeleta  ;
name  given  to,  the  giant  story  of,  V,  17,  Pigafetta.

Patapsco,  destruction  of  the,  V,  146.  Quackenbush.

Patapsco  institute,  V,  174,  Randolph,  S.  N.

Patents,  first  petitioner  for  a,  V,  199,  Read,  JV.  ;  law,  foun-
dation of  the,  673  ;  lawsuits,  III,  79,  Harding,  G. ;  appli-
cations for,  IV,  460,  Munn  ;  in  the  colonies, III,  425,

Patent-Office  Gazette,  the,  III,  562,  Knight,  E.  H.

Paterson,  Cornelia,  VI,  252,  Van  Rensselaer,  S.

Pathfinder,  loss  of  the  balloon,  VI,  581,  Wise,  J.

Pathfinder,  the,  sobriquet,  II,  546,  Fremont.

Pathfinder,  the  weekly,  II,  671,  Godwin.

Patriarch  of  Dorchester,  the,  VI,  472,  White,  J.

Patriarch  of  the  N.  E.  clergy,  the,  IV,  539,  Nott,  S.

Patriot  war,  the,  I,  12,  Adams,  Charles  ;  II,  179,  Dimick  ;
254,  Dumonchel  ;  267,  Duquet  ;  amnesty,  272,  Durham,
Earl  of  ;  520,  Fox,  H.  S.  ;  bill  for  compensating  loyalists,
II,  319,  Elgin  ;  pardon  for  insurgents,  VI,  316,  Wait,  B.

Patriot,  pilot-boat,  loss  of  the,  I,  468,  Burr,  T.

Patrocle,  M.  de  T.,  II,  375,  Espivent.

Patron  of  Industry,  the,  IV,  24.  Lord,  E.

Patten,  W.  H.,  V,  436,  Scott,  I.  M.

Patterson,  Alexander.  II,  534,  Franklin,  John.

Patterson,  Elizabeth,  I,  310,  Bonaparte.

Patterson,  John.  IV,  672,  Patterson,  Joseph.

Patterson,  Gen.  Robert,  II.  739.

Patti,  Salvatore.  IV,  674,  Patti,  C.

Pattison,  Rev.  R.  H.,  IV,  676,  Pattison,  R.  E.

Patton,  Maj.  James,  V,  439,  Scott,  T.  A.

Patton,  Prof.  J.  H.,  II.  500,  Ford,  E.  L.

Patton,  Ludlow,  III,  334,  Hutchinson,  Abby.

Patzun,  battle  at,  I,  535,  Carrera,  R.

Paugus,  Chief,  IV,  37,  Lovewell,  J.

Paul  III.,  Pope,  III,  183,  Hernandez,  V.;  VI.  205,  Uhland.

Paul,  John,  III,  467,  Jones,  J.  P.

Paul,  John,  pen-name,  VI.  402,  Webb,  C.  H.

Paul,  Moses.  IV,  552,  Occum.

Paulding,  Miss.,  III.  363.  Irving,  William.

Paulding,  J.  K.,  original  of  a  character  of,  II,  277,  Duval,
W.  P.;  his  home,  illustration,  IV,  680.

Paulding,  William.  IV.  679,  Paulding,  J.  K.

Paulet.  Lord  G.,  Ill,  482.  Judd,  G.  P.

Paule-Vaudreuil,  Count  de,  VI,  266,  Vaudreuil,  J.  F.

Paulist  Fathers,  the,  III,  157,  Hecker,  I.  T;  191,  Hewit,  N.
A.;  VI,  346.  Walworth.  C.  A.

Paulists.  the  (traders),  III,  403,  Jaray.

Paullin,  William,  VI.  581,  Wise,  J.

Paul  Quinn  college,  I,  495,  Cain.

Paulus  Hook,  engagement  at.  III,  667,  Lee,  H.

Pavement,  the  Russ,  V,  351,  Russ,  H.  P.

Pavon  and  Ruiz,  botanical  work  of,  II.  196,  Dombey.

Pavon,  battle  of,  VI.  218,  Urquiza  :  IV,  350,  Mitre.

Pavy  river,  discovery  of,  IV,  683,  Pavy.

Pawnee,  the,  ship,  II,  766,  Griffiths,  J.  W.

Pawnees,  massacre  by  the,  VI,  691,  V  Archeveque.

Pawtucket,  founder  of.  III,  425,  Jenckes,  J.,  2d.

Paxton  Boys,  the,  I,  255.  Biddle,  C. ;  V,  512,  Shippen,  E.

Paxton,  Philip,  III,  66,  Hammett.


Payaguas  Indians,  the,  I,  490,  Cabeza  ;  II.  515.  Foucher.

Paybodv,  Francis,  IV,  688,  Peabody,  G.  ;  689,  Peabody,
Joseph.

Payne,  Anna,  II.  48,  Cutt,  R.

Payne,  Elisha.  IV,  685,  Payne,  H.  B.

Payne,  John,  IV,  171,  Madison,  D.  P.

Payne,  William,  IV,  685,  Payne,  D.

Paysandu,  capture  of,  IV,  299,  Menna.

Payson,  A.  M.,  Ill,  595,  Laighton.

Payson,  Louisa,  III,  257,  Hopkins,  L.  P.

Payta,  burning  of,  I,  560.  Cavendish.

Paytable,  the,  II,  336.  Ellsworth,  O.

Payton,  Catherine,  HI,  470,  Jones,  Rebecca.

P.  D„  pen-name,  III,  399,  James,  T.  C.

Pea  Patch  island,  title  to,  V,  463,  Sergeant.  J.

Pea  Ridge,  battle  of,  II,  37.  Curtis.' S.  R.;  Ill,  50 ;  IV,  98,
McCulloch,  B.;  V,  119,  Price,  S.:  524.

Peabody  academy  of  science,  III,  335,  Hyatt ;  IV,  422,
Morse,  E.  S.  ;  619,  Packard,  A.  S.

Peabody,  Dr.  Jacob,  IV,  689,  Peabody,  N.

Peabody,  Mrs.  Mark,  pen-name,  VI.  287,  Victor,  M.  V.

Peabody,  Mary  T.,  IV,  191,  Mann.  M.  T.

Peabody,  Dr.  Nathaniel,  IV,  688,  Peabody,  E.  P.

Peabody,  Judge  Oliver,  IV,  689,  Peabody,  O.  W.  B.

Peabody,  Polly,  V,  182,  Rantoul.

Peabody,  Sarah,  V,  273,  Roberts,  S.

Peace  commission,  II,  69,  Dana,  F.  ;  of  the  Revolution,
111,109.

Peace  conference  of  Feb.  3,  1865,  I,  280.  Blair,  F.  P.

Peace  congress,  an  American,  proposed,  I,  102  ;  150,  Bald-
win, R.  S.  ;  279.

Peace  convention,  the,  VI,  199.

Peace  jubilee,  II,  658,  Gilmore,  P.  S.

Peace,  let  us  have,  II,  718.

Peacemaker,  the,  I,  395.

Peace,  negotiations  for,  with  Great  Britain,  I,  18.

Peace,  policy  of  Calhoun  on,  I,  501.

Peace  society,  the,  III.  585,  Ladd,  W.

Peach  Tree  Creek,  battle  of,  V,  504.

Peacock,  an  automatic,  II,  625,  Gennes.

Peacock,  vessel,  captures  by  (1813).  VI,  368,  Warrington  ;
I,  594,  Chauncey,  J.  S.;  destruction  of,  III,  640,  Law-
rence, J.;  11,351,  Emmons,  G.  F.;  cruise  of,  IV,  638,
Palmer,  J.  C.

Peale's  Museum,  IV,  690,  Peale,  C.  W.

Pearson,  John,  IV,  692,  Pearson,  Jonathan.

Pearson,  Judge  J.  S.,  Ill,  526,  Kerr,  J.

Pearson,  Judge  R.  M.,  II,  &33,  Ellis,  J.  W.

Peat-formation,  study  of,  III,  697,  Lesquereux.

Peck,  Elizabeth.  IV,  730,  Perkins,  T.  H.

Peck,  Judge  J.  H..  IV,  112,  McDuflie.

Peck,  John,  IV,  696.  Peck,  W.  D.

Peck,  Joseph.  IV,  695,  Peck,  G.  W.

Peck,  Paul,  IV,  696.  Peck,  W.  H.

Peck,  Philander,  VI,  696,  Peck,  C.  C.

Peck,  Prof.  Tracy,  V,  564,  Smith,  C.  L.

Peckham,  James,  IV,  69.  Lyon,  JV.

Peckham  vs.  Burrows,  case  of,  III,  425,  Jenckes,  T.  A.

Pecksnut,  Chief,  V,  643,  Standish  ;  VI,  444,  Weston.

Peddie  institute,  gifts  to,  I,  689,  Colgate.

Pedestrianism,  IV,  539,  Norton,  T.  H.

Pedraza,  Gomez,  IV,  473,  Muzquiz  ;  V,  393,  Santa-Anna.

Pedro  I.  of  Brazil,  II,  5(57,  Gabriac.

Peebles,  Augustus  A.,  IV,  699,  Peebles,  M.  L.

Peebles's  farm,  engagement  at,  II.  715.

Peeping  Tom,  pen-name.  III.  528,  Kettell.

Peers,  Maj.  Valentine.  IV,  699,  Peers,  B.  O.

Peirce,  Abraham,  IV,  703.  Peirce,  W.  S.

Peiret,  Pastor,  II.  55,  Daille.

Peirson,  Oliver,  IV,  703,  Peirson.  L.  J.  W.

Peixotto,  Rev.  M.  L.  M.,  IV,  703,  Peixotto,  D.  L.  M.

Peking  Scientific  Magazine,  the,  IV,  234,  Martin,  W.  A.  P.

Pelados,  the,  I,  302,  Bohorques,  P.

Pelegaud,  Gen.,  VI,  280.  Vermont.

Pelew  islands,  discovery  of.  VI,  293,  Villalobos.

Pelham,  Penelope,  VI,  567,  Winslow,  J.

Pelican,  the,  III,  339,  Iberville.

Pelleport,  Marquis,  book  by,  I,  379,  Brissot.

Pellew,  Edward,  II.  395,  Exmouth.

Pellico,  Silvio,  III.  162,  Hempel.

Pellock,  Dr.,  IV,  379,  Moore.  E.  M.

Pelouze.  Theophilus  J..  V,  573,  Smith,  J.  L.

Pelton,  Oliver,  IV,  693,  Pease,  J.  I. ;  V,  423,  Schoff.

Pemaquid,  IV,  171,  Madockawando  ;  I,  554.  Casiin.

Pemaquids,  the,  V,  382,  Samoset.

Pemberton,  James,  IV,  705,  Pemberton,  E.

Pemberton,  Ralph,  IV,  706,  Pemberton,  P.

Pembina,  boundary-line  near.  I,  92,  Armstrong,  M.  K.

Pembosta,  Count  of.  IV,  497,  Neuville.

Pembroke,  Earl  of,  VI,  687,  Herbert.

Pembroke,  N.  H.,  IV,  37,  Lovewell,  J.

Pemmican,  invention  of,  I,  321.  Borden.  G.

Penacook,  proprietorship  of,  VI,  330,  Walker,  Timothy.

Penal  legislation,  works  on,  III,  710.

Penalty  envelope,  use  of  the.  III,  540,  King,  H.

Pencader  Hundred,  Del.,  settlement  of,  IV,  395.  Morgan,  E.

Pendleton,  Alexander  S.,  IV,  709,  Pendleton,  W.  N.

Pendleton,  John  S..  V.  418,  Schenck.  R.  C.

Pendleton,  Nathaniel,  H,  142,  Dennison.


774


PENDLETON


PERU


Pendleton,  Philip,  IV,  708,  Pendleton,  E.

Pendleton,  W.  K.,  IV,  20,  Loos.

Penguin,  capture  of  the,  I,  256,  Biddle,  James.

Penguin  islands,  discoveries  in,  IV,  530,  Noort.

Pen-holder,  pen-name,  II,  315,  Eggleston,  E.

Penikese  island  school,  founded,  I,  36,  Agassiz.

Penington,  Isaac,  IV,  710,  Penington,  E.

Penmanship,  V,  630,  Spencer,  P.  R.

Penn,  Arthur,  pen-name,  IV,  261.  Matthews.

Penn,  Letitia,  I,  116,  Aubrey,  Lady  L.

Penn.  Moses,  IV,  711,  Penn,  J.

Penn,  Mr.,  pen-name,  I,  700.  Colwell.

Penn,  Springett.  rv,  715,  Penn,  W.

Penn,  Admiral  William,  II,  569,  Gage,  T. ;  IV,  712,  Penn,  W.

Penn,  William,  pen-name,  II,  385,  Evarts,  J.

Penn,  William,  III,  99,  Harrison,  G.  L.

Penn  Magazine,  the,  projected,  V,  45.

Penn  Monthly,  the.  VI,  94,  Thompson,  R.  E.

Pennie,  Mrs.,  II.  613,  Gaspe,  P.  A.  de.

Pennimites,  the.  II,  534,  Franklin,  John.

Pennock.  Mrs.  Alexander  ML,  II,  419,  Farragut.

Penn's  house  in  Philadelphia,  illustration,  IV,  715.

Pennsbury  Manor,  IV,  711,  Penington,  E.;  715,  Penn,  H.

Pennsylvania,  surveys  in,  I,  109,  Ashburner  ;  iron  industry
in,  237,  Benner  ;  abolition  of  slavery,  421,  Bryan,  G. ;  Re-
serve, the,  II,  34,  Curtin,  A.  G. ;  new  constitution  of,  288,
Earle,  T. ;  placed  under  Fletcher,  481 :  sale  of,  501,  Ford,
P. ;  question  of  taxing  proprietary  estates,  529 ;  Insur-
rection in,  551,  Fries  ;  l>equests  to,  660,  Girard,  S.;  trou-
bles in  the  colony  of,  III,  62,  Hamilton,  A.;  first  church
in,  238,  Holm,  J.  C. ;  map  of  the  province  of,  239,  Holme,
T. ;  debt  of,  290,  Hoyt,  H.  M. ;  Dutch  and  Swedish  claims
to,  295,  Hudde ;  agricultural  college,  gift  to,  357,  Irvin,
J.:  purchase  of  "  the  triangle,"  858,  Irvine,  W;  histori-
cal society,  399,  James,  T.  C;  political  dissensions  in
the  colony,  503,  Keith,  Sir  W.;  first  iron-furnace  in,
ibid. ;  high  court  of  chancery  in,  ibid.;  struggle  with
the  proprietary  in,  748,  Lloyd :  troubles  in,  II,  383,
Evans,  J.;  6°S.  Gordon,  P.;  Ill,  503.  Keith,  Sir  W.\
IV,  3,  Logan,  J. ;  university  of,  4,  Logan,  James ;  col-
lege, medical  department  of,  85,  McClellan,  G.;  Latin
poems  on,  179,  Makin ;  first  town  in,  Philadelphia  pur-
chased, boundary  controversy,  administration  assumed
by  the  crown,  restored  to  Penn,  pirates  in  the  waters  of,
210-211,  Markham,  W.;  boundary  of,  239,  Mason,  C;
Catholic  institutions  in,  V,  481,  Shanahan  ;  IV,  553-554,
O'Connor,  M.;  VI,  179,  Tuigg  ;  595,  Wood,  J.  F.;  650,
Young,  J.  M. ;  purchase  of  the  southwestern  part,  IV,
532,  Norris,  I. ;  struggle  with  the  proprietaries,  ibid. ;  the
state-house  bell,  ibid.;  view  of  the  state -house,  532;
Welsh  tract  in,  614,  Owen,  G.;  home  for  blind  men,  the,
672,  Patterson,  M.;  academy  of  fine  arts,  founded,  690,
Peale,  C.  W. ;  grant  of,  its  name,  colonization  of,  713  ;
treaty  with  Indians,  annexed  to  New  York,  714 :  prov-
ince restored  to  Penn,  his  proposal  to  sell,  715  ;  disputes
of  heirs,  boundary  dispute  settled,  Indian  troubles  in.  716;
adjustment  of  rights  in,  during  the  Revolution,  717,  Penn,
J. ;  funding  system  of,  747,  Pettit,  C. ;  insurrection  in,
or  "Pennimite"  war,  II,  534,  Franklin,  John;  V,  2;
debt  reduced,  59,  Pollock,  J. ;  Episcopal  institutions  in,
86,  Potter,  A. ;  agricultural  college,  132,  Pugh,  Evan ;
first  mills  in,  137,  Pusey ;  first  paper  money  in,  188,
Rawle  ;  Welsh  colony  in,  229,  Rhees,  M.  J. ;  first  consti-
tution drafted  for,  263  ;  Indian  release  of  lands  in,  402,
Sasoonan  ;  rival  legislatures  in,  677,  Stevens,  T. ;  uni-
versity, scientific  department  of,  689  ;  library  building,
illustration,  690  ;  gifts  to  university,  VI,  202,  Tyndale  ;
449,  Wharton,  J;  hospital,  gift  to,  447,  Wharton,  J.;
school  system,  588,  Wolf,  G.

Pennsylvania  Freeman,  the,  mobbed,  VI,  493.

Pennsylvania  Magazine,  the,  IV,  631,  Paine,  T.

Penny  Magazine,  the.  III,  316,  Hunt,  F.

Pennymite  war,  the,  III,  427,  Jenkins,  J. ;  TV,  142,  Maclay,  W.

Penny  society,  the,  II,  702,  Graham,  I.

Penobscot,  defence  of  the  fort  at  (1779),  rv,  143.  MacLean,
F. ;  taken  by  the  French,  I,  583,  Charnisi  ;  expedition
against  the  French  at  V.  644.  Standish.

Penobscot  Indians,  relations  of,  with  the  English,  rv,  171,
Madockawando.

Penobscot  river,  naval  action  in,  V,  380,  Saltonstall,  D.;  I,
690,  Collier,  Sir  G.

Penrose,  Clement  B.,  IV,  719,  Penrose,  C.  B.

Penrose,  Capt.  J.  W.,  VI,  696,  Penrose,  W.  H.

Pens,  processes  for  making,  rv,  429,  Morton,  A.

Pensacola,  surrender  of,  I,  514.  Campbell,  J.;  harbor,  dis-
covered, II,  153,  De  Soto  ;  taken  (1781),  5R5,  Gdlvez,  B.;
stormed  by  Jackson,  III,  377 ;  captured,  378  ;  restored,
878  ;  taken  from  the  Spaniards,  687,  Le  Moyne.  Joseph  ;
taken  by  the  French  and  retaken  (1719),  IV,  542,  Noyan.

Pensacola,  the,  IV,  417,  Morris,  H.  W.

Pensions,  of  revolutionary  veterans,  III,  638,  Law,  John.

Pentagoet,  Me.,  V,  368,  St.  Castin.

Pentecost  island,  discovery  of,  VI,  888,  Wallis,  S.

Penthievre,  Duke  of,  IV,  590,  Orleans,  P.  P.  J.  M.

People's  party,  the,  V,  419,  Schieffelin,  B.

Peoria,  French  mission  at,  IV,  204.  Marest.

Pepperbox,  Peter,  pen-name,  II,  445,  Fessenden,  T.  G.

Pepperell,  Sir  William,  II,  555,  Frost,  G.

Pequea,  Pa ,  theological  seminary  at,  V,  584,  Smith,  Robert.


Pequot,  pen-name,  TV,  200,  March,  C.  W.

Pequots,  the,  battle  with,  V,  402,  Sassacus  ;  the  war,  IV.
244,  Mason,  John  ;  VI,  209,  Underhill,  J. ;  detachment  of
the  Narragansetts,  532  ;  incident,  IV,  570,  Oldham,  J.

Peramas,  Melchor  de,  V.  131,  Pucnle.

Percheron  horses.  VI,  342,  Walters.

Percussion  pills.  III,  15,  Guthrie.  S.

Percussion  shells,  invention  of,  V,  074,  Stevens,  R.  L.

Percy,  Catharine,  I,  403,  Brown,  S.

Percy,  Capt.  Charles,  VI,  358.  Warfield.

Percy,  Florence,  pen-name,  I,  51,  Allen,  E.  A.

Pereda,  Gov.  Xnjrel.  I,  232,  Benavides.

Pereire.  Isaac,  IV,  726.  Pereire,  J.  E.

Perez,  Dr.  Roque,  VI,  258,  Varela,  H.  F.

Perfect  Pharisee,  the.  book  entitled,  VI,  425,  Welde.

Perfectionists,  the,  IV.  176,  Mahan,  A.;  543,  Noyes,  J.  H.

Perine,  Mary  E.,  VI,  173,  Tucker,  M.  E.

Periodical,  first  American,  V,  125,  Prince,  T.

Perkins,  Benjamin  D.,  H,  445,  Fessenden,  T.  G.;  V,  528.

Perkins,  Rev.  Daniel,  V,  208.  Reed,  John.

Perkins,  Judge  Hamilton,  IV,  728,  Perkins,  G.  H.

Perkins,  James,  IV,  730,  731,  Perkins,  T.  H.

Perkins,  Dr.  Joseph,  IV,  728,  Perkins,  E.

Perkins,  Roger.  IV,  728,  Perkins,  G.  H.

Perkins,  Samuel  H.,  Ill,  102,  Hart,  C.  H.

Perkins  institute,  the,  HI,  283,  Howe,  S.  G.  and  J.  R.

Perkinsism,  IV,  728,  Perkins,  E.

Perley,  pen-name,  V,  67,  Poore.

Peruambuco,  discovery  of,  IV,  658,  Parmentier,  J.;  capt-
ure of,  III,  603,  Lancaster,  Sir  J. ;  Catholic  institutions
in,  III,  712,  Lima ;  republican  revolution  in,  713,  Lima,
Jose ;  church  of  the  'fCarmo"  in,  IV,  213.  Marques.  Per-
digao  ;  II,  237,  Duarte  Coelho ;  revolution  in,  rv,  698-699,
Pedro  I.  and  //.

Perot,  Elliston.  IV,  732.  Perot,  T.  M.

Perrot,  M.,  II,  554.

Perry,  the,  wreck  of,  I,  284,  Blake,  G.  S.

Perry,  Anna  M.,  V,  298,  Rodgers,  G.  W.

Perry,  Edgar  A.,  pseudonym,  V,  45.

Perry,  Edmund,  IV.  734,  Perry,  C.  R.

Perry,  George,  IV,  762,  Phillips,  M.

Perry,  Martha  A.,  IV,  38,  Lowe,  M.  A.

Perry,  Matthew  C,  H,  415.

Perry,  Thomas  S.,  Ill,  711,  Lieber,  F.

Perry  treaty,  the,  II,  455.

Perry ville,  battle  of,  I,  442,  Buell,  D.  C. ;  TV,  662,  Parsons,
C.  C;  V.  498;  659,  Steedman,  J.  B.;  VI,  7,  Sweet,  B.  J.

Persan,  Madame  Doublet  de,  V,  6.  Pidansat.

Perseverance,  the.  steamboat,  II,  471,  Fitch,  John.

Perspective  protractor,  inventor  of  the,  IV,  604,  Otis.

Peru,  additions  of  territory  to,  public  works  in,  Spanish
conquest  and  an  old  prophecy  of  it,  royal  funeral  in,  III,
291,  Huayna  Capac  ;  ancient  records  of,  IV,  588,  Orlan-
do ;  confederation  with  Bolivia,  V,  395,  Santa  Cruz,  A.;

III,  343,  Iguain  ;  IV.  583,  Orbegozo  ;  the  apostle  of,  I.  168,
Barcena,  A.  de  ;  bridges  in,  III,  628,  Lalrobe,  C.  H. ;  chari-
ties, founded,  II,  23,  Cruz,  R.  de  la  ;  cities  founded  in,
improvements  in,  IV,  22,  Lopez  de  Zuniga  ;  conquest  of,
I,  59,  Almagro  ;  113,  Atahualpa  ;  602.  Chialiquichiama  ;
H,  168,  169,  Diaz,  R.;  177,  Diente,  J.;  427,  Felipe  ;  435,
Fernandez,  D.;  IV,  56,  Luque;  181,  Maldonado  ;  186,
Manco  Inca  ;  366,  Montemayor;  385,  Mora.  D.;  V,  35,
36,  Pizarro  ;  347,  Ruminagui  ;  392-393,  San  Mi  at  in  ;
VI,  180.  Tupac-Amaru;  206,  Ulloa,  F.;  656,  Zarate.  A.
and  P.  O. ;  contest  of  church  and  state  in,  III,  185,
Herrera,  B. ;  contributions  to  the  war  against  the  Dutch
and  English,  329,  Hurtado,  G.;  Dutch  attacks  on,  civil
war  in,  public  works,  II,  437,  Fernandez  de  Cordova  ;
decree  to  abolish  Indian  slavery,  rebellion  against  the
first  viceroy,  IV,  546,  Nunez-  Vela. ;  depredations  of  pirates
in,  II,  85,  David,  E.;  early  revolutions  in,  III,  329.  Hur-
tado, A.;  earthquakes  and  floods  in,  V,  82,  Portocarrero;
end  of  Spanish  domination  in,  739.  Sucre,  A.  J.;  explora-
tion of,  U,  152 ;  feud  between  the  conquerors,  V,  36,
Pizarro,  F.;  first  missionary  to,  IV,  366,  Montenegro;
founder  and  first  inca  of,  18f>,  Manco  Capac  ;  guano  de-
posits in,  I,  231,  Belmont.  P. ;  important  export  of,  V,  266,
Rivero  ;  indemnity  for  Alvarado's  claim,  1, 62,  Alvarado  ;

IV,  435,  Moscoso  ;  independence  proclaimed  (July  28,
1820),  11,588,  Gana;  reforms  in,  V.  392,  San  Martin.  J.  de  ;
Indian  conspiracy  in.  IV,  197,  Manso  ;  Indian  insurrec-
tions in,  I,  705,  Condorcanqui ;  III,  408,  Jauregui ;  II,
485,  Flores,  I.;  372,  Espartero ;  I,  705,  Condorcanqui;
insurrection  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  in,  II,  613,  Gasca  ;  last
inca  of,  captured,  IV,  47,  Loyola  ;  rebellion  of  the  con-
querors, II.  661,  Giron ;  liberation  of,  I,  306;  miracles
wrought  in, IV,  239,  Masias;  native  historian  of,  II,  593-594,
Garcilaso,  the  Inca  ;  pillaged,  224,  Drake,  Sir  F. ;  public
works  in,  Dutch  attack  on,  IV,  298-299,  Mendoza  ;  loans,
I.  153.  Balta  ;  V,  14,  Pierola  ;  war  with  Chili,  14,  Pierola;
rebellions  against  the  Spanish  government  in.  III,  214,
Hinojosa  ;  343.  Illatopa  ;  rebellion  of  1780,  II,  870,  Exco-
bedo,J. ;  rebellion  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  in.  III.  749,  Loayaza;

V,  604,  Solano  ;  of  Giron,  750  ;  reforms  in,  III.  714,  I.iiian  ;
revolutions  in.  1, 554,Cn*ti7ta  :  492.  Cdceres,  A.  A. ;  II,  297,
Echenique  ;  373.  BhmJo.  J. ;  III,  342,  Iqlesias.  M. ;  342  -S48,
Iguain  ;  IV,  866-367,  Montero  ;  682.  Paullu  ;  749.  Pezuda,
Joaquin :  V,  100,  Prado,  M.  I. ;  185.  Pumacahua ;  376,  Sala-
verry  ;  VI,  808,  Vivanco  ;  slaves  freed,  II,  300  ;  cotton  and


PERUVIAN


PIANO


775


wine  industries  in,  and  introduction  of  Chinese  labor,  320,
Elias ;  scientific  exploration  of,  IV,  356,  Mondesir ;  seizure
of  American  vessels  at,  V,  48,  Poinsett  ;  slaughter  in,  VI.
228.  Velverde  ;  Spanish  government  of,  128,  Toledo,  F. ;
civil  law  of,  128,  Toledo,  G.;  treatment  of  natives  in,  135,
Toribio  ;  unification  of,  IV,  178,  Malta  Capac  ;  war  of
independence  in,  I,  738,  Cordova,  J.  M.;  VI,  222.  Valdes.
Geronimo  ;  V.  463,  Serna  ;  739,  Sucre,  A.  J.;  IV,  568-569,
OlaAeta  ;  war  of,  with  Chili,  1,493,  Cdceres.

Peruvian  bark,  discovery  of,  I,  606,  Chinchon;  substitute
for,  646,  Clayton,  J. ;  treatise  on,  III,  666,  Lee,  A. ;  use
of,  in  throat  disease.  I,  185,  Bartlett,  J.

Pessacus,  IV,  313,  Miantonomo;  VI,  209,  Uncas.

Peshtigo.  Wis.,  IV,  562.  Oqden.  W.  B.

Pesigueyca.  burning  of,  IV,  460,  Munoz  de  Collantes.

Pestilence,  II,  766,  Griffltts;  III,  166,  HendHcken.

Pet  banks,  the.  III,  382,  383.

Peterborough  Review,  the,  VI,  475,  White,  T.

Peter  the  Great,  II,  457,  Fillmore.

Peter  Martyr,  I,  78,  Anghiera ;  quoted,  IV,  646,  Parent,  P. ;
letter  of,  VT,  261,  Varnhagen.

Peter  Porcupine's  Gazette,  V,  349,  Rush.

Peter,  William,  rv,  740,  Peter,  S.

Petersburg  Va.,  public  library  of,  II,  634,  Gholson,  T.  S.;
raid  to,  V,  500,  Sheridan;  siege  of,  II,  714;  III,  654,  Les-
lie ;  673 ;  IV,  584,  Ord,  E.  O.  C. ;  assault  on,  II,  7&5,  Grif-
fin; in,  202,  Hill,  A.  P.;  capture  of,  II,  635,  Gibbon,  J.;
716;  surrender  of,  II,  309,  Edwards,  O.

Peters,  Phillis,  VI,  450,  Wheatley,  P.

Peters,  Ralph,  IV.  743,  Peters.  R.

Peters,  Rev.  Dr.  Richard,  II,  433,  Ferguson,  E.

Peters,  William,  IV,  743,  Peters,  R.

Petigru,  James  L.,  IU,  100,  Harrison,  J.  T.  ;  IV,  234,
Martin,  W.  D.

Petersen,  III.  493,  Kane,  E.  K.

Petersfleld,  estate  of,  V,  737,  Stuyvesant,  P.  G.

Petersham,  Lord,  III,  89,  Harrington.  Earl  of.

Peterson,  Lawrence  and  Oolof,  IV,  744,  Peterson,  C.  J.

Petit,  Lizzie,  II,  46,  Cutler,  L.  P.

Petition,  right  of,  I,  28,  Adams,  John  Q.;  325,  Botts.

Petra,  Archbishop  of,  I,  746,  Corrigan.

Petrel,  capture  of  the  privateer,  V,  137,  Purviance.

Petroleum,  of  Pennsylvania,  first  mention  of,  V,  92,-
Pouchot ;  studies  of,  IV,  697,  Peckham,  S.  F.

Petticoat  Allen,  I,  56,  Allen,  W.

Petticoat  insurrection,  the,  IV,  525,  Nivelles.

Petticolas,  Mr..  IV.  483.  Neagle.

Pettit,  Henry,  VI,  554,  Wilson,  J.  M.

Petzholdt,  Julius,  II,  197,  Domenech.

Peynier,  Gov.,  IV,  563,  Oge.

Peynier,  Marquis  de,  III,  527,  Kerverseau.

Pezuela,  Gen.  Robles,  IV,  339,  Miramon.

Pharmacopoeia  of  the  United  States,  the,  V,  619,  Spal-
ding, L.

Pharmacy,  college  of,  IV,  220,  Marshall,  Charles  ;  inven-
tions, V,  219,  Remington,  J.  P.;  studies,  IV,  177,  Maisch.

Pharol,  the,  journal,  III,  735,  Lisboa.

Phazma,  pen-name,  II,  450,  Field,  M.  C.

Pheidias,  a  work  of,  identified.  VI,  322,  Waldstein.

Phelps,  Edward,  rv,  752,  Phelps,  S.  S.

Phelps,  Elnathan,  IV,  329,  Miller,  W.

Phelps,  John,  IV.  753,  Phelps,  S.  S.

Phelps,  John  J.,  IV,  754,  Phelps,  W.  W.

Phelps,  Judge  John,  IV,  750,  Phelps.  A.  H.  L.

Phelps,  Jonas  H.,  VI,  696,  Phelps,  G.  M.

Phelps  and  Gorham  purchase,  the,  II,  688,  Gorham,  N. ;  IV,
752.  Phelps,  O.

Phenix,  le,  I,  409,  Brown,  Moses.

Phi  Beta  Kappa  society,  the,  III,  521,  Kent,  J.

Philadelphia,  Academy  of  fine  arts,  I.  212,  Beck,  P.;
Academy  of  natural  sciences,  II,  652,  Gilliams  ;  IV,  147,
Maclure;  V,  434,  Schweinitz.  L.  D.;  VI,  171,  Tryon,  G.
W.  ;  270,  Vaux,  W.  S.  ;  557,  Wilson,  T.  B.  ;  the  Ameri-
can museum,  V,  532,  Simitiere  ;  blind  asylum  in,  238,
Richards,  B.  W.  ;  botanic  garden  in,  IV,  147,  MacMa-
hon,  B.;  Catholic  institutions  in,  III,  303,  Hughes,  J.;  IV,
497,  Neumann  ;  chemical  industries  in.  Ill,  101,  Harri-
son, J. ;  city  troop,  the,  680,  Leiper  ;  V,  603,  Snowdon,
A.E.;  Episcopal  hospital  of,  593,  Smith,  G.  W.;  VI,  433,
Welsh,  J.;  experiments,  the,  III,  550,  Kinnersley  ;  exten-
sion of,  II,  521,  Fraley  ;  Fairmount  park,  V,  459,  Sellers,
W.;  financial  embarrassment  of,  II,  521,  Fraley;  first
day-schools  in,  IV,  279,  Meade,  G. ;  first  mayor  of,  408,
Morrei/  ;  first  purchase  of  the  site  of,  III,  295,  Hudde  ;
first  water-works,  626,  Latrobe  ;  gifts  to,  IV,  122,
McHenry,  J.;  gifts  to  benevolent  institutions  in,  V,  164,
Ralston,  R.  ;  V,  474,  Seybert  ;  509,  Shields,  M.;  II,  660,
(firard,  S.  ;  hospital  for  blind  and  lame  in,  VI,  542,
Wills  ;  library,  founded,  II,  528  ;  library  bequeathed  to,
IV,  4.  Logan,  James  and  William  ;  library,  gifts  to.  134,
Mackenzie,  W ;  V,  350,  Rush,  R. ;  handsomest  man  in,  I,
257,  Biddle  ;  medical  college.  V,  512,  Shippen,  W.;  me-
morial church  of.  III,  178,  Henson,  P.  S.;  naval  hospi-
tal, the.  267,  Horwitz  ;  observatory  at,  VI,  331,  Walker,
S.  C;  old  church  in,  illustration,  618  ;  oldest  church  in,
III,  499,  Keen,  M. ;  old  men's  home  in,  VI,  488,  Whitney.
A.;  Penn's  house  in.  illustration.  IV,  715;  statue,  715;
Presbyterian  hospital  in,  V,  404,  Saunders,  E.  D. ;  Pres-
ton retreat  in,  113,  Preston,  J.;  Quakers,  struggles  of,


IV,  532,  Norris,  I.;  riots  in,  662,  Parsons,  A.  V.;  V,  72,
Porter,  D.  R. ;  335,  Roumfort ;  VI,  447-448.  Wharton,  R. ;
550,  Wilson,  J. ;  the  Rumsey  society  in,  V,  347,  Rumsey,
J.;  St.  George's  church,  20,  Pilmore  ;  school  of  design,
founder  of,  IV,  740,  Peter,  S. ;  Seminary  of  St.  Charles
Borromeo,  founded,  III,  519,  Kenrick,  F.  P.  :  site  of,
chosen  and  named,  IV,  714;  210,  Markham.  W.;  Spring


II,  700,  Graff,  F.;  Zion  church  and  St.  Michael's,  III,  578,

Kunze.
Philadelphia,  the,  capture  and  recapture  of,  IV,  107,  Mac-

donough  ;  wrecked,  I,  141  ;  destruction  of,  n,  121  ;  V,

105,  Preble.  E.
Philadelphia  and  Reading  coal  and  iron  company,  the,  II,

699,  Gowen.
Philadelphia  contribution  ship,  the,  V,  58(5,  Smith.  J.
Philadelphia  Repository,  the,  II,  648,  Gilder,  W.  H.
Philadelphians,  the,  III,  509,  Kelpius.
Philanthropic  Index  and  Review.  VI,  503,  Wilbur,  C.  T.
Philharmonic  society,  New  York,  III,  206,  Hill,  U.  C. ;  VI,

86.  Thomas,  T.
Phililenia,  pen-name,  IV,  430,  Morton,  S.  W.  A.
Philip,  King,  poem  on,  II,  290,  Eastbum,  J.  W.
Philip  II.,  II,  362,  Ercilla.

Philip  III.,  Ill,  306,  Hiihne  ;  343,  Ihering  ;  IV,  529,  Nodal.
Philip  IV.,  II,  362,  Erauzo.
Philippe  Egalite,  IV.  589,  Orleans.
Philippi,  battle  at,  III,  604,  Lander.  F.  W.
Philippine  islands,  conquest  of,  III,  581,  Labezares  ;  678,

Legaspi ;  VI,  216,  Urdaneta  ;  discovery  of,  IV,  173,  Ma-
gellan.
Philipseborough,  manor-house  of,  illustration,  IV,  758.
Philleo,  Calvin,  I,  768,  Crandall.
Phillips  Andover  academy,  founded,  IV,  762,  Phillips.  S.;

first  preceptor,  692,  Pearson,  E. ;  gifts  to,  763,  Phillips ;

688,  Peabody,  G.
Phillips  Exeter  academy,  founded,  IV,  762,  Phillips.  J.;

gifts  to,  V,  381,  Saltonstall,  L.;  521,  Sibley,  J.  L.;  VI,

565,  Winkley.
Phillips,  Abigail,  V,  151,  Quincy,  J.
Phillips,  Cornelia,  V,  629,  Spencer,  C.  P.
Phillips,  Col.  George,  V,  132,  Pugh,  E.  L.
Phillips,  Capt.  John,  II,  452,  Fillmore.
Phillips,  Sir  R..  II,  364.

Phillips.  Rev.  Richard,  IV.  759,  Phillips,  James.
Phillipse,  Mary,  IV,  418,  Morris,  M.  P.
Phillipse,  Susanna,  V,  282,  Robinson,  B.
Philokalist,  pen-name,  VI,  499,  Wierzbicki.
Philology,  III,  29,  Haldeman  ;  American,  V,  3,  Pickering,

J. ;  work  in,  III,  35,  Hale,  H ;  39,  Hall,  I.  H.  and  F. ;  116,

Haunt,  P.;  IV,  217,  Marsh.  G.  P.
Philo  Paciflcus,  pen-name,  VI,  613.  Worcester,  N.
Philo  Parsons,  the,  mutiny  on,  I,  204,  Bcall,  J.  Y. ;  capture

of,  455,  Burley.
Philopolis,  pen-name,  IV,  217,  Marsh,  James.
Philosopher  Woods,  sobriquet,  VI,  604,  Woods.
Philosophical  society,  III,  420  ;  American,  I,  47,  Alexander,

James  ;  of  St.  Louis,  III,  95,  Harris,  W.  T.
Philosophy  of  the  Plan  of  Salvation,  anonymous  book,  VI.

327,  Walker,  J.  B.
Phobos,  satellite  named,  III,  37,  Hall.  A.
Phocion,  pen-name.  Ill,  59  ;  V,  596.  Smith.  W.  L.
Phoenix,  the,  steamboat,  V,  644,  673  ;  burning  of,  VI,  160,

Trevett,  S.  R.
Phoenix,  J.  P.,  IV,  765,  Phoenix,  S.  W.
Phoenix,  John,  pen-name,  II,  148,  Derby.  G.  H.
Phoenixville  Pioneer,  the,  VI,  40,  Taylor,  B.
Phonetic  humor,  II.  521,  Foxcroft,  G.  A.
Phonograph,  the,  II,  304,  Edison.
Phonotypy,  III,  528,  Kettell.
Phosphates,  lost  in  milling,  III,  265,  Horsford,  E.  N.:  in

Canada,  319,  Hunt,  T.  §.;  of  South  Carolina,  V, 187,

Ravenel,  S.  J. ;  discovery  of,  494,  Shepard,  C.  U.
Phosphorescence  of  the  sea.  I,  335,  Bowdoin.
Photo-engraving,  IV,  437,  Moss,  J.  C.
Photograph,  first,  taken  from  life,  II,  227,  Draper,  J.  W.
Photography,  improvements  in.  I,  300,  Bogardus,  A.;  VI,

698,  Rockwood  ;  celestial,  II,  228,  Draper,  H. ;  composite,

as  a  test  of  signatures.  538,  Frazer.  P.;  illustration  of

medical  works  by.  519,  Fox,  G.  H.;  trimmer  invented,  V,

288,  Robinson.  S.  W.
Photo-lithography,  invention  of.  II,  187,  Dixon,  Joseph.
Photo-micrography,  VI,  607,  Woodward,  J.  J.
Photophone,  the.  I,  225,  Bell,  A.  G.
Phrenological  measurements,  inventor  of  instrument  for,

V,  676,  Stevens.  E.
Phrenology,  journals  of,  I,  700,  Combe  ;  II,  517,  Fowler,

O.  S.;  VI,  431,  Wells.  S.  R.
Physicians,  licensing  of,  VI.  393,  Watson,  W.  H.
Physicians  and  Surgeons.  College  of,  I,  164,  Bard,  S.
Physick,  Edmund,  IV,  765,  Physick,  P.  S.
Physics,  researches  in,  V,  338,  Rowland.
Physiognomy,  studies  in,  V,  533,  Simms.  J.
Physiology,  experiments  in,  II,  220,  Dowler.
Physionotrace,  the,  V,  372,  Saint  Memin.
Piano,  invention  of  a  mute,  of  a  system.  IV,  744,  Peter-

silea  ;  new  mode  of  teaching.  II,  427,  Feininger  ;  inven-


776


PICARD


PNEUMATIC


tion,  III,  206,  Hill,  U.  C.  ;  .#k>lian  attachment,  I,  686,
Coleman,  O.  M. ;  improvements,  602,  Cnickering,  Jonas.

Picard,  le.,  V,  14.  Pierre.

Pichardo,  Jos6,  VI,  20,  Talamantes.

Piehincha,  battle  of,  I,  306.

Pichot,  M.  Amedee,  V,  111.

Pickatolika,  engagement  at,  II,  193,  Dodge,  H.

Picken,  Ebenezer,  IV,  767,  Picken.

Pickens,  Rebecca  C,  I,  131.  Bacon,  J.  E.

Pickens,  Samuel,  IV,  768,  Pickens,  I.

Pickering,  Mary  O.,  V.  3,  Pickering,  J.

Pickering.  Timothy,  trial  of,  VI,  475,  White,  S.

Picket-shovel,  invention  of  a,  I,  234,  Benham.

Pico  de  la  Mirandola  of  Chili,  the,  I,  86,  Aracena.

Picot,  F.  E.,  pupils  of,  II,  68,  Dana,  W.  P.;  Ill,  642,  Law-
rie  ;  V,  371.  Saintin  ;  VI,  271,  Vedder.

Picquet.  M.  de  la  Motte,  II,  178,  Dillon,  A.

Picquotaine,  III,  599,  Lamare-Picquot.

Pictet,  Mile.,  II.  577,  Gallatin.

Picton,  Col.  T.,  Ill,  180,  Herbert.

Picton,  Rev.  T.,  V,  6.  Picton,  J.  M.  W.

Pictorial  national  library,  the,  V,  535,  Simonds.

Pictou,  Roman  Catholic  institutions  in.  IV,  105,  McDonald.

Picture-writing,  key  to,  I.  360,  Brasseur.

Pie-Crust  Palmer,  sobriquet,  IV,  639.  Palmer,  J.  S.

Piedmont,  battle  of.  Ill,  321.  Hunter,  D.

Piedrahita,  II.  437,  Fernandez  de  Piedrahita.

Pieras,  Father  Miguel,  V,  543,  Sitjar.

Pierce,  Benjamin,  V,  7,  Pierce,  F.

Pierce,  Bradford  K.,  II,  684,  Goodyear.

Pierce,  Franklin,  birthplace,  illustration.  V,  8  ;  tomb,  10.

Pierpont,  Juliet,  IV,  402,  Morgan,  J.  S.

Pierrepont  manor,  V,  15,  Pierrepont,  W.  C.

Pierrepont,  Sarah,  II,  309,  Edwards,  J.

Pierrot,  President,  V,  244,  Riche,  J.  B.

Pierson,  Abraham,  statue  of,  illustration,  VI,  93.

Pierson,  Charles  T.,  II,  176,  Dickson,  T.

Pierson,  Elijah,  IV,  262.  Matthias.

Pierson,  John  L.,  VI,  189,  Tuthill.

Pierson,  Lydia  J.,  V,  677,  Stevens,  T.

Pieterson,  Eriek,  IV,  744,  Peterson,  C.  J.

Pietists,  the,  III,  509,  Kelpius.

Pigale,  M..  HI,  270,  Houdon.

Pigeon  Hill,  Pa.,  proposed  college  at,  rv,  476,  Nagot.

Pigeons,  artificial.  I.  245,  Bergh.

Pigeon's  Ranche,  battle  of,  V,  552,  Slough.

Pig-iron  Kelley,  III,  505,  Kelley,  W.  D.

Pigot,  Rev.  Mr.,  Ill,  448.  Johnson,  S.

Pigwacket,  battle,  IV,  36.  Lovewell ;  V,  653,  Stark,  W.

Pike,  Rev.  Richard,  V,  18,  Pike,  F.  W.  A.

Pike's  Peak,  V,  19.  Pike,  Z.  M.  ;  in,  397,  James,  E.

Pike,  the,  fighting  by,  I,  593,  Chauncey,  I.

Pilcomayo  river,  the,  discovered,  II,  441,  Ferrer,  R.

Piles,  first  driven  for  bridges,  V,  468,  Sewell,  Samuel.

Pilgrim  Fathers,  the,  V.  286,  Robinson,  J.  ;  I.  349.  Brad-
ford ;  371,  Brewster,  W.;  emigration  of,  VI,  443,  Weston,
T. ;  monument  to,  illustration,  567.

Pilgrimage,  first,  from  America  to  Rome,  H,  114,  Dealy.

Piling,  iron,  and  machinery,  V,  288,  Robinson,  S.  W.

Pillsbury.  Wingate,  V,  518,  Shubrick,  T.  B.

Pilot  Knob,  assaults  on,  II,  394,  Ewing,  T.

Piloty.  Carl  von.  pupils  of,  V,  326,  Rosenthal,  T.  E.  :  IV,
436,  Mosler  ;  483,  Neal,  D.  D.

Pils,  M.,  HI  15.  Guthers.

Pincheira,  Pablo,  V,  22,  Pincheira,  J.  A.

Pinckney,  William,  quoted.  I,  499.

Pindar,  Charles,  V,  23,  Pindar,  S.

Pindar  Cockloft,  III,  363,  Irving.  William.

Pindar  Puff,  VI,  281,  Verplanck.  G.  C.

Pindar's  Vale,  estate  of,  V,  23,  Pindar,  S.

Pine,  John,  V,  23,  Pine,  R.  E.

Pine  Bluff,  attack  on,  IV,  212,  Marmaduke.

Pinede,  Alphonse,  V,  259.

Pine  Grove  house,  Saratoga,  illustration.  VI,  345.

Pine-tree  shillings,  the,  illustration,  III,  425.

Pingree,  E.  M..  V,  236,  Rice,  N.  L.

Pinhorne,  William,  IV,  354,  Mompesson.

Pinkard,  Miss,  III,  665,  Lee,  R.  H.

Pinkney,  Isabella,  VI,  497,  Whyte.

Pink-root.  the.  introduced  as  a  vermifuge,  II.  594,  Garden.

Pin-machine,  invention  of  a,  III,  282,  Howe,  J.  I.

Pinta,  the,  caravel,  I.  697.

Pinto,  Father,  II,  398.  Fabert.

Pinto,  Fernando  Mendez,  pseudonym,  I,  375,  Briggs,  C.  F.

Pioneer,  the,  1.541,  Carter,  R.;  IV,  40.

Piozzi,  Mrs.,  I,  712,  Conway,  W.  A.

Pipe-coupling  machine,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  622,  Wright,  E.

Pipe-lines  for  oil,  use  of,  VI,  8,  Sweet,  J.  E.

Pirates  and  piracy,  capture  of  sixteen  junks.  IV.  700,  Pe-
gram,  R.  B.  ;  fleet  sent  in  search  of,  V,  74.  Porter.  /).  ;
in  China,  473,  Seward,  G.  F.  ;  in  the  West  Indies,  720,
Stringham  ;  in  Falkland  islands,  721.  Strong.  J.  H.  ;
rapture  of  ships  of,  694,  Stockton,  R.  F.  :  ravages  of,  in
South  America.  II.  85,  David,  E.  ;  62,  Dampier  ;  engage-
ment with,  off  Charleston,  HI,  447,  Johnson,  Robert ;
Greek,  496.  Kearny,  L.  ;  attempt  to  suppress,  531-532,
Kidd  ;  Moorish,  681,  Leisler  ;  expedition  to  exterminate,
IV,  123,  Mcintosh;  in  Delaware  bay.  211.  Markham,  W.\
in  America,  I,  229,  BeUomont ;  III,  531,  Kidd.


Piratininga,  colony  of,  V,  615,  Souza.

Piscataways,  king  of  the,  I,  605.  Chilomacon.

Piscator,  lien-name,  II,  332,  Elliott,  W.

Pisgah,  Mt.,  identification  of,  IV,  629,  Paine,  J.  A.

Pison,  Dr.  W.,  IV,  204,  Marggraf.

Pistol,  invention  of  a,  I,  694,  Colt,  S.

Pitag6rico,  Gallo,  pen-name,  IV,  386,  Morales,  J.  B.

Pitcher.  Moll,  VI,  695,  Molly.

Pitkin's  Falls,  mills  at,  V?  32-33,  Pitkin.

Pitman,  Isaac,  V,  33,  Pitman,  B.

Pitman,  Theophilus  T.,  V.  33.  Pitman,  M.  J.

Pitt,  Thomas,  Robert,  and  William,  I,  591,  Chatham,  W.  P.

Pitt.  William,  resolution  for  erection  of  a  monument  to,
IV,  44,  Lowndes,  R.  ;  H,  498.  Forbes,  John.

Pitts,  Baruth,  V,  34,  Pitts.  John.

Pittsburg,  name  of,  U,  498,  Forbes.  John  ;  Catholic  insti-
tutions in,  576,  Gallagher,  H.  P.  ;  site  of,  207.  Duquesne
de  Menneville  ;  gift  to,  I,  529,  Carnegie  ;  cathedral,  IV,
554,  O'Connor,  M.

Pittsburgh  Landing,  battle  of. See  Shiloh.

Pittston,  Me.,  founded,  II,  596,  Gardiner,  S.

Pius  IX,  II,  297,  Eccleson.

Pizarro,  murder  of,  V,  157,  Rada,.

Placenta  previa,  treatment  of.  II,  371,  Eshleman.

Placentia,  N.  F.,  British  attack  on.  III,  595.  La  Hontan.

Placentia,  Paulding's  home,  illustration,  IV,  680.

Placide,  Alexander,  V,  37,  Placide,  H.

Placido.  IV,  197,  Manzano  ;  VI,  222,  Valdis,  Gabriel.

Plagiarism,  charges  of,  IH,  228,  Hoffman,  C.  F. ;  V,  45,  46.

Plagrograph,  the,  VI,  15,  Sylvester,  J.  J.

Plaidy,  M.,  pupil  of.  I,  437,  Buck.  D.

Plainfield,  N.  J.,  gifts  to,  IV,  181,  Male.

Plains  of  Abraham,  name  of,  V,  157,  Racine.

Planck,  Prof.,  I,  154,  Bancroft,  G.

Plan  de  Ayutla,  the,  II,  124,  Degollado  ;  I,  62,  Alvarez.

Plan  de  Casa-Mata,  III,  368.

Plan  de  Iguala,  HI,  368.

Plan  de  las  tres  garautias,  the,  III,  368.

Plan  de  Navidad,  the,  IV,  339,  Miramon.

Plan  de  Patzicia,  the,  1, 177.

Plandome,  estate  of,  rv,  517,  Nicolls,  M.

Planer  and  lathe,  invention  of,  VI,  543,  Wilmarth,  S.

Planetarium,  invented,  I,  167,  Barlow,  T.  H.

Planets,  an  extra-Neptunian,  intra-mercurial,  VI,  11,  Swift,
L.;  125,  Todd,  D.  P.;  undiscovered,  392,  Watson,  J.  C.

Planing-machine,  invention  of  a,  II,  731,  Gray,  S.  S.

Planisphere,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  119,  Tillman.

Plan  of  Tuxtepec,  the,  II,  370,  Escobedo,  M.;  IH,  341,  Igle-
sias,  J.  M.

Planting,  machines  for.  in,  460,  Johnston,  S.

Plantius,  Rev.  Peter,  III,  297.

Plaquemines  frauds,  the,  I,  643.

Platen,  Count,  II,  363,  Ericsson.

Plate,  La,  river,  British  expedition  to,  VI,  480,  Whitelocke  ;
discovery  and  first  name  of,  II,  165,  Diaz  de  Solis  ;  591,
Garcia,  A.;  -settlements  on  the,  IV,  436,  Mosquera.

Platino-tungstes,  II.  638,  Gibbs,  O.  W.

Platinum,  in  California.  I,  286,  Blake,  W.  P.

Piatt,  Erminnie  A.,  V.  563,  Smith,  E.  A.

Plattsburg,  founder  of,  V,  39,  Piatt,  Z. ;  battle  of.  rv,  107.
Macdonough,  T.;  151,  Mac  Nab  ;  155,  Macomb,  A.;  V,
116,  Prevost,  G.\  125,  Pring  ;  282,  Robinson,  F.  P.

Pleasant  Hill,  battle  of,  I,  159,  Banks  ;  VI,  55,  Taylor,  R.

Pleasant  Hours,  III,  696,  Leslie,  F.

Pleasants,  J.  J.,  II,  8,  Creswell,  Julia.

Pleasants,  Robert,  IV,  435,  Mosby,  M.  W.

Pleiades,  occupations  of  the,  IV.  701,  Peirce.

Pleometer,  inventor  of  the,  IV,  729,  Perkins,  Jacob.

Plockhoy,  Peter  Cornelison,  V,  661,  Steendam.

Plough,  Loom,  and  Anvil,  magazine,  V,  545,  Skinner,  J.  S.

Ploughs,  invention  of  a,  I,  151.  Ball,  E.\  IV,  95,  McCor-
mick,  C.  H.\  198,  Mapes,  J.  J.:  experiments  with,  311.
Metcalf.  L.  S.;  the  first,  in  Massachusetts,  III.  334,  Hutch-
inson, Jesse  ;  cast-iron,  inventor  of.  VI,  597,  Wood,  W.  A.

Plowden.  Sir  Edward,  V,  126,  Printz,  J.

Plumbago,  II,  187,  Dixon,  Joseph.

Plumer,  Francis,  V,  42,  Plumer,  W.

Plumeria,  trees,  V,  43.  Plumier.

Plummer,  Jonathan,  II.  162,  Dexter,  T.

Plummer,  Sarah  A.,  VI,  692,  Lemmon.

Plumsted,  Nathaniel,  V,  43,  Plumsted,  C.

Plurality  rule,  adoption,  in  congress,  I,  158.  Banks,  N.  P.

Plutarch  of  the  Lutheran  church,  the,  V,  699,  Stoever.

Plymouth,  Mass.,  Bradford  house  at,  illustration,  I.  349  :
first  white  person  on  the  rock.  VI,  369,  Washburn,  E.;
Pilgrim  monument,  illustration,  576.

Plymouth,  N.  C,  attack  on,  VI,  438,  Wessells.

Plymouth  colony,  I,  649,  Bradford  ;  V,  643,  Standish  ;  VI.
443,  Weston,  T.\  566,  Winslow.  E.;  expulsion  from,  for
heresy,  H,  690,  Gorton  ;  first  book  on,  in  England,  IV,
429,  Morton,  G. :  treaty  of,  with  Indians.  249,  Massasoit ;
union  of,  with  Massachusetts.  VI.  583,  Wiswall.

Plymouth  company,  the,  II,  687-688,  Gorges  ;  355,  Endi-
cott,  J.

Plymouth  Friends,  the,  settlement,  V,  188,  Rawle.

Plymouth  Purchase,  the,  II,  596,  Gardiner,  S.

Plymouth,  the,  sloop-of-war,  II,  54.

Pneumatic  railway,  II,  647.  Gilbert,  R.  H.;  steel  associa-
tion, the,  IH,  509,  Kelly,  W.


POCAHONTAS


POST-TRADERS


777


Pocahontas,  abduction  of.  V,  98  ;  controversy,  99  ;  view  of

church  having  memorial  of,  99.
Pochino,  V,  99,  Pocahontas.
Pocket  veto,  III,  381.
Pococke,  I,  689,  Colles.
Pocorosa,  Chief,  II,  374,  Espinosa,  G.
Poe,  Edgar  A.,  quoted,  III,  703,  Lewis.  Estelle  ;  monument

to,  I,  605,  Childs,  G.  W.  ;  IV,  172,  Maelzl ;  subject  of  a

sketch  by,  309,  Koqers,  M.  C.
Poe,  John  and  David,  V,  44,  Poe,  E.  A.
Poelnitz,  Baron,  V,  171,  Randall,  R.  R.
Poems  of  Two  Friends,  IV,  767,  Piatt,  J.  J.
Poems,  pretended  translation  of  Indian,  V,  148,  Querard.
Poesten  Bouwery,  the,  VI,  243,  Vanderheyden.
Poet,  first  monument  to,  and  statue  of  a,  in  America,  III,

48,  Halleck.
Poet  laureate  of  the  army,  the,  IV,  671,  Patten,  G.  W.
Poet  laureate  of  Freemasonry,  IV,  417,  Morris,  Robert.
Poet  of  Low  Hampton,  the.  IV,  329,  Miller,  W.
Poet  of  Paisley,  the,  rv,  767,  Picken.
Poet  sportsman,  the,  IV,  145,  McLellan.
Poet,  the  mad,  I,  635,  Clarke,  McDonald.
Poetical  Epistle  to  George  Washington,  anonymous  book,

V,  135,  Pulsifer.
Poetry,  Harris  Collection  of  American,  I,  82,  Anthony,  H.

B.;  Ill,  90,  Harris,  C.  F.
Poictiers,  capture  by  the,  I,  256,  Biddle,  James ;  capture

of  the  Wasp  and  Frolic  by,  III,  465,  Jones,  J.
Poincy,  Louis  de,  V,  293,  Rochefort.
Poincy,  Louvilliers  de,  II,  263,  Duparquet ;  III,  270,  Hou-

detot ;  IV,  563,  Ogeron.
Poinsettia  Pulcherrina,  the,  V,  49,  Poinsett.
Point  Coupee,  La.,  gift  for  college  at,  V,  100,  Poydras.
Point  Peleo  island,  engagement  at,  IV,  178,  Maitland,  J.
Point  Pleasant,  battle  of,  II,  480,  Fleming,  T.  ;  III.  701.

Lewis,  Andiew  ;  V,  491,  Shelby,  E.\  Indian  fight  at,  III,

108,  Harvie.
Pointe  a  Pitre,  capture  of,  III,  305,  Hugues.
Poison  examinations,  II,  203,  Doremns,  R.  O.
Poison  Springs,  engagement  at,  IV,  268,  Maxey.
Poiteau,  M.,  VI,  188-189,  Turpin,  P.  J.  F.
Pokanokets,  the,  IV,  755,  Philip.

Poland,  campaign  of,  against  the  Turks,  III,  658  ;  revolu-
tions in,  14,  Gurowski ;  1831,  IV,  520,  Niemcewicz  ;  parti-
tion of,  V,  188,  Pulaski  ;  insurrections,  the,  IH,  573.
Polar  sea,  the  open,  HI,  133,  Hayes,  I.  I.;  first  suggested,

297  ;  first  seen,  IV,  459,  Munk  ;  search  for,  685,  Payer.
Polarimeter,  use  of  the,  VI,  619,  Wright,  A.  W.
Polaris  expedition,  the.  III,  38,  Hall,  C.  F. ;  IV,  522,  Ninde-

mann  ;  parallel  in  fiction,  43,  Lowell,  R.  T.  S.
Poles,  colony  of,  VI,  182,  Turchin.
Polhemus,  Rev.  J.  T.,  V,  50,  Polhemus,  A.
Police,  uniformed,  II,  628,  Gerard.
Polignac,  Prince  de,  II,  274,  Dusuau.
Political  and  Commercial  Register,  III,  393,  Jackson,  W.
Political  Focus,  the,  V,  106,  Prentiss,  C.
Political  Greenhouse,  the,  H,  282,  Dwight,  Theodore  ;  HI,

256,  Hopkins,  L.
Political  parties,  first  division  of.  rV,  168-169.
Political  Register,  the,  I,  506.  Callender,  J.  T.
Poliute,  pen-name,  VI,  510,  Wilkie.
Polk.  Ezekiel.  V,  50,  Polk,  J.  K.
Polk  Place,  illustration,  V,  53.
Polk,  Samuel,  V.  50,  Polk,  J.  K.
Polk,  W.  J.,  V,  58,  Polk,  L.  E.
Pollock,  Robert,  V,  50,  Polk,  J.  K. ;  56,  Polk,  T.
Polo,  Admiral,  II,  464,  Fish,  H.
Polyanthus,  magazine.  I,  438,  Buckingham,  J.  T.
Polygamy,  discussion  on,  V,  103,  Pratt,  O.
Polytechnic  institute,  Troy.  II.  296,  Eaton,  A.
Pombal,  Marquis  de,  II.  270,  Duras  ;  585,  Gama,  J.  B.  da  ;

V,  377,  Saldanha.
Pomeroy,  George,  VI,  429,  Wells,  H.
Pomeroy,  Hannah  C,  VI,  611,  Woolson,  C.  F.
Pometacom,  IV,  249,  Massasoit.
Pomf ret,  Earl  of.  IV,  716,  Penn,  T.
Pomfret,  Conn.,  V,  139,  Putnam.  I.
Pomona,  the  privateer,  IV,  189,  Manley,  J.
Pompadour,  Madame  de,  TV,  264,  Maurepas.
Pompons  Blancs,  the,  IV,  26,  Mandnit  du  Plessis.
Pomroy.  Daniel  F.,  V,  61,  Pomroy,  R.  R.
Ponce.  Pedro,  IV,  340,  Miranda,  F.
Poncet  de  Bretigny,  III,  300,  Huet.
Pontchartrain,  Jerome  de,  IV.  264,  Maurepas.
Ponteach,  anonymous  book,  V.  310,  Rogers,  R.
Pontejos,  Santiago,  Admiral,  II,  a5,  David,  E.
Pontgrave,  M.,  IV,  374,  Monts.

Pontiac's  conspiracy,  I,  512,  Campbell,  D.;  V,  64,  Pontiac.
Pontoon-bridsres,  improvements  in,  I,  234,  Benham.
Poole,  John,  V,  65.  Poole,  W.  F.
Poor,  aid  to  the,  I,  344.  Brace,  C.  L.;  488,  Caballero  y  Ocio;

327,  Boudinot ;  II,  2,  Cranston,  R.  B.
Poor  man's  counsellor,  the,  I,  623,  Clark.
Poor  Richard's  Almanac,  II,  528.
Poore,  John,  V,  67,  Poore,  B.  P.
Popayan.  Colombia,  conquest  of,  I,  232,  Benalcazar.
Pope,  Alexander,  address  to.  Ill,  560,  Knapp,  F. ;  IV.  665,

Oglethorpe  :  quotation  from  the  Dunciad,  V,  164,  Ralph.
Pope,  Col.  Curran,  IH,  476,  Jouett,  G.  P.


Pope,  Hannah,  V,  139,  Putnam,  I.

Pope,  John,  II.  763,  Griffin  ;  V,  139,  Putnam,  I.

Popham,  Admiral,  VI,  480,  Whitelocke.

Popkin,  Lieut. -Col.  John,  V,  70,  Popkin,  J.  S.

Poplar-worm,  the,  IV,  659,  Parrish,  J.

Popocatapetl,  ascension  of.  III,  555,  Kirkham,  R.  W.

Popol-Vuh,  the,  VI,  308,  Votdn  ;  635,  Ximenes.

Popotla,  noche-triste  tree  at,  illustration,  I,  749.

Popular  Science  Monthly,  VI,  643,  Youmans.

Popular  Science  News,  the,  IV,  513,  Nichols,  J.  R.

Popular  sovereignty,  I,  235,  Benjamin,  J.  P. ;  484,  Butts,  I. ;
II,  173,  Dickinson,  D.  S. ;  214  ;  HI,  716,  717.

Popularity  Sumner,  sobriquet,  V,  745.

Porcelain,  discovery  of  an  earth  like.  II,  594,  Garden.

Porcupine,  Peter,  pen-name,  I,  669,  Cobbett,  W.

Porpoise,  wreck  of  the,  H,  534,  Franklin,  Sir  J.

Port-au-Prince,  siege  of,  H,  341,  Emerian.

Port  bill,  of  1784,  IV,  166.

Port  Desengano,  IV,  180,  Malaspina.

Port  des  Francais,  HI,  616,  La  Perouse.

Porte  Crayon,  pen-name,  V,  725,  Strother.

Porter,  Alexander,  V,  73,  Porter,  D.

Porter,  Charles  E.,  V,  78,  Porter,  L.  A.  E.

Porter,  David,  II,  413.

Porter,  Elizabeth,  V.  139,  Putnam,  I. '

Porter,  Rev.  John,  V,  77,  Porter,  E.

Porter,  Robert,  V,  71.  Porter,  Andrew.

Porter,  Robert  and  Thomas,  V,  79,  Porter,  N.

Porter,  Samuel,  V,  73,  Porter,  D.

Porter,  Susannah,  I,  649,  Cleveland.

Porter's  Rocks,  Conn.,  engagement  at,  V,  402,  Sassacus.

Port-folio,  the,  magazine,  I,  257  ;  H,  141,  Dennie  ;  HI,  44.
Hall,  S.  H.  J.  and  T.  M. ;  TV,  259,  Mathews,  W.

Port  Gallant,  colony  at,  II,  373,  Espeleta.

Port  Gibson,  battle  of,  II.  712  ;  IV,  157,  McPherson,  J.  B.

Port  Hope,  Canada,  founded,  V,  589,  Smith,  Sidney.

Port  Hudson,  siege  of,  I,  159,  Banks;  266,  Birge,  H.  W.;  II.
417  ;  713  ;  III,  427,  Jenkins,  T.  A.;  V,  580,  Smith,  M.

Port  Independence,  I,  647,  Cleaveland,  M.

Portland,  Duke  of,  H,  366,  Erskine,  F.

Portland,  Me.,  fort  on  the  site  of,  II,  554  :  gifts  to  societies
of,  VI,  670,  Baxter  :  graves  of  Burrows  and  Blythe  in,
illustration,  I,  471  ;  IV,  10-11,  Longfellow,  H.  W.

Portland,  N.  Y.,  community  at,  IV,  572,  Oliphant.

Portland,  Ore.,  founder  of,  VI,  683,  Gilpin.

Portland,  island  of,  Pennsylvania  castle  on,  TV,  716,  Penn,  J.

Portland  Magazine,  the,  V,  665,  Stephens,  A.  S.

Port  Leon,  Fla.,  I,  505,  Call,  R.  K.

Port  Nelson,  Hudson  bay. See  Fort  Bourbon.

Portraits,  collection  of  historic,  V,  483,  Sharpless  ;  collec-
tion of,  by  the  physionotrace,  372,  St.  Memin.

Port  Republic.  Ill,  392,  Jackson,  T.  J.

Port  Royal,  Acadia,  I,  583,  Charnise  ;  founded,  TV,  374,
Monts  ;  colony  at,  V,  93,  Poulrincourt ;  Jesuit  mission-
aries at,  sieges  of,  738,  Subercase  ;  destruction  of,  I,  88,
Argall  ;  capture  of,  VI,  285,  Vetch.

Port  Royal,  S.  C,  capture  of,  II,  265,  266  ;  negroes  at,  549,
French,  M. ;  battle  of,  653,  Gillis.  J.  P. ;  expedition,  capt-
ure of  Fort  Pulaski,  654,  Gillmore  ;  liberated  slaves  of,
rV,  136,  McKim,  J.  M.

Porto  Calvo,  battle  of,  H.  164,  Dias,  H.

Porto  Rico,  British  attack  on,  I,  746.  Correa,  A.;  Carib  in-
vasions into,  III,  408,  Jaureybo  I.  and  II . :  colony  in,  IV,
196,  Manso ;  conquest  of,  cities  founded  in,  V,  61-62,
Ponce  de  Leon;  revolt  of  Caribs,  609,  Sotomayor,  C;  I,
36,  Agiieynaba  II.  ;  defence  of,  I,  556,  Castro,  R.  ;  dis-
covery of,  697 ;  early  history  of,  III,  605,  Lando ;  first
missionary  in,  IV,  367,  Montesinos,  A.  ;  pirates  at,  V,  74,
Porter,  D.;  rebellion  in,  I,  36,  Agiieynaba ;  resistance  to
the  Spaniards  in,  IV,  23,  Loquillo ;  Spanish  conquest  of,
V,  376,  Salazar,  D.  de.

Portsmouth,  Wentworth  house.  VI,  435,  Wentworth,  J.

Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  founded,  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  Anne;
botanical  garden  at,  V.  206,  Redwood.

Portugal,  British  expedition  to  aid  (1762).  Ill,  657,  Lee,  C;
constitutional  struggle  in,  II,  526,  Francisco,  F.  de  M. ;
ex-king  of.  III,  178,  Hensler ;  first  American  minister  to,
313,  Humphreys,  D.;  French  invasion  of,  emigration  of
the  royal  family,  IV,  698.  Pedro  I. ;  return  of  the  king,
ibid.;  abdication  of  the  throne,  usurpation  of  Dom  Mi-
guel, end  of  it,  ibid. ;  revolution  in  (1821),  IH,  351,  Inham-
bupe ;  royal  family  of,  406,  Jarvis,  W.

Posey,  Gen.  John,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archibald.

Postage,  cheap,  II,  455. :  III.  650,  Leavitt ;  reduction  of,  I,
105 ;  192,  Bates,  B. ;  HI,  284,  Howe,  T.  O. ;  postal-cards,
205,  Hill,  John;  V,  544,  Skinner.  C.  R.;  635,  Spooner.  L.

Postage-stamps,  manufacturing,  I,  301,  Bogardus,  J.

Postal  directory,  the  first,  III,  675,  Leech,  D.  D.  T.

Postal  service,  the,  II,  528 ;  III,  399,  James,  T.L.;  a  private,
V,  635,  Spooner,  L. ;  colonial.  III.  62,  Hamilton,  A.

Post,  Alfred  C,  II,  464,  Fisher,  C.  H.

Post,  Henry,  I,  661,  Clinton,  De  W.

Post,  Joel,  V,  85,  Post,  A.  C.

Postel,  Karl,  V,  446,  Sealsfleld.

Postmaster-General,  first  made  a  member  of  the  cabinet,
I.  182,  Barry,  W.  T. ;  office  of,  IV,  144,  McLean,  J.

Post-traders,  charge  of  bribery  in  connection  with,  I,  225,
Belknap;  frauds  of,  III.  150,  Hazen.  W.  B.;  I,  225,  Bel-
knap, W.  W.


778


POTATOES


PRINTING-PRESS


Potatoes,  introduced  into  Europe,  V,  162 ;  into  Normandy,

II,  9,  Crevecceur.

Potomac  company,  the.  III,  451,  Johnson,  T.;  IV,  166.

Potomac  river,  navigation  of  the.  IV,  166.  167:  VI,  391,
Watson,  E.;  aqueduct,  the,  184,  Turnbull,  W.;  blockade
of  the,  161,  Trimble,  J.  R.

Pottawatomie  massacre,  the,  I,  405.

Pottawattamies,  mission  to  the,  II,  151,  De  Smet ;  246,  Due-
rink;  581,  Gallitzin,  E.

Potter,  Rev.  Ebenezer.  Ill,  103,  Hart,  L.

Potter,  Horatio,  casket  given  to,  VI,  480,  Whitehouse.

Potter,  John,  V,  89,  Potter,  James.

Potter,  Joseph,  V,  86,  Potter,  A.

Potter,  Mary,  IV,  12.

Potts,  John,  V.  92,  Potts,  Jonathan.

Potts.  Pipssissiway,  pen-name,  V,  233,  Rice,  R.

Pottstown,  Pa.,  founder  of,  V,  92,  Potts,  Jonathan.

Poughkeepsie,  Casket,  the,  IV,  31,  Lossing ;  gifts  to  chari-
ties of,  VI,  263,  Vassar.

Pound  Gap,  Ky.,  expedition  to,  V,  616,  Sowards.

Powder,  invention  for  making,  IV,  576,  Oliver,  P.  A.;  com-
pressed granulated,  II,  203,  Doremus,  R.  O. ;  mammoth
or  pebble  and  perforated  cake,  V,  299,  Rodman.

Powder  River,  battle  of,  II,  15,  Crook.

Powell,  William.  IV,  599,  Osceola.

Power,  Anna  Marsh,  VI,  485,  Whitman,  S.  H.

Power,  Cecil,  pen-name,  I,  52,  Alien,  Grant.

Power,  Hope,  I,  395.

Power,  John  Carroll,  III,  727',  Lincoln,  A.

Power,  Nicholas,  VI,  485.  Whitman,  S.  H.

Power,  Patrick,  V,  96,  Power,  L.  G.

Power-loom,  invention  of  a.  III,  389,  Jackson,  P.  T.

Power-presses,  invention  of,  I,  722,  Cooley,  A.  A.

Powers,  Abigail,  II,  456.

Powers,  Lee  L.,  V,  530,  Silloway.

Pownall,  Mrs.,  II,  175,  Dickson,  J.  A.

Poyas,  Peter,  VI,  283,  Vesey.

Poydras,  M.  de.  poem  by,  II,  585,  Galvez,  B.

Pozos,  Dulces,  Count,  II,  550,  Frias,  Francisco.

Prairie  Grove,  battle  at.  Ill,  212,  Hindman,  T.  M.

Prairies,  origin  of,  VI,  28,  Tammany.

Prat,  Jean,  IV,  587,  Orelie.

Pratt,  Rev.  J.  C,  II.  7:33,  Greatorex,  E.

Prattsville,  N.  Y.,  V.  104,  Piatt,  Z.

Pray,  Benjamin  S..  IV,  423,  Morse,  H.  D.

Pray,  Maria,  VI,  520,  Williams,  M.  P.

Prayer-book,  revision  of  the,  I,  761,  Coxe,  A.  C.

Preachers,  Congregational,  will  in  favor  of,  I,  229,  Belling-
ham.

Preaching,  trials  for.  I,  766,  Craig,  L.  and  E.

Preble,  Henry,  V,  105,  Preble.  Harriet.

Preciado,  Francisco,  VI,  207,  Ulloa.

Precursor,  the,  periodical,  II,  122,  De  Charms.

Prentiss,  Rev.  Caleb,  V,  106,  Prentiss,  C.

Prentiss,  John,  V,  106,  Prentiss,  G.  A.

Presbyterian  lawyer,  the,  III,  742,  Livingston,  W.

Presbyterian  magazine,  the,  VI.  252,  Van  Rensselaer,  C.

Presbyterian  Review,  the,  V.  566,  Smith,  H.  B.

Presbyterianism  west  of  the  Mississippi,  II,  643,  Giddings.

Presbyterians,  division  of,  I,  217 ;  231,  Beman ;  united  synod
of,  340,  Boyd,  A.  H.  H;  charities,  gifts  to,  394,  Brown,  J.
A.;  division  of  synod  of,  II,  651,  Gillespie  ;  hospital.  New
York,  gift  to,  III,  689,  Lenox,  J. ;  first  church  of,  in  New
England,  IV,  120,  MacGregqor  ;  first  clergyman  of,  in  the
colonies,  136,  Mackie  ;  intolerance  toward,  179,  Makemie  ;
dismission  for  heterodoxy,  327,  Miller,  John  ;  general
federal  council  of,  466,  Murphy,  T. ;  gift  to  missions  of,
694,  Peck,  E.  J. ;  the  declaration  and  testimony,  V,  289,
Robinson,  S. ;  in  New  York,  296.  Rodqers  ;  division  in
(1741),  VI,  62,  Tennent,  G.;  first  church  founded  in  U.  S.,
550,  Wilson,  H.  P.  C;  603,  Woodhull,  J.  ;  missions  of,
I,  75,  Andrews,  Lorrin  ;  190,  Bassett,  J. :  II,  169,  Dibble  ;
251,  Dukes  ;  298,  Eckard  ;  627.  George,  S.  C;  686,  Gordon,
J.  D.;  Ill,  179,  Hepburn  ;  390,  Jackson,  S.;  403,  Janvier ;
404.  Jardine  ;  549,  Kingsbury,  C. ;  390,  Jackson,  S. ;  403,
Janvier  ;  568,  Knox,  G.  W.;  632,  Laurie,  T.;  IV,  2,  Loe-
venthal ;  114,  McFarland,  A.  R.;  213,  Marques,  T.\  234,
Martin,  W.  A.  P.;  305.  Merrick,  J.  L.\  379.  Moore,  D.;
45, 46,  Lowrie,  W.  C.  and  R. ;  V.  66,  Poor,  D. ;  1 12,  Preston,
C.  F;  618,  Spalding,  H.  H.\  626,  Speer  ;  629,  Spencer,
E.;  VI,  122.  Tinker;  534,  Williams,  S.  W.;  554.  Wilson,
J.  Leighton  ;  New  Side,  I,  282,  Blair,  S.;  Old  Side  and
New,  VI,  555,  Wilson,  M. :  old  and  new  school  of,  I,  760,
Cox,  S.  H;  III,  396,  Jacobus,  M.  W.\  IV,  471,  Musgrave,
G.  W. ;  V,  566,  Smith,  H.  B. ;  II,  3,  Day,  H. ;  in  Canada,

III.  608,  Lang.  G. ;  rV,  a57.  Mori, fort.
Presbyterians,  the  Cumberland.  IV,  120,  McGready.
Prescott,  Judge  Benjamin,  V,  109,  Prescott.  W.
Prescott,  Capt.  Jonathan,  V,  108,  Prescott,  B.
Prescott,  John,  V.  109.  Prescott,  W.

Prescott,  Joseph  N.,  V.  633.  Spofford.

Prescott,  Misses.  II.  561,  Fuller,  S.  M.

Prescott,  Dr.  Samuel.  V,  224,  Revere,  P.

Prescott,  W.  H..  quoted,  I,  156.  Bancroft,  G.

Prescott,  William  (illustrations),  statue  of,  V,  109  ;  birth-
place, 112  ;  headquarters,  R.  I.,  I.  189.

Present  State  of  North  America,  the,  reputed  author  of,
HI.  330.  Huske,  E.

Present,  the,  periodical,  I,  578,  Channing,  W.  H.


Presidency,  discussion  of  the  term  of  the,  III,  275,  Hous-
toun  ',  mode,  of  election  to  the,  I,  21.

President,  the,  and  the  Little  Belt,  V,  297  ;  Dacres's  search
for,  II,  52,  Dacres  ;  III,  311,  Hull.

President,  loss  of  the,  I,  722,  Cookman,  George  G.;  V,  97,
Power,  Tyrone.

Presidents,  of  the  U.  S.,  see  Elections,  Presidential  ;
re-election  of,  I,  653  ;  day  of  inauguration  of  the,  VI,
379  ;  removals  from  office  by,  III,  380 ;  veto  power  of,
382  ;  attempt  to  curtail  the  appointing  power,  383  ;  pow-
ers of  the,  VI,  412.

President's  house,  building  for,  IV,  211,  Markoe,  A.

Presque  isle,  II,  327,  Ellicott.

Press,  the,  freedom  of,  H,  631.

Press  intelligence  company,  the  national,  V,  481,  Shanks.

Preston,  Amos,  V,  112,  Preston,  Ann.

Preston,  Capt.,  trial  of,  for  the  Boston  massacre,  I,  16.

Preston,  Henrietta.  Ill,  454,  Johnston,  A.  S.

Preston,  John,  V,  114,  JPreston,  W.

Preston,  Prof.  J.  T.  L.,  V,  113,  Preston,  M.  J.

Preston,  Letitia,  II,  487,  Floyd,  J.

Preston,  Margaret,  III,  70,  Hampton.

Preston,  Paul,  pen-name,  V,  6,  Picton,  T.

Preston,  Sarah,  IV,  111,  McDowell,  James.

Preston,  William,  V,  113,  Preston,  J.

Prevost,  Abb6,  VI,  618,  Wouverman.

Prevost.  Gen.  A.  M.,  V,  116,  Prevost,  C.  M.

Prevost,  Paul  H.  M.,  V,  116,  Prevost,  C.  M.

Prevost,  Theodosia,  I,  466.

Price,  Edwin  H.,  II,  82,  Davenport,  F.  L.  G.

Price,  Lizzie,  II,  425,  Fechter.

Price,  Philip,  V,  117,  Price,  E.  K.

Price,  Stephen,  V,  536,  Simpson,  Edmund.

Price,  William,  V,  117,  Price,  D.  E.

Pride's  Purge,  II,  672,  Goffe.

Priessnitz,  Dr.  Vincent,  V.  508,  Shew.

Priest,  Nancy  A.  W.,  VI,  318,  Wakefield,  N.  A.  W.  P.

Priesthood  of  the  Bow,  the,  II,  39,  Cushing,  F.  H.

Priestley,  Caroline,  V,  241,  Richardson,  H.  H.

Prieto,  Tomas,  II,  643,  Gil.

PrinvGen.,  II,  197,  Domenech.

Prime,  James  and  Mark,  V,  121,  Prime  ;  123,  Prime,  R.

Prime,  Nathaniel,  V,  123,  Prime,  R.

Prime  meridian  conference,  the,  V,  357,  Rutherfurd,  L.  M. ;
298,  Rodgers,  C.  R.  T.

Primogeniture,  abolition  of  law  of.  HI.  418 ;  V,  a58,  Rut-
ledge,  E.;  II,  596,  Gardiner,  J.;  instance  of  its  observ-
ance in  America,  595,  Gardiner ;  property  law  of,  312,
Edwards,  J.  W.

Prince  Edward  Island,  III,  119,  Haviland,  T.  H;  name  of,
521,  Kent,  Duke  of;  R.  C.  institutions  in,  Mclntyve,  P.;
Scottish  colony  on,  V,  458,  Selkirk,  Earl ;  union  of,  with
the  Dominion,  III,  147,  Haythorne.

Prince,  Elizabeth  O.,  V,  589,  Smith,  E.  O.

Prince,  John,  V,  124,  Prince,  T.

Prince  John,  sobriquet,  VI,  234,  Van  Buren,  J.

Prince  of  Parthia,  the,  drama,  H,  669,  Godfrey,  T.

Prince  of  Schaghticoke,  the,  in,  561.  Knickerbocker,  H.

Prince  of  Two  Sicilies,  the,  IV,  462,  Murat.

Prince  of  Wales  strait,  the,  IV,  90,  McClure,  Sir  R.

Prince  Regent  inlet,  explored,  IV,  661 ,  Parru.  Sir  W.  E.

Prince  society,  the,  II,  115,  Dean,  J.  W.;  VI,  487,  Whit-
more  ;  V,  125,  Prince,  T.

Princess  Royal,  the,  capture  of,  V,  146,  Quackenbush.

Princess,  wreck  of  the,  III,  534,  Kieft.

Princeton,  N.  J. .  settlement  of,  V,  693,  Stockton,  R. ;  attack
on,  IV,  284,  Mease,  J.

Princeton,  battle  of,  I,  744  :  IV,  301.  Mercer,  H.:  Ill,  275,
Houston,  W.  C;  Stockton  house,  illustration,  V.  604

Princeton  college,  site  of.  VI.  28,  Tammany  ;  predecessor
of,  62,  Tennent,  W.;  IV,  95,  McCosh  ;  gift  to,  I.  223,
Belcher,  Jonathan  ;  313,  Bonner  ;  327,  Bond  in  ot  ;  678.
Cgoswell.  I. ;  college  and  seminary,  gifts  to.  II,  714.  Great,
J.  C;  college,  gift  to.  HI.  54,  Halsted,  N.  N.;  223,  Ihxhir.
C;  689,  Lenox,  J.;  rV,  213,  Marquand.  H.  G.;  V.  602,
Snowden.  J.  R.;  733,  Stuart,  R.  L.\  VI.  584.  Wither'
spoon  ;  after  the  Revolution.  V,  5R5,  Smith.  S.  S.;  view
of  Nassau  Hall,  II.  310 :  IV,  676,  Patton,  F.  L.

Princeton  seminary,  V,  315,  Romeyn,  J.  B. :  endowment  of,
VI,  252,  Van  Rensselaer,  C;  gift  to,  I,  674,  Codmaii  :  IV,
305,  Merrick,  J.  L.;  524,  Nisbet,  C;  V,  733,  Stuart,  R.  L.;
VI,  456,  Wheelock,  J.

Princeton,  the,  cabinet  officers  killed  on,  HI,  321,  Hunter,
L.  B.;  II.  364  ;  V.  695.  Stockton.  R.  F.;  VI,  199,  Tyler,  J.
G.;  I.  501  :  VI,  214,  Upshur,  A.  B.

Princeton.  Va.,  engagement  at,  IV,  227.  Marshall,  H.

Principio  company,  the.  V.  197,  Read,  John.

Pringle,  Mary  F..  IV.  346.  Mitchell,  D.  G.

Pringle,  Robert,  V.  126,  Pringle,  J.  J.

Printers,  bequest  for  asylum  for,  I,  413,  Browne.  C.  F.

Printer's  chase,  inventor  of  a,  V,  698,  Stoddard,  W.  O.

Printing,  collection  of  works  on,  IV,  462,  MurueU ;  in
China,  II.  115,  Dean.  W.:  improvements  in,  500,  Ford,  E.
L. ;  inventions  for.  462,  Firm,  J.  L.

Printing-machine,  inventor  of  a,  VI.  694,  Mayall.

Printing-press,  first,  in  America.  II,  113.  Dave;  IV.  297,
Mendoza  ;  first,  south  of  New  England,  in  New  York.  I,
350  :  inventions  of,  15.  Adams.  I.;  32.  Adams,  Seth  ;  447,
Bullock,  W.  A.;  511,  Campbell,  Andrew  ;  II,  685,  Gordon,


PRINTZ


QUAKERS


779


G.  P. ;  III,  225,  Hoe,  R.  and  R.  M. ;  VI,  155,  Treadwell,  D. ;

II,  582,  Gaily.

Piiutz,  Gov.,  of  New  Sweden,  III,  295,  Hudde.

Prisoner's  friend,  I,  203,  Beal,  A.  ;  magazine,  V,  625,
Spear,  C.

Prisoners,  in  the  civil  war,  V,  241,  Richardson,  A.  D.  ;
order  of  Jefferson  Davis  concerning,  III,  321,  Hunter,
D. ;  placed  under  fire,  157,  Heckman  ;  plot  of  Confeder-
ate, VI,  7,  Sweet,  B.  J. ;  treatment  of,  in  the  war  of  se-
cession, III,  89,  Harriman  ;  treatment  of,  in  the  civil
war,  IV,  678,  Paul,  A.  C;  I,  277 ;  treatment  of  war,  II,
99,  100  ;  treatment  of,  in  the  Revolution,  IV,  317,  Middle-
ton,  A.;  Revolutionary,  III,  258,  Hopkins,  S.;  treatment
of  American,  VI,  171,  Tryon,  W.

Prison-reform,  V,  20,  Pillsbury,  A.;  625,  Spear,  C ;  750,
Sumner,  G. ;  VI,  270,  Vaux,  R, ;  563,  Wines,  E.  C.

Prison-ship,  the  Jersey,  III,  198,  Hiester,  Joseph.

Prison-systems,  VI,  124,  Tocqueville.

Prisons  and  hospitals,  work  in,  II,  183,  Dix,  D.  L. ;  202,  Do-
remus ;  discipline  in,  183,  Dix,  D.  L. ;  architecture  of,

III,  119,  Haviland,  J. ;  charitable  work  in,  II,  279,  Dwight,
L.;  Ill,  261,  Hopper  ;  government,  II,  411.  Farnham,  E.
W.\  improvements,  IV,  390,  Moreau-Christophe  ;  II,  301,
Eddy,  T.;  646,  Gilbert,  L.\  250,  Dugdale.

Pritchard,  Lieut.-Col.,  II,  101.

Pritchard,  Sarah  J.,  VI,  355,  Ward,  A.  L.

Privateering,  abolition  of,  II,  533.

Privateers,  I,  432  ;  in  the  Revolutionary  war,  II,  147,  Derby,
E.  H.;  630,  Gerry  :  III,  76,  Huraden  ;  in  the  war  of  the
rebellion,  II,  99  ;  III,  495,  Kautz,  A.  V.

Prize  essay  fund,  a,  I.  325,  Botta,  A.  C.  L.

Probabilities,  Old,  I,  2,  Abbe.

Proctor,  Francis,  V,  127,  Proctor.  T.

Progress,  the,  II,  503,  Forney,  J.  W.

Progressive  Friends,  the,  II,  171,  Dickinson,  Anna  E.

Prohibition  movement.  II,  219,  Dow,  N.;  I,  271,  Black,  J.

Projectiles,  invention  of,  V,  515.  Shock.

Projection,  orthographic,  V,  530,  Silliman,  J.  M.

Propeller,  invention  of  a,  IV,  693,  Pease,  J.  I.

Propellers,  screw,  II.  364.

Property,  law  of  descent  of,  in  Louisiana,  II,  270,  Durell.

Prophete,  Guerrier,  II,  623,  Geffrard.

Prophet  of  the  Shawnees,  the.  Ill,  376.

Prophetic  convention,  V,  35,  Pitztr.

Prospect  Hill,  V.  140.

Protection,  I,  500,  501  ;  HI,  381  ;  VI,  686  ;  III,  144,  Hayne,
Robert  Y.

Protestant  Episcopal  church,  name  of,  VI.  543,  Wilmer,
W.  H.;  founded,  III,  580,  Labagh,  I.  P.;  bequest  to,  V,  21,
Pilmore  ;  first  bishop  of,  VI,  476,  White,  W. ;  centennial,
first  consecrated  in  U.  S.,  prejudice  against,  V,  129  ;
transmission  of  the  episcopate  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land, restoration  of  the  oblation  and  invocation  to  the
communion  office.  445-446,  Seabury  ;  in  New  York,  VI,
284,  Vesey,  W.\  in  Virginia,  the,  IV,  282,  Meade,  W.;
first  official  representation  of,  in  England,  II,  131 ;  gift
to  charities  of.  Ill,  571.  Kohne  ;  VI.  589,  Wolfe,  J.  D. ;
590,  Wolfe  ;  688,  Hoffman  ;  ritualistic  conflict  in,  V,  172,
Randolph,  A.  M.\  act  of  succession  secured,  IV,  743,
Peters,  R.;  reunion  of  (1865),  V,  88,  Potter,  H;  trial  in,
VI,  203,  Tyng,  S.  H. ;  proposed  change  of  name,  V,  475,
Seymour,  G.  F. ;  choral  service,  VI,  367.  Warren,  N.  B. ;
the  '"proposed  book,"  V,  592,  Smith,  W.;  missions,  VI,
520,  Williams,  C.  M.

Protestant  sisterhood,  IV.  455,  Muhlenberg,  W.  A.

Protestants  of  Asia,  the,  II,  708,  Grant,  A.

Proverbial  sayings,  III,  282,  Howe,  IT.

Providence.  R.  I..  Indian  deed  of,  IV,  312,  Miantonomo  ;
founded,  VI,  532  ;  gift  of  park  to,  533,  Williams,  B. ;
Baptist  institutions  in,  school  system  of.  IV,  192,  Man-
ning, James  ;  Brown  university  at.  illustration,  I,  395  ;
Friends''  institutions  in,  60,  Almy  :  III,  426,  Jehkins,  A.
A.;  I,  396.  Brown,  M.  and  O.;  V,  206,  Redwood  :  gifts  to
charities  in,  I,  396  ;  IV,  59,  Lyman.  D.  W. ;  I,  478.  Butler,
Cyrus ;  library  of,  founded,  III,  259,  Hopkins,  S. ;  mob
in,  IV,  586,  O'Reilly,  B.

Providence,  cruise  of  the,  III,  468 ;  captures  by,  VI,  459,
Whipple,  A.

Province  House,  the,  illustration,  V.  100.

Provoost.  David  and  John.  V.  128,  Provoost,  S.

Provoost,  S.,  book-plate  of,  illustration,  V,  130.

Prudent,  M.,  II,  403,  Fairlamb.

Prunus  Alleghaniensis,  discovered,  IV,  45,  Lowrie,  J.  R.

Prussia,  U.  S.  treaty  with,  H,  533.

Pryor,  J.  B.,  III.  474,  Jordan,  T.

Pryor,  Margaret,  IV,  48.  Lazier,  C.  S.

Psoralea,  the,  III.  599,  Lamar -e-Picquot.

Psychometry,  science  of,  I,  436,  Buchanan,  J.  R.

Pterodactyles,  first  in  America,  IV,  218,  Marsh,  O.  C.

Public  lands,  famous  resolution  on,  II,  496,  Foote,  S.  A.;
subdivision  of,  III,  96,  Harrison,  W.  H.  ;  sale  of,  on
credit.  543,  King,  R.;  to  settlers,  I,  144,  Baker,  D.  J.

Publicola,  pen-name,  I.  24.

Public-school  system,  first  suggestion  of,  II,  221,  Downey  ;
society,  of  New  York.  III.  700,  Leveridge.

Publishers'  Weekly  and  Annual,  III,  708,  Leypoldt.

Publius,  pen-name.  Ill,  59.

Pueara,  battle  at,  II,  661,  Giron  ;  Puckeshinwa,  VI,  57,
Tecumseh.


Puebla,  capture  of,  II,  369,  Escobedo  ;  cathedral  of,  IV,
197,  Manzo  ;  College  of  San  Ildefonso  in,  437,  Mota, ;
founding  of,  440,  Motolinia  ;  improvements  in,  II,  559,
Fuero,  F.  F. ;  defence  of,  VI,  655,  Zaragoza  ;  medical
academy,  I,  532,  Carpio ;  captured,  701,  Comonfort ;
seminary  and  cathedral  of,  259,  Bienpica  ;  sieges  of,  II,
166,  167,  Diaz,  Porfirio  ;  III,  87,  Haro  y  Tamariz  ;  V,
394,  Santa-Anna  ;  surrender  of,  I,  202,  Bazaine.

Pueblo,  Col.,  old  fort  at,  V,  538,  Simpson,  G.  S.

Pueblo  Indians,  the,  I,  490,  Cabeza  ;  II,  39,  Cashing,  F.  H.

Puelles,  Pedro,  II,  165,  Diaz  de  Pineda.

Puerto  Bello,  capture  of,  VI,  280,  Vernon,  E.

Puerto  Cabello,  capture  of,  IV,  623,  Paez. ;  burning  of,  hy
pirates,  III,  441,  Johnson,  Daniel ;  III,  343,  Illigen  ;  II,
705,  Grandmont ;  I,  303,  Bolivar  ;  304-306.

Puerto  del  Principe,  battle  at,  IU,  344,  Illigen.

Puesto  del  Marquez.  battle  of,  V,  316,  Rondeau.

Puget,  Peter  R.,  V,  245,  Richings.  P.

Puget  sound  company  claims,  HI,  436,  Johnson,  A.  S.

Pugh,  W.  W.,  V,  132,  Pugh,  E.  L.

Pujol,  Abel  de,  IV,  487,  Nehlig.

Pukeesheno,  Chief,  II,  335,  Ellskwatawa.

Pulaski,  Count,  II,  433,  Ferguson,  P.

Pulaski,  Joseph,  V,  133,  Pulaski,  K.

Pulaski's  legion,  his  monument,  illustration,  V,  133  ;
sword  of,  I,  70,  Anderson,  R.  C.

Pullman,  111.,  V,  134,  Pullmati,  G.  M.

Pulpit  Incendiary,  the.  anonymous  book,  VI,  353,  Ward,  N.

Pulque,  discovery  of,  VI,  64,  Tepaxicaltzin ;  VI,  635,  Xochitl.

Pulte,  Dr.  Hermann,  V,  135,  Pidte,  J.  H.

Pump,  invention  of  a,  IV,  425  ;  I,  77,  Andrews  ;  II,  216,
Douglas,  B.

Pumping-engines,  invention  of,  I,  740,  Corliss  ;  VI,  617,
Worthington,  H.  R.

Puna,  island  of,  III,  291,  Huayna.

Punchard,  John,  V,  136,  Punchard,  G.

Purcell,  Edward,  V,  136,  Purcell,  J.  B.

Purchas,  S.,  IH,  28,  Hakluyt ;  quotation  from,  III,  2C6,
Hudson,  H.

Purdue  university,  founded,  VI,  697,  Purdue.

Puren,  battle  of,  II.  361  ;  fortress  of,  III,  9,  Guanoalca  ;  I,
560,  Caupolican  ;  siege  of,  II,  25,  Cudequala.

Puritans,  the,  I,  349  ;  371,  Brewster,  W.;  in  England,  VI,
353,  Ward,  N. ;  migration  of,  in  1682,  II,  527  ;  persecu-
tion of,  V,  286,  Robinson,  J.

Puritan,  the,  sloop,  I,  451,  Burgess.  E..

Puritanism,  controversy  on,  IV,  575,  Oliver,  P.  ;  feeling
concerning,  in  the  colonies,  I,  30.

Puritan  Recorder,  I,  722.  Cooke,  P. ;  IV,  89,  McClure,  A.  W.

Purry,  Col.  Peter,  III,  447,  Johnson,  Robert.

Purrysbury,  S.  C,  III.  447,  Johnson,  Robert.

Puruaran,  battle  of,  HI,  368  ;  IV,  250,  Matamoros  ;  392,
Morelos.

Purvis,  William,  V,  137,  Purvis,  R.

Pushkin,  Alexander,  III,  707,  Lewis,  W.  D.

Putapichion,  Chief,  III,  10,  Guenucalquin.

Putnam,  Albigence  W.,  V,  279,  Robertson,  J.

Putnam  and  his  Wolf,  noted  tract,  IV,  217,  Marsh,  John.

Putnam,  Frederick  W.,  Ill,  335,  Hyatt ;  IV,  619,  Packard,
Alpheus  S.

Putnam,  Rev.  George.  II,  333,  Ellis,  G.  E. ;  V,  77,  Porter,  E.

Putnam,  Harve3'.  V,  143,  Putnam,  J.  O.

Putnam,  Israel,  his  birthplace,  illustration,  V,  141 ;  contro-
versy over.  II,  109,  Dawson,  H.  B.

Putnam,  John,  V.,  139,  Putnam,  I.

Putnam,  John  Bishop,  V,  143,  Putnam,  G.  H.

Putnam,  Joseph,  V,  139,  Putnam,  I.

Putnam,  Mary.  Ill,  394,  Jacobi,  M.  P.

Putnam,  Mary  K.,  Ill,  505,  Kelloqg,  Edward.

Putnam,  Rev.  Richard,  V,  143,  Putnam,  S.  A.  B.

Putnam,  Samuel  R.,  V,  143,  Putnam,  M.  T.  S.  L.

Putnam,  Thomas,  V,  139,  Putnam,  I.

Putnam's  Folly,  V,  142,  Putnam,  G.

Putnam's  Magazine.  V,  142,  Putnam,  G.  P. ;  II,  671,  Godwin.

Puyrredon,  IV,  23,  Lopez  y  Planes.

Pyle,  Col.,  Ill,  667,  Lee,  H;  689,  Lenoir.

Pylodet.  F.,  pen-name,  III,  708,  Leypoldt.

Pyramid  exploration,  VI,  141,  Totten,  C.  A.  L.

Pyratreon,  Col.,  IV,  403,  Morgan,  M.

Pyrometer,  invention  of  a,  I,  301,  Bogardus,  J.  ;  reflecting,
inventor  of  a,  V.  409-410,  Saxton.

Pyroxyline,  III,  336,  Hyatt,  J.  W.

Quadrant,  a,  II,  103  ;  invention  of  a,  668.  Godfrey,  T.

Quaker  City,  the,  steamer,  II,  521,  Frailey.

Quaker  guns,  VI,  384,  Washington,  W.

Quaker  Meadows  Joe,  sobriquet.  IV,  109,  McDowell,  J.

Quakerism,  debate  on,  VI,  533,  Williams.  R.

Quakers,  I,  163,  Barclay,  R.:  controversy,  the  Plea  of  the
Innocent,  III,  429.  Jennings,  S.  ;  Christian  or  Baptist,
502.  Keith,  G.  ;  arrest  of,  in  Cork,  IV,  712  ;  publications
in  defence  of.  713  ;  trial  of  Penn  and  Mead,  713  :  defence
of  the  doctrines  of,  V.  138,  Pusey  :  fined  in  Plymouth,
IV,  734,  Perry,  C.  R.  ;  the  Free  or  Fighting.  V,  410,  Say.
B.  ;  VI,  445,  Wetherill  ;  gifts  for  meeting-houses  of,  444,
445,  Wetherill ;  in  N.  C,  III,  337,  Hyde.  E.  ;  missions,  II,
506,  Forster;  VI.  691,  Jones;  II,  761.  Grellet  ;  noted
document  of,  IV,  614.  Owen.  G.  ;  opposition  to  war,  320,
Mifflin  ;  opposition  to  the  Revolution,  HI,  191,  Hewes;


780


QUAKER


RAMSAY


origin  of  the  name,  II,  519,  Fox,  G.  ;  party  of,  in  Phila-
delphia.  IV,  532. Norris, I.  ; persecution  of,  II, 284,
Duar  ;  355,  Endicott,  J.  ;  III,  124,  Hawthorne  ;  198,  Hig-
ginson,  J.  ;  IV,  706,  Pemberton,  P.  ;  V,  380,  Saltonstall,
Sir  R.;  438,  Scott,  R.  ;  511,  Shippen  ;  king  of  the,  IV,
706,  Pemberton,  I. ;  right  to  remain  covered  in  court,  III,
552,  Kinsey,  John  ;  ruse  to  incite  them  to  arm,  II,  383,
Evans,  J.  ;  sent  to  Virginia  from  Pennsylvania,  IV,  711,
Penington,  E. ;  separation  of  the  Unitarian,  III,  196,
Hicks,  E.  ;  set  at  liberty  by  James  II.,  IV,  714.
Quaker  Soldier,  the,  I,  255,  Biddle.  C.
Quallah  Battoo,  Sumatra,  V,  518,  Shubrick,  I.
Quanpopoca.  Chief,  II,  367,  Escalante,  J.
Quappa  and  Quoaquis  Indians,  IV,  185,  Mambre.
Quarles,  Francis,  III,  475,  Josselyn.
Quarry.  Col.  Robert,  IV,  383,  Moore,  John.
Quarterly,  first  American,  VI,  340,  Walsh,  R.
Quasson.  Joseph,  IV.  377,  Moody,  S.

Quebec,  city,  Arnold's  expedition  to,  I,  94  ;  attack  on.  402,
Brown,  John  ;  founded,  568,  Champlain  ;  attacked  by
Kirk,  569 ;  fortress  at,  677,  Coffin,  John  ;  marine
library  of  geographical  society,  II,  508.  Fortin  ;  bom-
barded by  Phips.  554  ;  capture  of.  III,  554,  Kirke,  Sir
D.\  siege  of,  by  Wolfe,  610,  Langlade;  early  religious
institutions  in,  635,  Laval,  F.  X. ;  the  Ursulines  in,  714,
L' Incarnation  ;  Arnold's  siege  of,  IV,  142.  MacLean,
Sir  A. ;  attempt  to  form  a  university  in,  310,  Messein  ;
fall  of  (1759),  364 ;  monument  to  Montcalm  and  Wolfe,
illustration,  364  ;  Montgomery's  assault  on,  371  ;  Morrin
college  in,  409.  Morrin  ;  siege  by  the  French  (1760),  468,
Murray,  James  ;  764,  Phips  ;  episcopal  palace  at,  V,  63,
Pontbriand ;  opposition  to  an  Irish  church  in,  525,
Signay  ;  conflagration  in,  525,  Signal/  ;  capture  of  (1759),
official  report.  VI.  150,  Townsend  ;  589,  Wolfe.  J.
Quebec,  province  of,  schools  founded  in,  II,  208,  Dosquet,

Peter  H.
Quechi  Indians,  mission  to,  IV,  748,  Peyri.
Quechua  language,  the,  I,  247,  Bermudez,  J.  M.
yueen  Anne's  war,  destruction  of  Norridgewock,  IV,  446,

Moulton,  J. See  French  and  Indian  wars.
Queen  Charlotte  island,  discover}-  of,  VI,  338,  Wallis,  S.
Queen  Esther,  IV,  374,  Montour,  E.
Queen  of  the  air.  the,  III,  546,  King,  S.  A.
Queen  of  the  Plaza,  the,  IV,  299,  Menken.
Queen's  college,  N.  J.,  V,  355,  Rutgers.
Queen's  Head  hotel,  the,  in  New  York,  II,  129.
Queen's  Rangers,  the,  church  burned  by,  III,  77,  Harden-

bergh  ;  V,  310,  Rogers,  R.
Queen's  Royal  borderers,  the.  II,  698,  Gowan,  O.  R.
Queenston,  battle  of,  Brock's  monument  at,  I,  381  ;  611,
Christie,  J. ; V,  440,  Scott.  Winfteld  ;  489,  Sheaffe  ;  VI,
251,  Van  Rensselaer,  S.;  253,  Van  Rensselaer,  S.
Quepotan,  II,  31,  Cunequeo.
Queretaro,  siege  of,  II,  370,  Escobedo,  M. ;  TV,  215,  Mar-

quez,  L. ;  269.
Querist,  pseudonym,  I,  292,  Blennerliassett.
Quesada,  Antonio,  II,  435,  Fernandez,  J.;  Ill,  485,  Juels.
Quesnay,  M.,  II,  263,  Du  Pont  de  Nemours.
Qiietzalcoatl,  sons  of,  III.  371,  Ixtlilxochitl  II.
Quevedo  Redivivus,  VI,  626,  Wright,  R.  W.
Quezaltenango,  institute  of,  1, 178,  Barrios.
Quiche,  kingdom  of,  I,  123,  Axopil,  Axicoat ;  123,  Axopil ;

conquest  of  the,  602,  Chignavitcelut.
)uidah  Merchant,  the,  III,  531-532,  Kidd.
jjuids,  the,  I,  762,  Coxe,  T. ;  V,  152  ;  VI,  230.
Quietism,  III,  509,  Kelpius.

Juiet  Man.  A,  pen-name,  VI,  71,  Thayer,  A.  W.
Juilca.  battle  of,  II,  588,  Oana.
Juilibet.  Philip,  pen-name,  V,  62,  Pond,  G.  E.
Juillero,  battle  of,  II,  32.  Curanteo.
Juimby  Bridge,  S.  C,  engagement  at,  IV,  209.  Marion.
Juinatzin,  King,  I.  9,  Acamapictli  ;  VI,  57,  Techotlalatzin.
Juince,  Peter,  pen-name,  V,  716,  Story,  I.
Juincey,  John,  I,  205,  Beall,  S.  W.
juincy,  Adams  houses  at,  illustrations,  1, 15,  26.
Juincy,  Anna  C..  VI,  388,  Waterston.
Juincy,  Elizabeth,  I,  11,  Adams,  Abigail.
>uincy,  Miss,  V,  469,  Sewall,  Jonathan.
Juinine,  first  used  in  yellow  fever,  III,  369,  Iturrigaray  ;

use  of,  VI,  625,  Wright,  J.  J.  B.
Quinipiac,  II,  83, Davenport,  J.; settlement  at,  II,  294,

Eaton,  T.
)uiflones.  Gen.,  Ill,  299,  Huelen.
niintard.  Isaac,  V,  154,  Quintard.  C.  T.
)uipos.  the,  IV.  588,  (hlando  ;  VI,  225,  Valdurezo.
luires,  the.  II,  373,  Espejo,  A.
Juiros,  Pedro  de,  IV,  295,  Mendaila.
Juiros.  P.  F.  de,  V,  148,  Queiros.
Juispehuaneha.  II,  361.
Juisquiz,  Peruvian  chief,  III.  291,  Huascar.
Juito,  city,  expedition  to  conquer,  I.  62,  Alvarado.  P.;
convent  in,  216,  Bedon  \  conquest  of.  232,  Benalcazar.

Suito,  the  Lily  of,  miracles,  TV.  205.  Marianna.
uito,  province,  conquered, II,  168,  169,  Diaz,  R.  ; 190,
Docampo,  Rodri<i<>.
Quito,  reign  of  the'Shyris  in,  VI,  272,  Velasco.  Juan.
Quivira.  ruins  of,  I.  745,  Coronado  :  supposed  country  of,

IV.  297.  Mendoza  ;  kinsrdom  of,  VI,  273,  Velasco,  L.
Quod,  John,  pen-name,  III,  364,  Irving.  J.  T.


Raab,  George,  pupil  of,  V,  514,  Shirlaw.

Raab,  Geheimerath,  II.  339,  Eluyar.

Rabbinical  Quarterly  Review,  the,  III,  712,  Lilienthal.

Raccourci  cut  off,  the,  III,  155,  Hebert.

Racine,  prediction  by,  III,  686,  Le  Moine.

Racine  college,  II,  126,  De  Koven  ;  establishment  of,  V,  723,
Strong,  M.  M.

Raclawice,  battle  of,  III,  573.

Radecke,  Robert,  pupil  of,  VI,  482,  Whiting,  G.  E.

Radnor,  old  Welsh  church  at,  illustration,  II,  381.

Rafael,  Rafael,  VI,  687,  Haskell.

Rafn,  Prof.,  II,  468,  Fiske,  D.  W.

Rag-cutting  machine,  invention  of  a,  I,  203,  Beach,  M.  Y.

Ragone,  Count  Claudio,  V,  129.

Rahl,  Col.,  II,  543,  Frelinghuysen,  F.

Railroads,  organization  of  a  pool,  reform  in  management,
bridges  and  tunnels,  II,  459,  Fink,  A.:  stocks.  694,  Gould.
J.  ;  relative  cost  of  operating,  III,  235  ;  Holley,  A.  L.  ;
organization,  IV,  402,  Morgan,  J.  P.  ;  management.  V,
367,  Sage,  R.;  439,  Scott,  T.  A.;  investigation  concerning
bonds,  I,  277  ;  legislation,  II,  27,  Culloni  ;  taxation  of
bonds,  513,  Foster,  L.  S.;  VI,  188,  Toombs  ;  procurement
of  subsidies,  13,  Swinton,  W;  case  of  Dubuque  bonds,
475,  White,  S.  V.  C.  ;  system  of  standard  time.  679,
Dowd  ;  suits  of,  115  ;  riots,  III,  307,  Huidekoper,  H.  S.  ;
commissioners,  N.  Y.,  V,  668,  Sterne  ;  building  of,  I,  282,
Blair,  J.  I.  ;  V.  276,  Roberts,  S.  W.  and  W.  M.  ;  597.
Smith,  Z.  F.  ;  699,  Stone,  A.  ;  inventions  for,  I,  422,
Bryant,  G.  ;  III,  625,  Latimer,  C.  ;  earljt,  in  United
States,  V,  204,  Redfield,  W.  C.  :  first  suggestion  of  the
Boston  and  Albany,  VI,  369,  Washburn,  E.  ;  first,  in
Canada.  IV,  118,  McGill,  P.  :  Canadian  Pacific,  II.  480,
Fleming,  S.  ;  original  bill,  708,  Grant,  J.  A.  ;  contract
for,  charges  against  the  ministry,  698,  Gowan,  J.  R.  ;
scandal.  III,  326,  Huntington,  X.  S. ;  Canada  Southern.
Nickel  Plate,  West  Shore — war  of  rates,  VI,  242  ;  Chica-
go, Milwaukee,  and  St.  Paul,  492,  Whittemore,  D.  J.  ;
Detroit,  Mackinaw,  and  Marquette,  IV.  150,  McMillan,
James  ;  Erie,  III,  544,  King,  J.  Q.\  IV,  24,  Loi-d,  E.\  218,
Marsh,  L.  R. ;  Alabama  and  Chattanooga,  board  of  arbi-
tration, VI,  429,  Wells,  D.  A.  ;  Harlem,  Hudson  River,
New  York  Central,  and  Erie,  240-241  ;  Hamilton  and  St.
Joseph,  IV,  489,  Neilson,  W.  H.  ;  Kansas  and  Northern
Pacific.  VI,  294,  Villard  ;  Northern  Pacific,  V,  277,  Rob-
erts, T.  P.  ;  Lehigh  Valley,  IV,  620,  Packer ;  across
Mexico,  VI,  24,  Talcott,  A.;  Massachusetts  Western,  II,
117,  Dearborn,  H.  A.  S.;  Memphis  and  El  Paso,  548,  Fre-
mont ;  proposal  for  one  in  New  York  instead  of  a  canal,

V,  673 ;  first  long  one  in  United  States,  first  charters
granted,  circular,  in  Hoboken,  first  locomotive  run  on  a
railroad  in  America,  674,  Stevens,  John  ;  New  York  and
Erie,  HI,  434,  Jewett.  H.  J. ;  New  York  Central,  V,  130,
Pruyn;  Opelousas,  IV,  395,  Morgan,  C;  Pacific,  II,  11,
Crocker,  C.  ;  V,  644,  Stanford  ;  first  suggestion  of  a
Pacific,  VI,  488,  Whitney,  Asa  ;  government  mortgage
on  the  Pacific,  370,  Washburne,  E.  B.;  Northern  Pacific,
621,  Wright,  C.  B.;  Texas  Pacific,  V,  275,  Roberts,  M.  O.;
Pennsylvania,  VI,  99,  Thomson,  J.  E.  ;  first,  in  United
States,  IV,  731,  Perki7is,  T.  H.  :  Red  River  Valley,  532,
Norquay ;  in  Russia,  VI,  464,  Whistler,  G.  W.  ;  first,  in
Soutn  America,  H.  305,  Edwards,  A.;  South  American,

VI,  457,  Wlteelwright,  W.\  the  Three  Americas.  HI,  162,
Helper ;  trans-Andean,  IV,  287,  Meiggs  :  in  Utah,  VI,
646,  Young,  B.  ;  Western,  III,  324-825,  Huntington,  C.
P.  ;  West  Shore.  V,  72,  Porter,  H.  ;  VI.  B68,  Window,  E.
F. ;  rack  railroads,  improvement  in,  V,  673  ;  proposed,  on
the  40th  parallel,  VI.  683.  Gilpin  ;  inventor  of  plan  for  ele-
vated, V,  398,  Sargent,  H.  ;  cars,  improvements  in.  131,
Pullman,  G.  M. ;  chair,  invention  of  a,  223,  Renwick,  E.
S.  ;  first  guide  in  United  States,  n,  182,  Disturnell ;
manual,  IV,  10,  Long,  S.  H.  ;  signals,  invention  of  rail-
circuit  for,  V,  67,  P)pe,  F.  L.

Raimondi.  Antonio,  IV,  645,  Pardo.

Raimondi,  Marc  A.,  VI,  320,  Waldeck.

Rainbow,  the,  cruises  of,  I,  690,  Collier,  G.  ;  captures  by,

IV.  189,  Manley,  J.
Rainsborow.  Gen.  VV..  V,  712,  Stoughton,  I.
Rainsford  island,  discovery  on.  VI.  106,  Thorvald.
Raisin  river,  engagement  on  the,  III,  97  ;  massacre  on  the,

VI,  561,  Winchester,  J.
Rake,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  12,  Swift,  L.
Rale,  Sebastian.  V,  184,  Rode.
Ralegh's  birthplace,  illustration,  V,  163.
Raleigh,  gift  of  land  for,  III.  606,  Lane,  Joel.
Raleigh,  the,  fighting  by,  I,  180,  Barry,  J.
Raleigh  letter,  the,  I,  643.
Raleigh  tavern,  the,  I,  324,  Botetourt.
Ramalho,  Joab,  V,  615,  Souza.

Ramapo  Pass,  Burr's  headquarters  at,  illustration,  I,  466.
Rambaut,  Rev.  Thomas,  VI.  697,  RamlKtut,  M.  L.  B.
Ramberg,  Arthur  George  von,  pupil  of,  V,  514,  Shirlaw.
Rambouillet,  botanic  gardens  at,  IV,  314,  Michaux.
Ramirez,  Alonso,  V,  526,  Sigiienza.

Ramirez.  Gen.  Juan.  IV,  291,  Melgar  :  V,  135,  Pumacahua.
Rammelsberg,  Dr..  II,  638,  Gibbs.  O.  W.
Rammohun  Roy,  V,  182,  Rantoul.
Ram6n,  Garcia.  II.  25,  Cudequala.
Rams,  use  of,  II,  327,  Ellet.  C.
Ramsay,  Baron,  II,  57,  Dalhousie.


RAMSAY


RELAND


781


Ramsay,  Charlotte,  III,  688,  Lennox.

Ramsay,  Mary,  IV,  603,  Oswald,  R.

Ramses  II.,  statue  of,  VI,  571,  Winslow,  W.  C.

Ramsey,  Dr.  David,  III,  "29,  Lincoln,  B.

Ramsey,  Francis  A.,  V,  168,  Ramsey,  J.  G.  M.

Ramsey,  W..  Ill,  454.  Johnson,  W.

Ramsey,  Rev.  W.,  V,  197,  Read,  H.

Ramsour's  Mills,  engagement  at,  IV,  383,  Moore,  John.

Ramusio,  Giambattista,  III,  430,  Jerez.

Rancagua  valley,  battle  in  the,  I,  535,  Carrera,  J.  M.  ;  II,
541,  Freire,  R. :  IV,  566,  O'Higyins,  B. ;  602,  Osorio.

Ranck,  G.  W.,  IV,  566,  O'Hara,  T.

Rand,  Benjamin.  V,  745.

Randall.  Phineas,  V,  170,  Randall,  A.  W.

Randall,  Thomas,  V,  170,  Randall,  R.  R.

Randall's  island,  action  at,  III,  167,  Henley,  T.

Raudegger,  Alberto,  pupil  of,  VI,  490,  Whitney,  M.  W.

Randolfe,  Thomas,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W.

Randolph,  Ariana,  V,  176,  Randolph,  J.

Randolph,  Avery,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W.

Randolph,  Elizabeth,  IV,  282,  Meade,  R.  K.

Randolph,  Henry,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W.

Randolph,  Sir  John,  view  of  his  house,  V,  174.

Randolph,  Jane,  III,  415,  Jefferson,  T.

Randolph,  John,  III,  47  ;  \,  174,  Randolph,  W. ;  reply  to,
I,  451,  Burges  ;  quoted,  III,  25,  Hagner,  P.  ;  79,  Har-
din, B.

Randolph,  Martha,  III,  423,  Jefferson,  M.

Randolph,  Mary,  I,  386,  Brooks,  J.

Randolph,  Richard,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W. ;  178,  Randolph,  J.

Randolph,  Robert  L.,  V,  171,  Randolph,  A.  M.

Randolph,  destruction  of  the,  I,  256,  Biddle,  N.

Randolph-Macon  college,  II,  182,  Disosicay  ;  in,  680,  Leigh,
H.  G.;  IV,  571,  Olin,  S.

Ranger,  the,  III,  468.

Ransom,  Alexander,  V,  484,  Shattuck.  A.  D.

Ransom.  Col.,  V,  479,  Seymour,  T.  H.

Rantowles,  engagement  at,  VI,  384,  Washington,  W.

Rany.  S.,  II,  516,  Fouville.

Raousset-Boulbon,  Count  de,  VI,  296,  297,  Villeraye.

Rapaelje,  Jan  Joris,  V,  183,  Rapaelje,  S.

Rapp,  Frederick,  IV,  615,  Owen,  R.

Raritan  canal,  V,  694,  Stockton,  R.  F.

Rasher  Family,  anonymous  book,  VI,  287,  Victor,  M.  V.

Rasle,  Sebastian,  tragedy  founded  on  the  story  of,  n,  123,
Deering.

Rat,  the,  III,  572,  Kondiaronk.

Ratazzi,  Madame,  II,  75,  Daniel,  J.  M.

Ratcliffe,  Capt.  John,  V,  570  ;  626,  Spelman.

Ratib  Pacha,  IV,  28.  Loring,  W.  W.

Rattan,  inventions  for  using,  III,  194,  Heywood,  L. ;  use  of,
VI,  318,  Wakefield,  C.

Raucourt,  Oliver  de,  VI,  508,  Wilhorst.

Raumer,  Friedrich  von,  V,  622.

Raupp,  Carl,  pupil  of,  V,  326,  Rosenthal,  T.  E.

Ravenscraig,  Montreal,  I,  50,  Allan,  Sir  H.

Ravensworth,  estate  of,  II,  475,  Fitzhugh,  W.  H.

Rawle,  Francis  William.  V,  190,  Rawle,  H.

Rawlings,  Henry,  V,  190,  Rawlings,  M.

Rawlins,  James  D.,  V,  190,  Rawlins,  J.  A.

Rawson,  Peletiah,  II,  730,  Gray,  G.  E.

Ray,  Henry,  arrest  of.  V,  91,  Potter,  P.

Rayetayah.  Chief,  IV,  556,  Oconostota.

Raymond,  Charles  M.,  I,  548,  Cary,  A.  L.

Raymond,  H.  J.,  discussions  of,  with  Greeley,  II,  736,  738.

Raymond,  Miss.,  engagement  at,  H,  712  ;  IV,  157,  Mc-
pherson, J.  B.

Raynal,  Abbe,  in,  712,  Ligon,  R.

Rayneval,  M.,  Ill,  409.  410  ;  VI,  267.

Rayneval,  Gerard  de,  VI,  279,  Vergennes.

Razamowsky,  Count  G.  de,  II,  637,  Gibbs.

Razilly,  Isaac  de,  I,  583,  Charnisi.

Rea,  Samuel  J.,  IV,  205,  Marguerittes.

Read,  Col.  Clement.  V,  200,  Read,  T.

Read,  Deborah.  II.  527,  528.

Read,  Emily,  V.  213,  Reeves,  M.  C.  L.

Read,  Luman,  II,  477,  Flagg,  G.  W.

Read,  W.,  Ill,  365,  Irwing.

Reade,  Elizabeth,  VI,  574.

Reade,  Thomas,  VI,  575,  Winthrop,  J.

Readjuster  party,  the,  IV.  177,  Mahone.

Readymoney  Spencer,  sobriquet,  V,  629,  Spencer,  E.

Real  Advantages  ...  of  conforming  to  the  Church  of
England,  anonymous  book,  VI,  426,  Welles,  N.

Ream,  Vinnie.  Ill,  288,  Hoxie,  V.  R.

Ream's  Station,  engagements  at,  III,  73  ;  II,  714.

Reapers,  invention  of  the  Buckeye,  I,  151,  Ball.  E.;  inven-
tion of  steel,  II,  377,  Esterly ;  first  practical,  invention
of,  IV,  95,  McCormick,  C.  H. See  also  Harvesters.

Reason  the  only  oracle,  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  Aaron.

Rebellion,  Bacon's,  I,  131,  Bacon,  N.

Rebellion,  Shays's,  I,  335,  Bowdoin.

Rebellion  tree,  the,  II,  70,  Dana,  R.  H.

Rebisso,  statue  by,  II,  725  :  illustration,  724.

Recamier,  Madame,  I,  590,  Chateaubriand  ;  II,  254,  Du
Motay.

Recife,  surrender  of  the  Dutch  at,  IV,  487,  Negreiroa.

Reciprocants,  theory  of,  VI,  15,  Sylvester,  J.  J.

Reciprocity  treaty,  I,  324,  Botsford. See  Treaties.


Recollet  fathers,  the,  II,  555,  Frontenac ;  ITI.  168,  Henne-
pin; in  Quebec,  635,  Laval,  F.  X.;  missions  of,  618,
La  Ribourde  ;  652,  Leclerq  ;  IV,  185,  Mambre  ;  525,
Nivert ;  593,  Orry ;  V,  41,  Plessys  ;  366,  Sagard  ;  VI,  17,
Tac  ;  dissensions  with  the  Jesuits.  IV,  314,  Michel.

Reconstruction,  I,  64,  Ames.  A. ;  109,  Ashburn  ;  276  ;  409,
Brown,  J.  E.\  416,  Brownlow  ;  447,  Bidlock,  R.  B.;  531,
Carpenter,  M.  H.\  in  Mississippi.  607,  Chisolm;  report
on,  II,  444,  Fessenden,  W.  P.;  717,  719  ;  carpet-bag  gov-
ernments, 740  ;  III,  70,  Hampton  ;  203,  Hill,  B.  H. ;  con-
tests of  congress  and  the  president  on,  438,  439  ;  Lincoln
on,  725  ;  V,  472,  477  :  649,  Stanton.  E  M.\  677,  Stevens,
T. ;  726-727,  Stuart,  A.  H.  H;  the  Wade-Davis  manifesto,
VI,  311,  Wade,  B.  F.

Record  of  the  Year,  magazine,  IV,  381,  Moore.  F.

Recreations  of  Christopher  North,  the,  II,  260,  Dunlop,  W.

Rector,  Henry  M.,  VI,  141.  Totten.  J.

Red  Bank,  N.  J.,  battle  at,  II,  201,  Don  op.

Red  Book,  in,  517,  Kennedy,  J.  P. ;  II,  23,  Cruse,  P.  H.

Red  Cross  society,  the,  I,  187,  Barton  ;  II,  384,  Evans,
T.  W.;  VI,  333.  Walker.

Redden,  Laura  C,  pen-name,  V,  446,  Searing.

Redel,  Beatrice,  III,  188,  Herrman,  A.

Redemptorist,  first,  in  U.  S.,  IV,  497,  Neumann,  J.  N.

Reden,  Countess  von,  V,  251,. Riedesel,  F.  C.  L.

Reden,  Karl,  pen-name,  I,  711,  Converse,  C.  C.

Redfleld,  William,  IV,  593,  Orr,  J.  W.

Red  river,  Canada,  attempted  settlement  on,  III,  36,  Hal-
kett,  I. ;  V,  448,  Selkirk,  Earl ;  founder  of  settlement  on,
I,  47,  Alexander.  T.;  IV,  106.  Macdonell,  M.;  insurrec-
tion in,  I.  286,  Blake,  E.;  V,  252,  Riel  ;  VI,  18,  Tachi,  A.
A.;  591,  Wolseley.

Red  river,  La.,  expedition.  I.  159,  Banks  ;  V,  590,  Smith,
T.  K.;  dam  built  on  the,  I,  138,  Bailey,  J.;  blockaded,  II,
417  ;  raft,  the  great,  V,  517,  Shreve,  H.  M.

Red  Rose  tavern,  I,  116,  Aubrey.  L.

Redwood,  anonymous  book,  V,  451,  Sedgwick,  C.  M.

Redwood  library,  Newport,  I,  246.

Reed,  Charles,  IH,  260,  Hopkinson.  T.

Reed,  John,  VI,  112,  Ticknor,  W.  D.

Reed,  Joseph,  II,  433,  Ferguson,  E.

Reed,  Mary  J.,  UI,  200,  Hildeburn,  M.  J.

Reed,  Rebecca,  V,  350,  Rush,  Jacob.

Reed,  Rev.  Solomon,  V,  207,  Reed,  John.

Reed.  Rev.  Sylvanus,  VI,  697,  Reed.

Reed,  Rev.  W.,  V,  207,  Reed,  D.

Reed  college,  VI,  697,  Reed.

Rees,  J.,  II,  505,  Forrest,  E.

Reeve,  John,  I,  473,  Burton.

Reeves,  Charlotte,  V,  279,  Robertson.  C.  R.

Reeves,  Sims,  IV,  679,  Paul,  I.  F.

Reformed  church,  use  of  the  Dutch  language  in,  III,  595,
Laidlie,A. ;  independence  of  the,  II,  542,  Frelinghuysen,  T.
J.;  VI,  249,  Van  Nieuwenhuysen  ;  first  clergyman  of,  in
America,  IV,  313,  Michozlius  ;  first  classis  and  ordina-
tion, VI,  37,  Tassemacher ;  schism  in,  II,  553.  Froeligh  ;  the
Coetus  and  the  Conferentie,  III,  708,  Leydt ;  Coetus  and
Conferentie  parties  in,  IV,  312,  Meyer,  H.;  parties  in.
father  of,  III,  747,  Livingston,  J.  H:  Indian  missions,
rights  of,  under  the  English,  IV,  286-287,  Megapolensis  ;
lawsuit  on  the  use  of  English  in  preaching,  V,  316,  Ronde ;
first  English  book,  ibid.;  right  of,  under  the  English
rule,  VI,  251,  Van  Rensselaer,  N;  missions,  II,  209,  Doty,
E.;  IV,  58.  Lydius,  J.;  77,  McCartee,  D.  B.;  V, 444,  Scud-
der  ;  VI,  26,  Talmage,  J.  V.  N. ;  277,  Verbeck ;  records
of,  V,  459,  Selyns  ;  anniversary  at  Schenectady,  VI,  254,
Van  Santvoord.  S.

Reformed  Episcopal  church,  the.  I,  598,  Cheney,  C.  E.;  II,
31,  Cummins,  G.  D.;  VI,  479,  Whitehouse,  H.  J.

Reformed  Presbyterian  church,  psalmody  of,  IV,  145,  Mc-
Leod,  J.  N.

Refrigeration,  method  of  artificial.  II,  255,  Du  Motay.

Refugees,  the  associated,  H,  132,  406,  Fanning.  E.

Regicides,  the,  III,  676,  Leete  ;  story  of  one,  II,  187,  Dix-
well ;  672,  Goffe  :  VI,  446,  Whalley,  E.

Regiomontanus,  I,  222,  Behaim.

Register,  Seeley,  pen-name,  VI,  287,  Victor,  M.  V.

Regla,  the  count  of,  II.  28,  Cultzliayotl.

Regnier,  Francois  Joseph,  VI,  349,  Ward,  G.

Regulating  act,  the,  I,  592,  Chatham.

Regulator-clocks,  improvement  to,  III,  751,  Locke,  J.

Regulators,  the.  II.  406,  Fanning.  E.;  defeat  of,  by  Gov.
Tryon,  m,  329,  Husbands;  253,  Hooper,  W.;  U,  406,
Fanning.

Regules,  N..  n,  369.  Eicobedo.

Rehoboth,  Mass..  IV,  474,  Myles,  J.

Rehoboth,  R.  I.,  founded,  IV,  505,  Newman.  S.

Reichel.  Rev.  Benjamin,  V,  214,  Reichel,  W.  C.

Reid,  Alexander  R.,  V.  215,  Reid,  John.

Reid,  Anne,  I,  669,  Cobbett,  W.

Reid,  Christian,  pen-name,  II,  465,  Fisher,  F.  C.

Reid,  Lieut.  John,  V,  215,  Reid,  S.  C.

Reid,  John  W.,  V,  119.  Price.  T.  L.

Reily.  Benjamin,  V,  218,  Reily,  J.

Reindeer,  the,  I,  287,  Blakeley.

Reinecke,  I,  563,  Chadwick,  G.  W.

Reissiger,  C.  G.,  II,  317,  Eisfeld.

Rejenerador  party,  the.  III,  714,  Linares.

Reland,  Hadrian,'  V,  285,  Robinson,  E.


782


RELIGION


RHODE


Religion,  authority  of  the  state  over,  controversy  on,  I,
753,  Colton,  J. ;  intolerance  in,  537.  538  ;  634,  Clarke.  John  ;
636,  Clarke,  R. ;  freedom,  154,  Baltimore ;  liberty,  in
Virginia,  III,  174,  418  :  IV,  165,  166  ;  V,  700,  Stone,  B.  W. ;
VI,  532  ;  taxation  for  the  support  of,  I,  537  ;  attempt  to
introduce  religious  liberty  into  Massachusetts  constitu-
tion, 23  :  in  Russia,  32,  Adams,  W.

Religious  Magazine,  the,  VI,  57C,  Winslow,.H.

Religious  Retreat  sounded  to  a  Religious  Army,  anony-
mous book,  VI,  353,  Ward,  N.

Relly,  James,  IV,  469,  Murray,  John.

Remarks  on  Washington  College,  anonymous  book,  VI,  452.
Wlieaton,  N.  S.

Remembrancer,  the,  I,  59.  Almon.

Remigio,  Fray,  II,  359,  Enrique.

Remington,  Eliphalet,  V,  219,  Remington,  P.

Remington,  Samuel,  V,  219,  Remington,  P

Removals  from  office  by  the  president,  I,  430.

Renaissance  Louisianaise,  the,  review,  VI,  292,  Vignaud.

Rene,  the  good,  II,  690,  Coupil.

Renger,  Dr.,  II.  522,  Francia.

Rennie,  Sir  John,  VI,  170,  Trutch.

Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute,  VI,  252.

Rensselaerswick,  estate  of,  VI,  250,  Van  Rensselaer  ;  con-
flict in,  V,  471 ;  jurisdiction  over,  735,  Stuyvesant.

Renteria,  Rev.  N.,  II,  302,  Eranzo.

Repeating  carbine,  invention  of  a,  IV,  413,  Morris,  W.  H.

Report  on  the  municipalities,  the,  II,  264.

Reprisal,  the  brig,  captures  by,  and  loss  of,  VI,  497-498
Wickes,  L.

Republic,  an  international,  VI.  90,  Thompson,  E.

Republica  Literaria,  la,  Chilian  magazine,  VI,  332,  Walker-
Martinez.

Republican,  pen-name,  V,  23,  Pinckney,  C.

Republican  Methodist  church,  the,  IV,  568,  O'Kelly  ;  V,  18S,
Ravenscroft.

Republican  party,  resolutions  said  to  have  originated.  II,
706,  Granger,  A.  P.;  formation  of,  I,  276  :  542,  Carter, R.;

III,  277.  Hoicard,J.  M.\  716  ;  division  in  the,  I.  742,  Cor-
nell ;  707,  Conkling  ;  V,  748  ;  named,  VI,  386,  Waterman,
R.  W.;  436,  Wentworth,  J.;  origin,  469,  White,  D.  N.

Republican-Democratic  party,  the,  I,  21,  28,  Adams.  J.  Q. ;

II.  577,  578  ;  HI,  379,  413,  420  ;  IV,  169.
Repulse  bay,  named,  IV,  316,  Middleton,  C.
Requiescam.  anonymous  poem.  Ill,  288,  Howland,  M.  W.
Reregtibo,  III,  183.  Hermstaedt.
Resaca,  proposed  attack  on,  and  battle  at,  IV,  158.
Resaca  de  la  Palma,  battle  of,  IV,  273,  May,  C.  A.\  V,  53.
Resection,  operation  for,  II,  747,  Green,  W.  A.
Resolute,  the,  presented  to  the  British  government.  I,  223,

Belcher,  E.;  HI,  1,  Grinnell,  S.;  106,  Hartstene ;  I,  484,

Button.
Resolutions,  famous  four,  III,  416.
Respiration,  invention  of  a  method  of  artificial,  IV,  99,

McDaniel,  E.  D. ;  discoveries  on,  230,  Martin,  H.  N.
Restaurada  company,  the,  VI,  296,  Villeraye.
Restell,  Madame,  conviction  of.  IV,  135,  McKeon.
Restorationists,  II,  115,  Dean.  P.
Restrepo,  Dr.  Felix,  V,  223,  Restrepo,  J.  M.
Resumption  act,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,  W. ;  II,  722.
Retaliation,  the,  capture  of,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,  W.
Retina,  the,  discovery  concerning,  IV,  315.  Michel,  W.  M.
Retort,  Jack,  II.  535,  Franklin,  W.
Reunion,  Marquis  de  la,  VI,  276,  Venegas.
Reunion,  decree  freeing  blacks  in,  V,  462,  Sercey.
Reuss-Greitz.  Prince  of.  III,  486,  Jiigler.
Revenge,  wreck  of  the,  IV,  735.

Revenue,  special  commissioner  of  the.  VI,  429,  Wells,  D.  A.
Revenue  marine  service,  the,  HI,  537.  Kimball,  8.  I.
Revilla  Gigedo.  Count  of.  HI.  10,  Giiemes.
Revista  de  la  Habana,  the,  IV,  297,  Mendive.
Revivalists,  expulsion  of,  from  Connecticut,  HI,  637,  Law,

Jonathan.
Revivals,  II.  84,  Davenport,  James ;  III,  560,  Knapp,  J. ;

IV,  172,  Maffitt ;  376,  Moody,  D.  L.\  VI,  478,  While  field  ;
the  great,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archibald  ;  influence  of,  375,
Brigham :  falling  work.  IV,  213,  Marques,  T. ;  controversy
on,  500,  Nerin,  J.  W. ;  662,  Parsons,  J. ;  of  1800,  120,  Mc-
Gready  ;  130,  McKendree  ;  of  1831,  VI,  344,  Walton,  W.
C. ;  of  1832,  V,  247.  Ricord,  E.

Revoil,  Pierre  Henri,  V,  225,  Revoil*  B.  H.
Revolt  of  Tartarus,  anonymous  poem,  HI,  155,  Heavy sege.
Revolutionary  soldiers,  pensions  to,  HI,  638.  Law,  John.
Revolutionary  war,  the,  IH,  56,  57,  Hamilton,  A.;  events

grior  to  the,  II,  23,  Cruger,  J. ;  235-236.  Duane,  J. ;  529-
M  ;  570,  Gaqe  ;  III,  173,  174  :  259,  Hopkins,  S.;  332.  333  ;
408,  Jay  ;  417  :  569,  Knox  ;  664,  Lee,  R.  H. ;  742,  Living-
ston, P.;  IV,  107.  108,  Macdougall  ;  574,  Oliver,  A.;  writs
of  assistance.  606  ; stamp-act  congress,  607,  Otis,  J.  ;

V,  175,  Randolph,  P. ;  299-300,  Rodney ;  393.  Stockton,
R. ;  VI,  150,  Toumsend,  C. ;  309,  Waddell,  H. ;  365,  War-
ren, Joseph  ;  hospital  service,  365,  Warren,  John  ;  376  ;
418,  Weaderbum  ;  result  predicted,  V,  100,  Poumall ;
outbreak  of  the,  1, 16.  et  keq.:  537  :  II.  118,  De  Berdt ;  V,
224-225,  Revere  ;  feeling  in  New  York  in  1776,  IV,  414,
Morris,  L. ;  conference  on  reconciliation  (1776),  V,  858,
Rutledge,  E.  ;  first  martyr  of,  603,  Snyder,  C.  ;  first
victory  of,  IV,  382,  Moore,  James  ;  news  carried  across
the  ocean,  II,  147,  Derby,  R.  ;  Lord  North's  measures,


IV,  534,  North,  F. :  betrayal  of  plans  of  the  patriots,  VI,
663,  Zubly ;  scarcity  of  lead,  working  of  a  mine,  V,
271,  Roberdeau,  D.;  clock- weights  taken  in  exchange
for  iron,  263,  Rittenhouse  ;  the  Gates  party,  IV,  35,
Lovell,  James  ;  sentiment  in  France,  III.  586,  Lafayette;
French  officers  in,  586.  587;  V,  142,  Putnam,  R.;  the
Conway  cabal,  587 ;  alliance  of  France,  VI.  279,  Ver-
gennes  ;  foreign  officers  in,  III,  573  ;  V,  669  ;  III,  633,  Lau-
zun  ;  neutrality  of  Denmark,  IV,  211,  Markoe,  A.;  Span-
ish action  in,  II,  584,  Galvez,  B. ;  the  Hessians,  IV,  683,
Pausch  ;  German  troops  in,  V.  251.  Riedesel ;  in  Virginia,
II,  260,  Dunmore  ;  III,  418  ;  IV,  763,  Phillips,  William  ;
in  the  south,  44,  Lowndes,  R.\  "the  British  legion,"  op-
erations in  South  Carolina,  VI.  35.  Tarleton  ;  V,  752  ;  IH,
453,  Johnson,  W.  ;  IV,  207-209,  Marion  ;  battles  in  the
south,  III,  667,  Lee,  H;  V,  56,  Polk,  T.  and  W.\  plot  to
arm  the  slaves,  TV,  232-233,  Martin,  Josiah  ;  loyalists  in
Carolina,  90,  McClure,  J. ;  attack  by  British  and  Indians
on  southern  colonies,  555,  Oconostota  ;  first  sea-fight,
550,  O'Brien,  Jeremiah  ;  designs  of  boats  and  magazines,
511,  Nichola  ;  the  navy  in,  II,  482  ;  III,  468  ;  616,  La  Pe-
rouse  ;  IV,  189,  Manley,  J. ;  514,  Nicholson,  J.  and  D. ;  V,
116,  Prevalaye;  301,  Rodney;  380,  Saltonstall,  D.;  VI,
22,  Talbot,  G.;  170,  Truxtun  ;  174,  Tucker,  Samuel ;  266,
'  Vaudreuil,  Louis ;  497,  Wickes  ;  527.  Williams,  J.  F.  ;
Indian  combats,  V,  491-492,  Shelby,  E.  and  /.;  372,  St
Luc  ;  plan  for  an  Indian  raid.  730,  Stuart,  John  ;  expe-
dition against  the  Iroquois,  741,  Sullivan,  J.;  appoint-
ment of  generals.  Ill,  658  ;  scheme  for  a  conference  be-
tween Lee  and  Burgoyne,  659 ;  movements  near  the
Hudson,  659 ;  Lee's  insubordination,  659  ;  his  treason,
660  ;  organization  of  the  army,  VI,  376  ;  dissatisfaction
in  congress,  H,  630,  Gerry ;  concentration  of  American
forces,  589  ;  news  of  peace,  589  ;  massacre  at  New  Lon-
don, III,  655,  Ledyara,  W. ;  discontent  of  the  army,  VI,
377  ;  398-399,  Wayne  ;  mutiny,  399 ;  operations  on  Long
Island,  25,  Tallmadge  ;  invasion  of  Canada,  HI,  587  ;  IV,
371  ;  aid  of  France,  III,  588  :  projected  expedition  to  De-
troit, IV,  124,  Mcintosh,  L.;  recruits,  VI,  163,  Trumbull,
Jonathan  ;  British  extortion  in  New  York,  V,  278,  Robert-
son, J.;  supplies,  I,  210,  Beaumarchais  ;  III,  14,  Gurney.
F. ;  subscription  for  relief  of  the  army,  648,  Learning,  T. ;
funds  for,  IV,  711,  Penn  ;  743,  Peters,  R.;  V,  94,  Powel,
S.  ;  funds  for,  IV,  416.  Morris,  R.  ;  59,  Pollock,  O.  ;
379,  Salomon,  H. ;  attempt  to  obtain  a  foreign  loan,  447,
Searle,  J. ;  quartermaster's  department,  2 :  privateers.
271,  Roberdeau,  D.;  engineering  work  in,  III,  573,  Kosci-
uszko  ;  V,  313,  Romans  ;  arms  and  ordnance  used  in,  IV,
592,  Orr,  H.;  V,  127.  Proctor,  T.;  treatment  of  prisoners,
II,  32,  Cunningham,  W. ;  IV,  28,  Loring,  Joshua  :  317,
Middleton,  A.;  V,  27,  Pintard,  L.;  VI.  22,  Talbot,  S.;  87,
Thomas,  T. ;  hostages  held  at  St.  Augustine,  V,  166,  Ram-
say ;  hospital  service,  IV,  401,  Morgan,  J.;  V,  92,  Potts,
Jonathan;  512,  Shippen,  W.;  719,  Stringer;  VI,  68,
Thacher,  J.;  119,  Tilton;  parole  violated  by  a  prayer,  IV,
76,  McCalla,  D.;  exceptions  to  offered  amnesty,  III,  71,
Hancock  ;  85,  Harnett ;  close  of  the  war,  VI,  376-378  ;
missions  to  European  courts.  II,  116,  Deane,  S.;  HI,  666,
Lee,  A. ;  630,  Laurens ;  aid  of  France,  631  ;  peace  nego-
tiations, VI.  266-267,  Vaughan  ;  treaty  of  peace,  IV,  603,
Oswald,  R. ;  amnesty  act,  II,  406,  Fanning,  D. ;  Journal
of  Occurrences,  III,  600,  Lamb,  R. ;  last  major-general  of
the,  154,  Heath,  W.;  last  soldier  of  the,  H,  731,  Gray,  J.;
English  view  on,  VI,  173,  Tucker,  J.;  peace  party  in
England,  V,  294,  Rockingham ;  message  from  Whig
leaders  in  England,  151,  Quincy,  J. ;  only  woman  attainted
of  treason,  IV,  418,  Morris,  M.  P. ;  heroines,  I,  736,  Cor-
bin  ;  II,  79,  Darrah  ;  623,  Geiger  ;  HI,  103,  Hart.  N.;  163,
Hendee  ;  IV,  445,  Motte  ;  VI,  84,  Thomas,  Jane  ;  655,
Zane  ;  695,  Molly.

Revolvers,  invention  of,  I,  694,  Colt,  S.

Revolving  almanac,  inventor  of  a,  V,  79.  Porter,  R.

Revolving  rifle,  invention  of  a,  V.  79.  Porter,  R.

Revolving  turrets,  inventor  of.  VI.  120,  Timby.

Revons.  E.  C,  pen-name,  I,  717,  Converse,  C.  C.

Rewey.  E.  M.,  I,  717,  Cook,  M.

Reybaud,  Charles,  V,  612,  Soulouque.

Reyes,  Garcia,  H,  361,  Erauzo.

Reynier,  Joseph,  III.  402,  Jansen,  R.

Reynolds,  Aaron,  IV,  673,  Patterson,  R.

Reynolds,  Capt.  George,  V,  228,  Reynolds,  W.  M.

Reynolds,  James  M.,  II,  663,  Glass.

Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua,  I,  9,  Acland,  Lady  Harriet;  quoted,
VI.  439,  West,  B.

Rezanof,  M.,  I,  89,  Arguello.  C.

R.  G.  Coburn.  loss  of  the,  III,  224.  Hodge,  J.  T.

Rhea,  John,  I.  197,  Bayard.  J. ;  in.  378.

Rhea,  Judge  J.,  V,  132,  Pugh,  E.  L.

Rhemberger,  I,  563,  Chadwick,  G.  W.

Rhinebeck.  the  Mt.  Rutson  home,  V,  738,  Suckley,  T.  H.

Rhoads.  John,  V,  230,  Rhoads,  S.

Rhode  Island,  name  of,  I,  295.  Block  ;  settlement  of,  672,
Coddington  ;  Niantic  Indians  of,  grants  of  land  by  them,
IV,  523,  Ninegret;  founder  of,  VI,  631,  Williams,  R.;
charter  of,  247,  Vane ;  covenant  of  settlers,  V,  488,
Scott,  R.;  revolutionary  operations  in,  740,  Sullivan,
John ;  suffrage  in,  under  the  old  charter,  Dorr's  rebel-
lion, II,  205,  Dorr,  T.  W. ;  IV,  154,  McNeill ;  boundary
dispute,  H,  517,  Fowler,  O.


RHODE


ROCKINGHAM


783


Rhode  Island  college,  I,  396.

Rhodes.  Katharine  A.,  VI,  358,  Ware,  K.  A.

Rhodes,  Sally,  I,  81,  Anthony,  H.  B.

Rhodin.  M.,  Ill,  643,  Lawson.  L.

Rhyn,  Rebecca,  III,  337,  Hyneman.

Ribera,  Diego,  II,  674,  Gomez,  E. ;  V,  737,  Suarez,  Juan.

Ricaut,  Sir  Paul,  II,  594,  Garcilaso.

Ricci,  III,  634,  Lavalette.

Rice,  Lewis  L.,  V,  624,  Spaulding,  S.

Rice,  Mary  A.,  Ill,  740,  Livermore,  M.  A.

Rice-culture,  introduced  into  California.  I,  87,  Archdale  ;
IV,  64,  Lynch,  T.

Rich  Mountain,  battle  of,  V,  324.

Richard,  Henry,  III,  413,  Jay,  W.

Richards,  George,  II,  555,  Frost,  G.

Richards,  George  H.,  IV,  155,  Macomb,  A.

Richards,  Judge  Matthias,  V,  238,  Richards,  J.  W.

Richards,  Rowland,  III,  101,  Harrison,  8.

Richards,  Samuel,  V,  238,  239,  Richards,  J.  and  M.  T.

Richards,  Willard,  VI,  645.

Richards,  William,  II,  238,  Dubose.

Richards,  William  C,  II,  238.  Dubose.

Richardson,  Abby  Sage.  V,  241.  Richardson,  A.  D.

Richardson.  Ebenezer,  V,  603,  Snyder,  C.

Richardson,  Henry  D.,  V,  241,  Richardson,  H.  H.

Richardson,  Dr.  T.  G.,  Ill,  5,  Gross,  S.  D.

Richebourg,  Count  de,  IV,  542,  Noyan.

Richelieu,  Cardinal.  II,  353.  Enambuc.

Richelieu,  pen-name,  V,  289,  Robinson,  W.  E.

Richmond,  Hathaway,  V,  246,  Richmond,  D.

Richmond,  site  of,  I,  486,  Byrd,  W.  •  founded,  487  ;  survey
of,  IV,  277,  Mayo,  W. ;  gifts  of  land  in,  V,  355,  Ruther-
foord  ;  removal  of  state  capital  to.  III,  418  ;  Arnold's  capt-
ure of,  418  ;  Lafayette's  retreat  from,  588  ;  siege  of,  669  ;
Lee's  defence  of,  673  :  evacuated  by  Confederates.  II,
716;  Catholic  institutions  founded  in,  636,  Gibbons,  J.;
humane  association  of,  VI,  594,  Wood,  J.  M.;  hospital
and  training-school  founded  in.  TV.  121,  McGwire.

Richmond  college,  II,  1,  Crane,  W.;  V,  361,  Ryland,  R.

Richmond  Hill,  I,  466.

Richmond  Hill  theatre,  I,  392,  Brougham.

Richmond  junta,  the,  IV,  512,  Nicholas,  P.  N.

Richmond  theatre,  burning  of  the,  IV,  78,  McCaw  ;  V,  37,
Placide  ;  580,  Smith,  Meriwether.

Richter,  I,  437,  Buck,  D.;  664,  Gleason  ;  IV,  248,  Mason,
W.  ■  V,  707,  Storer,  F.  H.

Richter,  Ernst  F.  E.,  V,  508,  Sherwood,  W.  H.

Richter,  Henry,  V,  401,  Sartain,  J.

Ricketts,  Capt.  James  B.,  HI.  553,  Kirby,  Edmund.

Ricketts,  Mary  Walton,  VI,  237.  Van  Cortlandt,  Philip.

Rickey,  Randall  H.,  V.  276,  Roberts,  A.  S.

Rickoner,  pen-name,  V,  716,  Strachan.

Ricla,  Count  of,  II,  457,  Fimes.

Riddle,  Miss,  V,  452,  Sedley,  W.  H.

Ridgefield,  engagement  at,  I,  95  :  VI.  611,  Wooster.

Ridgeway,  Jacob,  V,  350,  Rush,  P.  A.

Riedesel,  John  W.,  V,  251,  Riedesel,  F.  A.

Riedesel,  Madame,  IV,  97,  McCrea.

Riethmueller.  C.  J.,  Ill,  60,  Hamilton,  A.

Rietz.  I,  437.  Buck.  D.

Rifle,  invention  of  a  breech-loading,  I,  463  ;  V.  483,  Sharps  ;
the  Ward- Burton,  VI,  355,  Ward,  W.  G. ;  561,  Winches-
ter, O.  F.

Rifle  clubs,  I,  564,  Chamberlain,  D.  H.

Rifle  contests,  II,  640.  Gibson,  J.  M.\  VI,  564,  Wingate.

Rigby,  Alexander,  VI,  301,  Vines.

Riggs,  Alfred,  V,  254,  Riggs,  S.  R.

Riggs,  Dr.,  I,  696.  Colton.  G.  Q.

Riggs,  Elisha,  IV,  688,  Peabody,  G.

Right  arm  of  British  power,  H,  698.  Gowan,  O.  R.

Right  of  search,  British  claim  to.  I,  433  ;  VI,  413.

Riguelme,  Alonso,  II,  166,  Diaz.  Melgarejo.

Riley,  Mary  L.,  V,  579,  Smith,  M.  L.' R.

Rimac,  wreck  of  the,  IV,  366.  Montero.

Rimac  river,  the,  V,  36,  Pizarro.

Rimmer,  Dr.  W.,  III.  33,  Hale,  E.  D.

Rimouski,  college  of,  founded.  III.  610.  Langevin,  J.

Rincon,  Gen.,  V,  394.  Santa-Anna.

Rindge,  Joseph,  V,  27,  Pinney.

Ringgold,  engagement  at.  HI,  251,  Hooker,  J.

Ringwood,  Ralph,  original  of.  II,  277,  Duval,  W.  P.

Rio-Bomba,  convent  in,  I,  216,  Bedon.

Rio  de  la  Plata,  discovery  of,  I,  492,  Cabot.

Rio  de  las  Vacas,  the.  II,  373,  Espejo,  A.

Rio.  Garcia,  III,  367.  Iturbide.

Rio  Grande,  the,  I,  490,  Cabeza  ;  expedition  to  the,  IT,  68,
Dana.  N.  J.  T.

Rio  de  Janeiro,  claim  to  the  site  of.  Ill,  686,  Lemos  ;  found-
ed, IV,  297,  Men  de  Saa  ;  V,  362,  Sa,  E.  de  ;  expedition
against,  II,  494,  Fonvielle  ;  made  capital  of  the  Portu-
guese monarchy,  IV,  698,  Pedro  I. ;  naval  academy,  news-
papers of,  II,  440,  Ferreira  de  Araujo  ;  steamship  line
to,  481,  Fletcher,  J.  C;  gifts  to  hospital  of,  IV,  310,  Mes-
quita,  J.  F.  de.

Rios,  Col.,  execution  of,  II.  168.

Riots,  in  Mississippi,  I,  64,  Ames,  A.;  in  Panama,  139,
Bailey  ;  Astor  Place,  II,  505,  Forrest,  E. ;  in  London,  629,
Germaine  ;  draft,  in  New  York,  636,  Gibbons,  A.  H.  ;
• V,  477.


Ripley,  Elizabeth.  I.  32.  Adams.  W.

Ripley,  Jerome,  V,  258.  Ripley,  G.

Ripley,  Sylvanus,  V.  258,  Ripley.  E.  W.

Ripley,  William  Young,  II,  205.  Dorr,  J.  C.  R.

Rip  Van  Winkle,  drama  of,  HI,  415,

Riquotau  (Hampton),  Va.,  IT,  134,  Delawarr.

Rische,  August,  VI,  17,  Tabor.

Risley,  Doanda,  V,  142,  Putnam,  G.

Risley  family,  the,  I,  528,  Carlisle,  R.  R.

Ritchie,  Judge  T.,  V,  261.  Ritchie,  J.  W.

Ritchie.  Thomas,  Jr.,  V.  39,  Pleasants,  J.  H.

Ritchie,  W.  F.,  IV,  450,  Mowatt.

Rittenhouse,  Hester,  VI,  387,  Waters,  N.  B.

Ritter,  Carl.  II,  655,  Gilman,  D.  C.

Ritualists,  contests  of  the,  II,  126,  De  Koven ;  392,  Ewer ;
opposition  to,  V,  475,  Ser/mour,  G.  F.

Ritzema,  Johannes,  IH,  708,  Leydt;  VI,  237,  Van  Cort-
landt, Philip.

Rivas,  II.  542,  Freites ;  battle  of,  VI,  405,  Webber.  C.  W.

Rivera,  Alonso  de,  III,  199,  Higuaihue ;  299,  Hueltn.

River-and-Harbor  bill,  veto  and  passage  of  a,  I,  104.

River  Raisin  institute,  III,  116,  Haveland,  L.  S.

Riverside  Magazine,  the,  V,  443,  Scudder.  H.  E.

Riverside  Park,  site  of,  V,  85,  Post,  A.  C.

Riverside  Press,  the,  III,  272,  Houghton,  H.  O.

Riviere,  William,  pupil  of,  V,  639,  Spread.

Riviere-Herard,  V,  612.  Soulouque.

Roads,  inventions  for  making,  II,  28,  Culyer.

Roanoke,  Va.,  colony  at,  destroyed,  II,  77,  Dare,  V.

Roanoke  island,  colonies  on,  II,  761,  Grenville,  R.;  III.  608,
Lane,  Sir  R. ;  V,  162-163 ;  expedition  to,  II,  441,  Ferrero  :
capture  of,  1, 463 ;  H,  673.  Goldsborouqh,  L.  M. ;  attack  on.

V,  337,  Rowan,  S.  C;  battle  of,  IH,  536,  Kimball,  E.  A.;

IV.  467,  Murray,  A.
Robards,  Lewis,  III,  374.
Robbins,  Archibald,  V.  256,  Riley,  J.
Robbins,  Rev.  Philemon,  V.  270,  Robbins,  C.
Robbins,  Sophia  L.,  Ill,  738,  Little,  S.  L.
Robert,  Daniel,  V,  271,  Robert,  C.  R.
Robert,  M.,  Ill,  15,  Guthers.

Robert  E.  Lee,  capture  of  the,  IV,  674,  Patterson,  T.  H.
Robert  F.  Stockton,  the,  II,  364.
Robert  college,  Constantinople,  III,  65,  Hamlin,  C.
Roberts,  Cornelia  H.,  V,  275,  Roberts,  R.  E.
Roberts,  E.  J..  Ill,  89,  Harrington,  E.  B.
Roberts,  Rev.  John,  V,  275,  Roberts.  R.  E.
Roberts,  Robert,  VI,  85,  Thomas,  John.
Roberts,  Thomas  P.,  V,  276,  Roberts,  W.  M.
Robertson,  Agnes,  I,  327,  Boucicault.
Robertson,  Alexander,  VI,  684,  Hall,  A.
Robertson,  Donald,  I,  626,  Clark,  G.  R. ;  IV,  165.
Robertson,  Jean  and  William,  III,  172,  Henry,  P.
Robertson,  J.  P.  and  W.  P.,  II,  522,  Francia.
Robertson,  W.  J.,  I,  11,  Adam,  G.  M.
Robertsons,  coins  called,  V,  278,  Robertson,  J.
Robespierre  of  the  West  Indies,  the,  III,  305,  Hugues.
Robin,  Abbe,  VI.  97,  Thomson,  C.
Robin,  Charles,  II,  484,  Flint,  A.

Robinson,  Beverly,  I,  52,  Allen,  Ethan;  house  of,  illustra-
tion, I,  95.
Robinson,  Charles,  V.  286,  Robinson,  G.  D.
Robinson,  Imogene,  TV,  407,  Morrell,  I.  R.
Robinson,  Isaac,  V,  286,  Robinson,  J.
Robinson,  John,  III.  703,  Lewis,  Estelle.
Robinson,  Rev.  John,  quoted,  V,  643,  Standish.
Robinson,  John  P.,  V.  259.

Robinson,  John  and  Anthony,  V,  284,  Robinson,  C.
Robinson,  Judith,  I,  361,  Braxton.
Robinson,  Marius,  H,  611.
Robinson,  Richard,  V.  287,  Robinson,  M.
Robinson,  Richard  P..  Ill,  288,  Hoxie,  J.
Robinson,  Susanna,  IV,  758,  Philipse,  F.
Robinson,  Thomas.  V,  305.  Rogers,  F.  W.
Robinson,  William,  III,  30,  Hale,  N. ;  V,  287,  Robinson,  S.
Robinson,  Rev.  W.,  V,  285,  Robinson,  E.
Robinson,  Sir  W.,  V,  544,  Skinner,  C.
Robinson  Crusoe.  V.  458.  Selkirk,  A.
Robiouni,  Nicolas,  IV,  494,  Nenguiru.
Robleria,  fight  at.  IH,  10,  Guenucalquin.
Rob  Roy,  V,  732.  Stuart,  R.

Rocafuerte,  President,  hjs  tomb,  illustration,  V,  291.
Rocha,  Gov.,  II,  62,  D^Amico;  IV,  339,  Miramon.
Rochefoucauld-Liancourt,  Duke.  Ill,  313,  Humphreys,  D.
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  V,  293-294,  Rochester;  observatory  at,

VI,  11,  Swift,  L.\  bequests  to  charities  in,  I,  888.  Brooks,
L. ;  state  convention  at,  I,  742,  Cornell ;  Catholic  Insti-
tutions in,  IV,  159,  McQuaid  ;  Knockings,  the,  II,  520,
Fox,  M.

Rochester,  Nicholas,  V,  293,  Rochester,  N.

Rochester,  Sally,  II,  501,  Ford.  S.  H.

Rochester  Fellow,  a,  pen-name,  V.  443,  Scudder.  S.  H.

Rochester,  University  of,  established,  II,  159,  Dewey,  C. ;

founders  of,  III,  91.  Harris,  Ira  ;  I,  69,  Anderson,  M.  B. ;

613,  Church.  P.;  gifts  to,  689,  Colgate  ;  TV,  175,  Magoon  ;

V,  185,  Rathbone,  J.  F.  :  522,  Sibley,  H.  ;  696,  Stoddard,
J.  F. ;  II.  116,  Deane,  John  H.

Rock-drill,  inventor  of  a,  VI.  591,  Wood,  D.  V.
Rocket,  the,  steam-carriage,  II,  364.
Rockingham,  Marquis  of,  VI,  435,  Wentworth,  J.


784


ROCKINGHAM


RUSSELLS


Rockingham  memorial,  the,  VI,  407.

Rock  island  treaty,  the,  III.  523,  Keokuk.

Rock  me  to  Sleep,  authorship  of,  I,  51,  Allen,  E.  A.

Rock  of  Chiekamauga,  the,  V,  498.

Rock  of  New  England  Democracy,  VI,  601,  Woodbury,  L.

Rock  Spring  seminary.  111.,  IV,  696,  Peck.  J.  M.

Rocky- Face  Ridge,  Ga.,  battle,  III,  82,  Harker,  C.  G.

Rocky  Gap,  Va.,  fight  at,  I,  121,  Averell.

Rocky  Mount,  S.  C,  log  fortress  at,  V,  752.

Rocky  mountain  region,  exploration  of,  II,  545,  Fremont ;
highest  peak  of,  IV,  10,  Long,  S.  H. ;  first  white  man  to
cross,  131,  Mackenzie,  Sir  A. ;  scientific  exploration  in  the,
218,  Marsh,  O.  C.\  discovery  of,  VI,  277,  Verandrye  ;  in-
scribed stone  found,  678,  De  Varennes  ;  first  white  women
to  cross  the,  485,  Whitman,  M.

Rocky  Point,  ambuscade  at,  III,  165,  Hendrick.

Rodenburg,  Elizabeth,  III,  188,  Herrman,  E.  G.

Rodgers,  Capt.  G.  W.,  IV.  734,  Perry,  S.  A.

Rodgers,  Dr.  J.  Kearney,  I,  36.

Rodman  guns,  V,  299,  Rodman.

Rodney,  Thomas,  III,  661,  Lee,  Charles.

Rodney,  William,  V,  299,  Rodney,  C. ;  300,  Rodney,  D.

Rogerenes,  sect  of  the,  V,  308,  Rogers,  J.

Rogers,  Charles,  I,  48,  Alexander,  W.

Rogers,  Edward,  VI,  210,  Underwood,  J.  R.

Rogers,  Gamaliel,  II,  516,  Fowle,  D.

Rogers,  Helen  K..  II,  566,  Furness,  H.  K.

Rogers,  John,  IV,  740.  Peters ;  V,  308,  Rogers,  H. ;  309,
Rogers.  N.:  VI,  518,  Willetts,  D.

Rogers.  Capt.  Moses.  V,  579,  Smith,  Junius.

Rogers,  Norman.  III.  246,  Homes,  M.  S.  S.

Rogers,  Patrick  K.,  V,  306,  Rogers,  J.  B.

Rogers,  W.  K.,  Ill,  134.

Rogers,  Woodes,  II,  63,  Dampier.

Rogers's  Rangers,  V,  140 :  309,  Rogers,  Robert ;  652,
Stark,  J.

Rogers's  slide,  Lake  George,  V,  309,  Rogers,  Robert.

Rogue  Indians,  the,  III,  607,  Lane,  Joseph.

Rohlfs,  Charles,  II,  742,  Green,  A.  K.

Rokeby,  Baron,  V,  287,  Robinion,  M.

Roland,  Dr.,  pen-name,  IV,  497,  Neuville.

Roldan,  IV,  567,  Ojeda.

Rolfe,  John,  V,  99,  Pocahontas.

Rolfe,  Sarah  W.,  V,  345.  Rumford.

Rolfe,  Thomas,  V,  99,  Pocahontas.

Rolim  de  Moura,  Antonio,  III,  713,  Lima,  M.

Rolliad,  the,  III,  256,  Hopkins.  L.

Rollins,  Daniel  M.,  V,  312,  Rollins,  A.  W.

Rollins,  Edward  Ashton,  V,  313,  Rollins,  E.  G.

Rollins,  Ichabod,  V,  312,  Rollins,  E.  H.

Romain,  Benjamin,  II,  275,  Dutcher,  A.  P.

Romain,  Jules,  VI,  320,  Waldeck.

Romaine,  Robert,  VI.  475,  White,  T.

Romalho,  JoSo,  II,  591,  Garcia,  D.

Roman  Catholics,  first  priest  ordained  in  U.  S.,  I,  133,
Badin  ;  first  work  printed  in  the  west,  134  ;  II,  580,  Gal-
litzin  ;  first  diocese  in  the  U.  S.,  I,  538,  Carroll,  J.;  intol-
erance toward,  537,  538  ;  controversy  on  doctrines  of,  IV,
470,  Murray,  N.;  doctrines,  noted  debate  on,  V,  236,
Rice,  2V.  L. ;  university,  V,  620,  Spalding,  J.  L.

Romani,  Signor,  III,  211,  Hinckley,  I.

Rome,  American  college  in,  I,  103  :  defence  of,  123,  Avez-
zana ;  its  capture  by  the  French,  II,  561,  Fuller,  S.  M. ;
American  Episcopal  church  in,  III,  609,  Langdon,  W.  C. ;
American  chapel  in,  IV,  62,  Lyman,  T.  B.;  VI,  589,
Wolfe,  C.  L;  gift  for  art-school  at,  IV,  689,  Peabody,  G.

Romer,  Jonathan,  pen-name,  IV,  277,  Mayo,  W.  S.

Romero,  Rev.  Francisco,  IV,  645,  Paredes,  J.  G.

Romeyn,  Claas  Janse,  V,  315,  Romeyn,  T.

Romeyn,  Dirck,  II,  553,  Fneligh  ;  III,  579,  Kuypers,  G.  A.

Romney,  capture  of.  III,  504,  Kelley,  B.  F.

Romney,  Lord,  III,  531-532,  Kidd.

Ronayne,  Patrick  and  Maurice,  I.  647,  Cleburne.

Ronquillo,  Admiral,  V,  631,  Spielbergen.

Ronzi,  Signorina,  II,  118,  De  Begnis.

Rooke,  Dr.,  Ill,  490,  Emma  Kaleleonalani.

Roorbach,  origin  of  the  term.  III,  733,  Linn,  W.

Roosa,  Isaac,  V,  317,  Roosa,  Daniel.

Roosevelt,  Isaac  V,  317,  Roosevelt,  JV.  J.

Roosevelt  hospital,  founded,  V,  319,  Roosevelt,  J.  H.

Root,  Prof.  Oren,  V,  319,  Root,  Elihu.

Ropes,  William,  II,  355,  Endicott,  C.  M.

Ropes,  Prof.  W.  L.,  V,  600,  Smyth,  E.  C.

Roquetilla,  Ignacio  Alarcon  de,  I,  10,  Acualmetzli.

Rosa,  Carl,  IV,  647,  Parepa.

Rosa,  pen-name.  III,  424,  Jeffrey.

Rosales,  Col.,  IV.  30,  Losada,  M.

Rosales,  Diego,  VI,  128,  Toledo,  F.  A.

Rosario  de  Cucuta,  I,  305.

Roscius,  the  African,  I,  44.  Aldridge.

Roscoe,  William,  IV,  45,  Lowndes,  W.  J.

Rose,  Daniel,  V.  1322,  Rose,  G.  M.

Rose,  Dr.  H.,  H,  638,  Gibbs,  O.  W.

Rose,  John,  V.  322.  Rose,  C.

Rose.  Victor  M..  IV,  98,  McCidloch,  B.

Rose,  William  E  ,  V,  322,  Rose,  E.  L.

Rose  frigate,  affair  of  the,  III,  247,  Hood,  S.

Roseau,  Marie,  pen-name,  III,  200,  Hildeburn,  M.  J.

Rosebud,  battle  of  the,  II,  15,  Crook  ;  III,  177,  Henry,  G.  V.


Rose-bud,  the,  children's  magazine,  II,  656,  Gilman,  C.  H.

Rosenfeld,  Sydney,  V,  696,  Stockton,  F.  R.

Rose  of  Heaven,  the,  VI,  654,  Zamna.

Rose  of  Sharon,  the,  annual,  IV,  276,  Mayo,  S.  C.  E.

Roset,  Hipponax.  pen-name,  IV,  684,  Paxton,  Joseph  R.

Rosetta  stone,  the,  IV,  430,  Morton,  H. ;  decipherment  of,
V,  474,  Seyffarth.

Rosewell,  Page  house  at,  illustration,  IV.  884

Rosicrucian,  pen-name,  II,  556,  Frothingham,  W.

Rosier,  Ferdinand,  I,  117,  Audubon.

Rosillo,  battle  at,  III,  16,  Gutierrez  de  Lara.

Roslyn,  Earl  of,  V,  368,  St.  Clair.

Roslyn,  Bryant's  home  at,  illustration,  I,  426.

Rosmini.  A.,  H,  89,  Davidson,  T.

Ross,  Rev.  George,  V,  198,  Read,  G.\  328,  Ross,  G.

Ross,  Gertrude,  V.  198,  Read,  G.

Ross,  Sarah,  VI,  450,  Wheatley,  S.

Ross,  William  R.,  V,  330,  Ross,  John.

Rossane,  William,  trial  of,  VI,  6.  Swayne,  N.  H.

Ross  Castle,  Staten  island,  IV,  66,  Lyon,  C.

Ross-Church,  Mr.,  IV,  216,  Marryat,  F.

Rossi,  Count,  V,  606,  Sontag.

Rosslyn,  Earl,  VI,  419,  Wedderburn.

Roszel,  George,  1, 172,  Barns.

Rotary  ascending-railway,  invention  of,  V,  531,  Silver.

Rotary-engine,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  614,  Work.

Rotary  force-pump,  invention  of  a,  I.  546,  Cary,  A.  W.

Rotch,  Benjamin,  II.  419,  Farrar,  E.  W.

Rotch,  Thomas,  V,  &33,  Rotch,  C.  R.

Rotenhan,  Baroness  von,  V,  251,  Riedesel,  F.  C.  L.

Roth,  Rudolf,  VI,  490,  Whitney,  W.  D.

Rottenburg,  Baron  de,  H,  260,  Dunn,  A.  R.

Rotten  cabbage  rebellion,  the,  II,  70,  Dana,  R.  H.

Rouge,  the,  party  in  Canada,  III.  632,  Laurier.

Rough  Hewer,  the,  pen-name.,  VI,  639.  Yates,  Robert.

Round  Hill  school,  I.  679,  Cogmrell,  J.  G.

Round  Lake  association,  gift  to  the,  VI,  440,  West ,  G.

Rouse,  M.,  m,  129.

Rousseau,  Eugene.  IV,  407,  Morphy.

Rousseau,  J.  J.,  II,  112,  Day,  T.

Routh.  Richard,  V,  336,  Routh,  Sir  J.  R.  J.

Rouville,  De  la  Fosse  de,  IV,  264,  Mauduit  du  Plessis.

Roux-Lavergne,  II,  55,  Dain.

Rouzaud,  Auguste,  IV,  522,  Nilsson.

Rovale  river,  the.  discovery  of,  HI,  366,  Isles.

Rovira,  VI,  135,  Torices.

Rowell,  Samuel,  VI,  90,  Thompson,  E.

Rowlands,  John,  V,  645,  Stanley,  H.  M.

Rowlandson,  Rev.  Joseph,  V,  838,  Rowlandson,  M.

Rowley,  Conn.,  founded,  V,  305,  Rogers,  E.

Rowsou,  William,  V,  339,  Rowson,  S.

Roxbury,  Mass.,  founded,  V,  144,  Pynchon  ;  the  Warren
house  at,  illustration,  VI,  365.

Roy,  pen-name,  VI,  539,  Willis,  N.  P.

Royal  grant,  the,  III,  452.

Royal  institution,  the,  founding  of,  gifts  to,  V,  346.

Royalston,  Mass.,  name  of,  V,  340,  Roy  all,  I.

Royal  Yacht,  destruction  of  the,  H,  288,  Eagle ;  capture
of,  476,  Jouett,  J.  E.

Royville,  Chevalier  de.  in,  300,  Huet.

Roze,  Marie,  IV,  731,  Perkins,  J.  E.

Rubber,  method  of  vulcanizing,  VI,  694,  Mayall :  manu-
factures, suits  concerning,  H,  111,  Day,  H.  H.  ;  vul-
canized. 684,  Goodyear.

Rubini,  IV,  207,  Mario.

Rubio,  Romero,  II,  167.

Ruck.  Abigail,  VI.  435,  Wentuorth,  B.

Rucker,  Miss,  V,  500,  Sheridan.

Rudersdorff,  Erminia,  pupil  of,  VI,  108,  Thursby.

Rudolph,  Lucretia,  II,  599,  605,  Garfield.

Rudolphi,  Prof.,  I,  34.

Rufane,  Gen.,  II,  200,  Donkin.

Rugby.  Tenn.,  HI,  305,  Hughes,  T.

Ruggles,  Philo,  V,  343,  Ruggles,  S.  B.

Ruggles,  Timothy,  IV,  128,  McKean,  T.

Ruhmkorff  coil,  the,  claim  to  the  discovery  of,  IV,  623,
Page,  C.  G.

Ruiz,  Father  Agustin,  II.  373,  Espejo,  A.

Ruiz,  Bartolome,  I,  616.  Cinque  ;  V,  35.  Pizarro.

Rumford,  Count,  V,  121,  Prime  ;  124,  Prince,  J.

Rumiantzeff,  Count,  III,  574,  Kotzebue.

Rum,  Romanism,  and  Rebellion,  I,  449,  Burchard.

Rumsey,  Charles,  V.  347.  Rumsey,  B.

Runnels,  Harrison  R.,  Ill,  275,  Houston,  S.

Running,  feats  of,  VI,  669.  Baker,  W.

Rupert.  Leonard,  IV,  684,  Paxton,  Joseph  R.

Rural  Carolinian,  the.  III,  396,  Jacques.

Rural  Magazine,  the,  VI,  525,  WilUams,  S.

Rush.  John,  V,  849.  Rush.

Rushbrooke,  Barham,  III,  661,  Lee.  Charles.

Ruskin,  John,  quoted,  IV.  504,  Aewman,  H.  R.

Russell,  Earl.  HI,  721.

Russell,  Frances.  I,  209,  Beauchamp.

Russell,  James,  V,  352,  Russell,  A.

Russell,  Rev.  Jonathan.  IV,  606.

Russell,  Dr.  William.  VI.  49,  Taylor.  S.  P.

Russell.  W.  H.  Ill,  226,  Hoey.

Russell.  Gen.  W.  H,  V,  651,  Stanton.  S.  T.

Russell's  Magazine,  III,  145,  Hayne,  P.  H.


RUSSELLVILLE


ST.  PIERRE


785


Russellville,  engagement  at,  VI,  685,  Harrison.

Russia,  claim  of,  in  America,  I,  245,  Bering  ;  designs  on
California,  I,  89.  Arguello  ;  relations  of,  with  U.  S.,  II,
69,  Dana,  F.  ;  prize  given  by  the  emperor  of,  141,  Deni-
son,  G.  T.  ;  railway  in,  III,  100,  Harrison.  J.  ;  expulsion
of  a  traveller  from,  655,  Ledyard,  J.  ;  navy,  proposal  to
build  a,  314,  Humphreys,  S.

Russia  company,  the,  III,  296,  Hudson.  H.  :  297.

Russian  America,  administration  of,  VI,  618,  Wrangell.

Russian  fiction,  modern,  III,  286.

Russo-Turkish  war,  the,  IV,  116,  MacGahan  ;  export  of
grain  from  U.  S.  during,  V,  199,  Read,  J.  M.

Rust,  Albert,  his  assault  upon  Greeley,  n,  739.

Rust,  Gen.  George,  I,  215,  Bedinger,  H.

Rustic  Bard,  the,  pen-name,  II,  181,  Dinsmoor.

Ruter,  Rev.  Calvin  W.,  V,  640,  Springer,  Rebecca  R.

Rutersville,  Texas,  college  at,  V,  355,  Ruter.

Rutgers,  Alice,  III,  737,  Lispenard.

Rutgers,  Anthony,  III,  737,  Lispenard.

Rutgers,  Henry,  II,  17,  Crosby,  W.  B.

Rutgers  college,  I,  704,  Condict  :  II,  542,  Frelinghuysen,
J.  ;  illustration,  616 ;  III,  77,  Hardenbergh  ;  gifts  to,  I,
678,  Cogswell,  J.;  IV,  651,  Parker,  James  ;  V,  131,  Pruyrx,
R.  H:  355,  Rutgers  ;  VI,  229,  Van  Bunschooten.

Rutgers  institute,  II,  442,  Ferris,  I.

Rutgers  medical  school,  the,  II,  523.  Francis,  J.  W.

Rutherford,  Daniel,  V,  356,  Rutherford,  F.  S.

Rutherford,  Walter,  V,  356,  Rutherfurd,  J.

Rutledge,  anonymous  novel.  III,  93,  Harris,  M.  C.

Ruxton,  Admiral,  III,  1,  Grinnell,  8.

Ryan,  Carroll,  pen-name,  V,  360,  Ri/an,  W.  T.

Ryan,  Mary  A.  M.,  V,  360,  Ryan,  W.  T.

Ryan,  Michael,  IV,  506,  Newsham.

Ryeker,  Abraham,  V,  254,  Riker,  J.

Ryerson,  Joseph,  V,  361.  Ryerson,  A.  E.

Rynerson,  William  D.,  V,  552,  Slough.

Sa,  Martin  de,  V,  362,  Sa,  S.  C.  de.
Sabana  de  Matanza,  battle  at,  IV,  187.  Manicaotex.
Sabine,  Nehemiah,  V,  863,  Sabin,  E.  R.
Sabine,  William,  V,  363,  Sabin,  E.  R.

Sabine  Cross-Roads,  battle  at,  I,  159,  Banks  ;  VI,  55,  Tay-
lor. R.
Sable  island,  colony  left  on,  V,  293,  Roche.
Sabre-attachment,  inventor  of  a,  V,  727,  Stuart,  J.  E.  B.
Sabre  brigade,  the,  IV,  338,  Minty.
Sachem,  the,  yacht,  I,  451,  Burgess,  E.
Sachem's  plain,  tomb  on,  illustration,  IV,  313.
Sachem's  Wood,  III,  208,  Hillhouse,  J.  A.
Sackett's  Harbor,  engagement  at,  I,  123  ;  VI,  610,  Wool-

8ev,  M.  T.
Sackville,  Viscount,  II,  629,  Germaine.
Sackville,  Baron,  VI,  441,  West,  L.  S.  S.
Sacramento,  first  settlement  at,  VI,  2,  Sutter.
Sacramento,  loss  of  the  colony  of,  by  Portugal,  II,  542,

Freire  de  Andrado.
Sacramento,  pass  of  the.  engagement  at,  II,  200,  Doniphan.
Sacred  Heart,  academies  of  the,  III,  78,  Hardey.
Sacs,  war  of,  with  the  Ottawas,  V,  484,  Shaubena  ;  and

Foxes,  the,  in  the  Black  Hawk  war,  IH,  523,  Keokuk  ;

battle  with,  III,  70,  Hamtramck.
Sacsahuana,  fortress  of,  VI,  180,  Tupac  Inca  ;  battle  of,

IH,  214,  Hinojosa  ;  VI,  224,  Valdivia.
Sacy,  Silvestre  de,  V,  377,  Salisbury.
Saddle-tree,  invention  of  a,  V,  257  Ringgold,  S.
Sadler,  Ann,  III,  107,  Harvard.
Sadlier,  James,  V,  365,  Sadlier,  M.  A.
Sadlier,  Mrs.,  letters  of,  II,  339,  Elton,  R.
Safety-barges,  V,  204,  Red  field,  W.  C.
Safety  fund,  a  national,  III,  505,  Kellogg,  Edward.
Sage,  Charles,  V,  367,  Sage.  H.  W.
Sage,  David,  V,  367,  Sage,  H  W.
Saget.  Nissage,  IV,  29,  Lorquet.

Sag  Harbor,  American  victory  at,  IV,  288,  Meigs,  R.  J.
Saginaw,  Mich.,  founded.  IV,  400,  Morgan,  J.  A.
Saginaw,  wreck  of  the,  VI,  21,  Talbot.  J.  G.
Sagoyewatha,  V,  205,  Red-Jacket.
Sahagun,  Bernardino  de.  II,  368,  Escandon.
Sahara.  Desert  of,  project  to  flood  the,  III,  697,  Lesseps.
Said  Barghash,  V.  519,  Shufeldt.
Sailing-vessels,  fastest  time  of,  IV,  71,  Macalester,  C.
Saillard,  Baron,  IV.  269.
Sailors,  impressment  of  American,  I,  140,  Bainbridge.  W.\

III,  422  ;  VI,  122,  Tingey;  "  Bethel  movement  "  for,  III,  51,

Hallett,  B.  ;  missions  for,  V,  241,  Richardson,  Edward  ;

III,  4*8,  Jenks,  W.
Sailor's  Creek,  battle  of,  II,  45,  Custer ;  309,  Edwards,  0.\

392,  Ewell,  R.  S.;  716  ;  V,  500,  Sheridan.
Sailor's  Magazine,  the,  II,  756,  Greenleaf,  J.
Sailors'  Snug  Harbor,  founded,  V,  171,  Randall,  R.  R.
Saint,  a  Peruvian.  V,  320,  Rosa.
St.  Agnes  school,  founded,  II,  189,  Doane,  W.  C.
St.  Agnes's  hospital,  Philadelphia,  bequest  to,  IV,  485,  Neb-

inger,  A.
St.  Alban's,  Vt.,  confederate  robbery  in,  I,  754,  Coursol.
Saint  Ambrose,  island  of,  discovered,  II,  436,  Fernandez,  J.
St.  Anthony,  first  factories  at,  IV,  398,  Morgan,  G.  N.
St.  Asaph's  Spring,  Ky.,  IV,  2.  Logan,  B.
St.  Augustine,  order  for  seizing,  HI,  378.

VOL.  vi. — 50


St.  Augustine's  Manor,  III,  188,  Herrman,  A.

St.  Benedict  the  Moor,  church  of,  I.  454,  Burke,  J.  E.

St.  Benoit,  hospital  at,  H,  662,  Girouai-d,  J.  J. ;  burning  of,
IH.  582,  La  Bruere.

St.  Bernardine,  order  of,  founded,  I,  62,  Alvarez,  B.  d\

St.  Brendon's  country,  I,  367.

St.  Charles,  Canada,  engagement  at,  I,  411,  Brown,  T.  S. :
IV,  493.  Nelson,  W.

St.  Charles  college,  founded,  II,  297,  Eccleson.

St.  Charles  river,  battle  at  the,  III,  687,  Le  Moyne,  James.

St.  Christopher,  island  of,  its  laws,  U,  178,  Dillon,  A. ;  353,
Enambuc  ;  surrendered  to  the  English,  625,  Gennes  ;  to
the  French,  III,  248,  Hood,  S. ;  contests  of  French  and
English  in.  339,  Icart.

St.  Clair,  Mr.,  IH,  178,  Henson,  J.

St.  Cloud,  convent  at,  II,  8,  Cretin.

St.  Croix.  N.  S.,  destruction  of,  I,  88.  Argall.

St.  Croix  river,  question  of  the  true,  VI,  568,  Winslow,
John.

St.  Denis,  engagement  at,  IV.  493.  Nelson,  W.

St.  Denis,  Sieur  de,  HI,  481,  Jucherau,  L.

St.  Eustache,  colonized,  HI,  339,  Icart ;  fight  at,  n,  661,
Girouard,  J.  J.

St.  Eustatius,  plunder  of,  I,  19.

St.  Felix,  island  of,  discovered,  II,  436,  Fernandez,  J.

St.  Foy,  engagement  near.  Ill,  701,  Levis.

St.  Francis,  Indian  village  of,  destroyed,  V.  309,  Rogers,
Robert.

St.  Francis,  Sisters  of  the  order  of,  IV,  497,  Neumann.

St.  George,  cross  of,  H,  .355,  Eadicott,  J.

St.  Germain,  Count,  V,  669.

St.  Helena,  island  of,  discovered,  IV,  542,  Nova  ;  gift  of
library  to,  V,  12,  Pierce,  E.  L.

St.  Helens,  Lord.  Ill,  412.

St.  Hyacinthe,  college  of.  III,  695,  Lesieur.

St.  Hyacinthe,  R.  C.  institutions  in.  V,  124,  Prince,  J.  C.

St.  James  college,  gift  to,  II,  251,  Duke  ;  IH,  287,  Howland,
R.  S. :  VI,  495,  Whittingham.

St.  Jerome,  Canada,  founded,  IV,  372,  Montigny.

St.  John,  N.  B.,  museum  at,  II,  633,  Gesner.

St.  John,  Oliver,  VI.  483.  Whiting,  S.

St.  Johnland,  L.  I.,  industrial  settlement  at,  TV,  455,  Muh-
lenberg, W.  A.;  VI,  589,  Wolfe,  J.  D.  and  C.  L.

St.  John  of  God,  asylum  of,  I  330,  Bourget.

St.  Johns,  N.  F.,  cathedral  of,  H,  479,  Fleming,  M.

St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,  I.  539,  Carroll,  J.

St.  John's  college,  Fordham,  IV,  88,  McCloskey  ;  IH,  304  ;
scholarships  founded  at,  II,  114,  Dealy.

St.  John's  park.  III,  737,  Lispenard.

St.  John's  river,  Fla.,  expedition  up  the,  n,  54.

St.  Joseph  island,  mission  on,  IV,  314,  Michel.

St.  Joseph's  college,  Pa.,  IV,  497,  Neumann,  J.  N.

St.  Just,  L.  L.  de,  I,  7.  Abbott,  J.  J.  C.

St.  Lawrence  river,  the,  first  steamer  on,  IV,  353,  Molson.

St.  Louis,  founded,  I,  610,  Chouteau  ;  name  of,  HI,  582,  La-
clede ;  claims  to  land  in,  IV,  710,  Penieres ;  at  the  outbreak
of  the  civil  war,  68  ;  attempt  to  take  the  arsenal  at.  VI,
7,  Sweeny  ;  R.  C.  institutions  founded  in.  III,  520,  Ken-
rick  ;  V,  321,  Rosati  ;  school  of  design,  III,  164,  Hender-
son, M.  F.;  park  of,  V,  4R5,  Share,  H.

St.  Louis,  S.  A.,  colony  of,  II,  373,  Espeleta.

Saint  Louis  du  Sud,  Duke  of,  VI,  698.  Salomon.

St.. Louis  university,  gift  to,  IV,  559,  O' Fallon.

St.  Lucia,  colony  of,  I,  19,  Armstrong,  James.

St.  Lucia,  island  of,  II,  762,  Grey  ;  massacre  in,  263.  Dupar-
quet ;  capture  of,  708,  Grant,  J. ;  English  colony  in,  and
French,  263,  Duparquet ;  III,  270,  Houdetot  ;  restored  to
the  Dutch,  305,  Hugues.

St.  Luke's  hospital,  New  York,  IV,  455,  Muhlenberg,  W.
A.;  gift  to,  I,  113,  Astor,  W.  B.

Saint- Maime,  M.,  IV.  472,  Muy,  J.  B.

St.  Marc,  Hayti,  defence  of,  II,  154,  Dessalines.

Ste.  Marguerite,  island  of,  I,  202,  Bazaine.

St.  Marks,  Fla.,  capture  of.  executions  of  Arbuthnot  and
Ambrister,  III,  378  ;  restored  to  Spain,  378.

St.  Martha,  New  Granada,  founded,  I.  191,  Bastidas.

St.  Martin,  Alexis,  I,  210,  Beaumont,  W.

Saint  Martin,  island  of,  restored  to  the  Dutch  (1795),  HI,
305,  Hugues.

St.  Mary's  college,  Ky.,  I,  487,  Byrne,  W.

St.  Mary's  college,  Md.,  II,  239,  Dubourg  :  founded,  I,  507,
Calvert,  L.\  IV,  476,  Nagot ;  gift  to,  I,  421,  Brute.

St.  Mary's  college,  Montreal,  IV,  229,  Martin,  F.

St.  Mary's  college,  S.  C,  founded  and  burned,  IV,  553,
CTConnell,  J.  J.

St.  Mary's  college  at  the  Barrens,  Mo.,  V,  321.  Rosati.

St.  Mary's  hall,  founded,  II,  188,  Doane,  G.  W.

St.  Mary's  mission,  founded.  II,  152.  De  Smet.

St.  Meinrad's  priory,  Ind.,  IV,  237,  Marty.

St.  Michael's  seminary.  Pa.,  IV,  553,  O'Connor,  M.

St.  Nicholas,  magazine.  II,  194,  Dodge,  M.  M.  ;  V,  586,
Smith,  Romcell ;  696,  Stockton,  F.  R.

St.  Nicholas  club,  the.  III,  700,  Leveridge.

St.  Ours,  Pierre  de,  V,  373,  St.  Ours,  J.  B.

St.  Paul,  Minn.,  cathedral  of,  H,  8,  Cretin  ;  gift  to,  V,  235,
Rice,  H.  M.

St.  Paul's  college.  L.  I ,  IV,  455.  Muhlenberg,  W.  A.

St.  Paul's  school.  Concord,  I,  681,  Coit,  H.  A.

St.  Pierre,  island  of,  III,  620,  Laroche,  A.  de.


786


ST.  ROSE


SANTIAGO


St.  Rose  of  Lima,  canonization  of,  II,  436,  Fernandez  de

Castro.
Saints,  proposed  Canadian,  III,  635,  Laval,  F.  X;  714,

IS  Incarnation.
St.  Saviour,  Mt.  Desert  island,  destruction  of,  I,  88,  Argall.
St.  Simon.  Marquis  de,  II,  55,  Dain.
St.  Stanislaus,  novitiate  of,  Mo.,  V,  149,  Quickenborne.
St.  Stephen's  college,  Annandale,  I,  164,  Bard,  J.;  IV,  163,

McVickar,  J.;  V,  475,  Seymour,  G.  F.

~~9,  Sands,  R.  C.


St.  Tammany  Magazine,  the,  V,
St.  Teresa,  VI,  128,  Toledo,  G.


Saint  Thomas,  alleged  visit  of,  to  Brazil,  V,  396,  Saraiva.

St.  Thomas  hall,  Flushing,  HI,  122,  Hawks,  F.  L.

St.  Thomas  home,  the,  New  York,  II,  487,  Flower,  R.  P.

St.  Thomas  island,  attempt  to  expel  the  Danish  from,  V,
401,  Sarmiento.

Saint-Venant,  J.  B.,  VI,  275,  Venant.

St.  Viateur,  clerks  of,  I,  330,  Bourget.

St.  Vincent,  Earl  of,  III,  430,  Jervis,  Sir  J.

St.  Vincent  de  Paul  of  the  Liberals,  the,  sobriquet,  V,  293,
Rochefouca  uld.

Saint  Vincent  river,  battle  at,  III,  405,  Jarric.

St.  Xavier  college,  Ohio,  III.  207,  Hill,  W.  H.

Sakayenkwaraghton,  III,  445,  Johnson,  J.  S.

Salamanca,  battle  of.  IV,  633,  Pakenham.

Salanueva.  Antonio,  IH,  478,  Juarez.

Salas,  Dr.  Manuel,  IV,  50,  Lucio.

Salazar,  Gen.,  VI,  272,  Veintimilla.

Salcedo  brothers,  rebellion  of,  II,  436,  Fernandez  de  Castro.

Salem,  first  settler  of,  IV,  634,  Palfrey,  Wanvick  ;  first
house  in,  I,  703,  Conant,  R. :  trade  of,  H,  147,  Derby,  E.
H.;  355,  Endicott,  J;  III,  124,  127,  Hawthorne  ;  gift  to,
IV,  257.  Mathew,  T.;  Academy  of  sciences  and  collec-
tions in,  423,  Morse,  E.  S.  ;  Peabody  museum  at,  689,
Peabody,  G. ;  Prescotfs  birthplace  at,  illustration,  V,
112  ;  witchcraft,  see  Witchcraft  delusion.

Salem,  N.  C,  IV,  216,  Marschall.

Salem,  N.  J.,  colony  at.  II,  432,  Fenwick,  J.

Salem,  Va.,  fighting  at,  I,  121,  Averell.

Salerianum,  the,  III,  169,  Henni.

Salicylic  acid,  use  of,  I,  342,  Boyland.

Salinas,  battle  of,  LI,  169,  Diaz,  R. ;  III,  214,  Hinojosa  ;  TV,
683.  Paullu.

Salinas,  Marquis  of,  HI.  329,  Hurtado,  G.;  VI,  272,  Velasco.

Salines  of  the  Neches.  battles  at,  III,  454,  Johnston,  A.  S.

Sallet,  Friedrich  von,  I,  295.  Bloede.

Salm,  Prince  von,  II,  580,  Gallitzin.

Salmadena  island,  in,  427,  Jenkins,  T.  A.

Salmagundi,  HI,  360  ;  IV,  679,  680,  Paulding.

Salmon  Falls,  destruction  of,  II,  554  ;  massacre  at,  III,  189,
Hertel.

Saltillo,  capture  of,  II,  369,  Escobedo.

Salt  Licks,  capture  at,  I,  315.

Salto  de  Alvarado,  El,  I,  61,  Alvarado,  P.  de.

Saltpetre,  II,  445,  Feuchtwanger.

Salt  springs,  of  Onondaga,  discovered,  III,  687,  Le  Moyne,  S.

Salt-tax,  the.  I,  241.

Salvado  del  Huerto,  IV,  197,  Manzo.

Salvador,  revolutions  in.  II,  244-245,  Dueilas.

Salvatierra,  Count  de,  V,  400,  Sarmiento  de  Sotomayor  ;
IV,  634,  Palafox.

Salvatierra,  founded,  V.  400,  Sarmiento  de  Sotomayor.

Salvor,  capture  of  the  steamer,  V,  436,  Scott,  G.  H.

Samana  bay  company,  V,  384,  Samuels.

Samococes.  tribe  of  the,  II,  515,  Foucher.

Sampson,  Elizabeth  O.,  HI,  290,  Hoyt.  E.  O.

San  Agustin  del  Palmar,  battle  of,  IV,  250,  Matamoros.

San  Antonio,  battle  at,  VI,  681,  Garibaldi.

San  Antonio,  Cal.,  mission  of,  V,  543,  Sitjar  ;  IH,  489,  Ju-
nipero.

San  Antonio,  the  sloop.  HI,  531-532,  Kidd.

San  Antonio  de  Gibraltar,  pillaged,  III,  343-344,  Illigen ;
taken  by  pirates,  IV,  315,  Michel.  J.  L.

San  BartolomS,  town  of,  IV,  567,  Ojedo.

San  Bernardino,  Cal.,  I,  615,  Cifuentes.

San  Bias,  capture  of,  I,  139,  Bailey.

San  Buenaventura,  engagement  at,  I,  61,  Alvarado,  J.  B.

Sanchez  de  Hoz,  VI,  223,  Valdivia,  P.  de.

Sand-bars,  making  channels  through,  I,  77.  Andrews.

Sandemanians,  the,  HI,  397,  James,  H.  ;  tenets  of,  V,  386,
Sandeman.

Sanders,  Sarah.  III.  360.

Sanders,  Thomas,  V,  386,  Sanders,  E.  E.

Sanderson,  James  H.,  V,  386,  Sanderson,  J.

Sandford,  C.  W.,  III.  239,  Holman.J.  G.

Sandford,  J.  F.  A.,  V,  435,  Scott.  D.

Sand  Hills,  engagement  at,  HI,  86,  Harney,  W.  S.

San  Diego,  capture  of,  H  265  ;  V,  695.  Stockton,  R.  F.

Sandiford,  John,  V.  387,  Sandiford.  R.

Sandoval,  Diego,  II,  164,  Diaz  de  Pineda.

Sandoval,  Don,  H,  435,  Fernandez,  D.;  II,  515,  Foucher.

Sands,  Comfort,  V,  389,  Sands,  R.  C.

Sands,  Gen.,  I,  306.

Sandusky,  Ohio,  Indian  conference  at,  HI,  728.

Sandwich,  college  of.  VI,  340,  Walsh,  J.

Sandwich,  the,  French  letter  of  marque.  III.  309,  Hull.  I.

Sandwich  islands,  discovery  of  the.  I,  715  ;  missions  to,  II,
169,  Dibble  ;  IV,  59,  60,  Lyman  ;  first  missionaries  to,  V,
636,  Sprague.


Sandy  Creek,  engagement  at,  VI,  610,  Woolsey,  M.  T.\  I,
85,  Appling.

Sandy  Hook,  pen-name.  III.  462,  Jones,  Alexander.

San  Felipe,  colony  at,  V,  737,  Suarez,  Judn.

San  Fernando,  Tex.,  founded,  I,  10,  Acuiia,  J.

Sanford.  Margaret,  III,  331.  Hutchinson,  T.  *

San  Francisco,  colony  near,  I.  161,  Baranoff;  founded,
III,  489,  Junipero  ;  first  house  in,  H,  28,  Culwer  ;  first
American  alcalde,  etc.,  of,  620,  Geary  :  lawlessness  in,  I,
686,  Coleman,  W.  T.\  prophecy  regarding,  HI,  19,  (iuin.
W.  M.:  gifts  for  charitable  institutions  in.  709,  Lick ;
VI,  2,  Sutro  ;  hospital,  founded,  III,  80,  Hardy,  B.  F.;

Bark  in,  IV,  111,  McDowell,  I. ;  proposed  King  monument,
[I,  547,  King,  T.  S. ;  Key  monument,  illustration,  529.

San  Francisco,  loss  of  the,  II,  702,  Graham,  J.  L. :  IV.  302,
Merchant,  C.  S.;  V.  531,  Silver;  VI,  310,  Waddell,  J.  I.;
385,  Washington  J.  M.

San  Francisco  bay,  exploration  of,  I,  123,  Ayala.

San  Francisco  medical  school,  I,  724,  Cooper,  E.  S.

San  Francisco  theological  seminary,  gift  to,  V,  733,  Stu-
art, R.  L.

Sangara,  Juan  de,  V,  301,  Rodney.

San  Giovanni,  pupil  of,  VI,  108,  Thursby.

Sangster,  George,  V,  391.  Sangster,  M.  E.

Sanguinaria,  in,  132.  Hayes,  A.  A.

San  Ignacio,  Cal.,  mission  of,  V,  542,  Sistiaga.

Sanitary  aid  societies  and  fair,  IH,  740,  Livermore,  M.  A.;
VI,  433,  Welsh,  J.

Sanitary  commission,  the,  I,  231,  Bellows,  H.  W.;  IV,  501,
Newberry,  J.  S. ;  578,  Olmsted.

Sanitation,  improvements  in,  V,  214,  Reid,  D.  B.

San  Jacinto,  battle  of,  II,  369,  Escobedo  ;  III,  274,  Hous-
ton, S. ;  IV,  339,  Miramon  ;  V,  393,  Santa-Anna.

San  Jacinto,  loss  of  the,  IV,  281,  Meade,  R.  W.

San  Jose,  Father  Bernardino  de,  VI,  205,  Uhland.

San  Jose,  noted  mill  near,  HI,  709,  Lick.

San  Juan,  founded.  Ill,  329.  Hurtado,  G.

San  Juan,  island  of,  H,  464.  Fish,  H. ;  720 ;  occupation
of,  V,  5,  Pickett,  G.  E.;  HI,  86,  Harney,  W.  S.;  317.
Hunt,  L.  C.

San  Juan  del  Obispo,  city  of,  IV,  215,  Marroquin,  F.

San  Juan  de  Nicaragua,  destruction  of,  I,  322,  Borland.

San  Juan  de  Ulua,  fortress  of,  designed,  I,  83,  Antonelli ;
invested,  174.  Barragan  :  161,  Baranda  ;  engagement
at.  III.  120,  Hawkins,  Sir  J. ;  castle  of,  II,  414,  415  :  V,  441 :
surrendered  by  the  Spaniards,  VI,  288,  Victoria,  G.;
naval  battle  at,  II,  223,  Drake,  Sir  F.  ;  bay  of,  fight  in,  II,
359,  Enriquez.

San  Juan  Nepomuceno,  the,  at  Trafalgar,  1, 614,  Churruca.

Sankey,  David,  V,  392,  Saiikey,  I.  D.

San  Lorenzo,  battle  at,  II,  167.

San  Lorenzo  el  Real,  treaty  of,  H,  327,  Ellicott.

San  Lucar,  I,  698.

San  Luis  de  Loyola.  Argentine,  IV,  47.  Loyola.

San  Martin,  statue  of,  illustration,  V,  392.

San  Mateo,  battle  of,  V,  232.  Ricaurte.

San  Miguel,  Cal.,  mission  of,  V,  543,  Sitjar.

San  Miguel,  gulf  of,  1, 147,  Balboa.

San  Miguel  de  Guandape.  I,  123.  Ayllon.

San  Pablo,  battle  at,  III,  341,  Iglesias,  M.

San  Pablo,  Fray  Juan  de,  VI,  586,  Witte.

San  Pasqual,  California,  engagement  at,  HI,  497,  Kearny,
Stephen  Watts.

Sansac,  Count  de,  VI,  142,  Touchimbert.

San  Salvador,  island  of,  I.  697.

San  Sebastian,  town  of,  IV,  567,  Ojeda.

Sanskrit,  first  American  editor  of,  HI,  40,  Hall,  F.

Santa  Ana,  capture  of,  1, 177.

Santa-Anna,  Angel,  V,  394,  Santa-Anna,  A.  L.

Santa-Anna,  capture  of  the,  I,  560,  Cavendish.

Santa  Barbara,  founded,  II,  28,  Culwer.

Santa  Catalina,  island  of,  IV,  400,  Morgan,  Sir  H.

Santa  Cruz,  Gen.,  IV,  568,  Olaneta.

Santa  Cruz,  island  of,  colony  in,  IV,  296,  Mendaila.

Santa  Cruz  de  Haltelolco,  college  of,  IV,  297,  Mendoza.

Santa  Cruz  del  Seybo,  n,  376,  Esquivel.

Santa  Fe,  N.  M.,  insurrection  in,  V,  119,  Price.  S.

Santa  F6  de  Bogota,  capture  of,  I,  301 :  observatory  at,
IH,  569,  Koehler,  A.  D.;  founded,  V,  148,  Quesada;  VI,
226,  Valanzuela,  P.  F.

Santa  F6  de  Vera  Cruz,  Paraguay.  II,  591,  Garay.

Santa  Maria,  the,  vessel,  illustration,  I,  697.

Santa  Maria  de  la  Mar  Dulce,  V,  29,  Pinzon,  V.  Y.

Santa  Marta,  siege  of,  1, 304 ;  plunder  of,  H,  437,  Fernandez
de  Piedrahita.

Santander,  I,  305.

Santarem,  I,  63,  Amerigo.

Santee  Sioux  Indians,  the,  HI,  401,  Janney,  A.  M.

Santiago,  Count  of,  VI.  272,  Velasco,  L.

Santiago  de  Anna,  founded,  IV,  460.  Muiloz  de  Collantes.

Santiago  de  Cali,  founded,  IV.  460.  Munoz  de  Collantes.

Santiago  de  Chile,  founded,  HI,  295,  Huden  ;  building  of,
800,  Huepon  ;  founder  of.  VI,  223,  Valdivia,  P.  de ;  at-
tacked, 1, 734,  Copailo  ;  gift  to,  V,  392.  San  Martin,  J.  de  ;
earthquake  at,  VI.  295,  Villaroel ;  academy  of  science,
and  journals  of,  ni,  623,  Lastarria.

Santiago  de  Cuba,  college  at,VI,  223,  Valdes  y  Sierra.

Santiago  de  Jerez,  founded,  II,  166,  Diaz,  Melgarejo.

Santiago  de  Tlaltalolco,  II,  168  ;  college  of,  489,  Focher.


SANTIAGO


SCIPIO


787


Santiago  del  Estero,  IV,  22,  Lopez  de  Zuniga.
Santisteban  del  Puerto,  Count  of.  I,  232,  Benavides.
Santo  Domingo,  treaty  with,  1, 103  ;  early  exploration  of,

II,  628,  Geraldini ;  166,  Diaz,  M. :  invasion  of,  240  Du-
casse  ;  374,  Espinosa,  G. ;  buccaneers  of,  375,  Espivent ;
battle  of  buccaneers  in,  III,  344,  lUigen  ;  conquered  by
France,  insurrection  in,  attacked  by  Spaniards,  reform,
decline  of  prosperity,  II.  439,  Ferrand  ;  campaign  of
1795  in,  III,  626,  La  Touche  Treville  ;  attacked  by  the
English  and  Spanish,  1691-4,  632,  Laurent ;  expedition
to  expel  the  French.  1691,  V,  387,  Sandoval  Silva  ;  French
expedition  to  reconquer,  III,  527,  Kerverseau  ;  rebellions
in,  I,  176,  Barrionuevo  ;  11,494,  Fonvielle  ;  588,  Gan-
dara  ;  rebellion  in,  III,  405,  Jarric ;  524,  Keratry,  C.  A.
de  ;  the  revolution  in,  I,  611,  Christophe  ;  III,  583,  584,
Lacroix  ;  651,  Leclerc,  V.  E.\  French  victory,  negro  ris-
ing, 652  ;  barbarities  of  the  insurrection  in,  688,  Lempe-
reur  ;  revolution  in,  IV,  199,  Marbois  ;  Indian  slavery  in,
367,  Montesinos,  A.;  negro  insurrections  in,  367,  Montes-
quiou  ;  527,  Noailles  ;  English  invasion  of,  47,  Loyanti  ;
troubles  in,  178,  Maistral,  D.  M.;  French  colonies  in,  563,
Ogeron  ;  the  revolution  in,  V,  59,  Polverel ;  462,  Sercey  ;
emancipation  proclamation,  III,  650,  Leborgne  ;  V.  607,
Sonthonax  :  59,  Polverel ;  annexation  of,  to  Spain.  464,
Serraiio  ;  insurrection  in,  292,  Rochambeau,  Donatien  ;
revolt  against  Hayti  (1843),  movement  for  annexation  to
U.  S.,  submission  to  Spain,  end  of  Spanish  rule,  395-396,
Santana  ;  the  cochineal  industry  in,  botanical  garden,

III,  327,  Huon  ;  concerted  treaty  with  England  (1796-'8),
VI,  145  ;  decree  of  enfranchisement,  145  ;  subjugation  of
the  Spanish  part,  145 ;  revolution,  144-145,  Toussaint ;
expedition  sent  to,  by  Napoleon  I.,  264,  Vatry  ;  British
protectorate  in,  480,  Whitelocke ;  Spanish  government
in,  663,  Zuazo ;  proposed  annexation  of,  I,  134,  Baez ;

II,  719  ;  III,  283,  Howe,  S.  G. ;  V,  748.

Santo  Domingo,  city  of,  slaughter  at,  I,  521,  Caonabo  ;  be-
sieged, II,  439,  Ferrand.

Sautonate  of  soda,  introduced.  II,  199,  Donaldson,  W.  H.

Sao  Paulo,  gifts  to  the  city  of.  Ill,  200,  Hilberniaz.

Sao  Vicente  island,  colony  on,  V,  615,  Souza.

Sapio,  Signor,  III,  132,  Hayes,  C.

Sappho,  the  rival  of.  III,  703,  Lewis,  Estelle.

Saragan  or  Antonio  island,  colony  in,  VI,  293,  Villalobos.

Sarandi,  battle  of,  V,  266,  Rivera.

Saratoga,  battle  of,  I,  95  ;  387,  Brooks,  John  ;  453,  Bur-
goyne  ;  II,  615,  Gates,  H.;  IV,  396  ;  V,  66,  Poor,  E.\  251,
Riedesel;  VI,  511,  Wilkinson  ;  monument  at.  illustra-
tion, II,  615  ;  Morgan's  residence,  illustration,  IV,  397.

Saratoga,  the,  in  the  battle  of  Plattsburg,  IV,  107,  Mac-
donough.

Saratoga  Springs,  founder  of,  hotels  at,  V,  142,  Putnam,  G.

Sarcognomy,  I,  436,  Buchanan,  J.  R.

Sargent,  Daniel,  V,  398,  Sargent,  H.

Sargent,  John,  VI,  396,  Watts,  S.

Sargent.  Judith,  IV.  469,  Murry.  J.  S.

Sargent,  William  and  Epes,  V,  397,  Sargent,  P.  D.

Sartain's  Union  Magazine,  V,  401,  Sartain,  J.

Sartoris,  Algernon,  II,  725.

Sass,  Job,  pen-name,  II,  521.  Foxcroft,  G.  A.

Sassacus,  the.  II,  105,  Davis,  J.  L.\  fight  of,  with  the  Albe-
marle, V,  302,  Roe,  F.  A.

Satouriona,  Chief,  IV,  57,  Olotoraca  ;  V,  85,  Potanou.

Satterlee,  Maj.  W.,  V,  403,  Satterlee,  R.  S.

Saturday  Magazine,  the.  III,  737,  Littell,  E.

Saturday  Night  club,  the,  I,  226,  Bell,  C.

Saturiba,  Indian  chief.  II,  697.  Gourgues.

Saturn,  discovery  of  the  eighth  satellite  of,  I,  313,  Bond,
W.  C:  rings  of,  IV,  701,  Peirce.

Saude,  Francisco  de.  III,  581,  Labezares.

Saugus,  Mass..  iron-ore  at.  III,  425,  Jenckes,  J.

Sault  Sainte  Marie,  settlement  of,  III,  458,  Johnston,  J.;
founded,  IV,  213,  Marquette.

Saumur,  France,  school  at,  II,  55,  Daille.

Saunders,  Courtland,  V,  404,  Saunders,  E.  D.

Saunders,  James,  V,  405,  Saunders,  R.  M.

Saunders,  Richard,  pen-name,  II,  528.

Saunders,  William,  V,  405,  Saunders,  R.  M.

Saur,  Christophe,  V,  616,  Sower.

Sausamon,  John,  IV,  756.

Saut  du  Recollet,  the,  V.  366,  Sagard.

Sauv6,  M.,  II,  146,  Derbigny.

Sauvolle,  I,  259.  Bienville  ;  III,  339,  Iberville.

Savage,  Maj.  Thomas,  V,  405,  Savage,  J.

Savage's  Station,  battle  at,  III.  669  ;  IV,  82.

Savannah,  founded,  IV,  565,  Oglethorpe  ;  Moravian  colony
at,  V.  621,  Spangenberg  ;  siege  of,  in  the  Revolutionary
war,  I,  252,  Bethisy  ;  511,  Campbell,  Sir  A.;  II,  715  ;  377.
Estaing  ;  III,  282,  Howe,  R.\  301,  Huqer,  L;  V,  41.  Pli-
ville  :  i34.  Pulaski  ;  657,  Stedinqk  ;  VI,  624,  Wright.  Sir
J. ;  472,  White,  J.;  IV,  208  ;  incident  of  the  siege  of,
62,  Lynch,  I.  de  ;  capture  of,  in  1864,  V,  504,  505  ;  orphan
house  at  VI,  478,  Wliitefield  ;  Pulaski's  monument  at,
illustration,  V,  133.

Savannah,  the,  privateer,  II.  99  ;  VI.  698,  Rogers.

Saving-fund  society,  the  first,  rV.  744,  Peters,  R.

Savings-banks,  inventor  of  a  system  for  use  in,  V,  637.
Spraque,  C.  E.

Saw-mill  machinery,  invention  of,  I,  671,  Cochran,  J.  W.;

III,  425,  Jenckes,  J.


Saws,  improvements  in.  II,  182,  Disston.
Sawtelle,  Cullen,  V,  406,  Sawtelle,  C.  G.
Saw-tooth,  the  adjustable,  and  chisel-bit,  V.  624,  Spauld-

ing,  N.  W.
Sawyer,  Addison,  V,  408,  Sawyer,  S.
Sawyer,  G.  P.,  HI,  153,  Heard.
Sawyer,  Joseph,  V,  408,  Sawyer,  S.
Saxe,  Marshal,  II,  177,  Dieskau.
Saxe  Holm,  pen-name,  III,  386,  Jackson,  H.  M.  F.
Say,  William,  V,  410,  Say,  T.
Saybrook  plantation,  II,  431,  Fenwick,  G.;  fort  at,  595,

Gardiner  ;  Indian  attack  on,  V,  402,  Sassacus  ;  VI,  255,

Van  Twiller :  574.
Saybrook  platform,  the,  V,  15,  Pierrepont,  J. ;  380,  Salton-

stall,  G.
Sayres,  Caleb  Smith,  V,  412,  Sayres,  E.  S.
Sayri  Tupac,  IV,  47,  Loyola.
Scales,  improvements  in,  VI,  454,  Wheeler,  S.;  invention

of  platform,  II,  400,  Fairbanks,  T.
Scammon  lagoon,  V,  413,  Scammon,  C.  M.
Scandinavian  literature,  collection,  IV,  217,  Marsh,  G.  P.
Scanland,  Dr.  S.  E.,  Ill,  691,  Leonard,  A.
Scarborough,  the  Countess  of,  III,  468.
Scarlet  fever,  theory  concerning,  H,  238,  Dubois,  H.  A.
Scarsdale,  Lordship  and  Manor  of.  III,  155,  Heathcote.
Scary  creek,  engagement  on,  IV.  38,  Lotce,  J.  W.
Scattergood,  Joseph,  V,  414,  Scaitergood,  T.
Schaeffer,  Rev.  Frederick  S..  V,  415,  Schaeffer,  C.  W.
Schaghticoke,  Knickerbocker  house  at,  illustration,  III,

561  ;  prince  of,  561.
Schapenham,  Vice-Admiral,  VI.  283,  Verschoor.
Scharf.  Thomas  G.,  V,  416,  Scharf,  J.  T.
Schaumberg-Lippe,  Count,  I,  453,  Burgoyne.
Scheffer,  Ary,  pupils  of,  I,  182,  Bartholdi ;  IV,  727,  Per

Scheie  de  Vere,  VI,  278,  Vere,  M.

Schelling,  I,  34.

Schenck,  Roelof  Martense,  V.  417,  Schenck,  J.  F.

Schenectady,  founded,  VI,  239,  Van  Curler  ;  burning  of.
and  massacre  at,  II,  554  ;  III,  339,  Iberville ;  577,  Kryn  ;
687,  Le  Moyne,  James ;  VI,  37,  Tassemacher.

Schenkl,  John  P.,  V,  701,  Stone,  E.  W.

Schieffelin,  Jacob,  V,  419,  Schieffelin,  B.

Schiernding,  Baron  von,  II,  550,  Frey.

Schiller,  wreck  of  the,  II,  180,  Dimock,  S.

Schillich  family,  the,  V,  490.  Sheeleigh.

Schilling,  Gustav,  IV,  496,  Neuendorff.

Schimper,  Prof.  Karl,  I,  34 ;  II,  356,  Engelmann,  G.

Schirmer,  M.,  II,  619,  Gay,  E.;  Ill,  104,  Hart.  J.  M.

Schlagintweit,  Hermann  and  Adolf,  V,  420,  Schlagint-
weit,  R.

Schleiermacher,  Friedrich,  VT,  538,  Willich.

Schletterer,  Hans  M.,  pupil  of,  V,  264,  Ritter,  F.  L.

Schlossberger,  Augusta,  V,  259.

Schlosser,  Prof.,  I,  155.

Schmettau,  Augustine,  H,  580,  Gallitzin.

Schmettau,  Count  v.,  II,  580,  Gallitzin.

Schmidt,  Dr.,  HI,  161,  Helmuth.

Schmitt,  Jacob,  pupil  of,  VI,  121,  Timm.

Schneider,  Frederick,  I,  80,  Anschutz.

Schoenbrunn,  Museum  of,  in,  396,  Jacquin.

Schomburgk,  Morris  R..  V,  424-425,  Schomburgk,  R.  H.

Schomburgk.  Otto,  V,  425,  Schomburgk,  R.  H.

Schoolcraft,  James,  V,  425,  Schoolcraft,  L.

Schools,  of  "Arts  et  metiers,"  the,  France,  V,  293,  Roche-
foucauld ;  bill  on  income  of  common,  II,  245,  Duer.  W.
A.;  monitorial,  516,  Fowle,  W.  B.;  foreign-born  teachers
in,  V,  471.

Schouten,  Cornelis,  III,  684,  Le  Maire.

Schouten  island,  V,  427.  Schouten.

Schroedter,  Adolf,  IV.  407,  Morrell,  I.  R.

Schulte,  Otto  H.,  rV,  91,  MacColl,  M.  J.

Schumacher,  H.  A.,  I,  79.  Anghiera.

Schuyler.  Alida,  III,  741,  Livingston,  R. ;  VI,  251,  Van  Rens-
selaer, N.

Schuvler,  Arent,  V,  430,  Schuyler,  P.

Schuyler,  Brandt,  I,  291,  Bleecker,  A.  E.

Schuyler,  Cornelia,  III,  743,  Livingston,  Walter.

Schuyler,  Elizabeth,  III,  57,  60.

Schuyler,  Gertrude,  I.  670,  Cochran,  John.

Schuyler,  John,  V,  431,  Schuyler,  P.  J.

Schuyler,  Madame,  n,  707,  Grant,  Anne.

Schuyler,  Margaret,  VI,  251,  Van  Rensselaer,  S.

Schuyler,  Philip,  V,  429,  Schuyler,  Peter.

Schuyler  house,  the,  illustration,  V,  433.

Schuylerville,  Saratoga  monument  at,  illustration,  H,  615.
See  Saratoga.

Schwab,  Michael.  V.  632,  Spies.

Science,  a  martyr  of,  II,  92,  Davila,  N.

Science,  popular  lectures  on,  V.  528,  529 :  and  religion,  har-
mony of,  V,  509-510,  Shields,  C.  W. ;  popularization  of,  VI,
643,  Youmans,  E.  L.

Science,  periodical,  V,  443,  Scudder,  S.  H.

Sciences,  National  academy,  gift.  VI,  892,  Watson,  J.  C.

Scientific  apparatus,  invention  of,  IV,  59,  Lyman,  C.  S.

Scientific  expedition,  first  American,  VI,  575,  Winthrop,  J.

Scio,  massacre  in,  I,  699,  Colvocoresses.

Scioto  land  company,  the,  I,  166,  Barlow,  J.

Scipio,  pen-name,  HI,  59.


788


SCITUATE


SHANLY


Scituate,  harbor  of  refuge  at,  IV,  55,  Lunt,  O.

Scolding-trial,  a,  V,  340,  Roy  all,  A.

Scolithus  linearis,  the,  III,  29,  Haldeman.

Scollay,  William,  VI,  268,  Vaughan,  C.

Scolve,  John.  VI,  16,  Szkolny.

Scott,  Caroline  W.,  VI,  685,  Harrison  ;  686.

Scott,  Cornelia,  V,  442,  Scott,  H.  L.

Scott,  Rev.  James,  V,  436,  Scott,  G.

Scott,  John  W.,  VI,  686,  Harrison,  C.  S.

Scott,  Lewis  Allaire,  V,  437.  Scott,  J.  M.

Scott,  Thomas,  murder  of,  V,  252,  Biel.

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  I,  37,  Ainslie  ;  V,  158,  Roe,  J.

Scott,  Winfleld,  his  grave,  illustration,  V,  441  ;  Brown's
statue  of,  442.

Scourge  of  the  Spaniards,  the,  IV,  481,  Nau.

Scranton,  Pa.,  name  and  growth  of,  V,  442,  Scranton.

Screw-auger,  the.  III,  176,  Henry,  W.

Screw-driver,  automatic,  V,  484,  Shaver.

Screw-propellors,  invention  of,  II,  617,  Gatling ;  V,  408,
Sawyer,  S. ;  V,  673.

Scribe,  Eugene,  II,  680,  Gorostiza.

Scriber,  Peter,  letters,  II,  94,  Davis,  C.  H.

Scribner.  Arthur  H.,  V,  443,  Scribner,  C.

Scribner,  John  Blair,  V,  443,  Scribner,  C.

Scribner's  Magazine,  V,  443,  Scribyier,  C.

Scribner's  Monthly,  III,  32,  Hale,  E.  E. ;  235,  Holland,  J.  G. ;
V,  443,  Scribner  ;  586,  Smith,  Rosnell.

Scrooby  Manor,  I,  348.  Bradford,  W.  ;  371,  Brewster,  W.

Sculpture,  pioneers  of  American.  II,  161,  Dexter,  H  ;  in-
vention for  use  in,  III,  102,  Hart,  J.  T. ;  new  processes
in,  268,  Hosmer,  H;  V,  98,  Poweis,  H

Scythes,  inventor  of  method  for  making,  IV,  592,  Orr,  R.

Seabury,  Rev.  Charles,  V,  446,  Seabury,  S.

Seabury,  house  of  Bishop,  illustration,  V,  446.

Seal  of  the  U.  S.,  third,  illustration,  VI,  480.

Sealchraig,  Alexander,  V,  457,  Selkirk.

Seaman's  aid  society,  III,  35,  Hale,  S.  J.

Seamen. See  Sailors.

Seamen's  friend  societies,  III,  650.  Leavitt.

Sea  miner,  the,  invention  of,  III,  320,  Hunt,  E.  B.

Search,  right  of,  on  the  high  seas,  I,  552.

Searing,  Edward  W.,  V,  447,  Searing,  L.  C.

Searle,  Cyril,  II,  396,  Eytinge.

Searle.  January,  pen-name,  VI,  696,  Phillips.

Searle,  Nathaniel,  VI,  450,  Wheaton,  H.

Sears,  Richard,  V,  448,  Sears,  I.

Sears,  Thacher,  V,  448,  Sears,  R.

Sea-serpent,  the,  VI,  632.

Seaton,  Lord,  I,  682,  Colborne.

Seaton,  Henry,  V.  448,  Seaton,  W.  W.

Sea-urchins,  the  Pourtalesia.  V,  93,  Pourtal&s.

Sea  Venture,  the,  wreck  of,  II,  616,  Gates,  Sir  T.  ;  V,  571  ;
716,  Strachey.

Seaver.  James  E.,  Ill,  424,  Jemison,  M.

Sea  well,  James  M.,  V,  480.  Shaft  er,  J.  M.

Sebald  islands,  the,  in,  371,  Iwert ;  discovery  of,  VI,  587,
Woert.

Seccomb,  Richard,  V,  449,  Seccomb,  Joseph.

Secession,  threatened  (1789),  V,  &58,  Rut  ledge,  J.:  III.  381  ;
early  advocacy  of,  opposition  to.  V,  611  :  medal  struck
in  1832,  HI,  4i2  ;  Georgia  "  platform  of  1850."  426,  Jen-
kins, C.  J.  ;  alleged  intended,  of  New  England,  I,  27 ;
ordinance  framed  in  1851.  IV,  593,  Orr,  J.  L.\  S.  C.
convention  of  1852.  283,  Means,  J.  H;  movement  for
(1851-'2),  V,  230,  Rhett,  R.  B.\  in  1860-'l,  I,  372,  Black,
J.  S.  ;  415,  Bronmlow  ;  434 ;  Buchanan  on,  435  ;  right
of,  500 ;  first  advocated  in  congress,  V,  152 :  of  Vir-
ginia. Ill,  668,  Lee,  R.  E.  ;  699,  Letcher,  J.;  705,  Lewi*,
J.  F.;  717,  718  ;  of  the  southern  states,  II,  99  ;  VI,  133,
Toombs  ;  VI.  637,  Yancey  :  constitutional  status  caused
by,  n,  186,  Dixon.  James :  plot  to  seize  Washington,
etc.,  429;  mob- violence.  111.  437  ;  Lincoln's  inaugural
on,  717-718  ;  Virginia  anti-coercion  resolution,  V.  280,
Robertson,  W. ;  peace  convention,  VI,  199.  See  War,
the  CIVIL.

Secessionists,  confidential  mission  to,  LI,  38,  Cushing.

Seeker.  Thomas.  I,  730,  Cooper,  M.

Seeker,  Dr..  IV,  275,  Mayhem.  ./.

Second  Advent,  the,  IV.  330,  Miller,  W.

Secret  service,  U.  S.,  1, 145,  Baker,  L.  C.

Seddon,  Thomas  and  John,  V,  449,  Seddon,  J.  A.

Sedgwick,  Charles,  V,  452,  Sedgwick.  E.  D.

Sedgwick,  H.  and  D.,  LI,  447,  Field.  D.  D.

Sedgwick  house,  the,  at  Stockton,  illustration,  V,  452.

Sedition  act.  the.  I.  23. See  Alien  and  sedition  acts.

Seelye,  Lillie  E.,  II,  315,  Eggleston,  E.

Seemttller,  Anne  M.,  II,  1,  Crane.

Seer,  the,  magazine.  V,  103,  Pratt,  O.

Beevir,  Mr..  II.  247,  Duff,  M.  A.

Segar,  William,  V,  571.

Seguin,  Elizabeth.  IV,  646.  Parepa.

Seignelay,  M..  II,  252.  Du  Unit.

Seismology,  researches  in,  IV,  296,  Mendenhall,  T.  C. ;  VI,
575.  Winthrop.  J.

Seixas,  Gershom,  IV,  349,  Mitchill :  654,  Parker,  T.

Selinsgrove.  Pa.,  missionary  institute  at,  III,  579,  Kurtz,  B.

Sellen,  W.,  HI,  39,  Hall,  D.

Selma,  Ala.,  capture  of,  IV,  9,  Long,  Eli.

Selyns,  Dominie,  IV,  255,  Mather,  C.


Selyns,  Henricus,  quoted,  VI,  249,  Van  Nieuwenhuysen.

Semi-Colon  club,  the,  V,  714.

Seminary  of  Our  Lady  of  Angels,  IV,  63,  Lynch,  J.  J.

Seminoles,  the.  wars  with,  I,  268  ;  499  :  II,  568.  Gadsden,
James  ;  572,  Gaines,  E.  P.;  HI,  378;  IV,  599,  Osceola  ;  V,
440,  Scott,  Winjield  ;  VI.  53.

Semple,  Letitia.  VI,  199,  Tyler,  R.

Senat,  Father,  I,  99,  Artaguette  ;  VI,  298,  Vincennes.

Senate,  the  U.  S.,  representation  in,  I,  215,  Bedford,  G.\
case  of  self-election  to,  191.  Bateman  ;  president  of.  III,
609,  Langdon,  J.;  constitution  of,  IV,  167-168  ;  assault  in
the,  V,  747,  749  ;  I,  389,  Brooks,  P.  S. :  panic  session  of,
VI,  29  :  resignations,  I.  700,  Conkling  ;  V,  38,  Piatt,  T.  C.

Seneca  Falls,  first  Woman's  Rights  convention  at,  V,  650,
Stanton,  E.  C.

Seneeas,  the,  last  missionary  to,  II.  608,  Gamier :  chief  of,

V,  205,  Red-Jacket ;  mission  to,  VI,  620,  Wright,  A.
Senex,  pen-name,  VI,  57,  Tazewell ;  221,  Vaill.
Seney,  Rev.  Robert,  V,  461,  Seney,  G.  I.
Sensitometer,  invention  of  a,  III,  271,  Hough,  G.  W.
Sentmanat,  Gen.,  I,  67,  Ampudia.

Sepoy  rebellion,  the.  I,  664,  Clyde.

Septuagint,  first  English  version  of  the,  VL,  97,  Thomson,  C.

Sequasson,  VI,  208,  Uncas.

Serapis,  fight  with  the  Bon  Homme  Richard.  HI,  468.

Serena,  Chili,  destruction  of,  III,  300,  Huepon.

Sergeant,  John,  IV,  711,  Penington,  J.

Sergeant,  Margaretta,  IV,  280.

Serigny,  Sieur  de,  III,  687,  Le  Moyne,  Joseph.

Seringapatam,  capture  of,  III,  91,  Harris,  G.

Serpents,  investigation  of  the  venom  of.  IV,  344,  Mitchell,

S.  W.\  antidote  for  bites  of,  472,  Mutis.
Serrano,  Rodriguez,  IV,  173,  Magellan.
Serre.  Henri,  II,  577,  Gallatin.
Serval,  M.,  H,  241,  Du  Chaillu.
Sesse,  IV,  350,  Mocino.
Setauket,  L.  I.,  founded,  II,  488,  Floyd,  R.
Seton  Hall  college,  founded,  I,  200,  Bayley,  J.  R. ;  IV.  159,

McQuaid.
Seven  days'  battle,  the.  III.  669  ;  IV,  82.
Seven  pillars,  the,  II,  294,  Eaton,  T.

Seven  Pines,  battle  of,  V,  161,  Rains,  G.  J.  See  Fair  Oaks.
Seventy-fours  in  disguise,  IU,  313.  Humphreys,  J.
Seven  Years'  war,  the,  I,  591,  Chatham  ;  H,  726,  Grasse  ;

VI,  303,  Viomenil.

Sever,  James  Warren,  V,  466,  Sever.  A.  E.  P.

Severn.  Md..  engagement  at  (1655),  V,  704,  Stone,  W.

Sevier,  Valentine,  V,  466,  Sevier,  J.

SevignG,  Madame  de.  subject  of  drama  by,  I,  109,  Asgill.

SeviUa  Nueva,  founded,  II.  376,  Esquivel.

Seville,  cathedral  library  of,  I,  699,  Columbus,  F.\  College
of  Conception  at,  IV,  551,  Ocampo,  G.  de.

Sewall,  Rev.  C.  C,  V,  469,  Seioall,  Samuel.

Sewall,  Jonathan,  V,  473,  Sewell.

Sewall,  K.  B..  V,  470,  Sewall,  R.  K.

Sewall,  Miss,  TV,  10,  Longfellow.  S.

Sewall's  Point,  engagement  at,  II,  287,  Eagle.

Sewanee,  Tenn.,  university  at,  V,  57,  Polk,  L.;  155,  Quin-
tard.

Seward,  Asahel,  VI,  534,  Williams,  W.

Seward,  Olive  R.,  V,  472.

Seward,  Dr.  S.  S.,  V,  470,  Seward,  W.  H.

Seward,  William  H.,  his  home,  illustration,  V,  472.

Sewerage,  systems  of,  VI,  359,  Waring.

Sewing-machines,  invention  of,  III,  602,  Lamson,  D.  L. ;
279.  Howe.  E;  V,  542,  Singer  ;  VI,  454,  Wheeler,  N.;  546,
Wilson,  A.  B. ;  largest  factory  of,  546,  Wilson,  A.  B. ;  in-
vention of  improvements.  IH.  273,  House,  J.  A.

Sexby,  Edward,  pen-name.  V,  151,  Quincy,  J.

Seyfried,  I.  X.,  IV.  204,  Maretzek.

Seymour,  Edward,  V,  443,  So-ibner.

Seymour,  Horatio,  his  home,  illustration,  V,  477.

Seymour,  Jonathan,  in,  87,  Harper.

Seymour,  Ozias,  V,  478,  Seymour,  O.  S.

Seymour,  Richard,  V,  478,  Seymour,  M.

Seymour,  Rev.  Storrs  O.,  V,  478,  Seymour,  M.  H.

Shabona,  Chief,  V,  403,  Sauganash.

Shackamaxon.  IV,  714.

Shackelford,  W.  F..  II,  180.  Dinnies.

Shadford,  George.  V.  180.  Rankin,  T.

Shadow,  the,  sobriquet.  II,  177.  Diente.

Shadrach.  rescue  of,  HI,  34.  Hale,  J.  P.

Shady  Side,  anonymous  book,  III,  294,  Hubbell,  M.  S.

Shafter,  James.  V,  480,  Shaffer,  O.  L.

Shafting,  invention  of  coupling  for.  V,  458,  Sellers,  C.

Shakers,  the,  VI,  492,  Whittaker,  J.

Shakespeare,  Edmund,  V,  480,  Shakespeare,  E.  O.

Shaking  Quakers,  the,  ni,  656,  Lee,  Ann.

Shakspeare-Bacon  controversy,  the,  I,  130,  Bacon,  D. ;
III,  243,  Holmes,  N.  ;  IV,  654,  O'Connor,  W.  D.

Shakspeare,  William,  map  referred  to  by,  HI,  297  ;  theory
as  to  plays  of,  IV,  400,  Morgan.  J.  A.;  supposed  stlgKW-
tionof  "The  Tempest,"  II,  616,  Gates,  Sir  T.  ;  V,  571  ;
dedication  of  poems  by,  613,  Southampton.

Shakspereana,  collection  of,  1, 188,  Barton,  T.  P.

Shanghai,  marking  of  channels  in  the  harbor  of,  I.  4,
Abbot,  Joel ;  rebels  in,  in,  11.  Gust.

Shanks.  John  T.,  VI.  8.  Sweet.  B.  J.

Shanly,  Francis,  V,  481,  Shanly,  W.


SHANNON


SILVER-TONGUED


789


Shannon,  the,  defeat  of  the  Chesapeake  by,  III,  640,  Law-
rence, J. ;  I,  383,  Broke.
Shapely,  Capt.,  II,  559,  Fuentes.  B.
Sharp,  Dr.,  VI,  391,  Watson,  E.
Sharp,  John,  pseudonym,  V,  90,  Potter,  J.  S.
Sharp,  Robert,  III,  100,  Harrison,  J.  A.
Sharpe,  Gov.,  VI,  375.
Sharpsburg,  battle  of,  III,  392,  Jackson,  T.  J. ;  670. See

Antietam.
Sharswood,  James.  V,  483,  Shaiswood,  O.
Shattuck,  George,  I,  681,  Coit,  H.  A.
Shaw.  Francis,  V.  486,  Shaw,  S.
Shaw,  Francis  G.,  IV,  43,  Lowell,  J.  S.
Shaw,  Sir  John,  II,  236,  Duane,  W.
Shaw,  Josephine,  III,  226,  Hoey  ;  IV,  43,  Lowell,  J.  8.
Shaw,  Joshua,  V,  401,  Sartain,  J.
Shaw,  Maj.,  VI,  378.

Shaw,  Mrs.,  actress.  Ill,  55,  Hamblin,  T.  S.
Shaw,  Rev.  Oakes,  V,  487,  Shaw,  Lemuel.
Shaw,  Thomas  and  Mary  S.,  Ill,  246,  Homes,  M.  S.  S.
Shaw,  William,  V,  272,  Robert,  C.  R.
Shawk,  Abel,  I,  3a5,  Brooks,  C.  S.
Shawmut  (Boston),  settlement  of,  III,  443,  Johnson,  Isaac  ;

VI,  167,  Trumbull,  J.  K.
Shawnee  Prophet,  the,  II,  335,  Eliokwatawa.
Shawnees,  the,  in  the  Revolution,  I,  626,  637 ;  wars  with,

II,  640,  Gibson,  J.;  Ill,  96.  97  ;  350,  Inglis,  M.\  701,  Lewis,

Andrew  ;  IV,  2,  Logan,  B. ;  5,  Logan.  John  ;  295,  Menard,

M.  B.;  V,  491,  Shelby.  E.\  VI,  58,  Tecumseh;  333,  Walk-

in-the-Water  ;  676,  Cornstalk.
Shawomet,  R.  I.,  II,  690,  Gorton.
Shaw  school  of  botany,  II.  356,  Engelmann,  G.
Shaw  university,  V,  563,  Smith,  E.  E.
Shays's  rebellion,  V,  487,  488,  Shays  ;  VI,  379.
Sheaffe,  William.  V,  489,  Sheaffe,  Sir  R.  H.
Sheehan,  James  W.,  II,  216,  Douglas,  S.  A.
Sheffield,  Lord,  I,  20  ;  II,  43,  Cushman,  R. ;  quoted,  HI,  410.
Shekelton,  Dr.,  II,  328,  Elliot,  G.  T.
Shelburne,  Lord,  II,  532  ;  III,  409,  412,  Jay  ;  586,  Lafayette  ;

V,  120,  Priestley  ;  VI,  266-267,  Vaughan.
Shelby,  N.  Y.,  Indian  relics  in,  II,  39.  Gushing,  F.  H.
Shelby,  Va.,  site  of,  V,  98,  Powhatan.
Sheldon,  Catherine  J.,  IV.  92,  McCook,  J.
Sheldon,  Electra  M.,  V,  685,  Stewart,  E.  M.  S.
Sheldon,  Isaac  E.,  V,  492,  Sheldon,  S.
Sheldon,  Dr.  John,  pupil  of.  V,  84,  Post,  W.
Shelley,  P.  B.,  Ill,  345,  Imlay.
Shelley  family,  the,  III,  47.
Shelly,  pupil  of.  V,  277,  Robertson.  Alexander.
Shelter  island,  estate  on,  IV,  518,  Nicolls,  W.
Shelton,  Rev.  Philo,  V,  493,  Shelton,  W.
Shelton,  Sarah,  III,  175,  Henry,  P.
Shenandoah,  army  of  the,  V,  499.
Shenandoah,  the  steamer,  VI,  310,  Waddell,  J.  S.
Shenandoah  Valley,  fighting  in  the,  I,  158,  Banks,  N.  P.  ;

V,  499,  Sheridan.
Shenijee,  III,  424,  Jemison.  M.
Shepard,  Alexander,  III,  235,  Holland,  S.
Shepard,  Rev.  Thomas,  II,  323  ;  IV,  344,  Mitchell,  J.
Shepard,  William,  pen-name,  VI,  341,  Walsh,  W.  S.
Shepard  rifles,  the,  II,  441,  Ferrero.
Shepherd,  Rezin  D.,  VI,  144,  Touro.
Shepley,  Joseph,  V,  496,  Shepley,  J.
Sheppard,  Nathan,  V,  496,  Sheppard,  M.
Sheppard's  railroad,  V,  496,  Sheppard,  F.
Sheridan,  Richard  Brinsley,  II,  247,  Dufferin.
Sheridan's  ride,  illustration,  V,  499.
Sherlock,  pen-name,  V,  614,  Southwick.
Sherman,  Charles,  V,  506,  Sherman,  J.
Sherman,  Grant,  Lincoln,  and  Porter,  illustration,  V,  505.
Sherman,  John,  V,  501,  Sherman,  Roger;  502,  Sherman,

William  T.
Sherman,  Samuel,  V,  502.  Sherman.  W.  T.
Sherman,  S.  S.,  III.  617;  Lapham,  W.  B.
Sherman,  Gen.  W.  T.,  quoted,  II,  65,  Dana,  C.  A.;  IH,  74,

Hancock  ;  his  Memoirs,  I,  687,  Coleman,  W.  T.  ;  Mrs.

Sherman.  II,  650,  Gillespie  ;  drawing  by,  VI,  374.
Sherwood,  John,  V,  508,  Sherwood,  M.  E.
Sherwood,  Kate  B..  subject  of  a  poem  by,  DII,  574,  Kountz.
Sherwood,  Katherine,  IV,  111,  McDowell,  K.  S.
Sherwood,  Rev.  Lyman  H.,  V,  508,  Sherwood,  W.  H.
Sherwood,  Rosina  E.,  V,  508,  Sherwood,  M.  E.
Sherwood,  Samuel,  VI,  387,  Waterman,  T.  G.
Sheshequin,  Pa.,  IV.  374,  Montour,  E.
Shewell,  Elizabeth,  VI,  439,  West,  B.
Shields,  John,  V,  509.  Shields,  M.

Shikellamy,  Chief,  IV,  4,  Logan,  John  ;  VI,  5,  Swatane.
Shiloh,  battle  of,  I,  211.  Beauregard  ;  II.  424,  Fearing,  B.  D. ;

711  ;  III,  455,  450  ;  IV.  212,  Marin  aduke  ;  V,  339,  Rowley  ;

503  ;  VI,  7,  Sweeny  ;  335.  Wallace,  W.  H.  L.
Shindler.  Rev.  Robert  D.,  V,  510,  Shindler,  Mary.
Shine,  Elizabeth,  II.  413.

Shingle-machine,  invention  of  a,  I,  722,  Cooley,  A.  A.
Shinnecock  Indians,  the,  II.  25.  Cujfee.
Ship-builders,  home  for,  VI,  404,  Webb,  W.  H.
Ship  island,  II,  416  ;  III,  339,  Iberville  ;  engagement  near,

V,  580.  Smith,  Melancton.
Shipp.  William,  V,  511.  Shipn,  B.
Shippen,  Ann  Home,  III,  745,  Livingston,  H.  B.


Shippen,  Dr.  Joseph  G.,  V,  513,  Shippen,  E.

Shippen,  Margaret,  I,  95  ;  V,  513,  Shippen,  E.

Shippen,  Richard,  V,  513,  Shippen,  E.

Shippen,  Rev.  Robert,  V,  511,  Shippen,  E.

Shippen,  William,  V,  511,  Shippen,  E.

Shipping,  subsidies  for,  I,  278  ;  American,  in  West  Indies,
III,  569,  Knox.

Shipping  and  Commercial  List,  the,  TV,  550,  O'Brien,  H.

Shipping  laws,  I,  104.

Ship-railway,  patent  of  a,  I.  578,  Channing,  W.  F.

Ship-raising  machine,  invented,  I,  295.  Blodget,  S.

Ships,  invention  for,  I,  419,  Brunei,  M.  I. ;  preparation  for
iron,  II,  662,  Ginborne  ;  capture  of  British,  III,  254,  Hop-
kins, E.  and  J.  B.\  building  of,  II,  299,  Eckford;  766,
Griffiths,  J.  W.\  III,  313.  Humphreys,  J.;  V,  268-269,
Roach,  J.;  inventor  of  steering-apparatus  for,  IV,  518,
Nicolson,  S.;  noted  figure-heads  for.  V,  351,  Rush,  W.;
apparatus  to  measure  velocity  of,  409,  Saxton  ;  method
of  navigating  in  shallow  water,  416,  Schank,  J. ;  cushion
for  wire  rigging  for,  515,  Shock ;  air-ports  and  bolt-ex-
tractor, VI,  556,  Wilson,  T.  D. ;  signals,  invention  of,  II,
662,  Gisborne.

Shoemaker,  Samuel,  V.  189,  Rawle,  W.

Shooting-matches,  II.  55,  Dakin.

Shooting-stars,  observations  of,  IV,  18,  Loomis,  E.\  577,
Olmsted,  D. See  Meteorology.

Short-hand,  system  of,  invented,  II,  527.

Shortridge,  Rev.  E.  W.,  II,  493,  Foltz,  C.  S.

Shrewsbury,  Lord,  in,  531-532,  Kidd  ;  VI,  22,  Talbot,  T.

Shurtleff,  Dr.  Benjamin,  V,  519 .Shurtleff,  N.  B.

Shurtleff,  Robert,  pseudonym,  V,  382,  Sampson,  D.

Shurtleff  college,  founding  of,  IV,  696,  Peck,  J.  M. ;  gifts
to,  II,  306,  Edwards,  C. ;  V,  519,  Shurtleff,  N.  B.

Shyris,  the,  VI,  272,  Velasco,  Juan.

Siam,  king  of,  abolition  of  slavery  in,  III,  692,  Leonawens  ;
treaty  with,  95,  Harris,  T.

Siamese  twins,  the,  I,  575,  Chang.

Sibbald,  Sir  Andrew,  VI,  551,  Wilson,  W.

Sibbald.  James,  VI,  551,  Wilson,  W.

Sibbs,  Richard,  II,  83,  Davenport,  J.

Siberia,  exploration  in,  III,  516,  Kennan  ;  655,  Ledyard,  J.

Sibley,  Maj.  Caleb  C.  VI,  245,  Van  Dorn.

Sibley,  Mrs.  H.  W.,  Ill,  87,  Harper.

Sibley,  John,  V,  520.  Sibley,  G.  C.

Sibococes,  tribe  of  the,  II,  515,  Foucher.

Sibylline  Leaves,  anonymous  book,  IV,  751,  Phelps,  J.  W.

Sicard,  Abbe,  I,  212,  Bebian  ;  II,  579,  Gallaudet,  T.  H.

Sicily,  rebellion  in,  IV,  443,  Mott,  V.\  conquest  of,  VI,  681,
Garibaldi.

Siddons,  Cecilia,  I,  700,  Combe.

Siddons,  Sarah,  III,  360  ;  510,  Kemble,  C.

Sidney,  pen-name,  V,  356,  Rutherfoord,  J.  C;  VI.  630,
Yates  A

Sidney,  Algernon,  IV,  712.  713.

Sidney,  Algernon,  pen-name,  II,  705,  Granger,  G. ;  V,  269,
Roane.  S.

Sidney,  Margaret,  pen-name,  IV,  32,  Lothrop,  H.  M.

Sieghen,  Prince,  I,  328,  Bougainville.

Siegvolk,  Paul,  IV,  258,  Mathews,  A.

Sierra  Leone,  settlement  in,  I,  132,  Bacon,  S.

Sierra  Madre,  projected  republic  of,  VI,  290.  Vidaurri.

Sierra  Morena,  colonies  in,  IV.  569,  Olavide.

Sieste,  Cornells,  pupil  of,  VI,  247,  Van  Elten.

Sigma,  pen-name,  V,  398,  Sargent,  L.  M.

Signals,  system  of, by  mirrors,  IV,  78,  McCauley,  C.  A.  H.\
system  of  marine,"  216,  Marryat,  Frederick  ;  army  and
weather,  473,  Myer  ;  marine,  V,  305,  Rogers,  H.  J. ;  meth-
od of,  VI,  189,  futtle,  H  P.

Signal  shells,  improvement  in,  VI,  141,  Totten,  C.  A.  L.

Signal  telegraph,  invention  of  a,  V,  216.

Sigoigne,  Adele,  II,  201.  Donnelly,  E.  C.

Sigourney,  Charles,  V,  525.  Siqowney,  L.  H.

Silentiarius,  Paulus,  IV,  755,  Philes.

Silent  senator,  the,  V,  734.  Sturgeon.

Silk-culture,  introduction  of,  IV,  335,  Miner,  C;  V,  125,
Prince,  W.  R.;  into  South  Carolina,  III,  446,  Johnson,
Sir  N.;  manufacture  of,  1,598,  Cheney,  W.\  667,  Cobb,
J.  H. ;  first,  in  U.  S.,  V,  361,  Ryle.

Silk  stocking  company,  the,  I,  494,  Cadwalader,  J.

Silk  stockings,  the.  IV,  525,  Nixon,  J.

Silk-worm,  the,  first  introduced  into  America,  LI,  135,  Del-
gadillo  ;  into  Virginia,  178,  Digges,  E.;  the  new,  V,  681,
Stewardson.

Sillery,  founded,  III.  682,  Le  Jeune  ;  V,  527,  Sillery  ;  battle
of,  IV,  468,  Murray,  James.

Silliman,  Judpe  Ebenezer,  V,  527,  Silliman,  G.  S.

Silliman,  Gold  S.,  III.  471.  Jones,  T.

Silvela,  Manuel,  IV,  304,  Merino.

Silver,  invention  for  freeing,  III,  570,  Koenig,  G.  A.

Silver  coinage.  III.  139.

Silver  currency,  bill  concerning,  I,  289,  Bland,  R.  P. ;  ques-
tion of,  VI,  688,  Horton.

Silver-gray  party,  II,  705.  Granger.  T.

Silver  lake  serpent,  the,  II,  423,  Faxon.

Silver-lead  mines,  discovery  of,  VI,  449,  Wheatley.

Silver-ore,  furnace  for,  V,  668,  SMefcldt.

Silver  scheme,  the.  I,  29,  Adam*,  S. ;  III,  332.

Silver-tongued  orator  of  New  Hampshire,  the,  H,  697,  Gove,
William  H.


790


SIMMS


SMITH


Simms.  W.  G..  his  home,  illustration,  V,  534.

Simonides,  III,  541,  King,  J.

Simonoseki  indemnity,  the,  HI,  272,  House,  E.  H.

Simons,  Gen.  James,  VI,  499,  Wigfall.

Simonson,  Dr.  A.  S.,  V,  536,  Simonson.  J.  S.

Simon  the  Wagoner,  pseudonym,  II,  221,  Downey.

Simpson,  George,  V,  539,  Simpson.  S.

Simpson,  Hannah,  II,  709.

Simpson,  John,  IV,  590,  Ormsby.  S.

Simpson's  Nest,  mountain  called,  V,  538,  Simpson,  G.  S.

Sims,  Thomas,  returned  fugitive,  II,  155,  Devens.

Sinclair,  Catherine  N.,  II,  504,  Forrest.

Sinclair,  Rev.  Elijah,  V,  542,  Sinclair,  C.  B.

Sinclair,  John,  II,  504,  Forrest.

Singing  Sibyl,  pen-name,  VI,  287,  Victor,  M.  V.

Singleton,  Angelica,  VI,  234,  Van  Buren.  A.

Sioux,  the,  uprising  of.  Ill,  739,  Little  Crow  ;  II,  44  :  479,
Flandrau,  C.  E.;  V.  522,  Sibley,  H.  H;  543,  Sitting  Bull.

Sipe-Sipe,  battle  of,  V,  316,  Rondeau  ;  IV,  749,  Pezuela,
Joaquin.

Siphon,  invention,  II,  335.  Ellsworth,  E.  W.

Siphon  tap,  invention  of  the,  I,  88,  Arents.

Siripo,  IV,  187,  Mangore.

Sir  Thomas  Rowe's  Welcome,  island.  II,  520,  Fox,  L.

Sisterhood  of  the  Holy  Child  Jesus.  II,  189,  Doane,  W.  C.

Sisterhoods,  establishment  of,  VI,  495,  Whittingham.

Sisters  of  Charity,  the,  Order  of,  founded,  V,  465,  Seton;
E.A.;  620,  Spalding,  C.

Sisters  of  Mercy,  convents  of,  I,  487,  Byrne,  A.;  IH,  262,
Horan,  M.  A.

Sisters  of  Peace,  the,  II,  38,  Cusack.

Sisters  of  the  Holy  Names.  VI,  281.  Verot.

Sisters  of  the  Visitation,  III,  9,  Gilbert.

Sisters  of  the  West,  the,  VI,  287,  Victor,  M.  V. ;  358,  War-
field.

Sitgreaves,  Sophia  C,  III,  512,  Kemper,  J.

Sitkovius.  Bishop,  IV,  524,  Kitsclimann,  D.

Six  Nations,  superintendent  of  the  affairs  of  the,  IH,  452.

Skalholt  Saga,  the,  V,  160,  Rafn.

Skelton,  Bathurst.  Ill,  423,  Jefferson,  M.

Skelton,  Mrs.  Martha,  III,  416,  423.

Skelton,  Rev.  Mr.,  VI,  531,  Williams,  Roger.

Skenandoah,  pen-name,  IV,  403,  Morgan,  L.  H.

Skene,  Sir  Andrew,  V,  543,  Skene,  P.

Skene  islands  and  bay,  V,  544,  Skene,  A.  M.

Skenesborough.  N.  Y.,  founded,  V,  544,  Skene,  P. ;  captured,
I,  52,  Allen,  Ethan.

Sketch-Book,  Irving's,  IV,  11.

Sketch  Club,  the,  periodical,  H,  509,  Fosdick:  HI,  349,
Ingham,  C.  C.

Sketchley,  John,  TV,  431,  Morton,  John.

Sketwarroes,  II,  687,  Gorges.

Skin,  the,  absorptive  power  of,  IV,  471,  Mussey,  R.  D.

Skinner,  Rev.  Benjamin  R.,  V,  545.  Skinner,  E.

Skinner,  Catherine,  V.  282,  Robinson.  W.  H.

Skinner,  Courtland,  IV,  544,  Nugent,  Sir  G.

Skinner,  Maria,  IV,  544,  Nugent,  Sir  G.

Skolnus,  John,  VI.  16,  Szkolny.

Skraellings,  the,  VI,  102,  Thorfinn  ;  106,  Thorvald.

Skulls,  collections  of,  IV,  432,  Morton,  S.  G. ;  V,  96,  Powell,
W.  B. ;  estimate  of  vital  force  by,  96.

Skye,  island  of,  IV,  101,  McDonald,  F.

S— 1,  pen-name,  III,  91,  Harris,  G.  W.

Slashes,  the,  birthplace  of  Henry  Clay,  illustration,  I,  640.

Slate,  invention  of  a,  III,  .336,  Hyatt,  J.  W.

Slater,  John,  V,  547,  Slater,  S.

Slate-roof  house,  the,  Philadelphia,  illustration,  IV,  715.

Slatersville,  R.  I.,  V,  547,  Slater.

Slave-prisons,  I,  269,  Birney,  W.

Slavery,  in  the  British  colonies,  n,  305.  Edwards,  B. ;  abo-
lition of,  in  the  French  West  Indies,  IV,  293,  Melvil ;  V,
423,  Schoelcher  ;  in  South  America,  III,  403,  Jaray  ;  abo-
lition of,  in  Chili,  346.  Infante  ;  abolition  of,  in  Peru,  I,
554,  Costilla  ;  in  the  West  Indies.  106,  Arthur,  G. ;  plan
for  gradual  abolition  of.  in  Martinique,  II,  567,  Gabaret ;
in  Santo  Domingo,  I,  739.  Cordova,  P.  de  :  abolition  of,
in  Santo  Domingo,  V,  607,  Sonthonax  :  abolition  of,  in
Jamaica,  suppression  of  the  slave-trade,  IV,  164,  Mad-
den ;  in  Cuba,  history  of,  V,  365.  Saco  ;  results  of  aboli-
tion of.  in  Barbadoes,  III,  212.  Hincks,  F. ;  in  the  Bar-
bary  states,  II,  395,  Exmouth  ;  treatment  of  the  question
of,  in  the  U.  S.,  I,  27  ;  in  the  event  of  war.  28.  Adams,  J.
Q.;  130,  Bacon,  L.;  182,  Barry,  W.  T.  S.;  n,  217,  Douglas
F. ;  I,  219,  242,  432,  433,  434,  501,  502,  503  ;  III,  178.  Henson
J. ;  33,  Hale.  J.  P. ;  agitation  in  Cincinnati  and  Washing-
ton, I,  136,  Bailey.  G.\  217:  arguments  in  favor  of,  II
474,  Fitzhugh,  G.\  III,  67,  68,  Hammond.  J.  H;  IV,  25
Lord,  J.  C.  and  N.;  controversy  on,  VI,  221,  Vail.  S.  M.
extension  of,  194,  231  ;  Webster's  attitude.  414  ;  legislation
on,  I,  114.  Atherton,  C.  G.;  Ill,  323,  Hunter.  R.  M.  T.
first  important  speech  against,  in  congress,  II,  175,  Dick
son.  John  ;  compromise  measures  on,  214  ;  admission  of
California,  rendition  of  fugitives,  454.  455 ;  excluded
from  the  northwest  by  the  ordinance  of  1787,  47.  Cutler,
M. ;  72,  Dane,  N. ;  in  the  territories,  question  of,  VI,  30  ;
party  of.  in  Illinois,  I,  687,  Coles,  E. ;  II,  487,  Flower.  G.  \
In  the  District  of  Columbia,  publications  on.  I,  430  ;
Georgia  "platform  of  1850,"  m,  426,  Jenkins,  C.  J.:  con-
tests, I,  403,  Brown,  B.  G.;  404-407  ;  bills  for  abolishing,


96,  Arnold,  I.  N. ;  plans  for  gradual  emancipation.  267  ;
persecution  of  opponents  of,  268  ;  272,  Blackburn,  W.  J. ;
641-644  :  abolition  of,  II,  285,  Dyer,  C.  V. ;  measure  for
gradual  abolition  in  Virginia,  fugitive  law,  421,  Faulk-
ner ;  abolition  of,  in  Missouri,  482,  Fletcher.  T.  C. ;  me-
morial to  congress  for  abolition  of  (1790),  533  ;  constitu-
tional right  to  abolish,  III,  174 ;  abolition  of.  in  Rhode
Island,  2T)8,  Hopkins,  S. ;  importation  of  slaves  prohibited
there,  259,  Hopkins  ;  abolition  of.  in  New  York,  196,  Hicks,
E.;  411,  Jay,  P.  A.;  413,  Jay,  W.  ;  abolition  in  District
of  Columbia,  716 ;  repeal  of  Missouri  compromise,
716  ;  emancipation  proclamation,  719,  720  ;  abolition,  in
New  Jersey  recommended,  743,  Livingston,  William  ;
the  Lemmon  case,  I,  99,  Arthur ;  apprentice  law  used,
813,  Bond,  H.  L.\  imprisonment  of  free  negroes  in  S.  C,
IH,  220,  Hoar,  S.:  Virginia  law  on  freeing  slaves,  416  ;
proposed  prohibition  of  (1785),  542,  King,  R. ;  plan  for  the
extinction  of,  543  ;  case  of  the  child  "  Med,"  IV,  27,  Lor-
ing,  E.  G.\  important  decision  regarding,  V,  435,  Scott,
Dred  ;  the  compromise  measures,  9  ;  policy  of  the  Pierce
administration,  10  ;  in  the  territories,  54  ;  prediction  con-
cerning, by  Lincoln,  in.  716  ;  Lincoln's  second  inaugural
on,  723-724  ;  mob  violence  against  abolitionists,  II,  514,
Foster,  S.  S.  and  A.K.:  IV,  54,  Lundy,  B. ;  unpopularity  of
the  anti-slavery  movement  at  Harvard.  II,  491,  Follen  ;
opposition  to,  I,  72,  Andrew,  J.  A. :  76,  Andrews,  S.  P. ;
864,  Beicley,  A.;  586  ;  639,  Clay,  C.  M.;  11,64,  Dana  ;  610.
611,  Garrison  ;  III,  411,  Jay,  P.  A.  and  W. ;  case  of  Gil-
bert Horton,  411,  412;  controversies,  412;  IV,  190-191,
Mann,  H.;  opposition  to,  in  the  south,  111,  McDowell.
James ;  the  higher  law,  V,  471  ;  plan  for  emancipation
(1825),  705,  Stone,  W.  L.\  opposition  to,  746-748  ;  VI,  29 ;
311,  Wade,  B.  F.;  confiscation  act  of  congress  (1861),  III,
719  ;  Fremont's  proclamation,  719 ;  resolution  to  effect
gradual  abolition.  719  ;  Hunter's  proclamation,  719  ;  Lin-
coln's emancipation  proclamation,  719,  720 ;  constitu-
tional amendment,  720

Slaves,  decisions  regarding,  I.  99,  Arthur ;  129,  Backus,  F.
T.:  right  of,  to  trial  by  jury,  241  ;  cases  involving  the
rights  of,  150,  Baldwin,  R.  S. ;  introduction  of,  into  Louisi-
ana, 259,  Bienville  ',  emancipation  of,  in  Venezuela,  304  ;
sentiments  of,  II,  97,  Davis,  H.  W. ;  order  declaring  them
free,  issued  and  annulled,  III,  321,  Hunter,  D.;  counting
of,  as  population,  IV,  166,  168  :  emancipation  of,  by  their
owners.  319,  Mifflin,  W.;  law  admitting,  in  Virginia,  320  ;
fugitive,  655  ;  attempt  to  forbid  importation  to  Delaware,
V,  299,  Rodney,  C. ;  of  Indian  tribes,  385,  Sanborn  ;  fugi-
tive, 451,  Sedgwick,  T.\  test  case  of  a,  469.  Seirall,  Jona-
than ;  first  damages  for  aiding  fugitive,  550,  Sloane,  R.
R.;  conspiracy  for  a  rising  of,  687.  Stewart,  V.  A.;  de-
cisions regarding  fugitive,  VI,  30  ;  the  Pierce-Butler  sale
of,  99,  Thomson,  M. :  emancipation  of,  in  New  York,  130,
Tompkins  ;  law  freeing  the,  in  French  colonies,  264,  Vau-
blanc  ;  insurrection  of,  283-284,  Vesey,  D. ;  attempt  of.  to
escape,  328.  Walker,  Jonathan  ;  compensated  emancipa-
tion, 466,  White,  A.  S. ;  I,  225,  Bell,  C.  H. ;  II,  3,  Craven,
T.  A.  M.

Slave-trade,  the,  capture  of  ships,  I,  521,  Canot ;  decision
in  regard  to  the,  616,  Cinque  ;  III,  120,  Hawkins,  Sir  J.;
first,  in  New  England,  IV,  703,  Pierce,  W. ;  right  to  seize
ships,  V,  694,  Stockton,  R.  F.\  the  suppression  of,  VI,
413  ;  V,  710,  Story,  J. ;  right  to  stop  suspected  ships,  746.

Sledge-journey,  longest,  on  record,  V,  433,  Schwa  tka.

Sleeping-cars,  invention  of,  V,  134,  Pullman,  G.  M. ;  VI.  315.
Wagner,  Webster.

Sleepy  Hollow.  IV.  758,  Philipxe.

Slender,  Robert.  II,  549,  Freneau..

Slenker,  Isaac,  V,  549,  Slenker,  E.  D.

Slick,  Samuel,  pen-name,  III,  36,  Haliburton.

Slicking  clubs,  V,  663,  Stephens.

Slidell,  Alexander,  IV,  132,  Mackenzie,  A.  S.

Slim  Buttes,  engagement  at,  II,  15,  Crook.

Slingmeyer,  Ernest,  pupil  of,  V,  639.  Spread.

Sloane.  Emily,  VI.  242.  Vanderbilt,  W.  H.

Slocumb,  Joseph,  V,  552,  Slocumb.  E.

Slodtz,  Michael  Angelo,  III,  270,  Houdon.

Slop.  Dr.  Giuseppe,  IV,  337.  Min  to.

Slosson,  Annie  T.,  VI,  167,  Trumbull.  G.

S.  M.  correspondence,  the,  VI,  649,  Young,  J.  R.

Small,  Dr.  W.,  Ill,  415.  Jefferson,  T.

Smalley,  John.  IV,  184,  Maltby,  I.

Small-pox,  inoculation  for,  I,  342,  Boylston,  Z. ;  treatment
of,  IV,  57,  Luzenberg.

Smallwood,  Col.  W.,  IV,  370,  Montgomery,  Joseph.

Smarskite,  V,  578,  Smith,  J.  L.

Smartweed,  Parmenus,  pen-name.  VI,  8,  Sweet,  H.  de  L.

Smedes,  Lyell,  V,  554.  Smedes.  S.  D.

Smelting,  improvements  in.  III.  343,  lies.  M.  W.

Smith,  Adam,  quoted,  II,  217,  Douglass,  W.

Smith,  Albert,  V,  579,  Smith.  M.  L.  R.

Smith,  Rev.  Augustine,  II,  580,  Gallitzin.

Smith.  Austin,  V,  582,  Smith,  S.

Smith.  Bell,  pen-name,  rV,  766,  Piatt,  L.  K.

Smith.  Benjamin.  V.  684,  Smith.  G.

Smith.  Caroline  A.,  n,  160,  De  Wint.

Smith.  Rev.  Cornelius  B.,  IV,  127,  Mackay-Smith  ;  V,  582,
Smith.  Perry.

Smith,  Rev.  Daniel,  V,  560,  Smith,  T.  M.

Smith,  Gen.  David,  V,  578,  Smith,  Junius.


SMITH


SOUTH  CAROLINA


791


Smith,  Elias,  V,  589.  Smith,  Sidney.

Smith,  Elisha,  III,  256,  Hopkins,  L.

Smith,  Elizabeth  C.,  VI,  542,  Willson,  F.

Smith,  Elnathan,  V,  576,  Smith,  J.  L.

Smith,  Judge  Fayette,  V,  579,  Smith,  M.  P.  W.

Smith,  George,  V,  590,  Smith,  T.  K.

Smith,  Rev.  Henry,  V,  559,  Smith,  C.  M.

Smith,  Henry  Welles,  II,  269,  Durant,  H.  T.

Smith,  H.  Farnam,  III,  34,  Hale,  G.  S.

Smith,  Hyrum,  V,  576,  Smith,  Joseph.

Smith,  James  and  Marianna,  V,  230,  Rhett.  R.  B.

Smith,  Rev.  Dr.  J.  B.,  IV,  120,  McGready.

Smith,  J.  Hadley,  V,  579,  Smith,  L.  D.

Smith,  John,  V,  587,  Smith,  Samuel.

Smith,  John  R.,  V,  333,  Rothermel.

Smith.  Joseph,  incident  at  trial  of,  n,  213,  Douglas,  S.  A.

Smith,  Laura  S.,  Ill,  302,  Hughes,  C.

Smith,  Lenox,  III,  236,  Holley.  A.  L.

Smith,  Rev.  Manasseh.  V,  588,  Smith,  S.  E.

Smith,  Margaret,  VI,  52,  55.

Smith.  Martha,  III,  155,  Heathcote.

Smith,  Mary  Anne,  ease  of.  IV,  262,  Mattison.

Smith,  Dr.  Matson,  V,  577.  Smith,  J.  M.

Smith,  Capt.  Matthew,  III,  176,  Henry,  J.  J.

Smith,  Owin,  III,  734,  Linton.

Smith,  Peter  and  Matthew,  III,  225,  Hoe,  R.

Smith,  Rev.  Ralph,  VI.  531,  Williams,  Roger.

Smith,  Col.  Robert,  V,  583,  Smith,  P.  F.

Smith,  Samuel,  V,  574,  Smith.  J.  B.

Smith,  Dr.  Samuel  Blair,  V,  585,  Smith,  C.  F.

Smith,  Samuel  Harrison,  II.  575,  Oales.  Joseph.

Smith,  Samuel  Jenks,  V,  588,  Smith,  Sarah.

Smith,  Simeon  H.,  V,  563,  Smith,  Erminnie  A.

Smith,  Sol,  IV,  51,  Ludlow,  N.  M.

Smith,  Sydney,  I,  379,  Bristed  ;  V,  474,  Seybert ;  quoted,  II,
424,  Fearon.

Smith,  Sir  T.,  HI,  296,  Hudson,  H.

Smith,  Thomas,  V,  578,  Smith,  Josiah  ;  591,  Smith,  W.

Smith,  Rev.  William.  1, 11,  Adams,  Abigail.

Smith,  W.  H.,  pseudonym,  V,  452,  Sedley,  W.  H.

Smith,  Dr.  W.  P.,  Ill,  267,  Hosack.  D.

Smith  Charities,  the,  V,  582,  Smith,  O.

Smith  college  and  preparatory  school,  V,  582,  Smith,  S.;
V,  453,  Seelye,  L.  C.

Smithell's  Hall,  HI,  129.

Smithfield,  Va.,  St.  Luke's  church  at,  illustration,  V,  99.

Smithson,  Sir  Hugh,  V,  597,  Smithson,  J.

Smithsonian  institution,  the,  HI,  173,  Henry,  J.;  gift  to,
III,  80,  Hare,  R. :  bill  to  organize,  IV,  615,  Owen,  R.  D. ;
legacy  for,  V,  350,  Rush,  R. ;  illustration,  V,  598  ;  medi-
cal library  and  lectures  of,  VI,  132,  Toner.

Smithsonite,  V,  598,  Smithson.

Smollett,  Tobias,  correspondence  with,  V,  587,  Smith,  R. ;
supposed  original  of  a  character  of,  V,  692,  Stobo  ;  de-
scribes the  Cartagena  expedition,  VI,  280,  Vernon,  E.

Smoutius.  Rev.  Adrian,  IV,  313,  Michaelius.

Smucker,  Samuel  M.,  V,  422,  Schmucker,  S.  M.

Smuggling,  I,  229,  Bellomont. See  Writs  of  assistance.

Smyrna,  first  paper  in,  I.  370,  Brewer,  J.

Smyth,  Mrs.  C.  G-.  P..  II.  289,  Earle,  J.

Smyth,  Piazzi,  V,  15,  Pierrepont,  W.  C;  VI,  141,  Totten,
C.  A.  L.

Smythe,  Dr.  J.  D.  F.,  VI,  420,  Weedon.

Smythe,  Thomas,  II.  57.  Dale,  Sir  T.

Snag-boat,  invention  of  a,  V,  517,  Shreve,  H.  M.

Snake  Creek  Gap,  IV,  158  ;  battle  at,  VI,  7,  Sweeny.

Snell,  Sarah,  I,  422.  Bryant,  W.  C.

Snelling,  Dr.  Frederick  G.,  TV.  743,  Peters,  J.  C.

Snethen,  Barak,  V,  601,  Snethen,  P.

Snodgrass,  Rev.  Benjamin,  V,  602,  Snodgrass,  W.  D.

Snorre,  VI.  102,  Thorfinn.

Snow,  Erastus,  V,  103,  Pratt,  O.

Snow,  Prince,  V,  602,  Snow,  C.  H.

Snow  campaign,  the,  m,  68.  Hammond,  L.  R.

Snowden,  Nathaniel  F.  R.,  V,  602.  Snowden,  J.  R.

Snowden,  Rev.  Nathaniel  R.,  V,  602,  Snowden,  J.  R.

Snow  Hill,  Md.,  IV,  179,  Makemie.

Snowhill,  Pa.,  settlement  at,  I,  223,  Beissel.

Snow  island,  engagement  at,  II,  222.  Doyle,  Sir  J.

Snow-plough,  inventor  of  a,  IV,  248,  Mason,  M.  W.

Snuff-boxes,  collection  of,  I,  50,  Allan,  J.  ;  Jackson's.  459,
Burnett,  W.  B.  ;  II.  284,  Dyckman  ;  HI,  45,  Hall,  W.  P.

Snyder,  Anthony,  V,  603,  Snyder,  S.

Socabaya,  battle  of  HI,  342,  Iguain  ;  V,  376,  Salaverry.

Socialists,  the,  V,  632,  Spies.

Social  Palace,  the,  I,  380,  Bristol,  A.  C.

Social  Science  Review,  the,  V,  668,  Sterne.

Society  St.  Jean-Baptiste,  II,  522,  Franchere.

Society  for  constitutional  information,  I,  544,  Cartwright,
John.

Society  for  diffusion  of  physiological  knowledge,  V,  327,
Ross.  A.  M.

Society  for  political  inquiries,  the,  V.  189.  Rawle.  W.

Society  for  promoting  Christian  knowledge,  I,  362,  Bray.

Society  for  propagating  the  gospel,  Moravian,  II,  379,  Ett-
wein.

Society  of  death,  the,  I,  177.

Society  of  ethical  culture,  founded.  I.  33,  Adler,  F. .

Society  of  friends  of  the  blacks,  HI,  405,  Jarric.


Society  of  naturalists  of  New  Granada,  VI,  217,  Uricochea.

Society  of  St.  George,  bequest  to.  V,  21,  Pilmore.

Society  of  the  Cap  Nord.  HI,  300,  Huet ;  IV,  309,  Mesnard.

Society  of  the  holy  family.  I,  593,  Chaumonot.

Soconusco,  in,  368 ;  annexation  of,  to  Mexico,  890,  Leon,
Antonio.

Socorini  Indians,  the,  I,  490,  Cabeza.

Soda,  machine  for  hyposulphite  of,  VI,  487,  Whit  more.

Sodium  nitrate  of  Tarapaca,  the,  V,  266,  Rivero.

Soft-shell  Democrats,  VI,  115.

Soires  Canadiennes,  the,  VI,  18,  Tache,  J.  C.

Solander,  Dr.,  I,  715.

Solano,  Francisco,  VI,  275,  Velloso.

Solar  compass,  the,  I,  471,  Burt,  W.  A.

Solar  corona,  the,  HI,  83,  Harkness,  W. ;  author  of  theory
of,  V,  127,  Proctor.  R.  A.

Soldier  of  the  Andes,  the,  II,  374,  Espinosa,  J.

Soldier  parson,  the,  I,  497,  Caldwell,  James.

Soldiers,  colony  of  veterans,  VI,  651,  Young,  W.  H.  H.  H.;
gifts  to  wives  of,  V,  267,  Rives,  J.  C.

Soldiers''  and  sailors'  home,  gift  to,  VI,  347,  Ward,  H.

Soldier's  Rest,  the,  Morgan"s  home,  IV,  396.

Soledade,  Euzebisda,  IV.  868,  Mattos,  E.

Solemn  league  and  covenant,  proclamation  concerning,  H,
570,  Gage  ;  the,  VI,  247,  Vane.

Solera,  Marquis  of,  I,  232,  Be.navides.

Sole  sewing-machine,  patent  on  a,  V,  408,  Sawyer,  S.

Solferino,  battle  of,  III,  497,  Kearny,  P.

Solid  south,  the,  the  phrase  first  used,  IV,  435,  Mosby.

Solitas,  first  prelate  to  receive,  I,  232,  Benavente.

Solms,  Countess  de,  U,  75,  Daniel,  J.  M.

Solomon  islands,  the,  discovery  of,  IV,  295,  Mendana  ;  498,
Neuville,  J.  N.

Sombrerete,  mines  of,  HI,  338,  Iban-a,  F.  de.

Sombrero,  island  of,  HI,  486,  Julien,  A.  A.

Somerby,  Anthony,  V,  605,  Somerby,  H.  G.

Somers,  Sir  George,  V,  571.

Somers,  Rosalie,  stage-name,  V.  666,  Stephens,  H.  M.

Somers,  the  brig,  mutiny  on,  IV,  132,  Mackenzie,  Alexan-
der S. ;  V,  746 ;  loss  of,  V,  459,  Semmes,  Raphael ;  518,
Shubrick,  Thomas  B.

Somerset,  far.,  engagement  at,  H,  654.  Gillmore.

Somerset,  N.  J.,  engagement  at,  U,  174.  Dickinson,  P.

Somerset  case,  the,  IV,  27,  Loring,  E.  G.

Somerville,  Mary.  IV,  403,  Morgan,  M.  S.  ,

Somondoco,  emerald-mines  of,  VI,  226,  Valanzuela,  P.  F.

Sonntag,  W.  L.,  V,  606,  Sonntag,  G.

Sonora,  republic  proclaimed  in,  I,  329,  Boulbon  ;  proposal
to  colonize,  HI,  20,  Gwin  ;  V,  612,  Soule,  P.;  VI,  297,  Vil-
leraye  ;  expedition  to  conquer,  331,  Walker,  W.

Sons  of  Liberty,  the,  I.  197,  Bayard,  J.;  411,  Brown,  T.  S.;
588,  Chase,  S.;  HI,  273,  Houston,  J.;  349,  Inglis,  C;  IV,
432,  Morton,  O.  P. ;  V,  140  ;  437,  Scott,  J.  M.

Sons  of  the  Revolution,  HI,  272,  Houghton,  G.  W.  W.

Sorcery,  U,  92,  Ddvila,  N.

Sorel  destruction  of  spars  at,  I,  4,  Abbot,  Joel.

Sorghum-sugar,  I,  691,  Collier.  P.

Sorosis,  II,  14,  Croly,  J.  C. ;  VI,  503,  Wilbour,  C.  B.

Sosa,  Lope  de,  II,  374,  Espinosa,  G.

Sotheran,  Henry.  V,  607,  Sotheran,  C.

Sothonac,  Gen.,  HI,  650,  Leborgne.

Soudan,  services  of  Canadians  in,  II,  141,  Denison,  F.  C.

Soule,  George,  V,  612,  Soule,  R.

SoulS,  Rev.  H.  B..  V,  610,  Soule,  C.  A.

Soule,  Nelvil,  V,  611.

Sound  dues,  treaty  concerning,  I,  215,  Bedinger,  H.

Sounding-machine,  a  deep-sea,  I.  301,  Bogardus,  J.

Sound-wave,  theory  of,  IV,  444,  Mott,  H.  A.

Sourie,  Jacques,  I,  124,  Azevedo,  I.

Sousa,  Alfonso  and  Thome,  II,  671,  Goes  ;  P7,  544,  Nunes.

South  America,  alleged  discovery  of.  in  the  14th  century,

IV,  481,  Navailles  :  explorations  in,  I,  89,  Arias,  F.  G. ;  495,
Caldas,  F.\  549,  Casal :  739,  Coreal ;  U.  9,  Crevanx  ;  164,
165  ;  378,  Estrada  ;  426,  Federmann  ;  446,  Feuillet ;  515,
Foucher  ;  treatment  of  Indians  of,  ibid. :  516,  Fouville  ;
III,  342,  Ihering;  504,  Keller,  C.  A.  ;  560,  Knapp,  M.;
582,  Lacerda  ;  583,  Lacordaire  ;  IV,  477.  Narborough  ;
519,  Niebuhr  ;  523-524,  Nino  ;  529,  Nodal ;  541,  Nova  ;
VI,  15,  Sylvie  ;  283,  Verschoor :  first  Spanish  governor
of,  rv,  697,  Pedrarias ;  French  colony  in  southern,  II,
373,  Espeleta  ;  grant  in,  HI,  300,  Huet ;  early  maps  of,
II,  405,  Falkner  ;  flora  of,  196,  Dombey  ;  III,  219,  HJorn  ;
scientific  exploration  of,  IV,  393,  Moreno,  F.  ;  583.  Or-
bigny  ;  733,  Perrotet ;  VI,  688  :  Humboldt ;  discovery  of
fossils  in.  677,  Darwin  ;  great  bibliography  of  works  on,

V,  25,  Pinelo  ;  history  of  the  conquest  of,  605,  Solis ;
revolutions  in,  I,  303,  Bolivar  ;  war  for  independence  in,
303-307,  Bolivar  ;  V,  739,  Sucre,  A.  J.  ;  392.  San  Martin,
J.  de  ;  395,  Santa  Cruz,  A.;  VI.  1&5.  Torices  ;  138,  Torre-
Tagle  ;  Indian  dialects  of,  HI,  190,  Hervas ;  origin  of
races  of,  190.

Southampton  insurrection,  the,  VI.  187,  Turner,  N.

Southard,  Abraham.  V,  613,  Southard.

SouthborouKh,  free  library  of.  11.  423.  Fay,  F.  B.

South  Carolina,  colonization  of,  VI,  640.  Yea  mans  ;  French
attack  on  (1706),  silk-industry  in.  III,  446,  Johnson,  Sir  N. ;
struggle  between  proprietors  and  commons,  447,  John-
son, Robert ;  proprietary  government  thrown  off,  church
of  England  established  in,  iy,  316,  Middleton,  E. ;  grants


792


SOUTH  CAROLINA


SQUIBB


in,  316,  Middleton,  E. ;  expedition  against  St.  Augustine
(1702),  first  paper  money,  Indian  expeditions,  381,  Moore,
James  ;  the  Revolutionary  war  in,  207-209,  Marion  ;  V,
357-358  ;  proposition  of  neutrality,  357,  Rutledge  ;  funds
for  defence  of,  IV,  187,  Manigault ;  statue  of,  I,  401,
Brown,  H.  K. ;  estates  in,  393,  Broughton,  T. ;  nullifica-
tion ordinance  passed  and  repealed  in,  III,  144,  Hayne,
R.  Y.;  V,  594,  Smith,  W. ;  VI, 411;  contested  elections  in,

I,  482,  Butler,  M.  C.\  564,  Chamberlain,  D.  H.;  Ill,  70,
Hampton  ;  137,  138  :  boundary  of,  274,  Houston,  J.  ;  275,
Houstoun  ;  council  of  safety  iu,  301,  Huger,  J.  ;  ordi-
nance of  secession,  350,  Inglis,  J.  A.;  "neutral  ground"
in,  V,  243,  Richardson,  R.  ;  alleged  fraudulent  issue  of
bonds,  439,  Scott,  R.  K. ;  first  cotton-factory  in,  489,  Slie-
cut ;  literary  and  philosophical  society  of,  489  ;  discov-
ery of  phosphates  in,  494,  Shepard,  C.  U.

South  Carolina,  the  frigate,  II,  654,  Gillon.

South  Carolina  college,  V,  586,  Smith,  Robert.

Southern  historical  society,  the,  IV,  266,  Maury,  D.  H.

Southern  Magazine,  the,  I,  512,  Campbell,  B.

Southern  Matron,  a,  signature,  II,  387.

Southern  Presbyterian  Review,  the,  IV,  637,  Palmer,  B.  M.

Southern  Quarterly  Review,  the,  II,  119,  De  Bow  ;  VI,  465,

Whitaker,  D.  K.
Southern  Review,  the,  III,  678,  Legare  :  II.  332,  Elliott,  S.
Southern  Rights  convention  (1851),  IV,  593,  Orr,  J.  L.
Southern  states,  plan  for  military  occupation  of  the,  I,  551,

Casey  ;  expulsion  of  senators  from  the,  625,  Clark,  D.  ;

election  troubles  in.  Ill,  138,  139,  140,  142,  143.
Southey,  Robert,  quoted,  I,  388,  Brooks,  M.  G. :  423  ;  cited,

II,  282,  Dwight,  Timothy  ;  540,  Freeman,  James  ;  quoted,
707,  Grant,  Anne  ;  IV,  493,  494,  Nenguiru.

South  Georgia,  island  of,  III,  620,  Laroche,  A.  de.

South  Manchester,  Conn.,  I,  598,  Cheney,  W.

South  Mountain,  battle  of,  I,  463  ;  IU,  134  ;  250  ;  IV,  83.

Southold.  L.  I.,  in,  193,  Hewlett,  R.

South  Pole,  land  at  the,  IV.  498,  Neuville,  P.  B.

South  Side  railroad,  expedition  against,  m,  73.

Southwark,  Pa.,  riots  in,  V,  40.  Pleasonton,  A.  J.

Southwestern  republic,  conspiracy  to  found  a,  VI,  511,
Wilkinson.

Southwick,  Alfred.  V,  614,  Sotithwick,  S.

Southworth,  Ed\tiard,  V,  614,  Southworth,  C.

Southworth,  Frederick  H..  V,  614,  Southworth,  E.  D.  E.  N.

Sovereignty,  doctrine  of  the  divine,  II,  309,  Edwards,  J.

Sower.  C.,  house  of,  illustration,  V,  616.

Soyer,  I,  584,  Chase,  H.

Spaeth,  Rev.  Adolph,  m,  575.  Krauth.

Spaight,  Capt.  William,  V,  617,  Spaight,  R.  D.

Spain,  French  intentions  toward,  in  America,  1, 18  ;  treaties
with,  26, 103  ;  negotiations  with,  335,  Bowdoin,  J. ;  Ameri-
can claims  against.  434  ;  and  Portugal,  their  possessions
in  America,  council  to  define,  II,  674,  Gomez,  E. ;  pro-
posed commercial  treaty  with,  512,  Foster,  John  Wat-
son ;  war  against,  224,  Drake,  Sir  F. ;  Carlist  war  in,
offer  of  the  crown  of,  373,  Espartero  ;  tribute  to,  from
the  New  World,  374,  Espinosa,  G. ;  expected  subsidy  from,
HI,  409  ;  threatened  war  with,  422  ;  writers  of,  on  Ameri-
can Indians,  369,  Iturri ;  attempts  of,  on  the  Mississippi
valley,  IV,  118,  McGillivray  ;  revolutionary  movement
in  (1814),  335,  Mina  :  405,  Morillo  ;  constitution  of  1812,
560,  CGaban  ;  relations  of  U.  S.  with,  582,  Onis  ;  release
of  claim  on  Louisiana,  V,  23,  Pinckney,  C. ;  changes  of
government  in,  464,  Serrano  ;  on  the  Mississippi,  492,
Shelby  ;  treaty  with,  as  to  Mississippi  valley,  516,  Short,
W. ;  archives  at  Samancas,  the,  633,  Spire  ;  dissolution
of  the  cortes  (1823),  VI,  259,  Varela,  F. ;  intrigues  of,  to
divide  the  U.  S.,  511,  Wilkinson.

Spaniards,  the  treatment  of  Indians  by,  V.  464,  Servien  ;
604,  Solano.

Spanish  America,  settlements  in,  II,  359.  Enriquez  ;  for-
eigners excluded  from,  missionary  hidden  in  a  hogshead,
book  describing,  its  effect  in  England,  569,  Gage,  T. ;  im-
provements in,  V,  165,  Ramirez,  A.

Spanish  conspiracy,  the,  IV,  225,  Marshall,  J.  M.\  226,
Marshall,  H.

Spanish  fort,  capture  of,  II,  621,  Geddes,  J.  L.\  641,  Gibson,
R.  L. ;  III.  293,  Hubbard,  L.  F.

Spanish  history,  V.  110-111.

Spanish  language,  the,  first  American  journal  in,  II,  706,
Granja.

Spanish  rule  in  America,  lost  history  of  the,  IV,  312,
Meyer,  B.

Sparhawk,  Col.  Nathaniel,  IV,  722,  Pepperrell.

Sparhawk,  Dr.  Thomas,  V,  621.  Sparhawk,  F.  C.

Sparkman,  James  D.,  V,  621,  Sparkman,  J.  T.

Sparrow,  Thomas,  III,  134.

Sparrowgrass  papers,  the,  I,  762,  Cozzens.

Spatula,  painting  with  the,  I.  230.  Bellows,  A.  F.

Spaulding,  Edward,  V,  623,  Spaulding,  E.  G.

Speaker  of  the  house,  contest  for,  I,  158,  Banks,  N.  P.

Speak  Gently,  controversy  over  the  authorship  of  the
poem,  1, 192.  Bates.  D.

Specie  circular,  the,  II,  394,  Ewing,  T. :  III,  .383.

Specie  payment,  suspension  and  resumption  of,  n,  722 ;
in,  139,  140  ;  V,  507.

Spectra,  researches  on,  IV,  430,  Morton,  H.

Spectroscope,  invention  of  an  automatic,  VI,  646,  Young,
Charles  A.


Spectrum,  the  solar,  V,  338,  Rowland  ;  VI,  646.  Young,
Charles  A.

Spectrum  analysis,  H,  227,  Draper,  J.  W. ;  228.  Draper,  H. ;
V,  356-&57,  Rutherfurd,  L.  M.\  338,  Rowland,  H.  A.

Speech,  method  of  recording,  I,  225,  Bell,  A.  G.

Speech,  visible,  I,  22,  Bell,  A.  M.

Spelling  reform,  U,  768,  Grimke,  T.  S.

Spelter,  invention  of  process  for,  VI,  445,  Wetherill.

Spence,  Dr.,  III.  550,  Kinnersley.

Spence,  Harriet,  IV,  43,  Lowell,  C;  V,  627,  Spence,  R.  T.

Spence,  Keith,  V,  627,  Spence,  R.  T.

Spencer,  Adelia  C.,  II,  727,  Graves,  A.  C.

Spencer,  Caleb,  V,  630,  Spencer,  P.  R.

Spencer,  Edward.  1, 199.  Bayard,  T.  F. ;  575,  Chanfrau.

Spencer,  Elizabeth,  I,  551.  Cass,  L.

Spencer,  George  Trevor,  V,  629,  Spencer,  A.  G.

Spencer,  Henry  C,  V,  630,  Spencer,  S.  A.

Spencer,  Herbert,  sale  of  his  works  in  America,  VI,  643,
Youmans,  E.  L.

Spencer,  James  M.,  V,  629,  Spencer.  C.  P.

Spencer,  Capt.  Spier,  VI,  123,  Tipton,  J.

Spencer,  William,  Thomas,  and  Jared,  V,  627,  Spencer,
Asa.

Spencer,  William  Robert,  V,  629,  Spencer,  A.  G.

Spencer  Grange,  III,  685,  Le  Moine.

Spener,  Philip  Jacob,  ffl,  509,  Kelpius.

Spenser,  Edmund,  V,  163.

Spice  islands,  expedition  to,  III.  581,  Labezares.

Spiders,  discovery  concerning,  VI,  506,  Wilder,  B.  G.

Spiegel  iron,  manufacture  of,  II,  155,  Detmold.

Spies,  during  the  Revolution.  IV,  377,  Moody,  James ;
treatment  of,  V,  141.

Spikes,  machines  for  making,  I,  450,  Burden ;  VI,  437,
Wernwag  ;  622,  Wright,  E.

Spilberg,  Admiral  George,  commands  the  Dutch  fleet  in
the  Pacific,  H,  361  ;  IV,  299,  Mendoza.

Spinal  disease,  method  of  treating,  III,  657.  Lee,  B.

Spingler  institute,  the,  I.  6.  Abbott,  G.  D.

Spinner,  John  Peter,  V,  632,  Spinner,  F.  E.

Spinning-machines,  invention  of,  II,  72.  Danforth,  C;  for
flax,  563;  first,  in  U.  S..  IV,  592,  Orr,  H.;  ring,  for  wool,
V,  515,  Shoemaker,  G.  W.

Spire,  Georges  de,  II,  426,  Federmann.

Spirit-level,  invention  of  a.  III,  751,  Locke,  J.

Spirit  rappings,  11.  520,  Fox,  M.

Spirit-rations,  abolition  of.  in  the  navy,  in.  34,  Hale,  J.  P.

Spiritualism,  II,  93,  Davis,  A.  J. ;  304.  Edmonds,  J.  W.;  HI,
245,  Home ;  V,  274,  Roberts,  J.  M.

Spiritualists,  community  of,  in,  94,  Harris,  T.  L.;  572,
Oliphant,  L.

Spitfire,  the,  I,  419,  Bruce,  H.

Spithead,  mutiny  at,  HI,  280,  Howe,  R.

Spix,  Prof.,  I,  34.

Spofford,  Richard  S.,  V,  634,  Spofford,  H.  P.

Spohr,  Louis,  I,  445,  Bull,  O.  B.;  HI,  206,  Hill,  U.  C;  266,
Horsley;  IV,  435,  Mosenthal.

Spoils  system,  the,  I.  27 ;  Calhoun  on.  I,  500 ;  II,  631 :  Jef-
ferson's letter  on.  II,  681,  Goodrich,  E. ;  origin  of,  and  of
the  phrase,  III,  380.

Sponge-gold,  method  of  manufacture  of,  HI,  602,  Lamm.

Spontini,  M.,  II,  372,  Esmenard.

Spooling-machine,  invention  of  a,  III,  564,  Knoivles,  L.  J.

Spooner,  Judge  Philip  L.,  V,  634,  Spooner,  J.  C.

Spot  resolutions,  the,  V,  53.

Spotted  fever,  epidemics  of,  IV,  336.  Miner,  T. ;  533,  North .  E.

Spottsylvania,  I.  70,  Anderson,  R.  H:  battle  of.  I,  166,
Barlow,  F.C.;  H,  713,  714  ;  HI,  73  ;  722 ;  V,  488 ;  " bloody
angle  "  at,  II,  308,  Edwards,  O.

Sprague,  Benjamin,  V,  638.  Sprague,  W.  B.

Sprague,  Samuel,  V,  637.  Sprage,  C.

Sprigg,  Sophie,  IV,  301,  Mercer,  J.  F.

Spring,  elliptic,  for  loads,  inventor  of,  V,  623,  Spaulding,  E.

Spring,  Marcus,  IV,  637,  Palmer,  Edward.

Spring  balance,  invention  of  the,  II,  117,  Dearborn,  B.

Springer,  Charles,  V,  640,  Springer,  R.  R.

Springer.  Nathaniel.  I,  250,  Berry,  N.  S.

Springett,  Sir  W.,  IV,  713.

Springettsbury  Manor,  IV.  716,  Penn,  Springett.

Springfield,  111.,  II,  359,  Enos,  P.  P.;  capital  removed  to,
III,  716:  Lincoln's  home  at,  illustration,  717;  his  tomb,  726.

Springfield,  Iowa,  I,  406.

Springfield,  Mass.,  trading-house  at,  in,  295,  Hudde  ;  set-
tlement of,  sack  of.  IV,  403,  Morgan,  M.;  attack  on  the
arsenal  at,  V,  488,  Shays ;  founded  and  named,  144,  Pyn-
chon  ;  250th  anniversary  of,  145  ;  burning  of,  145,  Pyn-
chon,  John  ;  view  of  the  Old  Fort,  145  ;  Thompson  riots
in,  532,  Simmons,  G.  F. ;  library,  IV,  305,  Merriam.

Springfield,  N.  J.,  defence  of,  I,  497,  Caldwell,  James  ;  H,
751.752.

Spring  Green,  R.  I.,  II.  525.  Francis,  J.  B.

Spring  Hill  college,  Ala.,  V,  82,  Portier.

Spring  hooks,  inventor  of,  V,  561,  Smith,  D.  M.

Spurzheim,  I.  700,  Combe.

Spy,  the,  original  of  a  character  in,  II,  18,  Crosby,  E.

Spy  in  Washington,  the,  pen-name,  II,  105,  Davis,  M.  L.

Squanto.  V,  382,  Samoset.

Squatter  Sovereignty,  I,  434 ;  484,  Butts  ;  in,  716,  717  ;  cele-
brated debate,  716-717.

Squibb,  Dr.  Edward  R.,  V,  573,  Smith,  J.  L.


SQUIBOB


STEVENS


793


Squibob  papers,  the,  II,  148,  Derby,  G.  H.

Stace,  Gen.  William,  VI,  540.

Stackpole,  Joseph  L.,  IV,  438,  Motley.

Stadacone,  I,  543,  Cartier,  J.

Stafford,  Lady,  I,  538,  Carroll,  C. ;  558.  Caton,  R.

Stainville,  Choiseul,  I,  328,  Bougainville.

Staked  Plains,  V,  68,  Pope,  John  ;  Indian  fight  on  the,  IV,
322,  Miles,  N.  A.

Stalcop,  John,  VI,  208,  Unander.

Stalleart,  M.,  111,15,  Gutters.

Stalwart  Republicans,  the,  V,  281,  Robertson,  W.  H.

Stamatz,  Camille,  II,  691,  Gottschalk.

Stamford,  Indian  massacre,  III,  331,  Hutchinson,  Anne.

Stamp  act,  the,  I,  16  ;  protest  against,  29  :  opposition  to,
684,  Colden.  C;  IV,  44,  Lowndes,  R.;  II,  529  ;  author  of,
761,  Grenville,  G.;  excitement  about,  III,  173,  Henry, .P.;
347,  Ingersoll,  Jared  :  seizure  of  stamped  paper  in  Vir-
ginia, 664,  Lee,  R.  H. ;  first  court  to  order  unstamped
paper,  IV,  128,  McKean,  T. ;  enforcement  of,  574,  Oliver,
A. ;  VI,  150,  Townsend,  C. ;  resistance  to  the  landing  of

gaper  in  North  Carolina,  309,  Waddell.  H. ;  use  of  bircb-
ark  instead  of  paper,  562,  Winds;  remonstrance  against,
634,  Wythe,  G.

Stamp-act  congress,  the,  IV,  128,  McKean,  T. ;  V,  344,  Rug-
gles,  T.

S' amp-taxes,  repeal  of,  I,  103.

Stanbery,  Henry,  II,  706,  Granger,  R.  S.

Stanbery,  Jonas,  V,  643,  Stanbery,  H.

Standard  oil  company,  the,  V.  101,  Pratt,  C.

Standing  Order,  the,  in  Connecticut,  I,  415,  Brownell.

Standish,  Alexander,  V,  644,  Standish,  M.

Standish,  Barbara,  V,  644,  Standish,  M.

Standish,  Sir  John,  V,  642,  Standish,  M.

Standish,  Lora,  V,  644.  Standish,  M.

Standish,  Myles,  II.  513,  Foster,  L.  S. ;  monument  to,  illus-
tration, v;  644.

Standish,  Rose,  V,  644,  Sandish,  M.

Stanhope,  R.  Spencer,  III,  624.  Lathrop,  F.

Stanhope,  third  earl  of,  II,  563,  564.

Stanislas,  Poniatowski,  King,  V,  133,  Pulaski.

Stanley,  Abraham,  III,  656,  Lee,  Ann.

Stanley,  Dean  A.  P.,  quoted,  IV,  440,  Motley.

Stanley,  Charles  H.,  IV,  44,  Lbwenthal.

Stanley,  Lady  Charlotte,  I,  452,  Burgoyne.

Stanley,  Charlotte,  V,  339,  Rowson,  S.

Stanley,  John  Wright,  III,  121.  Hawkins,  B.

Stanly,  John,  V,  646,  Stanly.  E.

Stansberry,  W.,  attack  on,  III,  274,  Houston.  S.

Stansbury,  Caroline  M.,  Ill,  556,  Kirkland,  C.  M.

Stanton,  Lewis  M.,  V,  649,  Stanton,  E.  M.

Stanton,  Thomas,  V,  649,  Stanton,  H.  B.

Stanwood,  Harriet,  I,  276.

Staphyloraphy,  instrument  for,  III,  267,  Hosack,  A.  E.

Starch,  invention  of  process  for  making,  I,  5,  Abbot,  S.

Star-charting  machine,  invention  of,  III,  271,  Hough,  G.  W.

Stark,  Gen.  John,  ransom  paid  for,  V,  676,  Stevens,  P.

Stark,  Molly,  V,  653,  Stark,  J.

Starke,  Gen.  George,  IH,  429,  Jenness.

Starkstown,  N.  H.,  V,  652,  Stark,  J.

Starkweather,  George  A..  V,  653,  Starkiceather,  J.  C.

Starkweather,  Jane  E.,  Ill,  751,  Locke,  J.  E.

Starling  medical  college,  gift  to,  V,  742,  Sullivant.

Star  of  the  West,  the,  IV,  768,  Pickens,  F.  W. ;  capture  of,
VI.  245,  Van  Dorn.

Star- route  trials,  the,  n,  208,  Dorsey,  S.  W.  ;  III,  348,  In-
gersoll, R.  G. ;  400,  James,  T.  L.

Stars,  relative  brightness  of,  V,  4,  Pickering,  E.  C. ;  tem-
porary, VI,  190,  Tutwiler.

Star  Sisters,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  443,  Western.

Star-Spangled  Banner,  order  of  the,  I,  165,  Barker,  J.  W.

Star-Spangled  Banner,  writing  of  the,  III,  529,  Key,  F.  S.

Star-spectroscope,  the,  V,  357,  Rutherfurd.

State  in  Schuylkill,  the,  club,  IV,  409,  Morris,  S.

Staten  island,  Stapleton  library,  founded,  VI,  572,  Winter  ;
Billopp  house  on,  illustration,  I,  263.

Staten  Land,  discovery  of,  III,  684,  Le  Maire.

State-rights  doctrine.  Calhoun's,  I,  242  ;  celebrated  debate
upon,  III,  144,  Hayne,  R.  Y.  ;  Virginia  resolutions  on,
175 ;  IV,  168  ;  early  declarations  of,  169,  170 ;  decisions
regarding,  VI,  29,  30  ;  party  of,  V,  179,  Randolph.

State-rights  Whigs,  VI,  195.

State  sovereignty,  I,  365  ;  H,  99,  et  seq.

Statistical  congress,  the  first,  III,  518,  Kennedy,  J.  C.  G.

Statistics,  bureau  of,  VI,  429,  Wells,  D.  A.

Stattsonder  islands,  the,  discovered.  III,  343,  Iherinq.

Statue,  first  marble,  made  in  America,  H,  161,  Dexter,  H.

Staunton,  Mr.,  IV,  407,  Morphy.

Steam,  inventions  for  the  use  of,  I,  288,  Blanchard,  T. ;
first  employed  to  move  machinery.  III,  225,  Hoe,  R. ;  in
marine  engines,  IV,  561,  Ogden,  F.  B.

Steamboat  king,  the,  IV,  502,  Newberry,  O.

Steamboat  lines,  VI,  240,  Vanderbilt.

Steamboats,  invention  of,  illustration,  II,  471,  Fitch,  John;
controversy  on.  471,  Fitch,  J.;  563,  5(54,  Fidton,  R.;  Ful-
ton's, illustration,  563  ;  list  of  inventors  of,  563,  564  ;  con-
flicting claims  to  the  original  invention,  564;  list  of  those
built  under  Fulton.  564  :  inventors,  III,  176,  Henry,  W. ;
IV,  16,  Longgtreet,  W.:  393-394,  Morey  ;  experiments  on
the  Seine,  III,  745  ;  vertical  paddle-wheels  first  suggested,


V,  317,  Roosevelt ;  patent  for,  317-318  ;  first,  on  Missis-
sippi, 317,  Roosevelt ;  517,  Shreve,  H.  M. ;  Fulton  on  his
claim,  318,  Roosevelt,  N. ;  inventor,  347,  Rumsey,  J. ;  im-
provements in,  suits  with  Fulton,  517,  Shreve,  H.  M.;
first  attempts  with,  673 ;  first,  on  Lake  Ontario,  III,  64.
Hamilton,  John  :  inventions,  II,  364 ;  first  crossing  of
the  Atlantic  by,  II,  191,  Dod.  D.;  V,  579,  Smith.  Junius  ;
improvements  in,  V,  199,  Read,  N. ;  223,  Renwick,  E.  S. ;
673,  674,  Stevens,  R.  L.;  manufacture  of,  IV,  395,  Mor-
gan, C. ;  inspection  laws,  IH,  16,  Guthrie,  A.

Steam  boilers,  use  of  zinc  in,  HI,  113,  Haswell ;  improve-
ment, 132,  Hayes,  A.  A. ;  invention  of  a  feeder,  564-565,
Knowles  ;  inventions  for,  VI,  72,  Thayer,  Eli.

Steam-carriage,  invention  of  a,  V,  200.  Read,  N.

Steam-cylinders  for  drying  yarns,  I,  191,  Batchelder,  S.

Steam-drilling  apparatus,  invention  of,  IV,  509,  Newton,  J.

Steam-engines,  invention  of  attachments  and  improve-
ment to,  I,  57,  Allen,  Z. ;  58,  Allison,  B. ;  149,  Baldwin,
M.  W.;  607,  Chisholm;  740,  Corliss;  H,  349,  Emery.  C.
E.  ;  III,  700,  Le  Van  ;  V,  436,  Scott,  I.  M.  ;  673  ;  674,
Stevens,  W.  L. ;  oscillating,  77,  Andrews  ;  invention  of
the  cut-off,  341,  Boyden,  S.;  high-pressure.  384,  Evans,
O. ;  first  built  in  United  States,  III,  264,  Hornblower,  J. ;
inventor  of  a,  V,  408,  Sawyer,  S. ;  manufacture  of,  patent
suit,  VI,  109,  Thurston,  R.  L.;  inventor  of  a  governor,
110,  Thurston,  R.  H.;  packing,  172,  Tuck.

Steam-ferry,  the  first,  V,  673.

Steam  fire-engine,  first  in  United  States.  II.  758,  Green-
wood, M.;  invented,  III,  620,  Lamed  ;  628,  Latta,  A.  B.

Steam-generator,  patent  on  a,  V,  408,  Sawyer,  S.

Steam-heating,  improvements  for,  V,  515,  Shock.

Steam  land-carriage,  first,  in  America,  II,  384,  Evans,  O.

Steam-launch,  the  first.  III,  113,  Haswell.

Steam  marine  battering-ram,  invention  of  a,  V,  517,
Shreve,  H.  M.

Steam- pumps,  invention  of,  III,  565,  Knowles ;  VI,  591 ,
Wood.  D.  V.

Steamship  lines  to  California,  III,  636,  Law,  G.

Steamships,  opposition  to,  IV,  680  ;  first,  in  the  navy,  737,
Perry,  M.  G;  forced  draught  for,  V,  675,  Stevens,  E.  A.

Steamship  voyage,  first,  to  New  Orleans  and  Havana,  II,
299,  Eckford  ;  first  across  the  Atlantic,  VI.  698,  Rogers.

Steam  tow-boat,  invention  of  a,  V,  741,  Sullivan,  J.  L.

Stearns,  Isaac,  V,  655,  Stearns,  A.

Stearns,  Luther,  V,  655.  Stearns,  G.  L.

Stearns,  Rev.  Samuel,  V,  656,  Stearns,  S.  H.

Stebbins,  R.  Ill,  192,  Hewitt,  M.  E.

Stedman,  Edmund  B.,  Ill,  551.  Kinney,  E.  C.

Stedman,  E.  C.  I,  185,  Bartlett,  W.  A.

Stedman,  James,  V,  658,  Stedman.  E.  C.

Steel,  manufacture  of,  I,  607,  Chisholm  ;  of  rails,  II,  246,
Dudley,  C.  B.  ;  and  copper- works,  271,  Durfee,  W.  F.;
272,  Durfee,  Z.  S.;  first,  rails  made  in  U.  S.,  271,  Durfee,
W.  F.  ;  272.  Durfee,  Z.  S.  ;  air-boiling  process  of  mak-
ing. HI,  509,  Kelly,  W. ;  manufacture  of,  IV,  648,  Park,
James  ;  VI,  548,  Wilson.  G.  F. ;  TV,  692,  Pearse.

Steele,  Archibald,  V,  660,  Steele,  John.

Steele,  Elizabeth,  V,  660,  Steele,  John.

Steele,  Esther  B..  V,  660,  Steele,  J.  D.

Steele,  Francis  B..  V,  660,  Steele,  James.

Steele,  Margaret  C,  I.  707,  Conklin,  M.  C.

Stegge,  Capt.  Thomas,  I,  486.  Byrd,  W.

Stein,  portrait-painter,  I,  685,  Cole,  T.

Steiner,  Rev.  J.  C,  V,  420,  Schlatter.

Steinheil,  Herr,  IV,  426.

Stencils,  method  of  making.  IV,  311,  Metcalf,  M.  J.

Stenography,  invention  of  a  system  of,  H,  465,  Fisher,
Jonathan  ;  TV,  462,  Munson,  J.  E.;  court,  VI,  209,  Un-
derhill,  E.  F.

Stenotype,  invention  of  the,  VT,  653,  Zachos.

Stenton,  estate  of,  IV,  3,  Logan,  J.

Stephan,  Rev.  Martin,  V,  421,  Schmidt,  F.  A.;  VI,  343,
Walther.

Stephen,  William.  V.  663,  Stephen,  Sir  G.

Stephen  Hart,  capture  of  the,  I,  699,  Colvocoresses.

Stephens,  Edward,  V,  665,  Stephens,  A.  S.

Stephens,  execution  of,  I,  407.

Stephens,  James,  IV.  580,  CTMahony.

Stephens,  William,  IV,  342,  Mitchell,  D.  B.

Stephenson,  II,  364.

Stephenson,  G.  W.,  II,  589,  Gannon.

Steptoe,  Col.  E.  J.,  HI,  346,  Ingalls.  R.;  VI.  645.

Stereometry,  introduction  of,  IV,  573,  Oliveira,  C.  B.  de.

Stereoscope,  reversible,  invention  of,  V,  679,  Stevens,  W.  L.

Stereotyping,  introduction  of,  I,  418,  Bruce,  G.;  invention
of,  684.  Colden,  C.  ;  plates,  by  the  gelatine  process,  V,  33,
Pitman,  B. ;  composing  machine  for,  VI,  8,  Sweet,  J.  E.

Sternberg,  Count  v.,  Ill,  24,  Haenke.

Stetson,  Rebecca  B.,  IV,  285,  Medberry.  R.  B.

Steuben,  Baron,  his  property,  IV,  534,  North,  W. ;  his
house,  illustration,  V,  670.

Steuben  county,  settlement  in,  IV,  554,  O'Conor,  T.

Steubenville  seminary,  founder  of,  I,  208,  Beatty,  E.

Stevens,  Andrew,  V,  672,  Stevens,  J.  G.

Stevens,  Isaac  P.,  V,  190,  Rawlins.

Stevens,  Martha  B.,  V,  675,  Stevens,  E.  A.

Stevens,  Mary,  VI,  364,  Warren,  Joseph.

Stevens,  Dr.  Samuel,  VI,  364,  Warren,  Joseph.

Stevens,  Thomas,  V,  676,  Stevens,  P.


794


STEVENS


SULLIVANS


Stevens  floating  battery,  the.  IV,  84,  McClellan,  G.  B.  ;

V,  675,  Stevens,  R.  L.  and  E.  A.
Stevens  institute  of  technology,  gifts  to,  IV,  430,  Morton,

H. ;  illustration,  V.  675.
Stevenson,  Charles,  I,  638,  Claxton.  K.
Stewart,  A.  T.,  view  of  house,  V.  682  ;  mausoleum,  683.
Stewart,  Douglas,  pseudonym,  V,  608,  Sothern.
Stewart.  Dugald.  quoted,  II,  311.
Stewart.  Lieut.  James,  III,  203,  Hill,  D.  H.
Stewart.  Sir  W.  Drummond,  IV,  325,  Miller,  A.  J.
Stewart's  Literary  Quarterly,  V,  685,  Stewart,  G.
Stiles,  John  and  Isaac,  V,  687,  Stiles,  E.
Stillman's  run,  VI,  52.
Stilwell,  Stephen,  V,  690,  Stiltvell,  S.  M.
Stimson,  A.  L.,  I,  11,  Adams.  Alvin.

Stirling.  Earl  of,  I,  47,  Alexander,  W.\  48,  Alexander,  W.
Stirling  castle,  records  and  regalia  from,  1, 331,  Bourne,  N.
Stirrup,  pen-name,  I,  368,  Brent,  H.  J.
Stitching-machine,  invention  of  a,  375,  Briggs,  J.  W.
Stobo,  William,  V,  692.  Stobo,  R.
Stockbridge,  Mass.,  Sedgwick  house  at,  illustration,  V,

452 ;  Indian  grant  of,  462  ;  manual-labor  school  at,  362,

Sergeant,  J.
Stocker,  Anthony,  VI,  447,  Wharton,  T.
Stockhardt,  Julius  A.,  IV,  702,  Peirce,  C.  H.  ; V,  707,

Storer,  F.  H.
Stockton,  Andrew  Hunter,  V,  693,  Stockton,  A.  A.
Stockton,  John,  V,  693,  Stockton.  R.
Stockton,  Julia,  V,  349,  Rush.
Stockton,  Miss,  in,  321,  Hunter,  A.
Stockton,  Miss,  IV,  461,  Munro,  H.
Stockton,  Richard,  II,  450,  Field,  R.  S.
Stockton,  Robert,  V,  208,  Reed.  Joseph.
Stockton,  Susannah,  V,  27,  Pintard,  L.
Stockton,  William,  S.,  II,  381,  Evans,  E.  H.
Stockton.  Utah,  founded,  I,  709,  Connor,  P.  E.
Stockton  residence,  the,  illustration,  V.  694.
Stoddert,  Benjamin,  II.  391.  Ewell,  B.  S.
Stoddert,  Maj.  James,  V,  698,  Stoddert,  B.
Stoddert,  Capt.  Thomas.  V,  698,  Stoddert,  B.
Stoeek,  Rev.  Philip,  I,  403,  Brown,  J.
Stoepel,  Robert,  III,  184,  Heron.
Stone,  testing  the  strength  of,  II,  391,  Evibarik  ;  invention

of  artificial.  VI,  651.  Young,  W.  H.  H.  H.
Stone,  Harriett  M.,  IV.  32,  Lothrop,  H.  M.
Stone,  John.  V,  703,  Stone,  S.
Stone,  Malvina  and  Uriah,  I,  99.  Arthur.
Stone,  Noah.  V.  699.  Stone,  A.  L.
Stone,  Dr.  North,  III,  294.  Hubbell,  M.  S.
Stone,  W.  L.,  Bryant's  attack  on,  HI,  679,  Leggett,  W.  ;

IV,  597,  Osborn,  L.
Stone,  Zedekiah,  V,  701,  Stone,  D.
Stone  Arabia,  ambuscade  at,  I.  402.  Broivn,  John.
Stone-breaker,  invention  of  a,  I,  283,  Blake,  E.  W.
Stoneites,  the,  V.  700,  Stone,  B.  W.
Stone  River,  battle  of,  H,  599,  Gareschi  ;  V,  84,  Post,  P.  S.;

324,  498. See  Murfbeesboro.
Stonewall,  the  ram,  IV,  625,  Page,  T.  J. ;  surrender  of,  VI,

436,  Werden.
Stonewall  gold-mine,  the,  VI,  387,  Waterman,  R.  W.
Stonewall  Jackson.  IH.  391.
Stonewall  of  the  West,  the,  I,  648.  Cleburne.
Stonington,  Conn.,  bombardment  of,  HI,  Johnson,  Rossi-

ter ;  366,  Isham.
Stono,  battle  of.  HI,  301,  Huger,  I.
Stony  Creek,  engagement  at.  HI.  108,  Harvey,  Sir  J.
Stony  Point,  battle  at,  II,  424,  Febiyer  ;  482,  Fleury  ;  VI,

398,  Wayne.
Stoope,  Pastor,  in,  408,  Jay.

Stop-motion  to  the  drawing-frame,  invented,  I,  191,  Batch-
elder.  S.
Storer,  Miss,  HI,  171,  Henry,  John.
Storey  farm,  the,  I.  529,  Carnegie.
Storm  King,  the,  sobriquet,  II.  375,  25?p.v.
Storms,  crossing  of  the  Atlantic  by,  II,  228.  Draper,  D. ;

theories  of,  375,  Espy  ;  scheme  to  produce,  375.
Storrs,  Henry  R.,  IV,  543,  Noyes,  W.  C.
Storrs,  Rev.  John,  V,  709,  Storrs,  R.  S.
Story.  Dr.  Elisha,  V,  710,  Story,  J.
Story,  Francis  V.,  II,  734.
Story,  Sarah,  IV,  252,  Mather.  R.
Story,  Sidney  A.,  Jr.,  pen-name,  V,  19,  Pike,  M.  H.  G.
Story,  Waldo  and  Julian,  V,  712,  Story,  W.  W.
Stot,  the,  sobriquet,  V,  730.  Stuart.  James.
Stoughton,  E.  W.,  II,  469,  Fiske,  John.
Stourton,  Lord,  I,  538,  Can-oil.  J.
Stout,  Capt.,  IV,  533,  North,  C.
Stover,  Daniel,  III,  439,  440,  Johnson,  Mary.
Stoves,  cylinder,  designed,  I,  49.  Alger,  C.  ;  invention  of

cooking,  114,  Atkinson,  E.\  151,  Ball,  E.\  open,  II,  528;

first,  for  anthracite  coal,  IV,  540,  Nott,  E.;  the  Olmsted,

577,  Olmsted,  D. ;  593,  Orr,  I. ;  cast-iron,  V,  617,  Sower,  C.
Stowe,  Rev.  Charles  E.,  V,  715.
Stowe,  H.  B..  originals  of  characters  of,  HI,  178,  Henson,

J.;  25H,  Hopkins.  S. See  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.
Strachey,  Henry,  III,  410,  660 :  IV,  603,  Oswald,  R.
Strafford.  Earl  of,  VI,  2/17,  Vane.
Straight-Tongue,  Robriquet,  VI,  462,  Whipple,  H.  B.
Strait  of  Juan  de  Fuea,  VI,  227,  Valerianos.


Strait  of  Le  Maire,  HI,  684,  Le  Maire ;  forts  on,  IV,  529,

Nodal  ;  discovery  of,  V,  725,  Struensee.
Straits  of  Magellan,  expedition  to,  colony  founded,  ni,

344,  Imecourt :  error  in  reference  to,  585.  Ladrilleron  ;

discovery  of,  IV,  173,  Magellan  :  expedition  to  fortify,

fort  and  colony  at,  V,  400,  Sarmiento,  Gamboa.
Strange  Friend,  the,  original  of,  I,  758.  Cox,  H.  H.
Strasburg,  Comite  de  Secours  de,  I,  187,  Barton.
Strategos,  game  of,  VI,  141,  Totten.  C.  A.  L.
Stratford,  the  seven  graces  of,  I.  52,  Allen.  Heman.
Stratford  house,  V,  606.  Somerville  ;  illustration,  HI,  664.
Stratton,  Catherine.  Ill,  584,  Ladd,  C.
Straumey  island,  VI,  101,  Thorfinn.
Straws,  pen-name,  II,  450,  Field,  J.  M.
Street,  Randall  S.,  V,  718,  Street.  A.  B.
Street-cars,  register  for,  IV,  220,  Marshall,  E.  C. ;  motor

for,  UI,  602,  Lamm.
Streeter,  Sebastian,  n,  334,  Ellis,  S.
Street-sweeper,  invention  of  a,  HI,  462.  Jones,  Alexander.
Stretching-frames,  IV,  234,  Martin,  T.  M.;  V,  484,  Shat-

tuck,  A.  D.
Strickland,  Agnes,  IV,  376,  Moodie,  S.
Strickland,  Catherine,  VI,  153,  Traill.
Strickland,  Susanna,  IV,  375-376,  Moodie.
Strohmeyer,  Prof.,  I,  394,  Brown,  Buckminster.
Strong,  Adonijah,  V,  722,  Strong,  S.
Strong,  Alfred  L.,  V,  721,  Strong,  G.  C.
Strong,  Alvah,  V,  720,  Strong,  A.  H.
Strong.  Benjamin,  V,  724,  Strong,  O.  S.
Strong,  George  W.,  V,  724,  Strong,  G.  T.
Strong,  Henry  W.,  V,  723,  Strong,  L.  C.
Strong,  Hezekiah  W.,  V,  723,  Strong,  M.  M.
Strong,  Joanna,  II,  489,  Floyd,  W.
Strong,  John,  V,  720,  Strong,  C.
Strong,  John  E.,  V.  723,  Strong,  W.  E.
Strong,  Julius  L.,  Ill,  124,  Hawley,  J.  R.
Strong,  Martin,  V,  722,  Strong,  T.  R.
Strong,  Philip,  V,  720,  Strong,  A.  H.
Strong,  Rev.  Samuel  T.,  V,  724,  Strong,  S.  H.
Strong,  Supply,  V,  722.  Strong,  Jedediah.
Strong,  Thomas,  V,  721,  Strong,  James.
Strong,  Judge  T.  S.,  V,  724,  Strong,  S.  B.
Strozzi,  Marechal  de,  II,  696,  Gourgues.
Strutt,  Jedediah.  V,  547,  Slater.
Stryker,  Rev.  Peter,  V,  247,  Record,  E.
Stuart,  Alexander,  V,  732,  Stuart,  R.
Stuart,  Lady  Arabella,  V,  163.
Stuart,  Archibald,  V,  726,  Stuart,  A.  H.  H.
Stuart,  A.  H.  H.,  quoted,  II,  455.
Stuart,  Carlos  D.,  VI,  391.  Watson,  Henry  Cood.
Stuart,  Charles  Edward,  adventure  of,  IV,  101,  McDonald,

Flora.
Stuart,  Col.  Christopher,  IV,  672,  Patterson,  Joseph.
Stuart,  Dr.,  Ill,  450,  Johnson,  T.
Stuart,  Elizabeth,  IV,  672,  Patterson,  Joseph.
Stuart,  Kinloch,  V,  732,  Stuart,  R.  L.
Stuart,  Mary,  maid  of  honor  of,  HI,  741,  Livingston,  R.
Stuart,  Mary,  IV,  152,  MacNab.
Stuart,  Rev.  Robert.  V.  731,  Stuart,  J.  T.
Stuart,  William,  I,  319.
Stuarts,  the,  HI,  503,  Keith,  Sir  W.
Study  Hill,  I,  274,  Blackstone.
Sturges,  Josiah  R.,  VI,  214,  Upshur,  M.  J.  S.
Stuyvesant,  Miss,  II,  463,  Fish,  N.
Stylus,  the,  projected  magazine,  V,  45.
Suaso,  Juana,  V,  538,  Simpson.  G.  S.
Submarine  battery,  III,  320,  Hunt,  E.  B.
Submarine  electric  cable,  the  first,  VI,  172,  Tuck.
Substance  of  an  Exercise  in  Scurrility  Hall,  the,  anony-
mous publication,  HI,  317,  Hunt,  I.
Sudbury,  Mass.,  Indian  battle  at,  VI,  312, Wadsworth,

Benjamin.
Sue  Murphy  case,  the,  n,  544,  Frelinghnysen,  F.  T.
Suez  canal,  the,  HI,  697,  Lesseps  :  VI,  172.  Tuck.
Suffleld,  added  to  Connecticut,  IV,  61.  Lyman,  P.
Suffolk,  battle  at,  IV,  696,  Peck,  J.  J.
Suffolk  county,  N.  Y..  charities  in,  VI,  589,  Wolfe,  J.  D.
Suffolk  resolves,  the.  VI,  364,  Warren,  Joseph.
Suffrage,  negro,  Calhoun  on,  I,  503.
Snffren,  Bailli  de,  V,  245,  Richery.
Sugar,  processes  for  making,  I,  691,  Collier,  P.;  Ill,  581,

Labat,  J.  B.;  IV,  198,  Mapes,  J.  J.;  V,  229,  Reynoso  ;  for

cube,  VI,  487,  Whitmore.
Sugar-beet,  culture  of  the.  I,  180,  Barry,  J.  S.
Sugar-cane,  the  Otahalti,  I,  86,  Arango  y  Parreiio  ;  culture

of,  V,  870,  SainU-Croix,  Louis ;  scientific  examination

of,  528,  529.
Sugar-house  prison,  the,  V,  428,  Schureman  ;  651,  Staples,

J.  J.:  VI.  321,  Waldo,  D.
Suipacha,  battle  at,  TV,  520,  Nieto,  V.
Suisse,  M.,  HI,  388,  Jackson,  J.  A.

Sullivan,  Gen.  John,  his  mission  to  congress,  I,  17  ;  his  ex-
pedition, passage  of  Otsego  lake,  V,  71,  Porter,  Andrew,
Sullivan,  Lucas,  V,  742,  Sullivant.
Sullivan,  Owen,  V,  740,  Sullivan,  John.
Sullivan,  Robert  B..  VI,  545,  Wilson,  Adam.
Sullivan,  William.  IV,  763,  Phillips,  WiUard.
Sullivan's  island,  S.  C,  palmetto  fort  on,  HI,  659  ;  IV,  440,

Moultrie.


SULLY


TALLEY


795


Sully,  Lawrence,  V,  743,  Sully,  T.

Sulphinides,  the,  properties  of,  V,  220,  Remsen.

Sulphuric  acid,  manufacture  of,  III,  101,  Harrison,  J.

Sulpitians,  the,  II,  476,  Flaget ;  at  Montreal,  554  ;  IV,  175,
Maguire  ;  Montreal  conveyed  to,  178,  Maisonneuve  ;  186,
Mance  ;  proposal  to  take  the  property  of,  in  Canada ;
difficulties  of,  with  the  bishop,  III,  621,  Lartigue  ;  mis-
sions, of,  I,  617,  Ciquard  ;  suppression  of,  in  France,  IV,
203-204,  Marechal  ;  missions  of,  V,  5,  Picquet ;  VI,  163,
Trouve  ;  seminary  of,  Maryland,  IV,  476,  Nagot ;  semi-
nary and  church  of,  Paris,  571,  Olier  ;  VI,  528,  Williams,
John  Joseph.

Sumatra,  attack  on  town  in,  II,  221,  Downes  :  pirates'
towns  of,  VI,  188,  Turner,  T.\  mission  in,  IV,  60,  Ly-
man, H.

Sumerian  dialect,  discovery  of  the,  III,  116,  Haupt,  P.

Summerfield.  Charles,  pseudonym,  I,  98,  Arrington.

Summers,  Rosalie,  stage-name,  IV,  199,  Marble,  A.  W.

Sumner,  Charles,  challenge  after  attack  on,  VI,  311,  Wade,
Benjamin  F.

Sumner,  Charles  Pinckney,  V,  744,  Sumner,  C.

Sumner,  Judge  Increase,  V,  750,  Sumner,  C.  A.

Sumner,  Job,  V,  744,  Sumner,  C.

Sumner,  Samuel  B.,  V.  750,  Sumner,  C.  A.

Sumner,  William,  V,  744,  Sumner,  C;  751.  Sumner,  I.

Sumter,  Fort,  bombardment  of,  I,  71,  Anderson,  Robert.
See  Fort  Sumter.

Sumter,  the,  privateer,  II,  415  ;  3,  Craven,  T.  A.  M. ;  V,
460,  Semmes,  R.

Sun,  the,  worship  of,  IV,  186,  Manco  Capac  ;  researches
on,  III,  611,  Langley ;  spots  on,  90,  Harriot;  invention
for  using  the  rays  in  heating  rooms,  IV,  423,  Morse,  Ed-
ward Sylvester.

Sunal,  statue  by,  illustration,  I,  698.

Sun-and-planet  horse-power,  a,  I,  301,  Bogardus,  J.

Suncook,  N.  H.,  grant  of,  IV,  37,  Lovewell.

Sunday  Afternoon,  magazine,  II,  663,  Gladden.

Sunday  laws,  III,  464,  Jones,  H.  G.

Sunday  Magazine,  the,  III,  696,  Leslie,  F.

Sunday-school,  first  in  New  England,  III,  505,  Kelley,  H.  J. ;
first,  in  U.  S.,  V,  547,  Slater  ;  TV,  649,  Parke,  Joseph  :  in
America,  V,  182,  Rantoid ;  publications  and  institutes,
VI,  299,  Vincent.  J.  H;  lessons  for,  III.  482,  Judd,  O.;  V,

234,  Rice,  E.  W.

Sun  motor,  II,  365,  Ericsson.

Sunnyside,  illustration,  III,  362.

Sun  of  Joy,  III,  25)1,  Huascar.

Sun-stone,  the,  I,  596,  Chavero.

Sunswick,  II,  127,  Delafield,  John.

Supporters  of  the  Bill  of  Rights,  society.  Ill,  666,  Lee,  A.

Supreme  court,  U.  S.,  organization  of,  VI,  380  ;  jurisdic-
tion of  the  Federal,  408.

Surgery,  new  operations  in,  I,  529,  Carnochan  ;  II.  16,
Crosby,  D.;  211,  Doughty,  W.  H;  III,  5,  Gross,  S.  D.;
738,  Little,  J.  L.\  IV,  379,  Moore,  E.  M.;  471,  Mussey,
R.  D.\  642,  Pancoast,  J.;  657,  Parker,  W.\  V,  85,  Post  ;
247,  Ricord,  P.;  541,  Sims,  J.  M.\  543,  Skene,  A.  J.  C;
581,  Smith,  Nathan  :  599,  Smyth,  A.  W.;  626,  Speir  ;  703,
Stone,  W.;  VI,  96,  Thomson,  W.\  use  of  hot  water  in,
260,  Varick,  T.  R.;  difficult  operations  in,  II,  386,  Eve,
P.  F.;  696,  Gouley;  IV,  55,  Lungren,  S.  S.;  57,  Luzen-
berg  ;  85,  McClellan.  G.  and  J.  H.  B. ;  111,  McDowell,  E. ;
227,  Marshall,  W. ;  266,  Maury.  F.  F. ;  765,  Physick ;  V,
89,  Potter,  H.  A.;  388,  Sands,  H.  B.;  590,  Smith,  S.;  VI,

235,  Van  Buren ;  314,  Wagner,  J. :  366,  Warren,  J.  C. ;
595,  Wood,  J.  R.;  667,  Agnew  ;  orthopedic,  V,  411,  Sayre,
L.  A.;  invention  of  instruments  for,  411,  Sayre,  L.  A.;
II,  472,  Fitch,  Simon  ;  524,  Francis,  S.  W.\  III,  5,  Gross,
S.  D.;  63,  Hamilton,  F.  H;  192,  Hewitt,  C.  N.;  215,
Hitchcock,  A.;  271,  Hough,  J.  S.;  296,  Hudson,  E.  D.;
538,  King,  D.\  550.  Kinloch,  R.  A.;  602,  Lamson.  D.  L.\
IV,  32,  Lothrop,  C.  H;  200,  March,  A.;  230.  Martin,
H.  A.;  442.  443;  458,  Munde  ;  490,  Nelson,  D.  T.\  493,
Nelson,  C.  E.;  505,  Newman,  W.  H  ;  510,  Newton,  R.  S.;
605,  Otis,  F.  N.;  635,  Pallen  ;  V,  685,  Stewart,  F.  C;  VI,
473,  White,  O.  A.;  632.

Surian,  M.,  botanist,  V.  43,  Plumier.

Surinam,  scientific  exploration  of,  IV,  304,  Merian  ;  V,
659,  Stedman,  J.  G.

Surnames,  classification  of,  I,  334,  Bowditch,  N.  I.

Surratt,  John  H..  III.  33,  Hale,  C.

Surrey,  Earl  of,  III,  663,  Lee,  R.

Surriage,  Agnes,  II.  526,  Frankland.

Suruhy,  Baron  of,  II.  494,  Fonseca  Lima.

Survey,  first  geodetic,  in  America,  I,  321,  Borden,  S.  ;  geo-
logical, see  Geology.

Surveying,  invention  of  instruments,  I,  321,  Borden,  S.  ;
methods  in,  II,  86,  Davidson  ;  96,  Davis,  J.  W.

Survilliers,  Comte  de,  pseudonym,  I,  311,  Bonaparte,
Joseph.

Susan  Wood,  sobriquet,  VI,  606,  Woods,  C.  R.

Susini,  Augustine,  III.  211.  Hinckley,  I.

Susquehanna  colony,  II,  285,  Dyer,  E.

Susquehanna  company,  the.  II,  273.  Durkee.

Susquehanna  purchase,  the,  VI,  166,  Trumbull,  B.

Sutherland,  Duke  of,  IV,  29,  Lome.

Sut  Lovengood  papers,  the.  Ill,  91,  Harris,  G.  W.

Sutter's  mill.  Cal..  illustration,  VI,  2.

Suwarrow,  Gen.  A.  V.,  V,  442,  Scott,  W.


Suzzara- Verdi,  T.,  VI,  278,  Verdi.

Swaanendael.  I,  296,  Blommaert ;  II,  157,  De  Vries.

Swallow,  Prof.  George  C,  V,  630,  Spencer,  J.  W.

Swamp-angel,  the,  V,  464,  Serrell.

Swamp-fox,  the,  sobriquet,  IV,  208.

Swamp  university,  IV,  321,  Milburn.

Swan,  Judge  Gustavus,  VI,  4,  Swan,  J.  R. ;  6,  Sieayne,  N.  H.

Swan,  Robert,  VI,  4,  Swan,  W.  D.

Swansea,  R.  I.,  IV.  474,  Myles,  J.  ;  Indian  attack  on,  756.

Swarthmore  college,  IV,  174,  Magill,  E.  H. :  660,  Parrish,
E.  ;  V,  564,  Smith,  C.  L.  ;  gift  to,  VI,  449,  Wharton,  J.

Swartout,  Col.  Abraham,  VI.  5,  Sivartout,  R.

Swartout,  Frances,  VI,  5,  Swartout,  S.

Swayne,  Francis  and  Joshua,  VI,  5.  Swayne,  N.  H.

Swearing  Jack  Waller,  sobriquet,  VI,  337,  Waller,  J.

Sweat,  Lorenzo  D.  M.,  VI,  6,  Sweat,  M.  J.  M.

Swedes,  colony  of,  VI,  82,  Thomas,  W.  W. :  on  the  Dela-
ware, V,  126,  Printz,  J.  ;  VI,  207,  Unander ;  claims  to
land  in  Pennsylvania,  III,  295,  Hudde.

Swedish  mission,  III,  238,  Hohn,  J.  C.

Swedish  Nightingale,  the.  Ill,  731,  Lind.

Swedish  West  India  company,  the,  III,  214,  Hinoyossa  ;
rV,  338,  Minuit.

Sweeny,  George  Wythe,  VI,  634,  Wythe,  G.

Sweet.  James,  VI,  7,  Sweet,  A.  E.

Sweetser,  Andrew  J.  and  Henry,  VI,  8,  Sweetser,  M.  F.

Sweet  William,  sobriquet,  II,  229,  Draper,  W.  H.

Swift,  Lucretia,  V,  620,  Spalding,  R.  P.

Swift,  McRae,  VI,  11,  Swift,  J.  G.

Swift,  Mary  A.,  VI,  12,  Swift.  Z.

Swift,  Thomas  and  Foster,  VI,  10.  Swift,  J.  G.

Swimming,  feats  of.  I,  343,  Boyton.

Swinburne,  A.  C,  II,  738.

Swinburne,  Emily  E.,  VI,  349,  Ward,  E.  E.

Swing-bridges,  invention  for,  VI,  502,  Wight.

Swinging  round  the  circle,  III,  439.

Swissnelm,  James,  VI,  13,  Swisshelm,  J.  G.

Switch-stand,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  492,  Whittemore,  D.  J.

Syconian  lake,  the.  Ill,  402,  Jansen  van  llpendam.

Sydney,  Edward  William,  pen-name,  VI,  175,  Tucker.  N.  B.

Sydney,  Prince  Edward  island,  founded,  II,  150,  Des  Barres.

Sydney,  the,  of  the  American  navy,  II.  4,  Craven,  T.  H.  M.

Sykes,  W.  W.,  IV,  3,  Logan,  O.

Sylvester,  Francis,  VI,  230.

Sylvester,  Gyles,  IV,  518,  Nicolls,  W.

Symbols,  geographical,  system  of,  VI,  132,  Toner.

Syme,  Sarah,  I,  489,  Cabell,  S.  J.

Symmes,  Americus  V..  VI,  16,  Symmes,  J.  C.

Symmes.  Anna,  III,  96,  98.

Symmes's  hole,  VI,  16,  Symmes,  J.  C.

Symphony  societv,  II,  63,  Damrosch.

Symposium,  the,  II,  344,  345.

Syng,  Philip,  III,  550,  Kinnersley.

Syracuse,  Prince  of,  V;  304,  Roemer.

Syracuse  university,  library  for,  V,  215,  Reid,  J.  M. ;  gifts
to,  220,  Remington,  P. ;  660.  Steele,  J.  D.

Syria,  mission  to.  II,  500,  Ford,  J.  E.

Szczekociny,  battle  at,  III,  573.

T.  A.,  gent.,  pen-name,  I,  110,  Ashe,  T.

Tabaro,  Duke  of,  II,  622,  Geffrard.

Tabasco,  capture  of  the,  V,  667,  Sterett.  I.  S.

Table  Rock,  engagement  near,  III,  607,  Lane,  Joseph.

Tabor,  Azor,  II,  114,  Dean.

Tabor,  Iowa,  I,  406 ;  college,  gift  to,  III,  219,  Hitchcock,

Samuel  A.
Tachnachdoarus,  Chief,  VI,  5,  Swatane.
Tacks,  machine  for  making,  I,  288.  Blanchard,  T.
Tacoma,  founded,  schools  in,  VI,  621,  Wright,  C.  B.
Taconic  system  of  rocks,  the,  II,  351,  Emmons,  E.;  IV,  202,

Marcou.
Tacuarembo,  battle  of.  III,  186,  Herrera,  N.
Tacubaya,  Mex.,  II,  368,  Escandon  ;  battle  of,  H,  124,  De-

gollado.
Tadousac,  V,  63-64.  Pontgravi.
Tafquantum,  II,  687,  Gorges.
Taggart,  James,  VI,  19.  Taggart,  S.
Tah-gah-iute,  IV,  5,  Logan,  John.
Tah-kah-ha-kuty,  engagement  at.  V,  743,  Sidly,  A.
Taine,  Henri,  quoted.  VI,  361,  Warner,  S.
Tainter,  Sumner.  I.  225.  Bell.  A.  G.
Tait,  A.  F.,  n,  498,  Forbes,  Edwin.
Takawombpait,  Daniel,  II,  322.
Talavera,  Bernardino  de,  IV.  568,  Ojeda,  A.  de.
Talavera,  Fernando  de,  I.  697.
Talbot,  Charles,  VI.  22,  Talbot,  T.
Talbot,  Marion,  V,  239,  Richards,  E.  H.
Talbot,  Sir  W.,  Ill,  653.  Ledtrtr.
Talca.  Chili,  captured.  II.  541,  Freire,  R.  ;  college  and

library  founded  in,  IV,  352,  Molina,  J.  I.
Tales  of  Glauber  Spa,  V,  389,  Sands,  R.  C.
Tales  of  the  Puritans,  I,  130,  Bacon,  D.
Taletell.  George,  pen-name,  III,  242,  Holmes,  Isaac  E.
Talfourd,  T.  N.,  II,  504,  Forrest.
Taliaferro,  Capt.  Nicholas,  IV,  226,  Marshall.  M.
Talisman,  the,  annual.  VI.  282,  Verplanck,  G.  C.
Talladega,  battle  at.  III,  376.
Tallahassee,  naming  of,  III,  700,  Le  Vert.
Talley,  Thomas,  VI,  423,  Weiss.


796


TALLEYRAND


TENOCHTITLAN


Talleyrand.  I,  22,  466 ;  658,  Clifton,  W.  ;  726  ;  II.  61,  Dal-
ton,  T. ;  his  treatment  of  American  commissioners,  631.

Tallmadge,  O.,  Indian  town  at,  I,  129,  Bacon,  D.

Tall  Sycamore  of  the  Wabash,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  307,
Voorhees,  D.  W.

Talluschatches,  battle  at.  Ill,  376.

Talmage,  Rev.  Goyn,  VI.  27,  Talmage,  T.  D.  W.

Talmage,  Rev.  J.  R.,  VI,  27,  Talmage,  T.  D.  W.

Talon,  Lucien,  VI,  28,  Talon,  P.

Talvi,  pen-name,  V,  285.  Robinson,  Therese.

Tamaqua,  Chief,  V,  510,  Shingark.

Tamarois,  mission  to  the,  II,  93,  Davion.

Tamaulipas,  invasion  of,  1, 122.  Avezzana  ;  174,  Barradas.

Tamidine,  invention  of,  VI,  443,  Weston.  E.

Tamil  language,  dictionary  of  the,  VI,  570  Winslow,  M.

Tamos,  the,  II,  373,  Espejo,  A.

Tampico,  battle  at,  1, 174,  Barradas  ;  V,  393,  Santa-Anna  ;
667,  Sterett,  I.  S.

Tanite,  invention  of,  IV,  647,  Paret,  T.  D.

Tannehill,  Gen.  John,  VI,  31,  Tannehill,  W.;  405,  Web-
ber, C.  W.

Tanner,  James,  VI,  32.  Tanner,  John.

Tanning,  inventions  for.  V,  103,  Pratt,  Z.  ;  Russian  proc-
ess introduced,  III,  432,  Jewell,  M.  ;  invention  of  proc-
ess, IV,  198,  Mapes,  J.  J.

Tappan,  Abraham  and  Benjamin,  VI,  32,  Tappan,  D.

Tappan,  engagement  near,  I,  201,  Baylor,  &.;  slaughter  of
a  regiment  at,  II,  762,  Grey. ■

Tarahumaro  Indians,  subjugation  of,  VI,  128,  Toledo,  F.  A.

Tar-cha-chee,  death  of,  II,  56,  Dale,  S.

Tarcote,  engagement  at,  IV,  208.

Tariff  of  Abominations,  the,  III,  381  ;  VI,  195  ;  409.

Tariff  question,  the,  VI,  198  ;  compromise,  I,  500,  501 ;  re-
vision, 104  :  Clay's  bill,  642  ;  reduction  of.  II,  58,  Dallas,
G.  M.  ;  the  Bond  case,  647,  Gilchrist.  R.  B.  ;  of  1842,
453  ;  struggle  and  compromise  over,  III,  381  ; in  1844.

II,  59,  Dallas,  G.  M.  ;  \ ,  53-54  ;  question  of  protective,
first  raised,  355,  Rutherfoord  ;  division  of  parties  on,  VI,
409-411  ;  the  Mills  bill,  694,  Mills,  R.  Q.;  works  on  the,
IV.  240,  Mason,  D.  H

Tarleton,  Col.  Banastre,  anecdote  of.  III.  46|2,  Jones.  M.
M. ;  his  dragoons,  story  of,  II,  525,  Francisco  ;  his  quar-
ter, I,  443,  Buford,  A.

Tarqui,  battle  of,  V,  739,  Sucre,  A.  J.

Tartars  of  America,  the.  IV,  354.  Monagas,  J.

Taschereau,  Thomas  Jacques,  VI,  36.  Taschereau,  E.  A.

Tasco,  paintings  in  the  church  of,  I,  492,  Cabrera,  M.

Tasmania.  II,  534,  Franklin.  Sir  J.

Tassy,  Garcin  de,  pupil  of,  V,  377,  Salisbury.

Tastanegy,  III,  651,  Le  Clerc.

Taste,  sense  of.  Ill,  202,  Hilgard.  T.  C.

Tax,  fight,  emancipate,  V,  19,  Pike,  F.  A.

Taxation,  of  colonies,  first  protest  against,  I,  29 ;  first  sug-
gestion of,  III.  504.  Keith.

Taxidermv.  art  of,  HI.  263,  Hornaday.

Tayatzin,  IV,  270,  Maxtla.

Tayloe,  Col.  Ogle.  II,  456.

Tayloe,  Rebecca,  m,  665,  Lee,  F.  L.

Taylor,  Bayard,  original  of  a  story  by,  I,  758,  Cox,  H.  H. ;
his  house,  illustration.  VI,  41.

Taylor,  Catherine,  IV,  711,  Penn.

Taylor,  Creed,  II,  634,  Gholson,  W.  Y.

Taylor,  Frances,  IV,  165.

Taylor,  Col.  Frederic,  VI,  41.

Taylor.  Hancock.  VI,  52.

Taylor,  Harriet,  n,  338,  Elmore,  F.  H.

Taylor,  Rev.  James,  VI,  49,  Taylor,  S.  P.

Taylor,  Janette,  III,  468.

Taylor,  Jeremy,  II,  262,  Dunster,  H.

Taylor,  Marion,  I,  487,  Byrd.

Taylor,  Mary  C,  II,  392,  Ewen,  M.  C.

Taylor,  Dr.  Ralph,  VI,  434,  Welton.

Taylor,  Col.  Richard,  VI.  51,  Taylor,  Z.

Taylor,  Robert  and  Joseph,  VI,  40,  Taylor,  B.

Taylor,  Sarah,  VI.  54.

Taylor,  Rev.  Timothy  A.,  VI,  48.  Taylor.  O.  A.

Taylor,  Tom,  III,  696,  Leslie,  C.  R.;  V,  530,  Silsbee,  J.  S.

Taylor,  Zachary,  IV,  165.

Tayupes,  tril>e  of  the.  II.  541.  Freire  de  Andrado.

Tazewell  Hall.  Va..  illustration,  V,  174.

Tea,  burned  at  Greenwick,  N.  J.,  Ill,  285,  Howell,  R.;  de-
stroyed at  Boston,  see  Boston  tea  party  ;  Japanese,
introduced,  III,  22,  Habersham,  A.  W.;  first  culture  of,
in  Brazil,  I,  124.  Azavedo,  A.  A.

Teach,  Edward,  II,  301,  Eden,  C.

Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  III,  218.  Hitchcock.  R.  D.

Teazer,  capture  of  the  gun-boat,  IV,  76,  McCann  ;  V,  679,
Stevens,  T.  H.

Techotlalla,  cacique,  VI.  123,  Tizoc.

Tecoac,  battle  of.  II.  167.

Tecpantcalzin,  III,  299,  Huehuetemixcatl.

Tecumseh.  his  interview  with  Harrison,  II,  335,  Ellskwa-
tawa  ;  IH,  96  ;  his  death,  97.

Tecumseh,  loss  of  the,  II,  3,  Craven,  T.  A.M.;  417.

Tegethoff,  Vice-Admiral,  IV,  269.

Teerethoff,  voyage  of  the.  IV.  685,  Payer.

Tehuantepec,"  conquest  of,  I,  123,  Axayacatl ;  capture  of,

III,  690,  Leon,  Antonio.

Tehuantepec,  Isthmus  of,  1, 169,  Barnard,  J.  G.


Teixeyra.  Domingos  de.  II.  542,  Freire  de  Andrado.

Telame  language,  the,  V,  543,  Sitja  r.

Telegram,  first  use  of  the  word.  V,  563.  Smith,  E.  P.

Telegraph,  the,  H,  227,  Draper,  J.  W.;  preliminary  dis-
coveries, HI,  172  ;  velocity  of  the  electric  fluid,  first  ob-
servations, IV,  18,  Loomix,  E.\  invention  of.  III.  3K">.
Jackson,  C.  T.;  IV.  425;  Morse's  first  apparatus,  illus-
tration. 426  ;  attempt  to  bury  the  wires.  426  ;  first  mes-
sage. 426  ;  submarine,  427  ;  appropriation  for  testing.  VI,
333,  Wallace,  D.;  220,  Vail,  A.;  invention  of  instruments.
I,  612,  Chubbuck;  improvements  in,  H,  303,  Edison  :  B8L
Gaily;  III,  513,  Kendall,  A.;  677,  Lefferts,  M.;  V,  108,
Prescott,  G.B.;  306,  Rogers,  II.  J. ;  multiplex,  II,  729,
Gray,  E. ;  Calhoun  on  the.  I.  501  :  machine  for  laying
wires,  741.  Cornell;  the  printing,  HI,  273,  House,  R.  E.;
system  of,  topographical,  568,  Knox,  T.  W.:  invention
of  a  visual,  607,  Lane,  J.  H. ;  system  for  fac-simile,  teleg-
raphy, V,  602,  Snow,  W.  D. ;  combination  printer,  VI,  696,
Phelps;  duplex.  699,  Stearns;  submarine,  to  Japan,  1,224,
Belknap,  G.  E. ;  695.  Colt :  the  American  union,  H,  694,
Gould,  J.;  proposed  Siberian,  III,  516,  Kennan;  568,
Knox,  T.  W. ;  V,  522.  Sibley,  H. :  union  of  lines,  521,  522  ;
management  of,  642,  Stager ;  the  Atlantic,  see  Atlan-
tic telegraph  ;  proposed,  from  San  Francisco  to  Sand-
wich islands,  II,  449,  Field,  C.  W.

Telephone,  the,  I,  225,  Bell.  A.  G.  ;  inventions  for,  247.
Berliner ;  portable  electro-magnetic,  578 ;  II,  195,  Dol-
bear ;  304,  Edison  ;  729,  Gray,  E.  :  invention  of  a  re-
ceiver, V,  4,  Pickering,  E.  C.  ;  invention  of,  charge
against  government  officials  concerning,  308,  Rogers,  J.
H. ;  transmission  of  messages  simultaneously  with  tele-
grams, 323,  Rosebrugh  ;  inventor  of  a,  for  the  deaf.  623,
Spaulding,  E.;  invention,  484,  Shaver  ;  suit  of  the  Bell,
VI,  699,  Roberts.

Telescopes,  improvements  in,  I,  624,  Clark,  Alvan  ;  II,
473,  Fitz  ;  early  manufacture  of.  III,  231,  Holcombe  ;  the
largest  in  the  world.  III,  709,  Lick.

Telfair,  Thomas,  VI.  60,  Telfair,  E.

Tellkampf.  Theodore,  VI.  60,  Tellkampf,  J.  L.

Tellurian  globe,  the,  IV,  162,  MacVicar.

Tellurides,  of  California,  I.  286,  Blake,  W.  P.

Telugus,  the,  H,  112,  Day,  S.  S.

Temperance,  cause  of,  I,  142,  Baird,  R.;  455,  Burleigh  ;
first  society  in  the  world,  624,  Clark,  B.  J. ;  woman's,  of
New  York,  82,  Anthony.  S.  B. :  H.  17,  Crosby.  H. ;  134,
Delavan  ;  first  society  in  Massachusetts,  162.  Dexter,  S.;
the  Dunkin  act,  258 ;  American  society,  307,  Edxcards,
J.:  692.  Gough  ;  HI,  14,  Gustafson  ;  120,  Hawkins,  J.  H.
W.;  143,  Hayes,  L.  W.  W.;  Luther  of,  191,  Hew  it.  X:
first  tract  on,  312,  Humphrey,  H.;  355,  Ireland,  John;
early  lectures  on,  559,  Kittredge,  J.  :  early  work  in,  650.
Leavitt;  women's  crusade  in  Ohio,  702,  Lewis,  D.;  early
movements,  IV,  217,  Marsh,  John  :  257,  Mathew,  T.;  465,
Murphy,  E. ;  suit  about  restriction  in  Cattaraugus,  V,
42,  Plumb,  J.;  work  for,  241,  Richardson,  Edtrard  ;  pro-
hibitory law  for  New  York,  476  :  first  hotel.  688,  Smith,
G.;  the  Scott  act,  438,  Scott,  R.  W.;  advocates  of,  630,
Spencer,  P.  R. ;  686,  Stewart,  G.  T.  ;  gifts  to,  VI.  90.
Thompson,  E.;  women's  union,  514,  Willard,  F.  E.;  first
society  in  U.  S.,  677,  Cowen;  work  of,  684,  Haddock.  See
also  Prohibition  and  Maine  law.

Tempest,  Shakespeare's,  II,  616,  Gates,  Sir  T.

Temple,  Charlotte,  V,  323.  Rose,  Sir  J.

Temple,  Charlotte,  story  of,  V,  839,  Roicson,  S.

Temple,  Elizabeth  B.,  VI,  576,  Winthrop.  T.  L.

Temple,  Joseph  E.,  V,  228,  Reynolds,  J.  F.

Temple,  Mr.,  II,  530.

Temple,  Sir  Purbeck,  IV,  490,  Nelson,  J.

Temple,  Sir  Thomas,  IV,  490,  Nelson,  J.

Templet  odontograph,  V,  288,  Robinson,  S.  W.

Ten  Broeck,  Catherine,  III.  747.  Livingston,  J.

Ten-cent  Jimmy,  II,  104,  Dai'is,  J.

Tender  Recollections  of  Irene  Macgillicuddy,  anonymous
book,  IV,  572,  Oliphant.

Tendilla,  Count  of,  IV,  297,  Mendoza,

Tenella,  pen-name,  I,  635,  Clarke,  M.  B.

Tenement-houses,  inspection  of,  HI,  91.  Han-is,  E.  ;  im-
proved, V,  560,  Smith,  J.  C;  model,  667,  Smith,  H.  B.

Teneriffe,  discovery  of  mummies  in,  V,  144,  Puysegur.

Ten  governors,  the,  HI.  54,  Halstead,  S.

Ten  Hills,  farm  of,  II,  147,  Derby,  E.  H,  Jr.

Tennessee,  pioneers  of,  II,  12,  Crockett;  TV.  115.  McFer-
rin,  James  ;  V,  50.  Polk  ;  161,  Rains,  J. ;  279.  Robertson,  J. ;
466,  Sevier;  VI,  400,  Weakley  :  Indian  warfare  in,  471,
White,  J.  ;  early  days  of.  III,  374,  375  ;  constitution
formed,  name  proposed  by  Jackson,  875  ;  "aristocratic
coterie"  in,  436  ;  new  constitution  of.  III,  437,  Johnson,
Andrew  ;  separation  of,  from  N.  C,  its  admission.  V, 467,
Sevier,  J.;  old  and  new  constitution  of,  666,  Stephenson  ;
the  civil  war  in,  IU,  437 ;  evacuation  of  central.  I,  441,
Buell,  D.  C. ;  bill  to  remand,  to  military  control.  Ill,  645,
Lea,  J.  M. :  R.  C.  institutions  founded  in,  II,  426,  Feehan  ;
TV,  323,  Miles,  R.  P.

Tennessee,  the  ram,  I,  428,  Buchanan,  F. ;  II,  417, 418 ;  sur-
render of,  418.

Tennessee  platform,  the.  I,  393,  Broum,  A.  V.

Tennyson,  Alfred,  quoted,  IV,  161.  Macready.

Tenochtitlan,  founded,  I,  9.  Acamapictli  ;  inundation  of,
and  rebuilding,  IV,  368,  Montezuma  I.


TENT


TIGER


797


Tent,  invention  of  a  military,  V,  521,  Sibley,  H.  H.

Tenth-day  excitement,  the,  IV,  330,  Miller,  W.

Tenth  Muse,  the,  II,  24,  Cruz.

Tenth  Muse,  the,  lately  sprung  up  in  America,  1, 354,  Brad-

Tenure-of-offlce  act,  the,  II,  718  ;  IU,  380,  439.

Teomaxtli,  the,  III,  300,  Huematzin ;  371,  Ixtlilcuechahua  ;
original  of,  VI,  308,  Votdn.

Teondechoren,  IV,  567,  Oiouhaton.

Tepetlaxtoc,  the,  III,  183,  Hernandez,  V.

Tepic,  capture  of,  IV,  300,  Mercado,  J.  M.

Tepotzotlan  college.  Ill,  86,  Haro,  A.  N.  de.

Teresa  of  the  New  World,  the,  III,  714,  V Incarnation.

Terra-cotta  work,  discovery  of  clay  suited  to,  V,  639,
Spring,  E.  A.;  coping,  VI,  502,  Wight.

Terray,  Abbe,  II,  264.

Terre  Haute,  gifts  to  charities  of,  V,  322,  Rose,  C. ;  Rose
polytechnic  institute,  illustration,  322.

Terrible  Tractoration,  anonymous  poem,  II,  445,  Fessen-
den,  T.  G.

Terror,  the,  II,  535,  Franklin,  Sir  J.

Terry,  David  S.,  II,  448,  Field,  S.  J.;  V,  482,  Sharon.

Tertius  in  Nubibus,  pen-name,  V,  151,  Quincy,  J.

Testa,  Countess,  II,  413.

Test-oath,  the.  I,  476,  Busteed.

Testory,  Abbe,  I.  89,  Arillaga.

Tetzotzomoe,  King.  I,  9.  Acalhua.

Tewksbury  almshouse,  I,  478,  Butler,  B.  F.;  V,  384,  San-
bom,  F.  B.

Texan  revolution,  incident  of  the,  II,  10,  Crittenden,  G.  B.

Texaus,  357,  shot  in  Mexico,  II,  405,  Fannin.

Texas,  colonization  in,  I,  121,  Austin,  S.  F.;  555.  Castro  ;
French  colony  in,  II,  703,  Graham,  G.  ;  French  and  Span-
ish in,  690,  Leon,  Alonso  de  ;  Spanish  colonies  in,  VI,  665,
Zufliga,  B.  ;  declaration  of  independence  of,  657,  Za-
vala ;  organization  of  independent  government  in,  the
General  Consultation,  invasion  of,  by  Mexicans,  their
defeat,  first  president,  second  invasion  threatened,  an-
nexation of,  III,  274,  Houston,  S.;  war  for  independence
in.  IV.  97,  McCulloch  ;  operations  at  sea,  380,  Moore,  E.
W.\  V,  393,  Santa- Anna  ;  VI,  155,  Travis,  W.  B.;  I,  458,
Burnet,  D.  G.  ;  independent  government  of,  III,  598,
Lamar,  M.  B.  ;  U.  S.  occupation  of,  I,  155  ;  annexation
of  431  ;  501,  502  ;  II,  214,  578  ;  Clay  on,  I,  643  ;  protest
against,  II,  616,  Gates,  S.  M.  ;  annexation  of,  642,  Gid-
tlingx,  J.  R.  ;  III,  .33,  Hale,  J.  P.  ;  debate  on  it.  V,  8,  52  ;
VI,  198,  233  ;  opposition  in  Europe  to  it,  III,  548,  King,
W.  R.;  petition  against  it,  VI.  548,  Wilson,  H.;  secession
of,  III,  275,  Houston,  S. ;  building  of  the  state-house  of,  II,
420,  Far-well,  J.  V. ;  missions  in,  IV,  205,  Margil ;  R.  C.
institutions  in,  197,  Manucy  ;  557,  Odin  ;  church  proper-
ty in,  VI,  121,  Timon  ;  first  railway  in,  III,  537,  Kimball,
R.  B. ;  boundary  of,  V,  52,  53  ;  VI,  53  ;  communistic  col-
ony in,  IV,  531,  Normand  ;  asylum  for  political  exiles  in,
III,  404,  Jamac  ;  597,  Lallemand  ;  V,  252,  Rigaud,  A.

Texcoco,  III,  307,  Huitzilihuitzin  ;  kings  of,  371,  Ixtlilxo-
chitl  :  IV,  495,  Netzahualcoyotl;,  a  centrtj  of  civilization,
496,  Ni'tzahtutlcoyotl.

Texeira,  I,  10  ;  III,  344,  Imhoffer.

Texmalaca,  battle  at,  IV,  392,  Morelos.

Tgirhitontie,  Iroquois  name,  V,  621.  Spangenberg.

Thacher,  Rev.  Thomas  Cushing,  VI.  70,  Thacher,  S.  C.

Thackeray,  W.  M.,  the  Virginians,  III,  517,  Kennedy,  J.  P.;
quoted,  V,  405,  Savage,  J.

Thalberg,  IU,  228,  Hoffman,  R.  H.

Thallene,  discovery  ot,  IV.  430,  Morton,  H.

Thames,  battle  of  the.  Ill,  97  ;  IV,  685,  Payne,  D.;  V.  127,
Proctor,  H  A.;  484,  Shaubena  ;  VI.  58,  Tecumseh  ;  offer
of  the  Wyandots,  333,  Walk-in-the-Water.

Thaneraquechta,  V,  348,  Rundt.

Thanksgiving-Day,  of  1771,  IV,  705,  Pemberton  ;  made  na-
tional, III,  35,  Hale,  S.  J.

Tharin,  William  C.,VI,  70,  Tharin,  R.  S.  S.

That  Girl  of  Mine,  anonymous  novel,  II,  313,  Egan,  M.  F.

That  Husband  of  Mine,  anonymous  book,  II,  140,  Denison,
Mary  A.

Thaxter,  Levi  L.,  VI,  71,  Thaxter,  C.

Thayendanegea,  I.  359,  Brant.

Thayer,  Rev.  Ebenezer,  VI,  73,  Thayer,  N.

Thayer,  John  E.,  VI,  73,  Thayer,  N.

Thayer,  Mrs.  J.  E.,  II,  706,  Granger,  F.

Thayer,  Sylvanus,  statue  of,  illustration,  VI,  73.

Thayer  expedition,  the,  VI,  73,  Thayer,  N.

Theatres,  contest  at  London,  I.  317  ;  Booth,  J.  B. ;  closed  by
congress.  U,  216,  Douglas,  D.  ;  colonial,  III,  46,  Hallam  ;
Massachusetts  law  against  entertainments  in,  II,  596,
Gardiner,  J.  ;  in  old  New  York,  illustration,  V,  536  ;  the
Astor  place  riots,  11,505,  Forrest,  E.  ;  IV,  160,  Macready.

The  Brothers,  anonymous  novel,  III,  180,  Herbert.

Theiss  boycotters.  the,  V,  621.  Spark-man.

Theological  Review,  the,  V,  560,  Smith.  H,  B.

Theology,  the  New  Haven,  VI,  47,  Taylor,  N.  W.  ;  192,
Tyler,  B.

Theosophical  society,  the,  V,  191,  Rawson,  A.  L.;  I,  754,
Coues  ;  291,  Blavatsky  :  bequest  to,  II,  144,  De  Palm.

Theresa  de  Bourbon,  Princess,  IV,  699,  Pedro  II.

Thermometers,  deep-sea,  inventors  of,  V,  409,  Saxton  ;
410,  Saxton,  R. ;  inventor  of  physiological,  454.  Seguin,  E.

Thermophote,  the,  invention  of,  V,  550,  Sloane,  T.  O  C.


Thermostatic  apparatus,  a,  V,  602,  Snow,  W.  D.

Thetis,  capture  of  the,  II,  625,  Gennes.

Thibodeaux  college.  IV,  723,  Perche.

Thicketty  fort,  engagement  at,  V,  492,  Shelby.

Thiel  college,  Pa.,  IV,  668,  Passavant.

Thierry,  Ml,  V,  111.

Third  cavalry  division,  the,  H,  44.

Third  presidential  term,  resolution  on,  V,  640,  Springer,
William  M.

Thirteen,  committee  of,  I,  552.

Thirty  years,  the,  Guatemalan  regime,  I,  177.

Thoisy,  Patrocle  de,  HI,  270,  Houdetot.

Thorn,  John  H.,  II,  649,  Giles,  H.

Thomas,  Caroline,  pseudonym,  H,  205,  Dorr,  J.  C.  R.

Thomas,  Evan,  VI,  85,  Thomas,  L.

Thomas,  Gen.  G.  H.,  statue  of,  illustration,  VI,  81.

Thomas,  Isaiah,  quoted,  III,  244,  Holt,  John.

Thomas,  Col.  John,  VI,  84,  Thomas,  Jane.

Thomas,  Capt.  John,  VI,  412.

Thomas,  Rev.  Nehemiah,  VI,  608,  Woodworth,  S.

Thomas,  Richard  Symmes,  VI,  84,  Thomas,  J.  B.

Thomas,  W..  Ill,  279,  Howe,  E.

Thompson.  Benjamin,  V,  345,  Rumford.

Thompson,  Benjamin,  V,  363,  Sabine,  Lorenzo.

Thompson,  Dr.,  I,  670,  Cochran,  John.

Thompson,  Capt.  Edmund  F.,  VI,  88.  Thompson,  C.  G.

Thompson,  George,  IV,  160 ;  V,  173,  Randolph.  T.  J.

Thompson,  Hubert  O.,  VI,  88,  Thompson,  C.  G.

Thompson,  Judge  Isaac,  VI,  92,  Thompson,  J.

Thompson,  Rev.  James,  IV,  222.

Thompson,  Mr.,  V,  86,  Potter,  A.

Thompson,  Maria,  II,  81,  Daveiss.

Thompson,  Martha,  IV,  707,  Pemberton,  J.  C.

Thompson,  Sarah  Diodati,  II,  595,  Gardiner.

Thompson,  Thomas,  VI,  90,  Thompson,  E.

Thompson,  W.  C,  VI,  95,  Thompson,  J.  L.

Thompson,  Dr.  William,  book  attributed  to,  V,  658,  Sted-
man.  C.

Thompson,  Sir  Wyville,  I,  34,  Agassiz,  A.

Thomson,  Archibald,  VI,  96,  Thomson,  A.

Thomson,  Charles,  II,  632,  Gerry,  E.

Thomson,  James,  IV,  565,  Oglethorpe.

Thomson.  Stevens,  IV,  241,  Mason,  G.

Thomson's  island,  Mass.,  V,  643,  Standish.

Thoracentesis,  operation  of,  I,  334,  Bowditch,  H.  I.

Thoreau,  John,  VI,  100,  Thoreau,  H.  D.

•Thorflnnsbudir,  VI,  102,  Thorfinn.

Thorn,  Frost,  II.  82,  Davenport,  L.

Thorn,  the,  British  sloop,  VI,  174,  Tucker,  Samuel.

Thorne,  P.,  pen-name,  V,  579,  Smith,  M.  P.  W.

Thornton,  James,  VI,  104,  Thornton.  M.

Thornton,  James  B.,  VI,  103,  Thornton,  E.  B.

Thornton,  Presley,  VI,  103,  Thornton,  A.

Thorowgood,  Thomas.  H,  321,  Eliot,  J.

Thorpe,  Edmund  C,  VI,  105,  Thorpe,  R.  H.

Thorpe,  Kamba,  pen-name,  I,  228,  Bellamy,  E.  W.

Thorpe,  Miss,  I,  445,  Bull,  O.  B.

Thorwaldsen,  II.  5,  Crawford,  T. ;  IH,  630,  Launitz.

Thothmes  III.,  II,  690,  Gorringe.

Thousand  islands,  the,  purchase  of,  IV,  155,  Macomb,  A.

Thrale,  Mrs.,  II,  338,  Elphinstone.

Three-fifths  rule,  the,  IV,  168.

Three-mile-point  controversy,  the,  I,  727.

Three-million  bill,  the,  I,  502.

Three  Rivers,  founded,  I,  569,  Champlain  ;  battle  of,  II,
537,  Eraser,  S. ;  III.  358,  Irvine,  W. ;  VI,  398,  Wayne.

Threrwits,  E.  G.,  II,  623,  Geiger.

Throckmorton  family,  the,  IV.  431,  Morton,  O.  P.

Throgmorton,  Elizabeth,  V,  163.

Thunefeldt,  Countess  of,  II,  144,  De  Palm.

Thuret,  Gustave,  II.  409,  Farioir.

Thurm  and  Taxis,  Princess  of,  IV,  678,  Paul,  F.  W.

Thurman,  Rev.  Pleasant,  VI,  108,  Thurman,  A.  G.

Thurmann,  Jules,  IV,  201,  Marcou.

Thurston,  Franklin,  VI,  109,  Thurston,  L.  M.

Thurwanger,  M  ,  pupil  of,  V,  326,  Rosenthal,  M.

Tiahuanacu,  city  of,  IV,  178,  Malta  Capac.

Ticker,  the,  invention  of,  V,  67,  Pope,  F.  L.

Ticket-cancelling  boxes,  inventor  of,  V,  72,  Porter,  H.

Ticknor,  Benaiah,  VI,  111.  Ticknor,  C.  B.

Ticknor,  Benjamin,  VI.  112,  Ticknor,  W.  D.

Ticknor,  Benjamin  H..  VI,  112,  Ticknor,  W.  D.

Ticknor,  Howard  M.,  VI,  112,  Ticknor,  W.  D.

Ticknor,  Thomas  B.,  VI,  112,  Ticknor,  W.  D.

Ticknor  &  Fields,  book-store  of.  illustration,  VI,  112.

Ticonderoga,  capture  of,  I,  51,  Allen,  Ethan  ;  94  ;  recapt-
ure, 95  ;  in  the  Revolution,  402,  Brown,  John  ;  452,  Bur-
goyne  ;  battle  of,  V,  372,  St.  Luc  ;  evacuation  of,  VI,  680,
Fermoy.

Tides,  machine  for  predicting,  invention  of,  II.  440,  Ferret ;
plan  for  using  the  force  of  the,  V.  200,  Read,  N.;  instru-
ment for  recording  the  height  of,  V,  409,  Saxton.

Tientsin,  settlement  of  the  affair  of  massacre  at,  VI,  652,
Yung  Wing.

Tierra  Austral  del  Espiritu  Santo,  V,  148,  Queiros.

Tiffany,  C.  L.,  house  of,  illustration,  VI,  113.

Tiffany,  Sylvester,  VI,  113,  Tiffany,  A.  R.

Tiger,  the,  exploring  ship,  I,  295,  Block.

Tiger  of  Alica,  the,  sobriquet,  H,  167  ;  IV,  30,  Losada,  M.


798


TIGER


TREASURY


Tiger  of  Honduras,  the,  sobriquet,  III,  9,  Guardiola.

Tigress,  the.  capture  of,  I,  570,  Champlin,  S.

Tilden.  Elam,  VI,  114,  Tilden,  S.  J.

Tilcleu,  Moses  Y.,  VI,  115.

Tildeu,  Nathaniel,  VI,  114,  Tilden,  S.  J.

Tilghman,  Richard,  VI,  116,  Tilghman,  J.

Tilley,  Thomas  Morgan,  VI.  117,  Tilley,  S.  L.

Tilley  le  Peley,  V,  41,  Pleville.

Tillodontia,  the,  IV,  218,  Marsh,  O.  C.

Tilly,  Comte  de,  I,  264,  Bingham,  W.

Timanus,  Sarah  J.,  I,  764,  Crafts,  W.  F.

Timber-bending  machine,  a,  II,  766,  Griffiths,  J.  W.

Timber-culture  laws,  III,  218,  Hitchcock,  P.  W.

Timberlake,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  HI,  380 ;  II,  294,  Eaton,  M.  L.  O.

Timber  Ridge  meeting-house,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archibald.

Time-locks,  invention  of,  V,  397,  Sargent,  J.

Time-piece  and  Literary  Companion,  the,  II,  549,  Freneau.

Time  service.  Ill,  611,  Langley.

Time-store,  a,  VI,  366,  Warren,  Josiah.

Timoleon,  pen-name,  IV,  593,  Orr,  I.

Timon,  pen-name,  II,  176,  Didier,  E.  L.

Timrod,  William,  VI,  121,  Timrod,  H.

Tinker,  Nehemiah,  I,  438,  Buckingham.  J.  T.

Tinker,  Theodore,  pen-name,  VI,  609,  Woodworth.

Tinsley,  Peter,  I,  640,  CL'ij,  H.

Tinto,  Dick,  pen-name,  II,  680,  Goodrich,  F.  B.

Tippecanoe,  battle  of,  II,  92,  Daviess  ;  335,  Ellskwatawa  ;
III,  96  ;  97.

Tippecanoe,  sobriquet,  VI,  196.

Tippecanoe  and  Tyler  too,  the  song,  V,  327,  Boss,  A.  C.

Tippoo,  Sultan,  I,  744.

Tipton.  Joshua,  VI,  123,  Tipton,  J.

Titcomb,  Timothy,  pen-name,  III,  235,  Holland,  J.  G.

Titi,  Prince,  V,  164,  Ralph.

Titian,  the  American,  I,  58,  Allston,  Washington.

Titterwell,  Timothy,  pen-name,  III,  528,  Kettell.

Tittle,  Sarah,  I,  309,  Bolton.

Tituba,  IV,  659,  Parris,  S.

Titus,  Thomas,  III,  268,  Hosmer,  T.

Tixjanaque,  Chief,  VI,  665,  Zuiiiga,  B.

Tlalteloleo,  city  of,  captured,  IV,  385,  Moquihuix.

Tlascala,  republic  of,  I,  749  ;  a  god  of,  III,  307,  Huitzilon  ;
opposition  in,  to  Cortes,  434,  Jicotencal.

Tlaxcaltec  Indians,  the,  VI,  273,  Velasco,  L.

Tlogue  Nahuague,  IV,  496,  Netzahualcoyotl.

Tobacco,  made  a  medium  of  circulation,  V,  636,  Spotswood ;
introduced  into  Europe,  162  ;  II.  671,  Goes ;  destruction
of  a  fleet,  391,  Ecertsen  ;  trade  of  Virginia,  III,  188,
Herrman,  A.

Tobago,  II,  132,  De  Lancey,  S. ;  I,  288,  Blanclielande ;  II,
567,  Gobarel.

Toboket,  II,  295,  Eaton,  8.

Tobosos,  the,  II,  398,  Fabert.

Tocaima,  city  of.  IV,  194.  Manosalvas.

Todd,  Elizabeth  P.,  II,  308,  Edwards,  N.  W.

Todd,  John.  Ill,  727,  Lincoln,  M.  T.

Todd,  Lawrie,  pen-name,  VI,  100,  Thorburn,  G.

Todd,  Mary,  III,  726,  727.

Todd,  Sarah,  I,  112,  Astor.

Todd's  Tavern,  flght  at,  V.  498.

Tofino,  Vicente,  VI,  260,  Vargas  y  Ponce.

Tohopeka,  battle  of,  III,  274,  Houston,  S. :  376.

Token,  the.  annual,  II,  680,  Goodrich,  S.  G.

Tokio,  school  system  of,  IV,  467,  Murray,  D.\  university,
423,  Morse,  E.  S.

Toledo,  Chief,  III,  311.  Humbert.

Toleration  party,  the,  II,  313,  Edwards,  P. ;  III,  485,  Jud-
son,  A.  T.

Tolman,  Maria.  V.  239.  Richards,  M.  T.

Tololotlan,  battle  at,  IV,  214,  Mdrquez.

Tolsa,  Manuel,  II,  644,  Gil.

Tolstoi,  Count  Leo,  III.  287,  Howells.

Toltecs,  the.  III,  299,  Huehuetemixcatl :  300,  Huematzin  ;
divine  book  of,  300,  Huematzin  ;  burning  of  books  of,
300;  307,  Huitzilihuitl;  kings  of,  371,  Ixtlilcuechahua  ;
discovery  of  ruins  of  cities,  IV,  26,  Lorillard,  P. ;  history
of,  V,  149,  Quetzalcohuatl ;  VI,  64,  Tepancallzin  ;  superi-
ority of,  635,  Xolotl ;  literary  works,  654,  Zamora,  C.

Tolu,  balsam  of,  plant  yielding,  IV,  472,  Mutis.

Toluca,  capture  of,  IV,  339,  Miramon.

Tomlinson,  Antoinette,  II,  169,  Dibble.

Tomlinson,  Maria  M.,  II,  169,  Dibble.

Tomometer,  the,  VI,  119,  Tillman.

Tompkins,  Jonathan  G.,  VI,  130,  Tompkins,  D.  D.

Tompkins  square  demonstration,  II,  274,  Duryee,  A.

Tom's  river,  battle  at,  VI,  135,  Torbert.

Tom  Thumb,  Gen.,  V,  717.  Stratton,  C.  8.

Tonbachire.  colony  on  the,  III,  366,  Isles.

Tong  for  ships,  invention  of  a,  rV,  523,  Nindemann.

Tongue,  Elizabeth,  VI,  575,  Winthrqp,  J.

Tongue  river,  battle,  I,  709,  Connor,  P.  E. ;  II,  15,  Crook  ;  44.

Tonfatuh,  Chief,  VI,  665,  Zuiiiga,  B.

Tonica  Indians,  the,  II,  93,  Da'vion,  A.

Tonomy  hill,  fort  on.  IV,  313,  Miantonomo.

Tonti,  Lorenzo,  VI,  132.  Tonty.

Tonto,  engagement  at  the.  IL  15,  Crook.

Topham  family,  the.  VI,  31,  Tappan,  D.

Topiltzin,  King,  III,  299,  Huehuetemixcatl ;  VI,  64,  Tepan-
caltzin ;  635,  Xochitl.


Torata,  battle  of,  II,  372.  Espartero;  VI,  222,  Valdes.
Geronimo  ;  viscount  of,  223.

Torgan,  siege  of,  I,  248,  Bernard,  8.

Tories,  raids  of,  during  the  Revolution,  II,  132  ;  proposed
compensation  to,  I,  19  :  indemnity  to,  II.  532,  533 ;  con-
fiscation of  property  of,  132  ;  IV,  209  ;  V,  282  ;  claims  of,
on  the  British  government,  III,  569,  Knox  ;  raids  of,  and
captures,  II,  39,  Gushing.  N.;  132,  433  ;  V,  243;  IV,  90,
McClure,  J. ;  defeat  of.  at  Moore's  creek  ;  I,  557,  Cas-
well ;  IV,  382,  Moore,  James ;  at  Ramsour's  Mills,  383,
Moore,  John  ;  mobbed,  III,  317,  Hunt,  I.;  clause  in  the
treaty  concerning,  VI,  267  ;  destruction  of  a  newspaper
press,  V,  268,  Rivington  ;  verses  by,  IV,  556,  Udell  ;  V,
647,  Stansbury,  J.

Torkillus,  Rev.  Reorus,  VI.  207,  Unander.

Tornado,  sobriquet,  VI,  400,  Wayne,  A.

Toronto,  Benedict  Arnold's  grant  of  land  near,  I,  96  ;  lit-
erary club  of,  II,  260,  Dunlop,  W.;  R.  C.  institutions
founded  in,  338.  Elmsley  ;  in  the  Mackenzie  rebellion,
474,  Fitzgibbon  ;  gifts  to)  III,  278,  Howard.  J.  G.;  found-
ing of  hospital,  IV.  102,  Macdonald,  John  ;  newspaper
in.  mobbed,  134,  Mackenzie,  W.  L.;  former  name  of,
134  ;  McMaster  Hall  at,  149,  McMaster,  W. ;  religious  in-
stitutions in,  gifts  to,  149,  McMaster,  W.;  expedition
against,  V,  19,  Pike.  Z.  M. ;  Newsboys'  home  in,  VI,  547,
Wilson,  Daniel  ;  University  of,  II,  29,  Cumberland.

Torpedo-boats,  electric,  V,  542,  Sims,  W.  S.

Torpedoes,  invention  of,  I,  474,  Bushnell,  D.\  II,  563;  III,
285,  Howell,  J.  A. ;  644,  Lay,  J.  L. ;  invention  of  a  device
to  secure  ships  against,  V,  457,  Selfridge.

Torpedo-gun,  VI,  654,  Zalinski  ;  illustration,  654.

Torpedo  mines,  invention  for  arranging,  IV,  265.

Torre,  Duke  de  la,  V,  464,  Serrano.

Torrey,  James,  VI,  138,  Torrey,  C.  T.

Torrey,  Capt.  William,  VI,  138,  Torrey,  J.

Tortugas,  the,  I,  489,  Cabell,  E.  C.;'  Ill,  584,  Lacroix ;  buc-
caneers of  the,  679,  Legrand  ;  IV,  733,  Perrot,  P.

To  the  High  and  Honorable  Parliament,  Humble  Petitions,
etc.,  anonvmous  book,  VI,  353,  Ward,  N.

Totowa,  N.  J.,  IV,  312,  Meyer,  H.

Toucey,  Rev.  Thomas.  VI,  142.  Toucey,  I.

Toulmin,  Alfred,  IV,  399,  Morgan,  M.

Toulon,  siege  of,  II,  250,  Dugommier  ;  341,  Emerian.

Tounens,  Charles  de,  IV,  58* ,  Orelie.

Tourinho. See  Campo  Tourinho.

Tournelort,  J.  P.  de,  II,  177,  Diereville  ;  IV,  732,  Perrin,
E.  P. ;  V,  43.  Plumier.

Tourtellotte,  Col.  F.  W.,  II,  319,  Eldridge,  H.  N.

Toussaint,  C.  Henri.  II,  733,  Greatorex,  E.

Toussaint,  Isaac  and  Placide,  VI,  146,  Toussaint.

Town-clock,  first,  in  New  York,  H,  129,  De  Lancey.

Towne,  Rebecca,  IV,  546,  Nxirse,  R.

Towns,  John,  VI,  147,  Towns,  G.  W.  B.

Townsend,  David,  VI.  147,  Toicnsend,  E.  D.

Townsend,  Freelove,  HI,  471,  Jones,  T.

Townsend,  Gideon,  VI,  149,  Townsend,  M.  A.

Townsend,  John  R.,  VI,  149,  Townsend,  T.  S.

Townsend,  Rev.  Stephen,  VI,  148,  Townse7id,  G.  A.

Townsend,  William,  VI,  149,  Toumsend,  P.

Townshend,  Charles,  II,  334,  Ellis,  W.

Townshend  acts,  the,  action  on,  III,  664,  Lee,  R.  H. ;  dis-
cussion of,  666.  Lee,  A.

Toxteth  Park,  IV,  251,  Mather,  R.

Tractarian  movement,  the,  III,  370,  Ives,  L.  S.

Tract  society,  the,  gifts  to,  VI,  32,  Tappan,  A.

Tracy,  Charles,  memorial  building  to,  VI.  152.

Tracy,  Dr.  Elisha,  VI,  187,  Turner,  Philip.

Tracy,  Rev.  J.  M.,  II,  46,  Culler,  H.  M.  T.

Tracy,  Uriah,  quoted,  II,  578.

Trade  and  plantations,  board  of,  I,  290,  Blathtvayt.

Trade-dollar,  the,  III,  730,  Linderman.

Trafalgar,  battle  of,  VI,  296,  Villeneuve,  Pierre  ;  incident
of,  I,  614,  Churruca.

Trail,  the,  invention  of,  V,  674,  Stevens,  R.  L.

Traill,  Catherine  Parr,  IV,  376,  Moodie,  S.

Traill,  Lieut.  T.,  VI,  153.  Traill,  C.  P.  S.

Train.  Enoch,  VI,  487,  Whitney,  A.  D.  T.

Tramontane,  order  of,  V,  635,  Spotswood.

Trance,  a  remarkable,  VI,  62-63,  Tennent,  W.

Transcendental  club,  the,  II,  344,  345  ;  V.  259.

Transcendentalism,  II,  344  ;  VI,  100,  Thoreau  ;  poetic  at-
tack on,  IV,  40.

Transit  of  Venus,  the. See  Venus,  transit  of.

Transylvania,  Prince  of,  V,  570.

Transylvania  land  company,  the.  III,  104,  Henderson,  R.

Transylvania  university,  HI,  444,  Jolbnson,  M.  C. ;  V,  233,
Rice,  David,

Trapnell,  Rev.  Joseph,  VI.  495,  Whittingham.

Trappists.the.  II,  476,  Flaget  ;  convents  of,  IV,  23,  Loras  ;
565,  O'Gorman  ;  V,  599,  Smyth,  C;  at  Gethsemane,  Ky.,
619,  Spalding,  M.  J.

Traveller,  the,  pen-name,  V,  712,  Story,  I.

Treason,  proposed  trials  for,  H,  717.

Treasonable  offences,  I,  464.

Treason  resolutions,  U,  730,  Gray,  G.

Treasure,  recovery  of  lost,  IV,  764,  Phips.

Treasury  department,  the,  II,  577,  578 ;  III,  58 ;  IV,  808,
Meredith,  Samuel ;  VI,  232 ;  burning  of  the  building,
VI,  588,  Wolcott.


TREAT


TYLER


799


Treat,  Matthias,  VI,  157,  Treat.  S.  H.

Treat,  Theodore,  VI.  157,  Treat,  S.  H.

Treaties :  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  III,  332  ;  of  Brownsville,  IV,
730,  Perkins,  Simon  ;  of  Casco,  171,  Madockawando  ;
of  Cordova,  III.  368,  declared  void  in  Spain,  368  ;  of
Florida,  IV,  279,  Meade,  R.  W.  ;  of  Ghent,  II,  578  ;  in-
demnity for  violations  of,  578  ;  587,  Gambier  ;  III,  377  ;
V,  271,  Roberdeau,  I.  ;  of  Guadalupe  Hidalgo,  modifica-
tions of  provisions  of,  II,  568.  Gadsden,  James  ;  V,  441  ;
of  Josepliinton  and  Hopewell,  III,  121,  Hawkins,  B.;  of
Lircay,  II,  573,  Gainza  ;  of  New  Echota,  V,  249.  Ridge  ;
of  Paris,  I,  19,  20 ;  II,  127,  Delafteld,  John  ;  IV.  603.  Os-
wald, R.;  of  Piquisa,  II,  586,  Gamarra,  A.;  of  Port  Vin-
cent, V,  142,  Putnam,  R.  ;  of  Ryswick.  IV,  171,  Ma-
dockawando ;  of  San  Ildefonso,  III,  330,  Huss ;  V,  23,
Pinckney,  T.  ;  the  Scheldt,  V,  390,  San  ford,  H.  S.  ;  the
Seward-Lyons,  472  ;  the  Vivanco-Pareja,  100,  Prado,  M. ;
of  Washington,  the,  II,  720  ;  V,  322,  Rose,  Sir  J.  ;  of
Watoga,  III,  164,  Henderson,  R.  ;  the  Webster-Ashbur-
ton,  V,  441  ;  I,  110,  Ashburton  ;  Jay's,  IH,  420  ;  com-
mercial, with  Germany,  VI,  451,  Wheaton,  H;  with
China,  V.  209,  Reed,  W.  B.  ;  with  Japan,  IV,  737,  Perry,
M.  C.  :  V,  9  ;  with  Tripoli,  105,  Preble,  E.  ;  with  Zanzi-
bar, 273,  Roberts,  E.  O.;  with  Muscat,  Siam,  and  Coch  in-
China,  273  ;  reciprocity,  with  Canada,  9  ;  reciprocity,
with  Mexico,  314,  Romero  ;  securing  right  of  way  on
Panama,  55  ;  with  South  American  republics,  418,
Schenck,  R.  C.  ;  Indian,  672,  Stevens,  I.  I.  ;  Fort  Har-
mar  (1789),  369,  St.  Clair  ;  with  Indians  of  the  upper
lakes,  425,  Schoolcraft,  H.  R.  ;  with  the  Six  Nations,  2  ;
205,  Red-Jacket ;  635,  Spotswood  ;  with  Shawnees  and
Dela wares,  114,  Pi-eston,  W.  ;  with  the  Sioux  and  Chip-
pewas,  168,  Ramsey,  A.  ;  with  Miamis  and  Pottawat-
tamies,  192,  Ray,  J.  B.  ;  with  the  Ojibways,  235,  Rice,
H.  M.  ;  with  the  Cherokees,  249,  Ridge  ;  467,  Sevier,  J.

Treaty-making  power,  the,  I,  499.

Treddles,  Tummas,  pseudonym,  I,  427,  Brymner.

Tree  of  peace,  the,  III,  561,  Knickerbocker,  J.

Tremont  Temple,  burning  of,  VI,  95,  Thompson,  T.

Trenchard.  George,  VI,  158.  Trenchard,  E.

Trendelenburg,  Adolph,  II,  655,  Gilman,  D.  C.

Trent,  the,  arctic  exploring-ship,  I,  428,  Buchan ;  II,  535,

Trent  affair,'  the,'  IV,  243,  Mason,  J.  M. ;  V,  549,  Slidell ;
748  ;  VI.  509,  Wilkes,  C. :  principle  involved  in,  V.  472.

Trenton,  battle  of,  II,  543,  Frelinghuysen,  F.  ;  V,  198,
Read,  T.

Trepassy,  capture  of  the.  I,  180,  Barry,  J.

Tresse,  Thomas,  V,  262,  Rittenhouse.

Treuen  Sch western,  Die,  society  of,  III,  491,  Kalisch.

Trevillion  Station,  engagement  at,  II,  43,  Custer  ;  714  ;  IH,
69,  Hampton  ;  V,  499.

Trevino,  Gen.,  II,  167  ;  III,  480,  Juarez,  B.  P.

Trevithick,  II,  384,  Evans,  O.

Trevore  island,  V,  643,  Standish.

Trezevant,  Louis,  IH,  454,  Johnson.  W.

Triangulation,  system  of,  II,  86.  Davidson,  G.

Trico,  Catalina,  V,  183,  Rapaelje.

Trigge,  Gen.,  Ill,  644,  Laye.

Trigueros,  C.  M..  II,  362,  Erauzo.

Trimble,  Capt.  James,  VI,  160,  Trimble,  A.

Trinidad,  island  of,  IV,  588,  Orellana  ;  discovered,  523,
NiHo,  P.  A. ;  III,  16,  Gutierrez  de  Lara  :  V,  449,  Sedeilo.

Trinidad,  voyage  of  the,  IV.  173,  Magellan.

Trinitaria,  La.,  secret  society  of,  II,  136,  Delmonte  ;  237,
Duarte.

Trinity  church,  New  York,  title  to  property  of,  I,  301,
Bogardus,  E.\  charter  for  building,  II,  481,  Fletcher,  B.;
Ill,  155,  Heathcote  ;  IV,  309,  Merritt ;  organ  of,  IH,  44,
Hall,  T. ;  heirs  of  the  farm,  VI,  253,  Van  Rensselaer,  H. ;
284,  Vesey,  W.  ;  Lawrence  monument,  in  the  church-
yard, illustration,  III,  640  ;  illustrations,  IV,  564  ;  VI,
213,  302  ;  the  reredos,  illustration,  584.

.Trinity  college,  Hartford,  I,  415,  Broumell ;  removal  of,
III,  373,  Jackson,  Abner ;  V,  145,  Pynchon,  T.  R.  ;  VI,
142,  Totten.  S.;  gifts  to.  IV.  402,  Morgan,  J.  S.:  V,  751,
Sumner,  G.;  VI,  450-451,  Wheaton,  N.  S. ;  illustration,
V,  565.

Trinity  island,  taken  possession  of,  II,  510,  Foster,  Henry.

Triompho,  Baron  do,  IV,  499,  Neves.

Trip  for  mining-buckets,  invention  of  a,  II,  4,  Craven,  H.  S.

Tripoli,  pirates  of,  and  war  with,  I,  140,  Bainbridge,  W.;
violation  of  treaty  by,  II,  121  ;  war  with,  I,  179,  Barron,
S.;  II,  120,  Decatur ;  295,  Eaton,  W.\  III,  640,  Lawrence,
J.  ;  V,  73,  Porter,  D.  ;  105.  Preble,  E. ;  296-297,  Rodgers  ;
605,  Somers,  R.;  627,  Spence,  R.  T;  667,  Sterett,  A.  ;  684,
Stewart,  C;  VI,  161,  Trippe  ;  peace  concluded,  III,  648,
Lear.

Tristan  d'Acunha,  shipwreck  at,  V,  420,  Schley,  W.  S.

Trotter,  Ann,  I.  135,  Bailey.

Trotter,  Lieut. -Col.  James.  VI,  162,  Trotter,  G.

Trouin,  Duguay,  III,  596,  La.  Jonquiire.

Troup,  Lieut.  Robert,  II,  133.  De  Lancey,  C.

Trowbridge,  Judge  Edmund,  IV,  664,  Parsons,  T. ;  V,  143,
Putnam,  J.

Trowbridge,  Dr.  J.  F.,  II.  728.  Gray,  Asa.

Troy,  iron-works  at,  I,  450,  Burden  ;  polytechnic  institute
at,  VI.  252,  Van  Rensselaer,  S. ;  the  Vanderheyden  house
at,  illustration,  243  ;  Wool  monument  at,  illustration,  609.


True  Patriot.  A,  pen-name,  VI,  364,  Warren.  Joseph.

True  Reformed  Dutch  church,  the,  II,  553,  Froeli(;h.

Trujillo,  founded,  IV,  385.  Mora,  D.

Trujillo,  Torcuato,  HI,  367,  Iturbide.

Trumbull,  Faith,  III,  325,  Huntington,  Jedidiah.

Trumbull,  Harriet,  V,  529,  Silliman,  B.

Trumbull,  John,  his  painting  of  Cornwallis's  surrender,  II,

155,  Deuxponts, W; quoted,  305,  Edson,  J.; IV,  742,

Peters,  S.;  V,  469,  Sewall,  Jonathan.
Trumbull,  Juliana,  VI,  600,  Woodbridge,  W.
Trumbull,  Mary,  VI,  526,  Williams,  W.
Trumbull,  the,  and  the  Wyatt,  IV,  515,  Nicholson,  J.
Trumpeter,  automaton,  invention  of,  IV,  171,  Maelzl.
Trusta,  H.,  pen-name,  IV,  752,  Phelps,  E.  S.
Truxton,  Cornelia,  IV,  476,  Nancrede,  J.  G.
Truxtun.  the,  I,  419,  Bruce,  H
Tryal,  the  ship,  II,  727,  Graves,  T.
Tryon  county.  N.  Y.,  I,  479,  Butler,  J.
Tryon  Hall,  III,  471,  Jones,  T.
Tryoninhokaraven.  Chief,  IV,  537,  Norton,  J.
Tscheraikoff,  wreck  of  the,  III,  86,  Haro,  G.  L.  de.
Tsomus  (Victoria),  II,  212,  Douglas,  Sir  J.
Tucapel,  battle  of  the,  I,  559,  Caupolican  ;  694,  Colocolo  ;

III,  295,  Huden  ;  633.  Lautaro.
Tuckahoe,  Randolph  of,  V,  173,  Randolph,  T.  M.;  174,  Ran-
dolph, W.
Tucker,  Ellen  L.,  II,  344.
Tucker,  Prof.  George,  in,  423,  Jefferson,  T.
Tucker,  G.  F.,  IV,  361,  Monroe,  f.
Tucker,  St.  George,  IV,  91,  McClurg,  J.
Tuckey,  Janet,  III,  683,  Leland,  C.  G.
Tucuman,  congress  of,  V,  301,  Rodriguez,  M.  D.
Tudor,  Frederic,  VI,  178,  Tudor.
Tufts,  Peter,  VI,  178,  Tufts,  C.
Tufts,  Simon,  I,  387,  Brooks,  John.

Tufts  college,  gift  to,  I,  173,  Barnum,  P.  T. ;  VI,  178,  Tufts.
Tug  Fork  of  the  Big  Sandy,  named,  V,  114,  Preston,  W.
Tuke,  Miss,  IH,  46,  Hallam,  L.
Tula,  kingdom  of,  III,  371,  Ixtlilcuechahua  ;  rebellion  in,

ruin  of  the  city,  299,  Huehuetemixcatl  ;  convent  of,  VI,

654,  Zamora,  C.
Tulane  university, II,  640,  641, Gibson, R.  L.;  Ill,  456,

Johnston,  W.  P. ;  illustration,  VI,  179.
Tungstall  Station,  action  at,  V,  499.
Tungsten,  discovery  of,  II,  339,  Eluyar.
Tuning-forks,  II,  195,  Dolbear.
Tunis,  violation  of  treaty  by,  II,  121.
Tunja,  battle  at,  I,  305.

Tunnelling-machine,  invention  of  a,  II,  4,  Craven,  H.  S.
Tupac-Amaru,  II,  485,  Flores,  I.

Tupinamba  Indians,  the.  V,  616,  Souza,  T.  de  ;  642,  Staden.
Tupper,  Tristram,  VI,  181,  Tupper,  H.  A.
Turbines,  improvement  in,  I,  341,  Boy  den,  U.  A.;  VI,  120,

Timby.
Turgot,  botanist,  II,  196,  Dombey;  quoted,  531.
Turgofs  Memoirs,  anonymous  publication  on,  VI,  267.
Turk,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  254,  Van  Satlee.
Turk,  William,  III,  744,  Livingston,  J.  W.
Turkey  island,  Va.,  V,  174,  Randolph,  W.
Turkeys,  first  mention  of,  II,  628,  Geraldini.
Turkish  compassionate  fund,  the,  I,  186,  Bartlett,  W.  L.  A.
Turmeric,  compounds  of,  III,  384,  Jackson,  C.  L.
Turnbull,  Col.  George,  V,  752.
Turner,  Dr.  Edward,  H,  226,  Draper,  J.  W.
Turner,  Horsefall,  I,  693.  Collyer,  R.
Turner,  Nathaniel,  III,  312,  Humfrey.
Turner,  Robert,  V,  262,  Rittenhouse.
Turner,  W.  G.,  statue  by,  IV,  736,  Perry,  0.  H.
Turreted  monster,  the,  V,  75.
Tuscahachees,  Chief,  IV,  125,  Mcintosh,  W.
Tuscaloosa  Monitor,  the,  V,  596,  Smith,  W.  R.
Tuscarawas,  peace  of,  I,  329,  Bouquet ;  fighting  with,  173,

Barnwell  ; H,  700,  Graff enried  ; IH,  643,  Lawson,  J.;

337,  Hyde,  E.
Tuscarora  John,  sobriquet,  I,  173,  Barnwell,  J.
Tuscarora,  the.  I,  224,  Belknap,  G.  E.
Tuskegee  college,  Ala.,  HI,  735,  Lipscomb,  A.  A.;  VI,  372,

Washington,  B.  T.
Tustinugee-Thlucco,  VI.  58.  Tecumseh.
Tuthill,  Rev.  Cornelius,  II.  284,  Dwight,  H.  E.
Tuthill,  Cornelius,  VI,  189,  Tuthill,  L.  C.
Tutul  Xin,  I,  602,  Chi-ah-kin  ;  II,  613,  Gaspar.
Tuxedo  Park,  IV,  26,  Lorillard,  P.
Tuxtepec.  plan  of,  II,  167.  168.
Twain,  Mark,  pen-name,  I.  648,  Clemens,  S.  L.
Tweed  charter,  the,  VI,  115.
Tweeddale,  Marchioness  of,  V,  323,  Rose,  Sir  J.
Tweed  suits,  the,  IV,  555,  CConor.
Twelve  Seigneurs,  the,  IV,  300,  Huet :  310,  Mesnard.
Twickenham,  skirmish  at,  VI.  447,  Wharton,  T.
Twiggs,  Gen.  John,  VI,  191,  Twiggs,  D.  E.
Twilight  club,  the,  VI,  564,  Wingate,  C.  F.
Twiss,  Dr.,  I,  669,  Cobbett,  T.
Two-third  rule,  the,  V,  405,  Saunders,  R.  M.
Tybee  island,  II,  266,  Du  Pont ;  654,  Gillmore.
Tycoon,  defeat  of  the,  H.  358,  English,  E.
Tydings,  Keely,  VI.  192,  Tydings,  R.
Tyler,  Grafton,  VI,  201,  Tyler,  S.
Tyler,  President  John,  house  of,  illustration,  VI,  196.


800


TYNDAL


VALENCIENNES


Tyndal,  Margaret,  VI,  573.

Tyndale's  hill.  VI.  202,  Tyndale.

Tyndall.  Prof.  John,  II,  348  ;  VI,  202,  Tyndale.

Tynes,  Col.,  IV,  208;

Tyng,  James,  VI,  202,  Tyng.

Type,  improvements  in,  machine  for  casting,  1, 418,  Bruce,

G.;  invention  for  making,  708,  Conner,  J.;  inventor  of

wooden,  VI,  428,  Wells,  D.
Type-distributor,  invention  of  a,  HI,  506,  Kellogg,  G.
Type-foundry,  the  Johnson,  IV,  129,  Mackellar.
Type-setting  machines,  I,  43,  Alden,  Timothy ; IV,  462,

Munson,  J.  E.
Type- writers,  application  of  steam  to,  V,  173,  Randolph,

T.  F.  ;  invention  of,  220,  Remington,  P. ;  484,  Shaver  ;

515,  Sholes,  C.  L.
Typhoid  pneumonia,  treatment  of,  II,  635,  Gibbes.  R.  W.
Typograrjh,  inventor  of  the,  VI,  372,  Washburn,  C.  A.
Tyrannicide,  the,  war-ship,  II,  469,  Fiske,  J.
Tyson.  Dr.  H.,  VI,  204,  Tyson,  J.
Tzompan,  VI,  57,  Techotlalatzin.

U  Bet.  pen-name.  VI,  626,  Wright,  R.  M.

Uhl,  Jacob,  IV,  608,  Ottendorfer.

Ulster,  Pa.,  village  on  the  site  of,  IV,  374,  Montour,  E.

Umachiri,  assault  on,  V,  135,  Pumacahua.

Umsted,  F.  G.  Q.,  I.  285,  Blake,  L.  D.

Unadilla,  destruction  of,  I,  480,  Butler,  W.

Uncle  Esek,  pen-name,  V,  485,  Shaw,  H.  W.

Uncle  Frank,  pen-name,  VI,  609,  Woodworth.

Uncle  Si,  sobriquet,  III,  178.  Henson,  J.

Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,  originals  of  characters  in,  I,  586  ;  675,
Coffin.  L. ;  III,  178,  Henson,  J ;  reply  to,  184,  Herndon,
M.  E. ;  V,  180,  Rankin,  J. ;  the  southern,  IV,  304,  Meri-
wether, L.

Undercliff,  IV,  412,  Morris,  G.  P.

Underground  railroad,  the.  I,  675,  Cotftn,  L. :  IT,  285,  Dyer,
C.  V. :  637,  Gibbons,  Joseph  ;  V,  659,  Steel ;  689,  Still ;
VI,  172,  Tubman.

Underwood,  Orison,  VI,  209,  Underwood,  A.  B.

Underwood,  W.  T.,  VI,  210,  Undericood.  J.  R.

Unimok  volcano,  discovery  of,  III,  86,  Haro,  G.  L.  de.

Union,  the  Federal,  speeches  on,  VI,  408,  410,  411.

Union  City,  capture  of.  I,  443,  Buford,  N.  B.

Union  college,  II,  312,  Edwards,  J.,  Jr.  ;  founding  of.  V,
433,  Schuyler,  P.  J.  ;  IV,  539,  Nott,  E.;  semi-centennial,
gifts  to,  540  ;  II,  134,  Delavan  ;  IV,  664,  Parsons,  L. ;  VI,
449,  Wheatley;  589,  Wolfe,  C.  L.

Union  de  Adobes,  battle  at.  II,  167.

Unionists,  expulsion  of.  from  the  South,  II,  517,  Fowler.  J.  S.

Union  League  club.  II,  638,  Gibbs,  O.  W.  ;  V,  734,  Stur-
ges,  Jonathan.

Union  Magazine,  the.  III,  556,  Kirkland,  C.  M.

Union  makes  strength,  incident,  II,  553,  Froeligh.

Union  Theological  seminary,  founding  of,  IV,  246,  Mason,
J.  M  ;  677,  Patton,  W.\  III,  218,  Hitchcock,  R.  D.;  gifts
to,  114,  Hatfield  ;  IV,  213,  Marquand,  F.\  398,  Morgan,
Edwin  D.

Unitarian  Essayist,  the,  magazine,  III,  306,  Huidekoper,
Harm  Jan.

Unitarianism,  controversy  on,  I,  154,  Bancroft,  A. ;  216-
217,  Beecher  ;  577  ;  II,  588-589,  Gannett,  E.  S. ;  649,  Giles,
H. ;  IV,  424;  Morse,  J. ;  654,  Parker,  T. ;  documents  on,
V,  13,  Pierce,  J.  ;  VI,  47,  Taylor,  N.  W.  ;  name  first
avowed  in  the  United  States,  II,  540,  Freeman,  James  ;
first  preached  in  America,  618,  Gay,  E.

Unitarian  party,  the,  in  the  Argentine  Republic,  V,  321,
Rosas  ;  forces  of,  396,  Santander.

Unitarians,  separation  of,  conservative  school  of,  VI,  357,
Ware,  H. ;  schools  of,  II,  565,  Furness  ;  IV,  537,  Norton,
A.:  first  church  in  New  York,  V.  502,  Sherman,  J.;  re-
lief society,  IV,  658,  Parkman,  F.\  missions  of,  II,  57,
Dall,  C.H.  A.

Unitas  Fratrum,  the. See  Moravians.

United  Brethren  of  Christ,  sect  of,  IV,  609,  Otterbein.

United  colonies  of  New  England,  VI,  566,  Winslow,  E.

United  Irishmen,  the,  II,  349,  Emmet,  T.  A. ;  473,  Fitzger-
ald, Lord  E. ;  IV,  92,  McCook,  D. ;  154.  MacNevin.

United  States,  the,  war  of,  for  independence,  see  Revolu-
tionary war  ;  proposal  to  make  a  monarchy  of,  VI,
377  ;  organization  of  the  government,  378,  380  ;  the  con-
federation, 378 ;  adoption  of  the  constitution,  379  ;  sug-
gestion for  form  of  government,  IV,  511,  Nichola. ;  gen-
eral survey  of,  701,  Peirce. See  War  of  1812  and  War,

the  CIVIL.

United  States,  the  frigate,  II,  120,  Decatur  ;  121 ;  appro-
priation for  finishing.  III.  375.

United  States,  the,  vessel.  III,  133,  Hayes,  1. 1.

United  States  bank,  the,  II,  286,  Duane,  W.  J. See  Banks.

United  States  Catholic  Magazine,  the,  IV,  466,  Murphy,  J.

Unite  or  Die  device,  the,  II,  528,  Franklin  ;  III,  243,  Holt ;
illustration.  II,  528.

Universalism,  pioneer  of,  IV.  469,  Murray,  J.

Universalist  Magazine,  founded.  I,  152,  Ballou,  H.

Universalists,  first  foreign  missionary,  V.  610,  Souli,  C.  A.',
first  woman  ordained  as  minister,  III,  71,  Hanaford ;
gift  to  societies  of,  VI,  25,  Talcott.

University  college,  founded,  I,  470,  Burroughs,  S.

University  of  California,  observatory  built  for,  illustration,
in,  709  ;  gift  to,  IV,  332,  Mills,  D.  O.


University  of  Cincinnati,  the,  I,  701,  Comegys.

University  of  Georgia,  founded,  I,  148,  Baldwin,  A.;  HI,
308,  Hull,  Hope.

University  of  the  Immaculate  Conception,  Texas,  IV,  557,
Odin,  John  Mary.

University  of  Lima,  endowment,  I.  232,  Benavides.

University  of  Louisiana.  Ill,  318,  Hunt,  T.

University  of  Mexico,  founded,  VI,  277,  Vera  Cruz.

University  of  Michigan,  laboratory  of,  n,  213,  Douglas,  S.
H. ;  opened  to  women,  551,  Frieze.

University  of  New  York,  gift  to,  IV,  18,  Loomis,  A.  L.

University  of  North  Carolina,  D.,  90,  Davie,  W.  R.

University  of  Notre  Dame,  Ind.,  V,  607,  Sorin.

University  of  the  Pacific,  the,  V,  717.  Stratton,  C.  C.

University  of  Pennsylvania,  the,  II,  130,  De  Lancey,  W.  H. ;
528  ;  law  department  of,  V,  483,  Sharsirood  :  gifts  to,  VI,
433,  Welsh,  J.;  488,  Whitney,  A.;  593.  Wood,  G.  B.

University  of  St.  Mary's  of  the  Lake,  111.,  founded,  V,  146,
Quarter,  William.

University  of  San  Pedro  de  Nolasco,  Peru,  n,  437,  Fernan-
dez de  Cordova.

University  of  the  South,  the,  IV,  604,  Otey  ;  re-established,
V,  155,  Quintard,  Charles  T.

University  of  Vermont,  gifts  to,  IV,  217,  Marsh,  G.  P. ;  648,
Park,  Trenor  W.

University  of  Virginia,  bequests  to,  I,  388,  Brooks,  Lewis  ;
HI.  422,  Jefferson.

Unrest,  the,  first  American  yacht,  I,  295,  Block.

Upham,  Hannah,  VI.  212,  Upham,  T.

Upham,  John,  VI,  212,  Upham,  T.

Upham,  Nathaniel,  VI,  212,  Upham,  T.

Upham,  W.  P.,  II.  666.  Glover,  John.

Upjohn.  Richard  M.,  V,  87,  Potter,  E.  T.

Upland,  Pa.,  founding  of,  HI,  499,  Keen,  G.\  mills  at,  V,
137,  Pusey.

Upsal  botanic  garden,  IV,  147,  MacMahon,  B.

Urdaneta,  Martin.  VI,  217.  Urdaneta,  F.

Ure,  Andrew,  II,  364.

Urethrometer,  inventor  of  the,  IV,  605,  Otis,  F.  N.

Urica,  battle  of,  I,  333,  Boves.

Urim  and  Thummim,  V,  575,  Smith,  Joseph.

Uroskiuneria,  geuus  of,  named,  V,  545,  Skinner,  G.  U.

Urquiza,  Gen.,  IV.  23,  Lopez  y  Planes.

Urre,  Felipe  de,  IV,  29,  Losada  ;  460,  MuAoz  de  Collantes.

Ursulines,  the,  I,  591,  Chatfield  ;  in  Quebec  and  Montreal,
III,  616,  La  Peltrie  :  714,  L' Incarnation  ;  destruction  of
convent  in  Charlestown,  IV,  61,  Lyman,  T:  in  Texas,
557,  Odin  ;  convent  of,  in  New  Orleans,  VI,  154,  Tranche-
pain.

Uruaga,  Gen.,  IV.  339,  Miramon.

Uruguay,  cession  of,  I,  107,  Artigas  ;  independence  of,  II,
206,  Dorrego  ;  insurrections  in,  486,  Flores,  V. ;  coloniza-
tion of,  515,  Foucher  ;  Indian  colonies  in,  676,  Gonzalez  de
Santa  Cruz  ;  made  independent  of  Spain,  III.  186  ;  revo-
lutions in,  186 ;  Portuguese  occupation,  annexation  to
Brazil,  independence,  186,  Herrera,  N. ;  634,  Lavalleja  ;
653,  Lecor ;  Jesuit  domination  in,  IV,  335,  Mimeure  ;  in-
dependence of,  698,  Pedro  I. ;  Portuguese  invasion,  inde-
pendence, rebellion  in,  names  of  towns  in,  V,  266,  Rivera ;
war  in,  316,  Rondeau  ;  invasion  of,  321,  Rosas  ;  VI,  218,
Urquiza  ;  681,  Garibaldi.

Uruguayana,  surrender  of  Paraguayan  army  at,  IV,  699,
Pedro  II.

Uruguay  river,  explored,  II,  591,  Garcia.  D.

Urville,  Dumont  d\  III.  616,  La  Perouse.

Ushant,  naval  battle  near,  III,  280,  Howe,  R.

Usher,  Noble  L.,  II.  225,  Drake,  S.

Usseling,  John,  IV,  531,  Nores  ;  VI,  517,  Willekens.

Utah  expedition,  II,  29,  Cumming,  Alfred.

Utah  territory,  established,  violence  in,  VI,  645.  646 ;  re-
volt in,  III,  455  ;  R.  C.  institutions  in,  V,  413,  Scanlan.

Utatlan,  city  of,  destroyed,  I,  603,  Chignavitcelut.

Utes.  the  Uncompahgre,  IV,  610,  Ouray.

Utica,  treaty  made  on  the  site  of,  I,  385,  Brooks,  D. ;  Steu-
ben house  near,  illustration.  V,  670.

Uzquiza,  President,  IV,  625,  Page,  T.  J.

Vaca,  Cabeza  de.  I,  745.

Vaccai,  II.  365,  Errani.

Vaccination,  introduced  into  America,  I,  111,  Aspinwall,
W.;  V,  446,  Seaman,  V.;  VI,  295,  ViUans;  886,  Water-
Mouse  ;  in  Spanish  colonies,  III,  153,  Balrnes  ;  369,  Iturri-
ga ray  :  public,  231,  Holbrook,  Amos  ;  animal,  IV,  230,
Martin,  H.  A.

Vail,  Alfred,  IV.  426.

Vail.  Dr.  Arnold.  VI.  221,  Vail.  W.  B.

Vail,  John  C,  VI.  221,  Vail,  W.  B.

Vail,  Robert,  VI.  221,  Vail.  W.  B.

Valcoulon,  Savary  de,  II.  577,  Gallatin.

Valcour  bay,  battle  of,  VI,  886,  Waterbury,  D.

Valcour  island,  battle  near,  I,  94.

Valdea,  Alejandro,  II,  584.  Galvez,  M.

Valdivia,  capture  of,  I,  495,  Calafquin  ;  694,  Colocolo  ;  II,
26,  Cuillamachu  ;  861  ;  III,  299,  Huelen.

Valence,  James,  II,  615.

Valence,  Mary,  II,  615,  Gates,  H.

Valencia,  battle  of.  IV,  840,  Miranda,  F.

Valencia,  Gen.,  V,  394,  Santa-Anna.

Valenciennes,  Prof.,  I,  35,


VALERO


VERMONT


801


Valero.  Marquis  of,  VT.  CG5,  Zuniga,  B.

Valladolid,  Spain,  I,  698.

Valladolid.  Yucatan,  burning  of,  II,  664.  Glasson.

Valladolid  de  Michoacan,  Mexico,  charities  founded  in,  II,
368,  Esccdona.  Juan  Jose  :  III,  197,  Hidalgo  y  Costilla,
M.  ;  IV,  298,  Mendoza,  A.  de  ;  battle  at,  392,  Morelos  ;
name  of,  changed,  392.

Vallandigham  case,  the,  III,  649,  Leavitt,  H.  H.;  721-722,
723.  Lincoln.

Valle,  M.,  Ill,  384,  Jackson.  A.

Vallee,  Florence,  II,  118,  De  Bar.

Valley  Forge,  support  of  the  army  at,  III,  364,  Irwin,  M. ;
IV,  279,  Meade,  G. :  VI,  398.  Wayne  ;  charge  concerning
the  distresses  at.  IV,  319,  Mifflin,  T.\  the  army  at,  V,  66,
Poor,  E. ;  669  ;  Washington  at,  92,  Potts,  Isaac.

Valley  of  Death,  the.  IV,  27,  Loring.  F.  W.

Vallieres,  battle  of,  IV,  451,  Moyse,  H.

Valparaiso,  bombardment  of,  IV,  545,  Nunez,  C.  M.\  V,
297  ;  founder  of,  363,  Saavedra,  J.  de.

Valve-cock  or  gallows-screw,  the,  III,  81,  Hare,  R.

Valverde,  Cristobal  de,  IV,  22,  Lopez  de  Zuniga.

Valverde,  engagement  at,  V,  521.  Sibley,  H.  H.

Vanadio-tungstates,  discoverer  of.  II,  638,  Gibbs,  O.  W.

Van  Alen,  James  I.,  VI,  230.

Van  Beest.  Albert,  I,  351,  Bradford,  W.\  II,  643,  Gifford,
Robert  Swain.

Van  Berckel,  III,  630,  Laurens  ;  666,  Lee,  W.

Van  Blarenberghe.  paintings  by.  V,  292,  Rochambeau.

Van  Brugh,  Catherine,  III,  741."  Livingston,  P.

Van  Buren,  Abraham  and  Beekman,  VI,  230,  234,  Van
Buren,  W.  H.

Van  Buren,  Ark.,  capture  of,  III.  189.  Herron.

Van  Buren,  John.  II.  505,  Forrest,  E.

Van  Cordes,  Simon,  VI,  586.  Woert.

Van  Corlear,  Anthony  and  Jacobus,  VI.  239.

Van  Cortlandt,  Ann,  VI,  252,  Van  Rensselaer,  P.  S.

Van  Cortlandt.  Anne.  II,  129,  De  Lancey.

Van  Cortlandt.  Catherine.  IV,  758.  Philipse.

Van  Cortlandt,  Frederick  and  James,  VI,  238,  Van  Cort-
landt. J.

Van  Cortlandt,  Johannes  and  Oloff,  VI,  237,  Van  Cort-
landt, P.

Van  Cortlandt,  Maria,  VI,  250,  251,  Van  Rensselaer,  Jere-
mias  and  Killian.

Van  Cortlandt  manor-house,  illustration,  VI,  238.

Van  Cortlandt  park,  VI,  238,  Van  Cortlandt,  J.

Vancouver  island,  colony  of,  II,  212,  Douglas,  Sir  J. ;  VI,
238.  Vancouver.

Vandalia,  111.,  Ill,  716.

Vandenbosch,  Rev.  L.,  II,  55,  Daille.

Vanderbilt.  Cornelius  J.,  VI,  242.

Van  der  Bilt,  Jan  Aertsen,  VI,  240,  Vanderbilt.

Vanderbilt,  \V.  K.,  VI,  242.

Vanderbilt  houses,  the,  illustration,  VI,  242.

Vanderbilt  university,  VI,  560,  Winchell ;  illustration.  241  ;
gifts  to,  241,  242.

Van  der  Donck,  Adrian,  VI.  250,  Van  Rensselaer.

Van  der  Launitz,  Prof.,  IV.  354,  Momberger.

Van  der  Linden,  Dr.  P.,  Ill,  340,  Iglesias.

Vanderpoel,  Dr.  Edward,  Vl.  243.  Vanderpoel.  A.  P.

Van  Dincklager,  Lubbertus,  VI,  255,  Van  Twiller.

Van  Dorth,  Jbhan,  IV,  621,  Padilha.

Vandyke  Brown,  pseudonym,  Brannan,  W.  P.  ;  I,  717,
Cook,  Marc.

Van  Egmond,  IV,  134,  Mackenzie,  W.  L.

Van  Graaf.  buccaneer.  VI.  297,  Vin.

Vanhise,  Charles  R.,  Ill,  &59.  Irving,  R.  D.

Van  Hulst.  William,  IV,  888,  Minuit.

Vanikoro,  island  of,  III.  616,  La  Perouse.

Vanity  Fair,  periodical.  IV.  50,  Ludlow,  F.  H.

Van  Kuyck.  Louis.  II.  196,  Dolph,  J.  H.

Van  Laet,  John,  II,  440,  Ferrelo.

Van  Lerins,  M..  pupils  of.  111,64,  Hamilton,  J.  M.;  IV,
286.  Meeks  ;  331,  Millet,  F.  D.

Van  Loo,  Carl,  picture  by,  VI,  265,  Vaudreuil,  Louis.

Van  Marcke.  pupil  of,  VI,  691,  Lakey.

Van  Mecelenburg,  IV,  286,  Megapolensis.

Van  Meteren,  III,  297.

Vann,  Charles,  chief,  V,  249,  Ridge.

Van  Ness,  Cornelia,  V,  319,  Roosevelt,  J.  J.

Van  Nest,  Peter,  VI,  249,  Van  Nest.

Vannuccini,  Signor,  pupil  of.  V,  320,  Root,  F.  W.

Van  Quickenbarne,  Father.  Ill,  226,  Hoecken.

Van  Rensselaer,  Anne,  IV,  518.  Nivalis,  W.

Van  Rensselaer,  Catherine.  V,  433.  Schuyler,  C.  V.

Van  Rensselaer,  Cornelia  R.  II.  706,  Granger,  F.

V;ih  Rensselaer,  Elizabeth.  VI.  61,  Ten  Broeck.

Van  Rensselaer,  Harriet.  VL  253,  Van  Rensselaer,  S.

Van  Rensselaer,  James  T.,  VI,  26,  Tallmadge,  J.

Van  Rensselaer,  Jan  Baptist,  VI,  250,  Van  Rensselaer,  K.

Van  Rensselaer,  Judge  J.  S.,  VI,  253,  Van  Rensselaer.  M.

Van  Rensselaer,  Schuyler,  VI,  253,  Van  Rensselaer,  M.  G.

Van  Rensselaer  manor-house,  the,  VI,  250,  Van  Rensselaer,
K. ;  illustration.  250.

Vansant,  Rev.  Nicholas,  TV.  262,  Mattison.

Van  Santvoord,  George,  IV.  224.

Van  Schaick,  Sybrant,  VI,  255.  Van  Schaick.  G.

Van  Slechtenhbrst,  Brant  Arent,  V,  735,  736,  Stuyvesant ;
VI,  250,  Van  Rensselaer.

vol.  VI. — 51


Van  Vechten,  Abraham.  V,  130,  Pruyn,  R.  H.

Van  Voorhis,  Mary  A..  VI,  149,  Townsend,  M.  A.

Van  Wely,  Johannes,  VI,  250,  Van  Rensselaer.

Vapor  index,  invention  of  a,  III,  734,  Lippincott,  J.  S.

Varela,  Felipe,  VI,  17,  Taboada.

Varennes,  Ren6  Gautier  de,  VI,  277,  Verandrye.

Vargas,  Isabel  de,  V,  36,  Pizarro,  H.

Varleth,  Jannetje.  Ill,  188,  Hen-man,  A.

Varley,  John,  V,  401,  Sartain,  J.

Varuna,  loss  of  the,  I,  302,  Boggs,  C.  S.

Vasconcellos,  Luiz  de,  VI,  275,  Velloso.

Vassall,  Col.  John,  IV,  15.  Longfellow,  H.  W.

Vassar.  James,  VI,  263,  Vassar,  M.

Vassar,  Thomas,  VI,  263,  264,  Vassar,  M.  and  J.  E.

Vassar,  AVilliam,  VI,  264.  Vassar,  T.  E.

Vassar  college,  gifts  to,  II,  116,  Deane,  J.  H;  III,  433,  Jew-
ett,  M.  P. ;  V,  193,  Raymond,  J.  H. ;  illustration.  VI,  47,
Taylor,  J.  M. ;  gift  to,  90,  Thompson,  E. ;  founding  of,
and  gifts  to,  263-264,  Vassar.

Vaughan,  Eleanor,  VI,  322,  Waldron,  R.

Vaughan,  George,  VI,  269,  Vaughan,  W.

Vaughan,  John  C,  I.  411,  Brown,  Thomas.

Vaughan,  Samuel,  VI,  266,  Vaughan,  B.

Vaughan,  Col.  W.,  IV,  721.  Pepperrell.

Vaughan,  William.  VI,  266  ;  268,  Vaughan,  B.  and  J.  A.

Vauguyon,  Due  de  la.  1, 18.

Vaux,  Ann,  IV,  716,  Penn,  W.

Vaux,  George.  VI,  270,  Vaux,  W.  S.

Vauxhall  garden,  I,  198.  Baiiard.  N.

Vaygats,  the,  passage,  of.  III,  297.

Veach,  W.,  Ill,  522,  Kenton.

Vector  notation,  system  of,  II,  639,  Gibbs,  J.  W.

Vegas  de  Saldias,  battle  of,  V,  121,  Prieto.

Vegetarianism.  II,  703,  Graham,  S.

Veigl,  Xavier,  II,  652,  Gilli.

Vela,  Nunez,  III,  214,  Hinojosa  ;  IV,  366,  Montemayor  ;
641,  Palomino.

Velalcazar,  Sebastian,  II,  164,  Diaz  de  Pineda  ;  168,  Diaz,
R. ;  V,  148,  Quesada.  G.  J.

Velasco,  Luis  de,  V,  455,  Segura.

Velasquez,  pen-name.  III,  738,  Little,  H.  D.

Velha,  Brazil,  church  in,  founder  of,  IV,  643,  Paraguassu.

Velocity,  invention  for  determining,  I,  240,  Benton,  J.  G.

Venables,  Gen.,  II.  569,  Gage,  T.

Venadito,  Count  of,  IV,  335,  Mina.

Venator,  pseudonym,  II,  332,  Elliott,  W.

Vendeans,  the,  III,  633,  Lauzun.

Venezuela,  discovered  and  named,  IV,  567,  Ojeda :  mis-
sionaries in,  738,  Cordova,  F.  de  ;  739,  Cordova,  P.  de  ;
grant  of,  II,  425,  Federmann  ;  colony  in,  III,  335,  Hutten  ;
conquest  of  the  Caracas  country,  IV,  29,  Losada ;  ex-
pedition to  conquer,  V,  633,  Spire  ;  grant  of,  expeditions
to,  colonization,  revocation  of  charter,  VI,  433,  Welser  ;
war  for  independence,  I,  303-307,  Bolivar ;  II,  542,
Freites;  III,  356,  Iribarren;  IV,  340,  Miranda,  F;  355,
Monagas,  J.  T. ;  405,  Morillo  ;  622-623,  Paez  ;  766,  Piar  ;
(1810),  V,  231.  Ribas,  J.  F.;  232,  Ricaurte  ;  609,  Soublette  ;
738,  Sucre  ;  VI,  217,  Urdaneta  ;  secession  from  Colombia,

IV,  623,  Paez  ;  revolutions  in,  DT,  297,  Echeandia ;  368,
Escalona  ;  III,  8.  Gual ;  19,  Guzman  -  Blanco  ;  338,
Ibarra,  A.;  TV,  206,  Mariiio  ;  368,  Monteverde  ;  679,
Paul,  J.  J. ;  VI,  259,  Vargas  ;  emancipation,  IV,  355,
Monagas,  J.  G.

Venice.  Ill,  286,  Hotvells.

Vennusini,  Luigi,  pupil  of,  VI,  490,  Whitney,  M.  W.

Ventilation, invention of fan-wheel for,  rv,  311,  Met-

calf,  M.  J.
Venus,  transit  of,  observed,  I,  395,  Brown,  Joseph  ;  III,  83,

Harkness, W.  ; IV,  503, Newcomb  ; 701,  Peirce  : 741,

Peters,  C.  F.  H. ;  VI,  125,  Todd,  D.  P. :  of  1769,  V,  263.
Vera  Cruz,  founded.  I.  748,  Cortes  ;  attacked,  749  ;  II,  367,

Escalante,  J.  ;  taken  by  buccaneers,  705,  Grandmont ;

III,  631,  Laurent ;  capture  of  (1683).  263,  Van  Horn  ;
668.  Lee,  R.  E.  ;  sieges  of  (1859  and  lt60),  IV,  339,  Mira-
mon  ;  taken  by  the  French  (1838),  589,  Orleans,  F.  F.  ;

V,  394,  Santa-Anna  ; sieges  of,  in  the  Mexican  war,

IV,  737,  Perry,  M.  C. ;  V,  394.  441  ;  the  hecatomb  of,  II,
168  ;  removal  of,  VI,  665,  Zuiliga,  G.

Vera  Cruz,  loss  of  the  steamer,  VI,  135,  Torbert.

Veragua,  burning  of.  V,  15,  Pierre.

Veragua,  Duke  de,  I,  696,  Columbus  ;  698.

Vera  Pax.  I,  79,  Angulo,  P.  de.

Veren,  Nathaniel,  V,  139,  Putnam,  I.

Verendrye,  Sieur  de  la,  VI,  678,  De  Varennes.

Vergara.  peace  of,  IV,  213,  Maroto.

Vergennes,  Count,  policy  of.  I,  18,  19  ;  II.  264  ;  532,  533.

Veritas  Ipsa,  the  bull,  III,  ia3,  Hernandez,  V.

Verlet,  Judith.  I.  198,  Bayard,  N.

Vermont,  boy  calculator,  the,  V,  366.  Safford,  T.  H.

Vermont,  first  settlement  in,  V,  287.  Robinson,  S.  ;  during
the  Revolutionary  war,  288 ;  I,  608,  Chittenden,  T. ;  at-
tempt to  win  to  the  royal  cause,  V,  372,  St.  Leger;
church  establishment  in,  II.  412,  Farnsivorth,  J.  D.;  de-
clared an  independent  state,  423,  Fay,  J.  ;  first  Catholic
mission  in,  545,  Fremin  ;  R.  C.  institutions  in,  671,  Goes-
briand  ;  pioneer  of.  V.  722,  Strong,  John  ;  dispute  of,
with  New  York.  VI,  587,  Wolcott,  O.  :  the  New  Hamp-
shire grants  in,  486,  Wentworth,  B.\  claim  of  New  York
in,  360,  Warner,  Seth.


802


VERMONT


WADE


Vermont  Episcopal  institute.  III,  255,  Hopkins,  J.  H.

Vermont  historical  society,  the,  V,  676,  Steven*,  H.

Vermont  rule  for  computing  interest,  the,  II,  209,  Doton.

Vermont  university,  cabinet  at,  VI,  96,  Thompson,  Z.  ;
illustration,  VI,  139.

Vermont's  Appeal,  author  of,  I,  353,  Bradley,  S.  R.

Vernier,  Emile,  I,  700,  Coman.

Vernon,  George,  VI,  280,  Vernon,  J.  M.  F.

Vernon,  James,  VI.  280,  Vernon,  E.

Verplanck,  Philip,  VI,  237,  Van  Cortlandt,  Philip.

Verplauck  house  at  Fishkill,  the,  illustration,  VI,  281.

Verplank,  Johnston,  III,  544,  King,  C.

Verreydt,  Father,  II,  151,  De  Smet.

Verus,  pen-name,  IV,  582,  Onis.

Very,  Lieut.  S.  M.,  VI,  454.  Wheeler,  O.  B.

Very,  Washington,  VI,  283,  Very,  J.

Vestal,  the,  capture  by,  III,  247,  Hood,  S.

Vestibule  car,  the,  V,  675,  Stevens,  E.  A.

Vestris,  Madame,  I,  392,  Brougham  ;  III,  500,  Keene  ;  IV,
258,  Mathews.  C.  J.

Vetch,  Rev.  William,  VI,  284,  Vetch,  S.

Veteran  Observer,  a,  pen-name,  IV,  195,  Mansfield,  Edward
Deering.

Veto  Governor,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  571,  Winston.

Veto-power,  the  president  s,  I,  430  ;  III,  382  ;  proposed  ab-
rogation of  the,  I,  501,  503  ;  a  governor's,  first  exercised
in /Massachusetts,  III,  730,  Lincoln,  L.

Viator,  pen-name,  V,  581,  Smith,  N.  R.

Vibration,  study  of,  III,  499,  Keely.

Vice-admiralty  court  of  America,  the,  V,  641,  Spry.

Vice-president,  authority  of,  in  the  senate,  II,  454.

Vick.  Rev.  Newit,  III.  244,  Holt,  Joseph  ;  607,  Lane,  John.

Vickers.  Sarah  L.,  IV,  549,  Oberholtzer.

Vicksburg,  siege  of,  II,  319,  Eldridge,  H  N.  ;  327,  Ellet,
C.  R.  ;  417,  711,  712,  713  ;  III,  722  ;  IV,  5,  Logan,  J.  A.;
157,  158 ;  attempts  to  open  passages  around,  157,  Mc-
pherson, J.  B.  ;  incident  of  the  passage  of,  639,  Palmer,
J.  S.  ;  naval  operations,  V,  75  ;  incident  of  the  siege  of,
241,  Richardson,  A.  D.;  503-504  ;  riot  in,  I,  64,  Ames,  A.;
public  schools  of.  III,  234,  Holland,  J.  G.  ;  suit  for  land
in,  244,  Holt,  Joseph';  name  of,  607,  Lane,  John.

Victor.  Metta,  I,  178,  Barrett,  F.  F.

Victoria,  Queen,  III,  521,  Kent,  Edward  Augustus,  Duke
of ;  Indian  title  of,  VI,  239,  Van  Curler.

Victoria,  treaty  of,  I,  303,  Bolivar  ;  capitulation,  304.

Victoria  bridge,  the,  III,  499,  Keefer.  T.  C.

Victoria  N'yanza,  the,  V,  646,  Stanley.

Victoria  regis,  the,  discovered,  V,  424,  Schoniburgk.

Vidaurre,  J.  A.,  V,  71,  Portales.

Videau,  Mary,  IV,  209,  Marion.

Vieira,  Fernandez,  II,  164,  Dias,  H.

Viel,  Father  Nicholas,  V,  366,  Sagard.

Vienna,  engagement  at,  V,  418,  Schenck,  R.  C.

Vieques,  island  of,  battle  near,  III,  408,  Jaureybo  I.

Vieux  Moustache,  pen-name,  II,  685,  Gordon,  C.

Viger,  David  B.,  IV,  406,  Morin,  A.  N.

Vigilantes,  the,  in  California,  I,  359,  Brannan,  S. ;  686,  687,
Coleman,  W.  T.

Vignaud,  pretended  discovery  by,  I,  569,  Champlain.

Vigo,  Francis,  II,  634,  Oibault.

Viflac  Umac,  IV,  682,  Paullu  ;  V,  37,  Pizarro,  Juan.

Villamanrique,  Marquis  of.  IV,  451,  Moya  de  Contreras  ;
V,  37,  Pizarro,  Jose  Alfonso  ;  VI,  205,  Ubilla,  Andres  ;
273,  Velasco,  Luis  de  ;  664,  665,  Zuiiiga.

Villanueva,  battle  of,  I,  535,  Carrera,  R.

Villa  Palma,  Count  of,  II,  354,  Encalada.

Villa  Rica,  Brazil,  founded,  II,  164,  Diaz,  C.  A.

Villarin.  Count  of,  VI.  223,  Valdes,  Geronimo.

Villarrica,  siege  of,  II,  26,  Cuillamachu  ;  32,  Cunequeo ;
III,  199,  Higuaihue.

Villarrica  delEspiritu  Santo,  founded,  II,  166,  Diaz,  Melga-
rejo.

Villars,  prediction  by.  III,  686,  Le  Moine.

Villasis,  Father,  III,  345,  Infante,  H.

Villa  Velha,  action  at,  III,  657-658,  Lee,  C.

Ville  de  Havre,  loss  of  the,  IV,  697,  Peckham,  R.  W.

Ville  de  Paris,  the,  war-ship.  II,  726,  Grasse.

Villegas,  Geronimo,  II,  165,  Diaz  de  Pineda.

Villele.  Count,  II,  567,  Gabriac.

Villemarie  (Montreal),  IV,  185,  Mance.

Villeminot,  Madame,  I,  445,  Bull,  O.  B.

Villena,  Marquis  de,  IV,  633,  Palafox ;  V,  400,  Sarmiento  de
Sotomayor.

Villeneuve,  Daniel,  III,  610,  Langlade.

Villiers,  Coulon  de,  III,  487,  Jumonville.

Villiers,  Harriet,  I,  591,  Chatham.

Villuma,  Marquis  of,  IV,  749,  Pezuela,  Joaquin.

Vimont,  Father,  IV,  516,  Nicolet.

Vincennes,  Ind.,  founded,  VI,  298,  Vincennes  ;  in  the  Revo-
lution, II,  634,  Gibault ;  capture  of,  I,  627  ;  III,  63,  Ham-
ilton, H.;  council  at,  96  ;  seminary  and  cathedral  at,  I,
421,  Bruti  ;  university  and  library,  IV,  648.  Parke,  B.\
college  and  cathedral  in,  difficulties  in  the  diocese  of,  IU,
594,  La  Hailandi&re.

Vincent,  James  R.,  VI,  300,  Vincent,  M.  A.

Vincent,  M.  de,  IH,  405,  Jarric.

Vincent,  Rev.  Thomas,  IV,  718.

Vindex,  pen-name,  H,  635,  Gibbons.  W.

Vinegar  Hill,  battle  of,  I,  390,  Brophy.


Vineyard,  the  largest,  in  the  world,  V,  644,  Stanford :  in
Illinois,  HI,  201,  Hilgard,  T.  E.

Vinland,  H,  363,  Eric,- Eric  the  Red  ;  V,  29,  Pinzon,  M.  A.;
VI,  101,  Thorfinn  ;  106,  Thorvald  ;  name  given  to,  204,
Tyrker.

Vinton,  Lucinda,  HI.  599,  Lamb.  M.  J.

Vinton,  Madeleine,  VI,  303,  Vinton,  S.  F.

Viola,  pen-name,  H,  222,  Downing,  F.  M. ;  VI,  109,  Thurs-
ton, L.  M.

Viola  Pierolana,  the,  V,  14,  Pierola.

Violins,  manufacture  of,  1, 14,  Adams,  F.  W. ;  II,  624,  Ge-
miinder.

Virgil,  I,  354,  Bradstreet,  A.

Virginia,  name  of,  I,  166,  Barlow,  A.;  V,  162;  under  the
Long  Parliament,  237,  Bennet,  R. ;  247,  Berkeley;  rebellion
in,  I,  131,  Bacon,  N.;  247,  Berkeley  ;  mountains  of,  406;
grants  in,  488,  Cabell ;  troubles  of,  with  Maryland,  620  ;
grant  of  lands  in,  II,  28.  Culpeper,  T. ;  TV,  225.  Marshall.  J.
M. ;  the  Fairfax  domain  in,  II,  402  ;  view  of  the  house,  402 ;
second  charter  of,  company  for  colonizing,  sufferings  of
colonists,  616,  Gates,  Sir  T. ;  patentees  of,  687,  Gorges  ;
colonization  of,  691,  Gosnold  ;  V,  570,  571,  626,  Spelman  ;
the  Revolution  in,  HI,  173,  174  ;  printing-presses  forbid-
den in  the  colony,  277,  Howard,  F.;  Arnold's  invasion
of,  588  ;  colony  sent  to,  607,  Lane,  Sir  R. ;  royalists  in-
vited to,  loyalty  to  the  Stuarts,  proposal  to  make  Charles
H.  king  of,  its  arms,  reward  of  its  loyalty,  663,  Lee,  R. ;
proposal  to  repudiate  debts  of.  665,  Lee,  R.  H;  R.  C.  in-
stitutions in,  IV,  118,  McGill ;  VI.  481,  Whitfield,  J.;  458-
459,  Whelan,  R.  V.;  revision  of  the  constitution  of,  IV,
224  ;  declaration  of  rights  and  constitution  of,  241.  Ma-
son, G.;  liberal  legislation  in,  241-242,  supposed  discov-
ery of  gold  in,  505,  Newport ;  large  land-owners  of,  624,
Page,  Mann  ;  volunteer  navy  of,  700,  Pegram,  R.  B. ;
Southampton  negro  insurrection,  V,  173,  Randolph,  T.  J. ;
finances  of,  173  ;  acts  of  toleration  and  uniformity  in,
175,  Randolph,  P. ;  anti-coercion  resolution  of,  280,  Rob-
ertson, W.;  representative  government  in.  389,  Sandyt,
Sir  E. ;  first  water-mill,  etc..  in,  Sandys,  G. ;  bill  of  rights,
supposed  author  of,  580,  Smith,  Meriwether  ;  colony  con-
test on  church  patronage  in,  636,  Spotswood  ;  secession
of,  II,  415,  418  :  III,  668,  Lee,  R.  E. ;  reconstruction  of.  V,
726-727,  Stuart,  A.  H.  H;  negro  revolt  in,  VI,  187,  Tur-
ner, N. ;  controversies  on  the  debt  of,  498,  Wickham,  W.
C. ;  boundary  dispute,  497,  Whyte  ;  first  president  of,
564,  Wingfield,  E.  M.;  colonial  constitution  of,  charter
annulled,  Indian  rising  in,  629,  Wyatt.  F.;  representa-
tive government  introduced,  640,  Yeardley.

Virginia,  capture  of  the,  I,  172,  Barney  ;  IV,  514-515,  Nich-
olson, James,

Virginia  Antiquary,  I,  289,  Bland,  R.

Virginia  City,  Nev.,  mines  under,  IV,  127,  Mackay,  J.  W.

Virginia  company,  MS.  records  of,  I,  486,  Byrd,  W.;
charter  of,  V,  613,  Southampton.

Virginia  Evangelical  Magazine,  V.  234,  Rice.  J.  H.

Virginia  Medical  Monthly,  the,  II,  306,  Edwards.  L.  B.

Virginia  plan  of  Federal  government,  the,  I,  480,  Butler,
P.;  IV,  167.

Virginia  Protestant  Episcopal  seminary,  the,  VI,  543,  Wil-
mer,  W.  H.

Virginia  rebel,  the,  1, 131,  Bacon,  N.

Virginia  university,  HI,  422.

Virginius,  the,  filibustering  steamer,  execution  of  the  crew
or,  II,  557,  Fry,  Joseph ;  seizure  of,  721 ;  V,  149,  Quesa-
da,M.

Visaroso,  Gov.,  VI,  218,  Urquiza.

Viscarra,  Gen.,  IH,  299,  Huelen.

Vision  of  Rubeta,  the,  anonymous  book.  IV,  597,  Osborn,  L.

Visitation  Nuns,  the,  IH,  597,  Lalor ;  IV,  23,  Loras ;  4*->,
Neale,  L.\  V,  82,  Portier.  See  Sisters  of  the  Visita-
tion.

Visual  synchronism,  V,  308.  Rogers,  J.  H.

Vives,  Dionisio,  II,  24,  Cuba.

Vivian,  II,  384,  Evans,  O.

Vivonne,  Marechal  de,  H.  625,  Gennes.

Vogel,  IH,  363,  Irving,  W.

VolapUk,  V,  637,  Spraque,  C.  E.

Volcanoes,  theory  of,  III,  319,  Hunt,  T.  S.

Volozan,  Denis  A.,  pupil  of,  IV.  643,  Paradise,  J.

Voltaic  arc,  discovery  concerning,  V,  528.

Voltaic  pile,  the,  improved  forms  of,  HI,  81,  Hare,  R.

Voltaire,  H,  531 :  quoted,  IV,  66,  Lussan.

Volunteers  of  Ireland,  the,  V,  188,  Rawdon.

Von  Billow,  Hans,  pupil  of,  IV,  693,  Pease,  A.  H.

Von  Schultz,  IV,  102,  Macdonald,  Sir  J.  A.

Vuillaume,  Baptiste,  n.  624,  Geniinder.

Vulcan,  the  planet,  VI,  392,  Watson,  J.  C.

Wabash  college,  Ind.,  II,  333,  Ellis,  J.  M.;  gifts  to,  II,  261,
Dunn,  Williamson;  HI, 638, Lawrence,  A.;  IV, 694,  Peck,
Edwin  J.

Waboojeg,  Ojibway  chief.  V.  425,  Schoolcraft,  H.  R.

Wachoria.  IV,  216,  Marschall.

Wachtel.  Theodore,  IV,  496.  Neuendorff.

Wachusett,  capture  by  the,  I,  692,  Colltns.  N.

Waddel,  Janetta,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archibald.

Waddell,  William,  VI,  310,  Waddell,  M.

Waddington  case,  the,  VI.  430,  Wells,  J.

Wade,  David  E.,  VI,  311,  Wade,  M.  S.


WADE


WAR


803


Wade,  Jonathan  and  James,  VI,  310,  Wade,  B.  F.

Wade,  May  A.,  VI,  96,  Thompson,  W.  T.

Wadsworth,  Daniel,  V,  525,  Sigoumey.

Wadsworth,  Gen.  Peleg,  IV,  10,  Longfellow,  S.

Wadsworth,  Capt.  Samuel,  VI,  312.  Wadsworth,  B.

Waechter,  Baron  August  von,  VI,  321,  Waldersee.

Waernard,  III,  339,  Icart.

Wager,  wreck  of  the,  I,  487,  Byron.

Wagler,  Prof.,  I,  34.

Wagner,  Alexander,  pupils  of,  IV,  483,  Neal,  David  D. ;  VI,

20b,  Uhle.
Wagner,  Ferdinand,  pupil  of,  VI,  301,  Vinton,  F.  P.
Wagner,  Richard,  pupil  of,  V,  514,  Shirlaw ;  his  music  in

America,  VI,  80,  Thomas,  T.
Wagner,  Rudolph,  I,  35.

Wahabs  plantation,  fight  at,  n,  90,  Davie,  W.  R.
Wahunsonacook,  Chief,  V,  98,  Powhatan.
Waiandance,  Chief,  IV,  523,  Ninegret.
Wainwright,  John  Howard,  V,  234,  Rice,  G.  E.
Wainwright.  Marie,  VI,  316.  Wainwright,  J.  M.
Wait,  F.  S.,  V,  452.  Sedgwick,  A.  G.
Waite,  Richard,  VI,  317,  Waite,  M.  R.
Waite,  Thomas,  VI,  317,  Waite,  H.  M.
Wakarusha  war,  the.  V,  481,  Shannon.
Wakefield,  Arlington  C,  VI,  318,  Wakefield,  N.  A.  W.  P.
Wakefield,  Mass.,  gift  to,  VI,  318,  Wakefield,  C.
Wake  Forest  college,  VI,  316,  Wait,  S.
Walbeck,  Johan  von,  VI,  283,  Verschoor.
Walbridge,  Henry  S.,  VI.  319.  Walbridge,  H.
Walcutt,  statue  by,  IV,  736,  Peng.  O.  H.
Walden  Pond,  VI,  101.  Thoreau.
Waldenses  of  the  East,  the.  H,  708,  Grant,  A.
Waldo,  Jonathan,  VI,  32\,  Waldo,  S.
Waldron,  Resolved.  Ill,  188,  Herrman,  A.
Waldteuffel,  M.,  III.  112.  Hassler,  S.
Wales,  Nathaniel,  VI,  323,  Wales,  S.
Wales,  Poet  of,  IV,  613,  Owen,  G.
Walkem.  Charles,  VI,  324.  Walkem,  G.  A.
Walker,  Rev.  Edward  Ashley,  VI,  329,  Walker,  K.  K.  C.
Walker.  Lucretia.  IV.  425.
Walker  mountains,  VI,  329,  Walker,  T.
Walker  river  and  pass,  VI.  328,  Walker.  J.  R.
Walking  doll,  inventor  of  a,  VI,  614.  Work.
AValking  purchase,  the,  VI,  58,  Teedyuscung.
Walk-in-the-Water,  the.  boat,  I,  586.
Wall,  Garrett  D.,  V,  722,  Strong,  W.
Wallace,  James,  IV,  734,  Perry,  S.  A.
Wallace,  J.  W.,  Ill,  153,  Heard.
Wallace,  Sir  W.,  V,  277,  Robertson.  Archibald.
Walldorf.  Germany,  asvlum  at,  I,  112,  Astor.
Waller,  Henry.  IV,  89,  McClung,  J.  A.
Walley,  Rev.  Thomas.  VI,  338,  Walley,  J.
Wallingford,  Conn.,  community  of  Perfectionists  at,  IV,

543,  Noyes,  J.  H.
Wall-paper,  invention  of  printing-machine,  VI,  694,  Mayall.
Wain,  Jesse.  VI,  339,  Wain,  R.
Wain,  Nicholas,  VI.  339,  Wain,  R.
Wain,  Robert,  V.  386,  Sanderson,  J.
Walnut  Grove,  illustration,  VI,  447.
Walpole,  Horace,  I,  452,  Burgoyne  :  458,  Burnet  :  II,  526,

Franklaiid ; quoted,  I,  347,  Braddock ; V,  599,  Smy-

bert,  J.
Walpole,  Sir  Robert,  I.  246  ;  n,  614,  Gates.
Walrus,  the,  III,  269.  Hosset.
Walsh,  Robert  M.,  VI,  340,  Walsh,  W.  S.
Walter,  Harry,  III,  365,  Irwing.
Walter,  Lynde  M.,  VI,  341,  Walter.  W.
Walters,  Henry,  VI.  342,  Walters,  W.  T.
Waltham,  cotton-mill  at,  HI,  389,  Jackson,  P.  T.
Walton,  Octavia,  III,  700,  Le  Vert.
Walworth,  Benjamin,  VI,  345.

Walworth,  Mai.  Douglas,  VI,  344,  Walworth,  J.  R.  H.
Walworth,  William,  VI,  345.
Walworth  house,  the,  illustration,  VI.  345.
Wampanoags,  the,  IV,  249,  Massasoit  ;  756.
Wamsutta,  IV,  249.  Massasoit ;  755.  Philip.
Wanderer,  the,  slave-yacht,  II,  412,  Farnum  ;  III,  388,  Jack-
son, H.  R.
Wandering  artist,  the,  II,  289,  Earle,  A.
Wandering  regiment,  the,  II,  431.  Fenton,  W.  M.
Wanton,  William,  VI,  346,  Wanton,  J.
War  and  Washington,  song,  V,  469,  Sewall,  J.  M.
Warburton,  Eliot,  VI,  347,  Warburton,  G.
War-chariot,  the,  revived,  II,  358,  English,  G.  B.
Ward,  Artemas,  Lee's  description  of.  III,  658.
Ward.  Artemus,  pseudonym,  I,  412,  Browne,  C.  F.
Ward,  Rev.  John.  VI,  353,  Ward,  N.
Ward,  John  and  James,  VI.  350,  Ward,  J.  H.  H.
Ward,  John  and  Thomas,  VI.  353,  Ward,  R.
Ward,  Maria,  V.  177,  Randolph,  P.;  178,  Randolph,  J.
Ward,  Robert  Plumer.  VI,  349,  Ward,  Sir  H.  G.
Ward,  Rev.  Samuel.  VI,  353,  Ward.  N.
Ward,  Sylvester,  VI,  13,  Swords.
Ward,  William,  VI,  348,  Ward,  C.  L.
War  department,  system  of  the,  1, 499  ;  Jackson's  collision

With,  III,  377.
Wardlaw,  Capt.,  VI.  174,  Tucker,  Sam.
Ward  lev,  James,  III.  656,  Lee,  Ann.
Ware,  Catherine  A.,  VI,  358,  War  field.


Ware,  Charles  A.,  VI.  358,  Ware,  K.  A.

Ware,  Robert,  VI,  357,  Ware,  H.

Ware,  Capt.  Robert,  VI,  358,  Ware,  N.

Ware  vs.  Hylton,  case  of,  IV,  223.

Warehouse  system,  the  public,  V,  55  ;  originator  of,  III,
323,  Hunter,  R.  M.  T. ;  first  advocated,  IV,  265.

Warfield.  Elisha.  VI,  358,  Warfield,  C.  A.

Warham,  Rev.  John,  IV,  252,  Mather,  E.

Wariaghejaghe,  III,  451,  Johnson,  Sir  W.

War  material,  seizure  of,  III,  390,  Jackson,  M.  M.

Warne,  William,  II,  133,  De  Lancey,  O.

Warner,  Dr.  Benjamin.  VI,  360,  Warner,  Seth.

Warner,  Henry  W.,  VI,  360,  Warner,  Susan.

Warner,  Hulbert  H.,  VI,  11,  Swift.  L.  j>

Warner,  rebellion  incited  by,  III,  270,  Houdetot.*-mtUigoh

Warner  observatory,  the,  VI,  11,  Swift,  L.

War  news,  transmission  of,  V,  553,  Smalley,  G.  W.

War  of  1812,  the,  I,  641  ;  672,  Cockburn,  G. ;  II,  234.  Drum-
mond.  Sir  G.;  413  ;  IV,  170  :  360  ;  V,  126-127,  Proctor,  H.
A.;  440,  Scott,  Winfield  ;  492,  Shelby  ;  VI,  251,  Van  Rens-
selaer, S.  ;  opposition  to,  406-407 ;  call  for  troops  from
Massachusetts,  V,  720,  Strong,  C.  ;  loan  for,  IV,  677,
Patton,  R.;  supplies  for,  766,  Piatt,  J.  H;  VI,  130,
Tompkins ;  condition  of  the  army  in,  689.  Izard  ;  hos-
pital service  in,  120,  Tilton,  James  ;  blockade  of  the
Thames,  V,  486,  Shato,  J. ;  British  expedition  to  Louis-
iana, IV,  129,  McKeever,  I. ;  Indians  in,  VI,  58,  Tecum-
seh  ;  V,  138,  Pushmatahaw  ;  Indian  massacre,  VI,  432,
Wells,  W.;  operations  in  the  northwest,  IV,  73.  Mc-
Arthur,  D.;  VI,  560,  Winchester;  surrender  of  Detroit,
HI,  308,  309,  Hull,  W. ;  Perry's  victory,  309  ;  burning  of
Washington,  V,  332,  Ross ;  burning  of  Newark,  and  re-
taliation for  it,  IV,  90,  McClure,  G.\  Jackson  in,  III,  375-
377  ;  invasion  of  Canada,  IV,  151,  MacNab  ;  V,  78,  Porter,
P.  B. ;  599,  Smyth,  Alexander  ;  naval  operations  of,  1, 140,
141  ;  III,  310,  31 1  ;  465,  Jones,  Jacob  ;  V,  735,  Perry,  O.  H. ;
73-74,  Porter,  D,  ;  215-216,  Reid,  S.  C.  ;  first  shot  of,
297  ;  naval  operations,  684,  Stewart,  C.  ;  operations  on
Lake  Ontario,  VI,  610,  Woolsey,  M.  T.\  641,  Yeo,  J.  L.\
the  Wasp  and  the  Frolic,  III,  465,  Jones,  J. ;  the  Enterprise
and  the  Boxer,  IV,  75.  McCall,  E.  R. ;  first  success  of,  on
the  lakes,  11.330,  Elliott,  J.  D.;  treaty  concerning  Lake
Ontario,  VI,  253,  Van  Rensselaer,  S. ;  services  of  pirates
in,  642,  You  ;  public  debt,  offer  of  mediation  by  Alexan-
der of  Russia,  treaty  of  Ghent,  II,  578 ;  first  American
officer  killed  in,  V,  76,  Porter,  T.  H.  :  first  prisoners
taken  in.  IV,  203,  Marcy,  W.  L. ;  Buchanan  on,  I,  429.

War,  the  Civil,  in  U.  S.,  Ill,  49,  50  ;  718-723  ;  predicted,  H,
176,  Didier ;  V,  16,  Pierrepont,  E.  ;  VI.  175,  Tucker,  N.
B. ;  peace  convention,  V,  449,  Seddon  ;  questions  at  issue,
VI,  30  ;  beginning  of,  II,  415  ;  612,  Garrison  ;  first  blood
shed  in  the,  VI,  390,  Watson,  B.  F.  ;  government  prop-
erty seized  before,  I,  408,  Brown,  J.  E. ;  first  great  battle
of,  IV,  110  ;  campaigns  of  northern  Virginia,  110;  the
campaign  in  West  Virginia,  79,  80  ;  reorganization  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac.  80  ;  the  peninsular  campaign,  80,
81,  82  ;  the  retreat,  82,  83  ;  the  Antietam  campaign,  83  ;
first  important  northern  victory,  II,  71 1  ;  progress  of.  in
the  west,  711-713 ;  plan  of  operations  for  1864,  713 ;
Grant's  campaign  in  Virginia,  713.  714  ;  operations  in
the  Carolinas,  Tennessee,  Maryland,  and  Virginia,  715,
716  ;  surrender  of  Lee,  716 ;  its  terms.  717  :  losses  of
1864-'5,  717  ;  surrender  of  Johnston,  717 ;  III,  459 ;  in
Tennessee,  III,  437,  455,  456  ;  V,  324,  503,  504  ;  opening  of,
V,  503  ;  the  Atlanta  campaign,  504,  505  ;  the  surrender,

505  ;  disapproval  of  the  terms  granted  to  Johnston,  505,

506  ;  troops  for,  the  Sherman  brigade,  507  ;  operations  in
Tennessee,  498  ;  in  Virginia,  498,  499  ;  in  Missouri,  IV,  212,
Marmaduke  ;  V,  69,  Pope,  J. ;  on  the  Rappahannock,  69  ;
in  Missouri  and  Arkansas,  119,  Price,  S.;  operations  in
the  west,  VI,  79,  80  :  the  Atlanta  campaign.  80,  81  ;  re-
enforcements  of  1862,  V,  472,  476  ;  of  1863,  477  ;  criticism
on  the  conduct  of,  476  ;  defence  of  the  Cumberland,  III,
668.  Lee,  S.  P. :  campaign  in  Virginia.  669-674  ;  Mobile
taken,  717  ;  close  of  the  campaign  in  Georgia,  717  ;  end
of,  717  ;  Confederate  mistakes,  460  ;  direction  of,  V,  648,
649,  Stanton  ;  disapproval  of  the  terms  of  Johnston's
surrender,  649,  Stanton,  E.  M.  ;  mustering  out  of  the
army,  VI,  300,  Vincent,  T.  M.;  peace  commission,  V,  313,
Roman  ;  664  ;  operations  of  guerillas,  IV,  434,  435,  Mos-
by  ;  raids,  402,  Morgan,  J.  H.  ;  VI,  453,  454,  Wheeler,  J. ;
552,  Wilson,  J.  H. ;  V,  727,  Stuart,  J.  E.  B.  ;  management
of  the  navy  in  the,  II,  520,  Fox,  G.  V.  ;  naval  operations,
IV,  467,  Murray,  A.  ;  515,  Nicholson.  J.  W.  A.;  V,  105,
Preble,  G.  H.  :  146,  Quackenbush  :  147,  Queen  ;  181,  Ran-
som, G.  M. ;  196,  Read,  A. ;  297. 298.  Rodgers  :  337,  Rotcan,
S.  C";  353,  Russell,  J.  H;  74-76  ;  VI,  38,  39;  51.  Taylor,
W.  R. ;  a50,  Ward,  J.  H. ;  treatment  of  prisonere,  IV,  535,
Northrop,  L.  B. ;  VI.  235,  Vance.  Z.  B. ;  562,  Winder  ;
exchange  of  prisoners,  II.  463,  Fish,  H.  ;  III.  495,  Kautz,
A.:  finances  at  the  opening  of,  I.  587;  loans  for  expenses
of,  IV.  672,  Patterson.  Joseph  ;  V, 671,  Stevens,  J.  A.;  VI.
47,  Taylor.  M.\  supplies,  313.  Wadsworth.  J.  S.;  Confed
erate  supplies.  VI.  235,  Vance,  Z.  B. ;  military  stores  for,
privateering  in,  V,  460,  Semmes,  R. ;  a  spy  in,  VI,  626,
Wright ,  R.  M. ;  exile  for  expressions  of  sympathy,  227,
Vallandigham  ;  arrests,  339,  Wallis,  S.  T. ;  fraudulent
proclamation  published  during,  V,  700,  Stone,  D.  M.;


Uh


published
liberty  of  the  press,  VI,


3,  Wall,  J.  W.\  confiscation,


804


WAR


WEATHER


*210,  Underwood.  J.  C. :  railroad  and  telegraph  service,

V,  439,  Scott,  T.  A.  :  National  forces  in,  II,  557,  Fry,
J.  B.; hospital  service, I,  187,  Barton; II,  183,  Dix,

D.  L.;  651,  Gillespie,  E.  A/.;  V,  61,  Pomroy ; 97,  Powers,

E.  H.  ;  180,  Rankin,  D.  N. :  VI,  244,  Vanderpoel  ;  V,  567,
Smith,  H  H;  18,  Strisshelm  ;  96.  Thomson,  W.  ;  172,
Tubman;  172,  Tucker,  H.  H.;  352.  Ward,  M.  L.;  456,
Wheelock,  J.  S.;  485,  Whitman,  W.;  615,  Wormeley,
K.  P.;  625,  Wright,  M.;  677,  Dame  ;  correspondence  on,

VI,  13,  Swinton,  W.  ;  feeling  concerning,  in  England,  I,
219  ;  relations  with  foreign  governments.  III,  721 :  peace
negotiations.  724  ;  proposal  to  unite  against  the  French
in  Mexico.  724  ;  danger  of  foreign  interference,  V,  748  ;
sympathy  of  Russia,  VI,  41  ;  commissioners  to  Europe,
419.  Weed,  T.;  newspaper  records  of,  149,  Townsend,  T.
S. ;  bill  to  exclude  names  of  battles  of,  V,  749.

War  of  the  Reform,  the,  II,  166,  Diaz,  Porfirio  ;  369,  Esco-
bedo.

War  of  the  Revolution. See  Revolutionary  war.

Warren,t Henry,  pupil  of,  V.  639,  Spread.

Warren,  Dr.  John,  IV,  665,  Parsons,  U.

Warren,  Dr.  Joseph,  III,  147,  Hayward,  L.

Warren,  Lavinia,  V,  717,  Stratton.  C.  S.

Warren,  Mercy,  original  of  a  character  of.  in,  691,  Leonard,
D. ;  IV,  607,  Otis,  J.

Warren,  Peter,  VI,  364,  Warren,  Joseph.

Warren,  Ratcliffe,  I,  620.

Warren,  Richard,  VI,  363,  Warren,  I.  P.

Warren,  Samuel  R.,  VI,  367,  Warren,  S.  P.

AA'arren,  Sarah,  III,  415.

Warren,  Pa.,  surveyed,  II,  327,  Ellicott.

Warren,  R.  I.,  IV,  249.  Massasoit.

Warren,  the,  sloop,  III,  311.  Hull,  J.  B.

Warren  association,  the,  IV,  192.  Manning,  J.

Warren  homestead,  the,  illustration,  VI,  365.

Warren  russet,  the,  VI.  364.  Warren,  Joseph.

Warrensburgh,  N.  Y.,  Ill,  451,  Johnson,  Sir  W.

Warren  Tavern,  battle  at.  VI,  398,  Wayne.

AVarrington,  pen-name,  V,  289,  Robinson,  W.  S.

AVarrior  parson,  the.  VI.  107,  Thurston,  C.  M.

War-ships,  revolution  in  manufacture  of,  II,  364.  See
Ships.

War  to  the  death,  proclamation  of,  I,  303,  Bolivar.

War-trumpet,  VI.  58,  Teedyuscung.

AVarwick,  Earl  of,  II,  431.  Fenwick,  G.

AVarwick,  R.  I.,  founded,  II,  690,  Gorton.

AA'arwickite,  discovery  of,  V,  494,  Shepard,  C.  U.

Washburn,  John  and  Seth,  VI,  369,  Washburn,  E.

Washburn,  Joseph.  VL  369,  Washburn,  E.

Washburn,  Reuel.  VI,  371.  Washburn,  C.  C.

AATashburne  observatory,  M,  232,  Holden,  E.  S.

Washington,  Andrew,  VI,  373.

Washington,  Augustine,  VI,  373.

Washington,  Bailey,  VI,  384,  Washington,  W.

Washington,  Col.,  I,  406.

AVashington.  Eliza.  V,  636.  Spotswood.  A.

AVashington,  Elizabeth,  III.  703,  Lewis,  F.

AVashington,  George,  his  birthplace,  illustration,  VI,  373  ;
drawing  of  the  locality,  374  :  church  at  Pohick,  376  ;  his
headquarters  at  Newburg,  378  ;  his  tomb.  381  :  his  home,
383  ;  statue  of,  379  ;  monument  to,  382 ;  narrow  escape
of,  II,  433,  Ferguson,  P.;  the  hatchet  story,  VI,  421,
Weems  ;  Mary  Phillipse.  IV,  418,  Morris,  M.  P. ;  publica-
tion of  strictures  on,  603.  Oswald,  E.;  V.  588,  Smith,  S.;
conspiracy  to  abduct,  III,  195,  Hickey  ;  headquarters  of,
on  the  Harlem,  illustration,  487  :  proposal  to  make  him
a  king,  VI,  281,  Verplanck,  D.  C;  nis  farewell  to  his  offi-
cers, in,  566  ;  scene  of  the  farewell,  illustration,  II,  129  ;
portraits  of,  V,  729  ;  VI,  382  :  collection  of  portraits,
medals,  etc.,  VI,  669,  Baker,  W.  S.;  first  child  named
after,  V,  153,  Quincy,  E.  S. ;  poetical  epistle  to,  VI,  446,
Wharton,  C.  H.;  acknowledgment  of  verses  by,  449,
Whcatley,  P.;  his  birthday  first  celebrated,  382  ;  made
a  legal  holiday,  IV,  608,  Otis,  E.  H. ;  his  monument,  com-
pletion of,  II,"  107,  Dawes  ;  IV,  332-333  ;  illustration,  333  ;
VI,  382.

Washington,  Henry  A.,  Ill,  423,  Jefferson,  T.

Washington,  John,  ArI,  373.

AA'ashington,  John  Augustine,  VI,  384,  Washington,  B.

AVashington,  Lawrence,  II,  402  ;  VI.  373.

AVashington,  AVilliam  Augustine,  VI,  385,  Washington,
George  Corbin.

Washington,  AVilliam  d"H.,  An,  385,  Washington,  L.  W.

AA'ashington.  Conn.,  school  at.  A'l.  684.  Gunn.

AVashington.  D.  C,  surveyed,  II.  327,  Ellicott,  A.;  plan  for,

III,  688,  L1  Enfant :  early  church  in,  632,  Laurie,  James  ;
taken  by  the  British.  I.  672.  Cockburn,  G. ;  II.  575,  Gales,  J. ;
382,  Evans,  Sir  G.;  Ill,  377  ;  burned  and  sacked.  V,  332,
Ross  ;  545,  Skinner.  J.  S.;  VI,  122.  Tingey  ;  fortification
of.  IV,  196.  Mansfield.  J.  K.  F;  threatened  in  1804,  VI.
623,  Wright,  H.  G. ;  Early "s  advance  against,  II,  714  ;
church  at,  III,  513,  Kendall,  A.:  scientific  societies  of,

IV.  183.  Mallery  :  view  of  Smithsonian  institution.  A7,  598  :
colored  normal  school  in,  IV,  336,  Miner,  M. ;  National
library  at,  V.  634,  Spofford,  A.  R.;  gifts  to  charities  of,
VI,  248,  Van  Ness,  M.  B.;  deaf-mute  asylum,  gift  to.  III,
513,  Kendall.  A.;  capitol  at,  illustration,  VI,  341,  Walter,
T.  U. ;  doors  of  the  capitol  at.  A7,  309,  Rogers,  Randolph  ;
designed  for  the  capitol  at,  IV,  637,  Palmer,  E.  D. ;  de-


signs of  columns  in  the  capitol  at.  with  illustration.  III,

627  :  Cabin  John  bridge  near.  V,  267,  Rives,  A.  L. :  statue

of  Gen.  Scott  at,  illustration.  A".  AVZ.
Washington,  Pa.,  founded,  III,  229. Hoge,  J.  :  library  at,

II.  687,  Le  Moyne,  F.  J.
Washington,  wreck  of  the  brig.  VL  158,  Trenchard,  S.  D.
AA'ashington  and  Lee  university,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archi-
bald ;  IH,  673  ;  gift  to,  I\T,  95,  McCormick,  C.  H.;  statue

of  Lee  at,  illustration.  VI,  226.
Washington  college,  I,  4£9,  Brown.  Matthew.
AATashington  college,  Conn. See  Trinity  college.
Washington  college,  Md.,  V,  592,  Smith,  W.
Washington  college,  N.  C.  founded,  H,  188.  Doak.
AVashington  college,  Pa.,  II-,  191.  Dod,  T.  :  329,  Elliott.  D.
AA'ashington  college,  Tacoma,  gifts  to,  VL.  621,  Wright,  C.  B.
AA'ashington  college,  Tenn.,  founded,  \\  467,  Sevier,  J.
Washingtonii  Vita,  curious  book,  H,  663,  664.  Gloss.
AA'ashington  navy -yard,  II,  54.
AA'ashington  observatory,  the,  I,  155  ;  II,  653,  Gilliss  ;  IV,

502,  Aewcomb,  S.
Washington  territory,  Episcopal  institutions  founded  in,

IV,  621,  Paddock.  J.  A.
AVashington Theological repertory, the, A'l,  543, Wil-

mer,  W.  H.
Washington  Union,  the,  II,  503,  Forney,  J.  W.
Washington  university.  St.  Louis,  gifts  to,  II,  356.  Engel-

mann,  G.  : IV,  559,  O'Fallon  ;  Y,  485,  Shaw.  H.  ; A'l,

294,  Villard.
Washita,  battle  of  the.  II.  44
AA7ashoe  process,  the.  III,  26,  Hague,  A.
Wasp and Frolic,  battle  and-  capture  of  the,  HI,  465,

Jones,  Jacob.
Wasp,  the  new,  capture  of  the  Reindeer  and  other  vessels

by,  loss  of,  I,  287,  Blakeley.
AA'aste  products,  utilization  of,  IV.  647,  Paret,  T.  D
AATatauga,  fort  at,  V,  279,  Robertson,  J.
Watauga  colony,  V,  466-467,  Sevier.

Watch-dog  of  the  Treasury,  the,  A7I,  370,  Washburne,  E.  B.
AVatches,  invention  of,  II,  625.  Gennes.
Watchful  Fox,  the,  III,  523,  Keokuk.
Watchmaker's  lathe,  patent  on  a,  V,  408,  Sawyer,  S.
AA'aterbury,  library  founded  in,  I,  384,  Branson,  S.
AVater-engineering,  inventions,  II,  406-407,  Fanning,  J.  T.;

700,  Graff,  F.
AVater-faucet,  invention  of  a,  VI,  622,  Wright,  E.
AA'ater-gas,  invention  of  process  for,  IA7,  39,  Loire,  T.  S.  C.
Water-gauge  for  steam-boilers,  invention  of  a,  V,  72,  Por-
ter, Horace.
Waterloo,  incident  of  the  battle  of,  II,  133,  De  Lancey,  W.  H.
AA7aterman,  Catherine  H..  II.  371,  Esling.  C.  H.
Waterman,  David,  VL  3S7,  Waterman,  T.  G.
Waterman,  Hannah,  I,  94.

Water-metres,  invention  of,  HI,  442,  Johnson,  F.  G.
AA'ater-power.  storage  reservoir  for.  I,  57,  Allen,  Z.
AVaters,  Edwin  F.,  I,  649,  Clement,  C.  E.
Waters,  Col.  Philemon,  II,  420,  Farrow.
Water-supply  for  New  York  and  Brooklyn,  project  for,  H.

407,  Fanning  ;  mode  of  testing.  III,  132,  Hayes,  A.  A.  ;

system  for  purifying.  III,  336,  Hyatt,  J.  W.
Watertown,  Mass.,  settlement  of,  V,  379,  Saltonstall :  IA'.

759,  Phillips,  G.
Watertown,  N.  Y.,  rv,  38.  Low.  N.
Water-wheel,  invention  of  a.  III.  425.  Jenckes.  J.
Water  AVitch,  the,  III,  414,  Jeffers  ;  attack  on,  demand  for

reparation.  IV,  20,  Lopez.
Watkinson.  AVilliam.  VI,  389,  Watkinson,  D.
Watling's  island.  I,  697.
AA'atson,  Caroline,  V.  130.  Prud^homme.
Watson,  John,  VI,  390,  Watson,  Ebenezer.
AVatson,  John  F.,  n,  134,  Delaplaine.  J.
Watson,  Dr.  Joseph,  II,  579,  Gallaudet,  T.  H.
Watt,  James,  I,  732,  Cooper.  T.
Watteau,  pupil  of,  VI,  3* ,  Tassin.
Watts,  George  F.,  IA7,  459.  Munn.
Watts,  Helen  R.,  V,  352,  Russell,  A.
Watts,  Margaret  C,  VL  396,  Watts,  S.
Watts,  Mary,  III,  453.  Johnson,  Sir  J.
Watts,  Robert,  VL  395,  Watts,  J.

AVatty  and  Meg,  anonymous  poem,  VI,  545.  Wilson,  Alex-
ander.
Wauhatchie,  battle  of,  II.  713  ;  VL  202,  Tyndale.
AVaverley  Magazine,  the,  II.  219.  Dow.  M.  A.
AA'averley  novels,  the,  I,  37,  Ainslie  ;  attributed  to  Mrs.

Grant.  II,  707.
Wawatam.  Ill,  170,  Henry,  A.
Waxhaw  Creek,  engagement  at,  I,  443,  Buford,  A. ;  A'L  35,

Tarleton.
Waxhaw  settlement,  the,  III,  878,  Jackson,  Andrew.
Way,  Rebecca.  VI,  40,  Taylor,  B.
AVayles.  John,  III,  416.  423.
A\Taymouth,  George.  IU.  297.
Wayne,  Anthony,  his  house,  illustration.  A'l.  399.
Wayne,  Capt.  Isaac,  IV,  823.  Miles,  S.  :  A'L  398.  Wayne,  A.
AA'aynesboro,  battle  of,  II,  44;  290,  Early.  J.  A.;  715;  V,

500.  Sheridan.
Wayside,  the.  Ill,  128 ;  IV,  32,  lJ>throp,  H.  M.
We.  Us.  and  Co.,  play.  I.  167.  Barnard.  C.
Weather  bureau,  work  of  the,  IA',  473.  Myer  :  at  Cincin

nati,  I,  2,  Abbe.


WEATHER


WHEELOCK


805


Weather  indications,  originator  of  a  theory  of,  V,  676,

Stevena,  E.
Weather  reports,  first  suggestion  of,  II,  205.  Dorr,  E.  P. ;

375,  Espy  ;  III.  570,  Koenig,  J.  R.
Weathersford,  III,  376.
Weather-signals,  system  of,  IV,  296,  Mendenhall,  T.  C. ;

III,  151.  Hazen.  W.  B.

Webb,  Col.,  III.  326,  Huntington,  E.

Webb,  Isaac,  VI,  404,  Webb.  XV.  H.

Webb,  Lucy  W.,  Ill,  134,  143.

Webb,  Richard,  VI.  402,  Webb,  S.  B.

Webb,  destruction  of  the  ram.  II.  351,  Emmons,  G.  F.

Webber.  Dr.  Augustine.  VI,  404,  Webber,  C.  W.

Weber,  Albrecht.  VI,  490,  Whitney,  W.  D.

Weber.  August,  pupil  of,  VI,  20.  Tait,  J.  R.

Weber,  Dr.  M.  I.,  VI.  405,  Weber,  G.  C.  E.

Weber,  Otto,  pupil  of,  VI,  673,  Butler.

Webster,  Dr.  Alexander.  VI.  415,  Webster,  J.

Webster,  Rev.  Alexander  H..  V.  6(53,  Stephens.

Webster,  Charles  R.,  VI,  418,  Webster,  R.

Webster,  Daniel,  quoted,  II,  369.  Everett,  E.\  III,  411,  Jay,
John  ;  VI,  593,  Wood,  G.  ;  view  of  his  home,  411  ;  his
grave.  413  ;  statue  of,  414.

Webster,  Emily,  II,  336,  Ellsworth,  W.  W.

Webster,  Grant,  II,  510,  Foster,  Hannah.

Webster,  James,  of  Canada,  II,  432,  Ferguson,  A.

Webster,  James,  of  Pennsylvania.  II,  525,  Francisco.

Webster,  John,  VI,  417,  Webster,  N.

Webster,  John  W.,  trial  of,  I,  657,  Clifford,  J.  H.;  V,  487,
Shaw,  L.

Webster,  Rev.  Josiah.  VI,  416,  Webster,  J.  D.

Webster,  Mary  A.,  V,  384,  Sanborn,  E.  D.

Webster,  M.  M.,  pen-name,  IV.  435,  Mosby,  M.  W.

Webster,  Noah,  anecdote  of,  III,  272,  Houghton,  H.  O.

Webster,  Dr.  W.  H.  B..  II.  510.  Foster.  Henry.

Wedderburn,  David.  II,  530 :  III,  888,  Hutchinson,  T.

Wedderburn.  Sir  Peter.  Ill,  36,  Halkett.

Weed,  Thurlow.  quoted,  I,  432.

Weehawken,  III.  59.

Weehawken,  the.  capture  by.  V,  297.

Weeping  prophet,  the.  sobriquet,  V,  468,  Sewall.  Joseph.

Weights  and  measures,  system  of,  invented,  VI,  141,  Tot-
ten.  C.  A.  L.

Weinlich,  Joseph,  IV.  496.  Xeuendorff.

Weir.  G.  V.  and  W.  B..  VI.  422.  Weir,  J.  A.

Weiser,  J.  Conrad,  IV.  453.  Muhlenberg.

Weitzmann,  Carl  F.,  pupils  of,  H,  664,  Gleason  ;  V,  508,
Sherwood,  W.  H.

Welby,  George  B.,  VI.  423.  Welby,  A.  B.  C.

Welch,  Sylvester,  V,  276,  Roberts,  S.  W.

Weldon,  Judge  J.  W..  VI.  425,  Weldon,  C.  W.

Weldon  railroad,  fight  on  the,  II,  714  ;  III,  202,  Hill,  Am-
brose P.

Welford,  Charles,  V,  443.  Scribner.

Welland  canal,  the.  charges  of  fraud,  III,  212,  Hincks.  F.

Welles,  Alfred,  IV.  402,  Morgan,  J.  S.

Wellesley,  Marchioness,  I.  538,  Carroll,  C;  558.  Caton,  R.

Wellesley  college,  II,  539,  Freeman,  A.  E.;  illustration,
269  ;  endowments,  etc.,  of.  III,  265,  Horsford,  E.  N.

Wellington,  Ambrose,  V,  312,  Rollins,  A.  W.

Wellington,  Duke  of,  II,  133,  De  Lancey,  W.  H. ;  quoted,

IV.  633.  Pakenham.

Wellington  channel,  explored,  IV,  661,  Parry,  Sir  W.  E.

Wells,  Elizabeth,  I.  31.

Wells,  J.  Madison.  II,  478,  Flanders.  B.  F.

Wells.  Joseph  B..  VI.  371,  Washburn,  C.  C.

Wells.  Marv  P..  V.  579.  Smith,  M.  P.  W.

Wells  college,  eift  to.  IV.  398,  Morgan,  E.  B.;  founded,  VI,

430.  Wells.  H.
Welsh,  Maj.  Nicholas,  IV,  383,  Moore.  John.
Welsh  colony  in  Pennsylvania,  a,  IV.  395,  Morgan,  A.  and  E.
Welsh  language,  first  book  in,  printed  in  America,  V,  132,

Pugh,  Ellis.
Wemyss,  Maj.  James,  V,  752.
Wendell,  Gerritt.  VI.  434.  Wendell,  J.  L.
Wendell.  Oliver,  III.  210,  Holmes.  A.
Wendt,  Dr.  Edmund  C,  IV.  743.  Peters,  J.  C.
Went  worth,  Charles  W..  VI,  435.  Wentirorth,  J.
Wentworth,  Ebenezer.  VI.  435.  Wentworth,  J.
Wentworth,  James.  II.  277.  Button.  H.  W.
Wentworth,  Mark  H..  VI.  435.  Wentworth.  J.
Wentworth,  Martha.  VI,  435.  436.  Wentworth,  B.  and  J.
Wentworth,  Col.  Michael,  VI,  435,  Wentworth,  B.
Wentworth.  Paul,  VI,  436.  Wentworth,  J.
Wesel,  III.  589.

Wesley  Dr..  II,  647.  Gilbert,  W.  B.
Wesley,  John,  reply  to.  II.  380.  Evans.  C.
Wesley,  John  and  Charles,  I,  108,  Asbury  ;  IV,  565,  Ogle-
thorpe.
Wesleyan  college.  Ga..  gift  to,  V,  461,  Seney,  G.  I.
Wesleyan  Methodist  church,  organized.  \ ,  438,  Scott,  O. ;

III,  663,  Lee.  L.;  missions.  V.  361.  Ryerson,  J.
Wesleyan  university,  gifts  to.  I,  618,  Claftin,  L.  ;  II.  231,

Drew.  D.  ;  40S.  Fi-ik.  W.  :  III.  290,  Hoy't,  O.  ;  482,  Judd,

O.;  IV,  571.  01  in.  S.;  V,  461,  Seney,  G.  I.
Wessagusset,  II.  688,  Gorges;  colony  at.  V,  103,  Pratt,

Phinehas  :  648,  Standish';  VI,  444,  Weston.
Wessels,  Dirck.  II.  136.  Delluis.
West,  John,  UI,  107,  Harvey,  Sir  J.


West,  William.  II,  183,  Dix.  J.  A.

West,  Judge  Zebulon,  VI.  441,  West,  S.

West.  Bay  City,  Mich.,  gift  to,  V,  367,  Sage,  H.  W.

Westbrook.  Col.  T.,  V,  185,  Rasle.

Westbrooke,  Elizabeth.  VI.  322,  Waldron,  R.

Westcote,  Baron,  IV,  69,  Lyttleton.

Westcott,  Thompson,  II,  472,  Fitch,  John.

Westerlo,  Rev.  Isaac,  VI,  442,  Westerlo,  E.

Western.  Helen,  VI,  442,  Western,  P.

Western  inland  lock  navigation  company,  n,  163,  De  Zeng.

Western  land  pirate,  the,  V,  687,  Stewart,  V.  A.

Western  lands,  relief  to  purchasers  of.  I,  458.  Burnet,  J.

Western  Monthly  Magazine,  III,  44,  Hall,  James  ;  IV,  731,
Perkins,  J.  H.

Western  Quarterly  Reporter,  II.  670,  Godman.

Western  Reserve,  the,  I,  647,  Cleaveland,  M.\  II.  599,  Gar-
field; IV,  346,  Mitchel,  S.  M.;  752.  Phelps,  O.;  Indian
titles  to,  663,  Parsons.  S.  H.;  use  of  the  fund  from,  V,
478,  Seymour,  M.

Western  Reserve  historical  society,  VI,  496,  Whittlesey,  C.

Western  Review,  II,  484,  Flint,  T.;  Ill,  151,  Hazewell.

Western  states,  exploration  of.  II,  457,  Filson.

Western  union  telegraph  company,  formed,  V,  522,  Sibley,
Hiram.

Westervelt,  trial  of,  IV,  135,  McKeon.

West  Fairlee,  Vt.,  settled,  IV,  521.  Niles,  N.

Westfield,  the,  destruction  of,  V,  222,  Renshaw.

West  India  company,  I,  292,  Blenac  ;  III,  636,  Imw,  John  ;
VI,  250,  Van  Rensselaer  ;  255,  Van  Twiller ;  II,  157,  De
Vries.

West  Indies,  the,  French  conquests  in,  I,  328,  Bouille  ;  II,
178,  Dillon,  A.;  567,  Gabaret ;  plan  for  gradual  emanci-
pation in  Martinique,  567,  Gabaret ;  war  operations  in,
224,  Drake.  Sir  F.  ;  English  expedition  to,  Jamaica
taken,  569,  Gage,  T. ;  contests  of  France  and  England  in,
III,  305,  Hugues  ;  the  guillotine  in,  305  ;  430.  Jervis,  Sir
J. ;  650,  Leborgue  ;  576,  Krohn  ;  626.  La  Touche  Treville  ;
French  fleet  in,  rv,  340,  Missiessy  ;  treatment  of  natives
in,  585,  Ordonez  y  Cevallos ;  naval  warfare  in,  V,  300,
301,  Rodney ;  contest  of  France  and  England  in,  615,
Souveslre  ;  captures  of  French  privateers  .in,  684,  Stew-
art, C. ;  expedition  against,  in  1655,  VI,  566.  Winslow,  E. ;
captures  by  pirates,  JV,  363.  Montauband.  Montbars ;
399,  Morgan,  Sir  H.  ;  early  history  of,  613,  Oviedo  y
Valdez  ;  French  archives  of,  V.  157,  Rabaud.

Westminster  abbey,  first  memorial  in,  to  an  American
poet,  IV,  15.

Weston,  Rev.  D.  C,  VT,  443,  Weston,  M.  C.  N.

Weston,  Nathan,  VI.  676,  Cony.

Weston,  Warren,  I,  581,  Chapman,  M.  W.

Westover  mansion,  illustration,  I.  486.

Westover  manuscripts,  the,  I,  487,  Byrd  ;  V,  636,  Spots-
wood,  Alexander.

Westphalia,  King  of.  I.  310.

West  Point,  intended  surrender  of,  I,  96 ;  Arnold's  head-
quarters at,  illustration,  95  :  attempted  treason  at,  VI,
260,  Varick,  R. ;  battle  of,  IV,  753,  Phelps,  T.  S  ;  chain
at,  VI,  454,  Wheeler,  S. ;  cadets'  monument  at.  illustra-
tion, 361  ;  grave  of  Gen.  Scott  at,  V,  441 ;  Kosciuzko's
monument  at,  illustration,  III,  573.

West  Point  academy,  VI.  73.  Thayer,  S.;  statue  at,  73  ;  im-
provements in  the  curriculum.  III,  668,  Lee,  R.  E.

Westray,  Juliana,  VI,  598,  Wood,  J.

West  Rock  (Providence  Hill),  story  of,  H,  672,  Goffe.

Westtown  school,  II,  635,  Gibbons.  J.

West  Virginia,  the  war  in,  I.  758,  Cox,  J.  D. ;  IV,  79-80.

West  Wind,  statue  of,  II,  695.  Gould,  Tliomas  R.

Wetherall,  Sir  Frederick,  VI.  444.  Wetherall,  G.  A.

Wetherell,  Elizabeth,  pen-name,  VI,  360,  Warner,  Susan.

Wetherill,  Christopher,  VI.  444.  Wetherill,  S.

Wethersfield,  conference  at.  I,  174,  Bai~ras,  L. ;  settlement
of,  II,  143.  Denton.  R.;  Indian  massacre  at,  IV,  244,  Ma-
son, John  ;  gift  to  academy  of.  V,  322.  Rose,  C.

Wetmore,  Robert,  VI,  445,  Wetmore,  P.  M.

Weymouth,  attempt  to  found  a  colony  at,  IV,  391,  Morell,
W.;  V,  643,  Standish  :  gift  to,  VI,  179,  Tufts,  Q.

Weyprecht.  Herr,  IV,  685,  Payer.

Whalley,  Edward.  II,  83,  Davenport,  J.

Wharton,  Rev.  C.  H.,  V,  135.  Pulai/er.

Wharton,  Eliza,  original  of  a  character  in  Action,  I,  440,
Buckminster,  J.

Wharton.  Richard,  IV,  253.

Whately,  Thomas,  letters  to.  II,  529,  530.

Whately,  William,  II.  529,  530.

Wheatland.  Buchanan's  home  at,  illustration,  I,  432.

Wheatley,  Frederick.  VI.  450.  Wheatley,  S.

Wheaton,  Abby.  VI,  451,  Wheaton,  R.

Wheaton,  Rev.  Robert.  VI,  450,  Wheaton,  H.

Wheat-ring,  a.  IV.  199.  Marbois.

AVheatstone,  Mr.,  IV.  426.

Wheeler,  Candace.  VI.  452.  Wheeler,  D.

Wheeler,  Everett  P.,  IV,  722,  Pepperrell.

Wheeler,  Admiral  Sir  Francis,  VI,  453,  Wheeler,  J.  H. ;  II,
567.  Gabaret.

Wheel-horse  of  the  senate,  the,  sobriquet,  V,  343,  Ruggles,
Benjamin.

Wheeling,  station  on  the  site  of,  VI,  655,  Zane  ;  college
founded  in,  459,  Whelmi.

Wheelock,  Rev.  Ralph,  VI,  455,  Wheelock,  E.


806


WHEELOCK


WILLIAMSBURG


Wheelock,  Ruth.  IV,  671,  Patten,  W.

Wheels,  invention  for  cutting.  V,  409,  Saxton.

Wheelwright,  G.  W.,  VI,  457,  Wheelwright,  J.  T.

Wheelwright,  William.  II,  305,  Edwards,  A.

Whiddon,  Jacob,  V,  163.

Whig  congress,  the,  II,  626,  Gentry.

Whig  party,  the,  I,  27,  430  ;  III,  381  ;  VI,  412,  414  ;  end  of,

V,  9,  664  ;  Conscience  and  Cotton,  747  ;  574,  Smith,  J.  B. ;
application  of  the  name,  VI,  195  ;  causes  of  their  victory
in  1840.  Ill,  383.

Whip-machine,  inventions  of  a,  III,  599,  Lamb,  I.  W.

Whipping-post,  the,  I.  422,  Bryant,  W.  C.

Whipping-post,  the,  sobriquet,  III,743,Li't'/?i!7s<on,  William.

Whipple,  E.  P.,  quoted,  V.  405.  Savage,  J. ;  637,  Sprague,  C.

Whipple,  George,  II,  748,  Greene.  F.  H.

Whipple,  Hannah,  I,  346,  Brackett.  J.

Whipple,  John.  II,  747',  Greene.

Whipple,  Joseph,  VI,  462,  Whipple,  W.

Whipple,  Matthew,  VI.  460,  Whipple,  E.  P.

Whipple,  W.  C,  III,  237,  Hollins.

Whiskey  frauds,  II,  722.

Whiskey  insurrection,  the,  II.  577,  Gallatin  ;  III,  58  ; 667,

Lee,  H.\  681,  Leiper,  T.  ;  V,  329,  Ross,  James.
Whistler  at  the  plough,  pen-name,  V,  605,  Somerville.
Whitaker,  Dean,  II.  582,  Galloway,  J.
Whitaker,  Rev.  Nathaniel,  IV,  552,  Occum.
Whitaker,  Rev.  W.,  VI,  464,  Whitaker,  A.
Whitcher,  Rev.  B.  W.,  VI.  465,  Whitcher,  F.  M.
White,  Calvin,  VI,  474,  White.  R.  G.
White.  Canvass,  V,  276.  Roberts,  W.  M.
White,  Ebenezer.  VI,  469,  White,  D.  N.
White,  Edwin,  VI,  337,  Waller,  F. ;  pupil  of,  V,  403,  Satter-

lee,  Walter.
White,  H.  Kirke,  I,  423.
White,  Dr.  James  P.,  II,  483,  Flint,  Austin.
White.  Dr.  J.  C,  VI,  497,  Whyte.
White,  Dr.  John  D.,  II,  384,  Evans,  T.  W.
White,  Johannah.  I,  198,  Bayard,  J.
White,  Judge  James,  VI,  469,  White,  E.  D.
White.  Judge  James  H.,  VI,  470,  White,  F.  J.
White,  Judge  John.  VI,  467,  White,  Alexander.
White,  Capt.  Joseph.  VI,  412.
White,  Josiah,  V,  276,  Roberts,  S.  W.
White,  Leonard,  VI,  468,  White,  A.  W.
White,  Maria.  IV,  40,  42,  Lowell.

White,  Mary,  IV,  417,  Morris,  M. ;  VI,  476,  White,  W.
White,  Melinda,  VI,  531,  Williams,  J.
White,  Nathaniel,  V,  610,  Soule,  C.  A.
White,  Philip,  I,  109,  Asgill.
White,  Rebecca.  V,  3,  Pickering,  T.
White,  Richard  M.,  VI,  474,  White,  R.  G.
White,  Susanna,  VI,  474,  White,  Peregrine:  566.  Winslow,  E.
White,  Thomas.  IV,  417,  Morris,  M. ;  VI.  476.  White,  W.
White  Banner  Quarterly,  the.  III,  734,  Lippard.
White  Basis  party,  the.  III.  441,  Johnson,  Chapman.
White  Cross  society,  II,  122,  De  Costa.
White  Eyes.  Chief.  Ill,  572,  Koquethagachton.
Whitefield,  Capt.,  IV,  476,  Nakahama.
Whitefield,  George,  quoted,  VI,  62,  Tennent,  W.
Whitehall,  Berkeley's  farm,  I,  246.
White  Hall,  country  seat,  II,  589,  Gansevoort,  L.
Whitehall,  N.  Y.,  founded,  V,  544.  Skene,  P.
White  Haven  farm,  H,  143,  Dent,  F.  F.
White  House,  the,  on  the  Pamunkey,  HI,  674,  Lee,  M.  R.  C.

and  W.  H.  F.
White  House,  the,  Washington.  I,  655  ;  appropriation  for

furnishing,  III,  375  ;  system  of  precedence  at,  421.
White  House,  Va.,  IV,  81  ;  V,  645,  Stanley,  D.  S.
White  League,  the  Louisiana,  rV,  755,  Phelps,  W.  W.
White  man's  friend,  the,  IV,  610,  Ouray.
White  Marsh,  proposed  attack  on  Washington  at,  n,  79,

Darrah,  Lydia.
White  mountains,  the,  IH,  547,  King,  T.  S. ;  avalanche  in,

VI,  518.  Willey,  B.  G.

White  murder  trial,  the,  II,  162,  Dexter,  F.
White  Plains,  battle  of,  III,  111,  Haslett.
Whiteside,  William,  VI.  481,  Whiteside,  P.
White  Stone  Hill,  engagement  at,  V,  743.  Sidly,  A.
White  Woman,  the.  IH,  424,  Jemison,  M.
Whitfield,  Rev.  H.,  his  house,  illustration,  VI,  481.
Whiting,  Anne  B.,  II,  545,  Fremont.
Whiting,  John,  VI,  483,  Whiting,  S.
Whiting,  Col.  John,  VI.  482,  Whiting.  H.
Whiting,  Gen.  John,  III,  178,  Hentz,  C.  L.
Whiting.  Rev.  John,  in,  145,  Haynes,  Joseph.
Whiting.  Lieut.-Col.  Levi.  VI.  484.  Wliiting,  W.  H.  C.
Whiting,  Rev.  Samuel,  VI,  483,  Whiting.  N.
Whiting,  Me.,  grant  of,  I,  50,  Allan,  J.
Whitlock,  Maj.,  II,  261,  Dunn,  Williamson.
Whitlock,  W.,  Ill,  411.  Jay.  John.
Whitman,  John,  VI,  484,  Whitman,  J.
Whitman,  John  W„  VI.  485,  Whitman,  S.  H.
Whitman.  Rev.  Levi.  VI,  484,  Wliitman,  E.
Whitmer,  Peter,  V.  575,  Smith.  Joseph.
Whitmore,  Arthur,  VI.  486,  Whitmore,  E.
Whitney,  Francis  N.,  IV,  513,  Nichols,  F.
Whitney,  George,  VI.  488,  Whitney,  A.
Whitney,  James  S..  VI,  491,  Whitney,  W.  C.
Whitney,  Seth  D.,  VI,  487,  Whitney,  A.  D.  T.


Whitney,  Stephen,  IV.  764,  Phoenix.

Whitney,  W.  W.,  II,  572,  Gaines,  Myra  C.

Whittaker,  James  A.,  III.  467,  Jones,  J.  M.

Whittemore,  B.  F.,  V,  161,  Rainey.

Whittemore,  Samuel,  VI.  492.  Whittemore,  A.

Whittier,  J.  G.,  a  teacher  of,  IH,  36,  Hall.  Arethxtsa  ;  his
friendship  with  W.  L.  Garrison,  II,  610  ;  his  "  Ein  Feste
Burg,"  III,  334,  Hutchinson,  Jesse  ;  his  "Pennsylvania
Pilgrim,"  509,  Kelpius ;  IV,  669,  Pastorius  ;  subject  of
poems  by,  V,  182.  Rantoul  ;  VI.  328,  Walker,  Jonathan  ;
heroine  of  an  incident  recorded  by,  V,  192,  Rawson,  Re-

Whittle,  Prof..  I,  684,  Colden,  C.

Whittlesey,  Charles.  II.  472.  Fitch.  John.

Whittlesey,  Rev.  Samuel,  VI,  495.  Whittlesey,  A.  G.

Whyte,  Chancellor.  I.  640,  Clay,  H.

Whyte,  Thom,  nseudonym,  H,  329,  Elliott,  C.  W.

Wichern,  Dr.,  HI,  238.  Holls.

Wickersham,  Thomas,  VI,  497,  Wickersham,  J.  P.

Wickliffe.  Robert,  I,  481,  Butler,  W.  O.

Wide- Awake  clubs.  V,  199,  Read,  J.  M.

Widgery,  William,  VI,  484,  Whitman,  E.

Widmann,  Prof.,  Ill,  530,  Keyser.

Widow  Benton's  settlement,  Tennessee,  I,  241.

Widows,  society  for  relief  of.  HI,  228,  Hoffman,  S.;  rights
of,  in  Indiana,  VI,  523,  Williams,  J.  D.

Wieprecht,  Prof.,  pupils  of,  IV,  629,  Paine,  J.  K. ;  693,  Pease,
Alfred  H.

Wightman.  Edward,  VI,  502,  Wightman,  V.

Wignell,  Thomas.  IV,  309.  Merry.

Wilberforce,  Bishop  S..  Ill,  413,  Jay,  W.

Wilberforce,  William.  II.  305,  Edwards,  B.

Wilberforce  university,  II,  548,  French,  M.

Wilbraham  academy,  gift  to,  I,  618,  Claflin,  L.

Wilbur,  Rev.  Homer,  IV,  40.

Wilcocks,  John,  IV,  649,  Parke,  John.

Wilcox,  Anna  M.,  I,  489,  Cabell,  E.  C.

Wilcox,  Robert  M.,  VI,  504,  Wilcox,  E.  W.

Wild-cat  banks,  and  banking  law,  II,  427,  Felch  ;  474,
Fitzgerald,  Thomas  ;  III.  383.

Wildcat  camp,  and  stampede,  V,  423,  Schoepf.

Wilde,  Richard.  VI.  505,  Wilde,  R.  H.

Wilde,  Sir  W..  Ill,  193,  Hewson.  A.

Wilder,  John,  III,  523,  Kenyon,  W.  A.

Wilderness,  battles  of  the,  II,  308,  Edwards,  O. ;  713  ;  HI,
146,  Hays,  E.  ;  722  ;  V,  450,  Sedgwick,  J.;  498.

Wilderness,  the  (Ohio),  II,  599,  Garfield.

Wildfire.  Nimrod,  original  of,  II,  277,  Duval,  W.  P.

Wildwood,  Will,  pen-name,  V.  62,  Pond,  F.  E.  ;  HI.  180,
Herbert.

Wildwood's  Magazine.  V,  62,  Pond,  F.  E.

Wilkes.  John,  I,  213,  Beckford  ;  II,  596,  Gardiner,  J. ;  HI.
666,  Lee,  A.

Wilkes,  Warren,  quoted,  I,  404.

Wilkes  exploring  expedition,  the,  ni,  298,  Hudson,  W.  L. ;
V.  4,  Pickering,  C. ;  VI,  Wilkes.

Wilkeson.  John,  VI.  509,  Wilkeson.  S.

Wilkie.  Sir  David.  III.  363,  Irving,  W.

Wilkins,  Martin,  VI,  510.  Wilkins,  I.

Wilkinson,  Gen.  James,  III.  746  ;  his  duel  with  Gates,  II,  615.

Wilkinson,  Judge,  trial  of.  V,  107,  Prentiss,  S.  S.

Wilkinson,  Thomas,  rV,  706,  Pemberton,  John.

Willard.  Ashbel  P..  IV,  431,  Morton,  O.  P.

Willard,  Dr.  John.  VI.  513,  Willard,  E.

Willard,  Oliver  A.,  VI,  514.  Willard,  F.  E.

Willard,  Richard,  VI.  514,  Willard.  S.

Willard  Parker  hospital,  the,  IV,  657,  Parker,  W.

Willey,  Samuel,  VI,  518.  Willey,  B.  G.

William  and  Mary  college,  I,  77,  Andros  ;  founded,  281,
Blair.  James ;  III,  418 :  IV,  164.  Madison,  J.  :  V,  174,
Randolph,  W.\  635,  Spotsuood  ;  gift  to,  636,  Spotswood  ;
illustration,  VI.  200.

William  IV..  IV,  556.  Odell,  J.  :  arrest  of,  in  Newfound-
land, 557,  (XDonnel ;  attempt  to  capture,  IV,  561,  Og-
den,  Matthias.

William  Henry,  Chief.  II.  624,  Gelelemend.

William  of  Orange,  III,  376.

William  of  Tuckahoe,  V,  173,  Randolph.  T.  M.

Williams,  Col.  Abraham,  VI,  347,  Ward,  Artemas.

Williams,  Capt.  A.  J.,  VI,  389,  Walmough.

Williams,  Mrs.  Barney,  II,  485,  Florence,  W.  J.

Williams,  Rev.  David.  VI.  523,  Williams,  J.  W.

Williams,  Emma,  I,  392,  Brougham.

Williams,  Frederick  G.,  V,  253,  Rigdon.

Williams,  Isaac.  VI,  521.  Williams.  Klkanah.

Williams,  Col.  John,  VI.  620.  Wright.  B.

Williams,  Rev.  John,  VI,  536.  Williams.  W.  R.

Williams,  Joseph,  VI.  521.  Williams,  Edit-in.

Williams,  Josiah  P..  VI.  529,  Williams,  M.  B.

Williams,  Nathaniel.  IV,  35,  Lovell.  John.

Williams.  Robert,  VI,  523,  Williams,  John;  534.  117//-
iams,  W.

Williams,  Dr.  Thomas,  V,  462,  Sergeant,  E.;  VI,  525,  Will-
iams, S.  W.

AVilliams.  William.  VI.  347.  Ward.  Artemas  ;  439,  West.  B.

Williamsburg,  battle  of,  III,  249,  Hooker,  J.;  IV.  16.  Ijmg-
8treet,J.;  81;  V,  706.  Stoneman  ;  removal  of  the  pow
der  from,  II,  260.  Dunmore  :  V.  176.  Randolph.  P.  and
J.  ; concentration  of  Washington's  forces  at.  III,  588-


WILLIAMS  COLLEGE


WOMEN


807


589  ;  Wythe  house  at,  illustration,  VI,  634  ;  convention,
the,  I,  361,  Braxton.

Williams  college,  II,  600 ;  III,  257,  Hopkins,  M. ;  observa-
tory of,  257,  Hopkins,  A . ;  gifts  to,  638.  Laicrence,  A. ;  IV,
398,  Morgan,  E.  D.\  founder  of,  VI,  522,  Williams,
Ephraim  ;  gift  to,  VI,  565,  Winkley.

Williamson,  Gen.  Andrew,  III,  144,  Hayne,  I.

Williamson,  J.  S.  and  J.  P.,  V,  254,  Riggs,  S.  R.

Williamson,  Matthias,  VI,  537,  Williamson,  I.  H.

Williamson,  Passmore,  case  of,  III,  492,  Kane,  J.  K.

Williamstadt,  manor  of,  IV,  716,  Penn,  W.

Willing,  Anne,  portrait,  I,  264.  Bingham,  W.

Willing,  Capt.,  II.  584,  Gdlvcz,  B.

Willing,  Charles.  IV,  416,  Morris,  R.

Willing,  Elizabeth.  V,  94,  Powel,  E.  W.

Willing,  Mary,  I.  487,  Byrd.

Willis,  Henry,  I,  409.  Brown,  O.

Willis,  Louisa,  II,  279,  Dwight,  L.

Willis,  N.  P.,  his  duel  with  Marryat,  IV,  216 ,  his  marriage,
III,  1,  Grinnell.  J.

Willis,  Sara  P..  IV.  666.  Parton,  S.  P.  W.

Willis,  Rev.  William,  VI,  539,  Willis,  A.

Williston,  Rev.  Payson.  VI,  541,  Williston,  S.

Willoughby.  Lord.  V,  569,  Smith,  John.

Willshire.  W.,  V.  255,  Riley,  J.

Willson,  Hiram,  VI,  542,  Willson,  F.

Wilmer,  Rev.  J.  J.,  VI,  543,  Wilmer,  W.  H.

Wilmington,  Del.,  gunpowder  works  near,  II,  265  ;  old
church  at,  illustration,  VI,  208.

Wilmington,  N.  C  taken  by  Schofleld,  II,  715.

Wilmot,  Daniel,  III,  6,  Grow.

Wilmot,  John  M.,  VI,  544,  Wilmot.  L.  A.

Wilmot  proviso,  the.  I,  242  :  377,  Brinkerhoff  ;  502  ;  643  ;
III,  65.  Hamlin,  H.  ;  IV,  86,  McClelland,  R.  ;  V,  53,  54  ;
VI.  544,  Wilmot,  D.

Wilson,  Alexander,  VI,  552,  Wilson,  J.  H. ;  554,  Wilson,  J.  L.

Wilson,  Bluford,  VI,  553,  Wilson,  J.  H.

Wilson,  Rev.  D.,  I,  298,  Blyden.

Wilson,  Harrison,  VI,  552.  Wilson,  J.  H.

Wilson.  James,  V,  483,  Sharswood  ;  508,  Sherwood,  M.  E.;
VI,  384,  Washington,  B.

Wilson,  J.  Arbuthnot,  pen-name,  I,  52,  Allen,  Grant.

Wilson,  John,  I,  425.

Wilson,  Prof.  John,  quoted,  II,  70,  Dana.  R.  H.  ;  IV,  128,
McKean,  T.;  V,  730.  Stuart,  James  ;  VI,  182,  Turell.

Wilson,  Rev.  Joseph  R.,  VI,  558,  Wilson,  W.

Wilson,  L.  M.,  II,  380.  Evans,  A.  J.

Wilson,  Matthew.  Ill,  727,  Lincoln,  A.

Wilson,  Rev.  Norval,  VI,  546,  Wilson,  A.  W.

Wilson,  Sir  Thomas,  VI,  553,  Wilson,  J.

Wilson,  W.  H.,  III.  705,  Lewis,  Ida.

Wilson,  William.  V,  493,  Shelton,  F.  W.

Wilson,  Dr.  William,  VI,  553.  Wilson.  J.

Wilson  college.  Pa.,  II,  312,  Edwards,  T.  ;  gift  to,  II,  627,
George,  S.  C.

Wilson  library,  Dartmouth,  illustration,  VI,  456.

Wilson"s  creek,  Mo.,  battle  at,  IV,  68  ;  98,  McCulloch,  B.  ;
V,  119,  Price,  S.

Winans,  William  Lewis,  VI,  559,  Winans,  J.  D.  K.

Winchester,  Earls  of,  V,  150,  Quincy.

Winchester,  Gen.  James,  III,  97.

Winchester.  Jonas,  II.  734.

Winchester,  Va.,  founder  of,  VI,  594,  Wood,  J.;  battles  of,
II,  714  ;  III,  134  ;  392,  Jackson.  T.  J.;  IV,  &34,  Milroy  ;  in-
formation regarding  Confederate  forces,  VI,  626,  Wright,
R.  M. :  incident  of  the  battle  of,  IV,  458,  Mulligan.

Windmill,  the,  engagement  at,  II.  698,  Gowan,  O.  R.

Windmills,  improvement  in,  V,  200,  Read,  N.

Window-blinds,  machine  for  making,  V,  567,  Smith,  H.  B.

Window-tax  revolt,  the,  II,  551,  Fries.

Winds  and  currents,  investigations  on,  IV,  265.

Windship,  Dr.  Amos,  VI,  562,  Windship.  G.  B.

Windsor  Locks,  Conn.,  bridge  at,  III,  632.  Laurie,  J.

Windward  islands,  the,  discovery  of,  I,  697.

Wine,  manufacture  of,  IV,  17.  Longirorth.

Wingate,  John  and  Joshua.  VI.  564,  Wingate,  P.

Winn,  Richard.  IV.  90,  McClure,  J.

Winnebagoes.  III.  292.  Hubbard,  G.  S.

Winnipeg,  college  at,  I,  427,  Bryce.

Winser.  Francis  J.,  VI,  565,  Winser,  H.  J.

Winslow,  John  and  Kenelm,  .VI.  567,  Winslow,  E.

Winston,  Judge  Anthony,  II,  525,  Francisco.

Winston.  Miss.  V,  448.  Beaton,

Winter,  Col.,  II,  370.  Escobedo,  M.

Winterbotham.  Ann  S..  V.  665  Stephens,  A.  S.

Winthrop,  Adam,  VI,  572,  Winthrop.  J.

Winthrop,  Francis  Bayard,  VI,  577,  Winthrop,  T.

Winthrop,  J.  B.,  I,  335,  Bowdoin.

Winthrop.  John,  quoted.  II.  295,  Eaton,  N.;  321,  Eliot,  J.;
his  journal  discovered,  V,  405,  Savage,  J.

Winthrop,  Judith.  V,  737,  Stuyvesant,  N.  W.

Winthrop,  Lucy.  II,  222.  Downing,  Sir  G.

Winthrop,  Mrs.  Robert  C,  II,  706,  Granger,  F.

Winthrop,  Stephen.  VI.  575,  Winthrop,  J.

Winthrop.  Thomas  C.  VI,  578,  Winthrop,  F.

Winton,  Earls  of,  V,  465,  Seton.  W.

Winton.  N.  C.  destruction  of,  V,  146.  Quaekenbush.

Wire,  inventor  of  process  for  making,  IV,  521,  Niles,  2V. ;
use  of,  in  bridges,  V,  303,  Roebling.


Wire  fence,  machine  for  making,  IV,  495,  Nesmith,  J.

Wire-grip  fastening  machine.  V,  288,  Robinson,  S.  W.

Wirt,  Jasper,  VI,  578,  Wirt,  W.

Wirt,  William/original  of  a  character  of,  VI,  57,  Tazeivell ;
the  blind  preacher,  I,  45,  Alexander,  Archibald  ;  VI.  309,
Waddel.

Wirz,  Henry,  trial  of,  VI,  334,  Wallace,  L.

Wisconsin,  founder  of.  III,  611,  Langlade  ;  ancient  people
of,  616,  Lapham,  I.  A.;  botany  and  geology  of,  616  ;
first  white  man  in.  IV.  516,  Nicolet ;  territory  of,  V,  548,
Slaughter,  W.  B.;  colonies  in,  VI,  239-240,  Van  den
Broek ;  R.  C.  institutions  in,  III,  574,  Krautbauer  ;  gu-
bernatorial contest  in,  HI,  284,  Howe,  T.  O.

Wisconsin  insurance  company,  certificates  of,  as  currency,

V,  565,  Smith,  George  ;  IV,  342,  Mitchell,  A.
Wisconsin  university  and  academy  of  sciences,  III,  290,

Hoyt,  J.  W. ;  observatory  at,  VI,  372,  Washburn,  C.  C.

Wise,  George  Stuart,  VI,  580,  Wise,  H.  Alexander.

Wise,  Henry  A.,  quoted.  I,  407.

Wise,  Jonathan  B.,  I,  700,  Colwell.

Wise,  Joseph,  VI,  580,  Wise,  John.

Wise,  Obadiah  J.,  VI,  580,  Wise,  H.  Alexander.

Wisenburgh,  Catherine,  III,  452.

Wissahickon,  the,  III,  734,  Lippard.

Wistar,  Dr.  Caspar,  IV,  659,  Pai-rish,  J.

Wistaria,  the,  VI,  583,  Wistar,  C.

Wister,  Mrs.  Annis  L.,  II,  565.  Fumess.

Wister,  Dr.  Caspar,  VI,  583,  Wister,  A.  L.

Witchcraft  delusion,  the  Salem,  executions,  I,  229,  Bel-
lingham  ;  470,  Burrouqhs.  G.  ;  498,  Calef :  535.  Carrier  ;
II,  80,  Daston  ;  III,  115,  Hathorne,  J.  ;  124.  125,  Haw-
thorne ;  IV,  546,  Nurse  ;  proposal  to  indemnify  children
of  sufferers  by,  28,  Loring,  I. ;  253  ;  255  ;  tragedy  founded
on,  258,  Mathews,  Cornelius ;  377,  Moody,  Joshua  ;  532,
Norris,  E. ;  543,  Noyes,  N. ;  supposed  witches  hanged,  be-
ginning of,  the  victims,  659,  Parris,  S.  ;  764,  Phips :  V,
139,  Putnam,  I. ;  468,  Sewell,  Samuel ;  710,  Stoughton,  W.

Withers,  Cora.  VI,  508,  Wilhorst.

Witherspoon,  Frances,  V,  166,  Ramsay,  D.

Witherspoon,  Rev.  James,  VI,  584,  Witherspoon,  John.

Wittgenstein  Berleberg,  Countess  of,  IV,  268,  Maximilian,

Wituwamat,  Chief,  V,  643,  Standish  ;  VI,  444,  Weston.

Wixom,  Emma,  IV,  498,  Nevada.

Wizard  of  the  north,  the,  I.  69,  Anderson,  J.  H.

Wodenethe,  estate  of,  V,  398.  Sargent,  H.  W.

Wofford,  Gen.,  IV,  307,  Merrill,  L.

Wohler,  Prof.  Frederick,  II,  356,  Engelhardt ;  671,  Goess-
mann.

Wolcott,  Dr.  Alexander,  VI,  587,  Wolcott,  O.

Wolcott,  Laura,  II.  637,  Gibbs.

Wolcott,  Mary,  1.  470,  Bur-roughs,  G.

Wolfe,  Capt.  David,  VI,  589,  Wolfe,  J.  D..

Wolfe,  Lieut. -Col.  Edward,  VI,  588,  Wolfe,  J.

Wolfe  and  Montcalm  monument,  illustration,  IV,  364.

Wolfe  exploring  expedition,  the,  VI.  590,  Wolfe,  C.  L.

Wolff,  Albert,  HI,  530.  Keyser  ;  VI,  342,  Walters.

Wolf -hunt,  Putnam's,  V.  140.

Wollstonecraft,  Mary,  III,  345,  Imlay.

Wolsey.  Cardinal,  I,  371,  Brewster.  W.

Wolsieffer,  M.,  IH,  112,  Hassler.  S.

Women,  rights  of,  I,  82,  Anthony,  S.  B.;  274,  Blacku'ell,  A.
L.  B.;  2a5,  Blake.  L.  D.\  296,  Bloomer  ;  455,  Burleigh,  C;
first  lectures  in  England  on,  II,  46,  Cutler.  H.  M.  T. ;  345  ;
515,  Foster,  A.  K. ;  568,  Gage,  F.  D. :  569,  Gage,  M.  J. :  III,
283,  Howe.  J.  W.;  proposed  constitutional  amendment
giving  suffrage  to,  486,  Julian,  G.  W.;  740,  Livermore,
M.  A.;  candidate  for  the  presidency,  751,  Lockwood,  B.  A.
B.:  IV,  337,  Minor,  V.  L.\  first  national  convention,  441,
Mott,  J.  and  L. ;  first  public  advocacy  of  suffrage  for,  484,
Neal,  J.;  V,  322,  Rose,  E.  L.;  578, Smith,  J.  E.\  631.  Spen-
cer, S.  A.;  first  convention,  suffrage  question,  650,  Stan-
ton, E.  C. ;  advocates  of  rights  of,  656,  Steams,  O.  P.  and
S.  B.\  703,  Stone.  L.;  VI,  13,  Swisshelm  ;  beginning  of  the
agitation  for  rights  of,  425,  Weld,  A.  E.G.;  pioneer  in
the  movement,  622,  Wright,  F.;  legal  rights  of,  IV,  512,
Nichols,  Clarinda  H.;  616,  Ou-en,  R.  D.;  the  first  Michi-
gan bill  on  property  rights  of,  V,  13,  Pierce,  J.  D.;  prop-
erty rights  of  married,  213,  Reeve,  T.\  117,  Price,  E.  K.;
education  of,  VI,  513,  Willard,  E. :  677.  Cowles  ;  first  pro-
fessor in  a  co-educational  college,  IV.  WQ„Morgan,  H.  C. ;
first  public  lecturer,  V,  589,  Smith,  E.  O.;  first  journalist,

VI.  390,  Watson.  Ebenezer  ;  first  newspaper  advocating
suffrage  for,  II,  106,  Darts,  P.;  a  soldier,  HI.  603,  Lan-
castro  ;  a  pirate,  365,  Irtving,  M.  K. ;  first,  in  America  to
make  literature  a  profession.  I,  14,  Adams.  Hannah  ;
missionary  societies  of.  Ill,  35,  Hale,  S.  J.;  admission  of,
to  Bellevue,  IV,  48,  Lozier,  C.  I.;  excluded  from  the
World*s  anti-slavery  convention,  establishment  of  jour-
nals, 441.  Mott,  L.:  as  members  of  anti-slavery  societies,
761  ;  early  preachers  and  physicians,  I,  274-275,  Black-
welt  :  admitted  to  the  bar  in  California.  II.  493.  Foltz,  C.
S.\  practice  of  law  bv,  in  Illinois,  IH,  307,  Hulett ;  prac-
tice of  medicine  by,  V,  112,  Preston,  A.;  employment  of,
in  government  offices,  632.  Spinner  ;  society  for  the  edu-
cation of  eastern.  I,  8,  Abeel  ;  medical  colleges,  IV.  48,
Lozier.  C.  S. :  I.  275,  Blackwell ;  TV,  732,  Perot  :  New  Eng-
land club.  Ill,  283.  Howe,  J.  W. :  association  for  advance-
ment of,  VI,  503,  Wilbour,  C.  B.


808


WOMEN


YELLOW  FEVER


Women  in  the  wilderness,  society  of  the.  III,  500,  Kelpius.

Wood,  process  for  preserving,  III,  579,  Kyan.

Wood,  Aaron,  VI,  597,  Wood,  W.  A.

Wood,  Florence,  VI,  591,  Wood,  C.  M.

Wood,  Jethro,  VI,  597,  Wood,  W.  A.

Wood,  John,  VI,  591,  Wood,  C.  M.

Wood,  Joseph,  V,  309,  Rogers,  N.

Wood,  Mrs.  Joseph,  II,  41,  Cushman  ;  VI,  503,  Wilbur,
Anne  Toppan.

Wood,  Mary.  III.  458.  Johnston,  P.

Wood,  Samuel;  VI,  598,  Wood,  William.

Wood.  Rev.  Samuel,  VI,  406,  Webster,  D.

Wood,  Silas,  V.  634,  Spooner,  A.  J.

Wood,  Thomas  S.,  VI,  596,  Wood.  S.  C.

Woodbridge,  Dudley,  VI,  599,  Woodbridge,  B.;  601,  Wood-
bridge,  W.

Woodbridge,  Enoch  D.,  VI,  600.  Woodbridge,  F.  E.

Woodbridge,  Jahleel,  VI,  599,  Woodbridge,  T.

Woodbridge,  Mary,  VI,  631,  Wyllys,  G.

Woodbridge,  William,  I,  41,  Alcott.  W.  A.

Woodbury,  John,  VI,  601,  Woodbury.  L.

Woodcuts,  illustration  by,  III,  288,  Hows,  J.  A.

Wood-engraving,  new  school  of,  III,  486,  Juengling.

Wooden-legged  Commissary,  the,  sobriquet,  VI,  390,  Wat-
son, Sir  B.

Woodhull,  Nathaniel,  his  death,  II,  133,  De  Lancey,  C.

Woodhull,  Richard  M.,  VI,  602.  Woodhull,  M.

Wood  lake,  Indian  fight  at,  V,  522,  Sibley,  H.  H.

Woodlands,  S.  C,  illustration,  V,  534.

Woodman,  Cyrus,  VI,  371,  Washburn,  C.  C.

Woodman,  Jeremiah  H.,  Ill,  33,  Hale,  J.  P.

Woodman,  Spare  that  Tree,  incident  connected  with  the
song,  IV,  412,  Morris,  G.  P.

Woodrow.  Rev.  James,  VI,  558,  Wilson,  W.

Woods,  Ezekiel  S.,  VI.  605.  Woods,  W.  B.

Woods,  Harriett*  N„  I,  143,  Baker.

Woods,  Samuel,  VI,  604,  Woods,  L.

Woodside,  Cooperstown.  I,  205,  Beall,  S.  W.

Woodstock,  battle  of,  II,  43,  Custer.

Woodstock,  Canada,  institute,  IV.  149,  McMaster,  W.

Woodstock,  Conn.,  IV,  79.  McClellan  ;  84,  McClellan,  S.

Woodward,  John,  I,  730.  Cooper,  P.

Wool,  American.  II,  147,  Derby.  E.  H.,  Jr.;  machines  for
manufacture  of,  667,  Goddard,  C.  L.

Woolfolk,  Austin,  IV,  54,  Lundy,  B.

Woolsey,  Elizabeth,  VI,  577,  Winthrop,  T.

Woolsey,  Mary,  II,  282,  Dwight,  Timothy  ;  III,  288.  How-
land,  M.  W.

Woolsey,  William  W.,  VI,  610,  Woolsey,  T.  D.

Woolson,  Charles  J.,  VI,  611,  Woolson,  C.  F.

Woolson,  Moses,  VI,  611,  Woolson,  A.  L.  G.

Woolworth,  Rev.  Aaron,  V,  709,  Storrs,  R.  S.

Woorali,  I,  154,  Bancroft,  E.

Worcester,  Jesse,  VI,  612,  Worcester,  J.  E.

Worcester,  Rev.  William,  VI,  613,  Worcester,  N.

Worcester  library,  gift  to,  II,  744,  Green,  J.

Wordsworth,  William,  II,  344.

Word  to  Mr.  Peters,  A,  anonymous  book,  VI,  353,  Ward,  N.

Work,  Alanson,  VI,  614,  Work,  H  C.

Working-girls,  summer  resort  for,  III,  87,  Harper.

Workingmen's  party,  a,  1, 417,  Brownson,  O.  A.  See  Labor
party.

Worlingham,  Lord,  II,  690,  Gosford.

Wormeley,  James,  V.  176,  Randolph,  J.

Wormeley,  Ralph,  III,  661,  Lee,  Charles.

Wormeley.  Admiral  R.  R.,  VI,  615,  Wormeley,  M.  E.

Worrell,  Phcebe,  IV,  640,  Palmer,  P.

Worship,  means  of  securing  attendance  at,  1, 208.  Beatty,  C.

Worth,  Gorham  and  Lawrence,  VI,  616,  Worth,  W.  J.

Worthen.  Ezra,  VI,  617.  Worthen,  W.  E.

Worthington,  Mary,  VI,  114,  Tiffin.

Worthington,  Ohio,  founded,  III.  534.  Kilbourne,  James  ;
medical  school  at.  IV,  422,  Morrow,  T.  V.

Wostenholme's  Ultima  Vale,  cape.  II,  520.  Fox,  L.

Wotherspoon,  Dr.  A.  S.,  IV,  743,  Peters,  J.  C.

Woton,  Emma  J.,  II,  136,  De  Long.

Wragg,  Lieut.,  V.  488,  8haw,  ft

Wrangell  Land,  II,  137,  De  Long ;  discovery  of,  III,  504,
Kellett.

Wrecking,  I,  237,  Rennet,  O.

Wrenshall,  John.  II.  725.  Grant,  J.  D.

Wright,  Amos,  VI.  626.  Wright,  R.  M.

Wright,  Rev.  Austin  H..  VI,  094.  Mitchell.  L.  M.

Wright,  Capt.  Edward.  VI.  626,  Wright,  R.  W.

Wright,  Frances,  IV,  615,  Owen,  R.  D.

Wright,  H.  G.,  1,40,  Alcott.

Wright,  Capt.  John.  VI.  620,  Wright.  B.

Wright,  Judge  John  C  VI.  881,  Walker,  T.

Wright,  Joshua  G.,  VI.  028.  Wright,  W.  H.

Wright,  Norris,  I,  338,  Bowie,  J.

Wright,  Patience,  VI.  888,  Wright,  J.

Wright.  Paul,  pen-name,  IV,  379.  Moore,  D.  A.

Wright,  Paulina,  II.  106,  Davis,  P.

Wright,  Philemon,  VI,  619,  Wright,  A.

AVright,  Rev.  Richard,  I,  108.  Asbxiry.

Wright,  Robert.  VI.  6*4,  Wright,  Sir  J.

AVright,  Stephen.  VI.  826,  Wright.  R.  I!'.

Writs  of  assistance,  I,  16 ;  IV,  606  ;  use  of,  683-684,  Pax-
ton,  Charles.


Wuerst,  Richard,  pupil  of,  IV,  693,  Pease,  A.  H.

AViirtemberg,  Duke  of,  IV,  678,  Paul,  F.  W.

AViirtemberg,  Princess  Catharine  of,  I,  310.

Wurtz.  Adolphe,  II,  755,  Greene,  W.  H.

Wurzel,  pen-name,  V,  320,  Root,  G.  F.

Wyandots,  mission  to,  II.  460,  Finley.  J.  B.:  and  Dela-
wares,  expedition  against,  II,  5.  Crawford,  W.

Wyatt,  Rev.  Haut.  VI,  629,  Wyatt,  Sir  F.

Wyatt,  Thomas.  V,  45.

Wyckoff,  Rev.  Cornelius  C,  VI,  629,  Wyckoff,  W.  H.

Wylie,  Robert,  pupil  of,  V,  5.  Pick  mil.

Wylie,  Dr.  S.  B.,  II,  357,  Engles.

Wyllis,  Col.  Samuel.  III.  320,  Huntington,  E.

Wyllis.  Hezekiah,  VI,  23,  Talcott,  J.;  031.  Wyllys,  G.

Wynkoop,  Gerardus,  VI,  633,  Wynkoop,  H.

Wyun,  Sir  John,  VI,  633,  Wynne.

Wynter,  John,  I,  290,  Blathwayt.

Wyoming,  Pennamite  war  at.  massacre,  the.  III,  427,  Jen-
kins, J.;  I,  479,  Butler,  J.;  483,  Butler,  Z.\  IV,  374,  Mon-
tour, E.

Wyoming  valley,  disturbances  in,  II,  534,  Franklin,  J.;

V,  2.

Wyse,  Lieut.  Bonaparte,  V,  203,  Rectus,  E.  A.  E.

Xaquixaguana,  battle of,  II,  593, Garcilaso ;  V,  36,  Pi

zarro,  G.
Xariff a,  pen-name,  VI,  149,  Townsend,  M.  A.
Xavier,  Paul,  pseudonym,  IV,  497,  Neuville.
Xavier  family,  the,  V,  466,  Sevier,  J.
Xequigel  river,  the,  battle  at,  VI.  58,  Tecum-Uman.
Xeres,  Francisco  de. See  Jerez,  F.  de,  III,  430.
Xibalbay,  founder  of  the  empire  of,  VI,  308,  Votdn  ;  654,

Zamna.
Xicalanco,  founded,  V,  149.  Quetzalcohuatl.
Xicalancos.  the,  VI,  654,  Zamna. .
Xicotencal. See  Jicotencal,  III,  433.
Ximenes,  Cardinal,  I,  549,  Casas,  B.
Xocoyotzin,  IV,  368.  Montezuma  II.
X.  Y.  Z.  correspondence,  the,  I,  22  ;  III,  58.

Yachts,  first  American,  I,  295,  Block  ;  manufacture  of,  V,
556,  Smith,  A.  C.  ;  races,  I,  238,  Bennett,  J.  G.,  Jr.  ;  V,
384,  Samuels ;  433,  Schuyler.  G.  L.  ;  674,  Stevens,  J.  C.  ;
prize  cup,  illustration,  IV,  631.

Yaguachi,  battle  of,  V,  739.  Sucre,  A.  J.

Yakima  expedition,  the.  II.  607,  Garnett,  R.  S.

Yale,  David,  VI,  636,  Yale,  E.

Yale  college,  I,  622,  Clap,  T.  ;  630.  Clark.  S.  :  founded,  V,
15,  Pierrepont,  J.  ;  first  president  or  rector,  17,  Pierson.
A.;  one  or  the  founders  of.  353,  Russell.  2V.  ;  380,  Saltern-
stall,  G.;  changes  at,  II,  281,  Dwight.  Timothy  ;  histori-
cal paintings  at,  V.  528  ;  m  neral  collections  of,  II,  637,
Gibbs  ;  V,  528  ;  529,  Silliman.  B.  ;  the  "  young  Yale  "
movement,  IV,  754.  Phelps.  W.  W. ;  the  Scroll  and  Key
society,  V,  78,  Porter,  J.  A.  ;  new  buildings  of,  the  cur-
riculum, 79,  Porter,  N.  ;  withdrawal  of  students  from,

VI,  525,  Williams,  W.  ;  scholarships  at,  I,  246  ;  gifts  to,
377,  Brinley,  G.  ;  II,  254,  Dummer.  J.  :  271,  Durfee,  B.
M.  C.  ;  410,  Farnam.  H.  ;  513,  Foster,  L.  S.  :  III,  733,
Linsly,  Jared  ;  742.  Livingston,  P.:  IV.  248.  Mason.  L.\
688,  Peabody,  G. ;  V,  367,  Sage,  H.  W.  :  379.  Salter,  R.  ;
491,  Sheffield,  J.  E.;  530,  Silliman,  A.  E.\  718,  Street,  A.
R.  ;  VI,  489, Whitney,  E.;  610.  Woolsei/.  T.  D.;  561,  Win-
chester, O.  F.  ;  636,  Yale,  E.  ;  illustration,  036  ;  statue  at,
illustration,  93.

Yale  College  in  1883,  anonymous  pamphlet.  II,  296,  Eaton,
Daniel  C.

Yale  Literary  Magazine,  the,  II.  385.  Evarts,  W.  M.

Yale  observatory,  founded,  VI,  561,  Winchester,  O.  F.

Yale  scientific  school,  the,  IV,  538,  Norton,  J.  P.;  V,  491,
Sheffield,  J.  E. ;  529,  Silliman,  B.

Yale  theological  school,  gift  to,  I,  439.  Buckingham  ;  IV,
213  ;  Marquand,  F.;  V,  319,  Root,  D.;  VI,  561,  Winches-
ter, O.  F;  565.  Winkle  y.

Yancey,  Benjamin  C.  VI,  637,  Yancey,  W.  L.

Yandell,  Dr.  Lunsford  P.,  V,  516.  Short.  C.  W.

Yang-tse-Kiang.  expedition  on  the,  I.  175,  Barrett,  E.

Yanhuitlan,  siege  of.  III.  690.  Leon.  Antonio.

Yankee,  a,  pen-name,  IV,  344,  Mitchell,  J.  A".;  VI,  474,
White,  Richard  G.

Yankee,  the,  steamer,  II.  520.  For,  G.  V.

Yankee  Farmer,  pen-name,  IV,  42,  Lowell,  J.

Yankee  Hill,  sobriquet.  III.  207.  Hill,  G.  H.

Yarmouth,  the,  I.  256,  Riddle.  N.

Yates,  Dr.  C.  C,  VI.  513.  Willard.  E.

Yates,  Henry,  VI.  638,  Yates.  J.  B.

Yazoo  City,  engagement  at,  IV,  129,  McKee.

Yazoo  fraud,  the.  V.  170.  Randolph.

Yazoo  fund  bill.  the.  IV.  868,  Mathews.  G.

Yazoo  Pass,  opening  of  the.  VI.  371,  Washburn,  C.  C.

Yazoos,  slaughter  by.  V.  MSI.  Sal  vert.

Yeates  institute,  founded.  VI.  640,  Yeates.  C.

Yellow  fever,  theory  of,  I.  200,  Bayley.  R.:  treatment  for,
669,  Cobbett.  W. ;  contagion  theory.  II.  807,  Dorsey.J.  S.;
epidemic  at  New  Haven,  III,  291,  Hubbard,  B.:  pro-
nounced not  contagious,  511,  Kemp.  W.  M.:  epidemic
of,  in  New  York,  745.  Livingston,  E.:  in  Philadelphia
(1793),  IV,  52,  Ludwick  ;  supposed  epidemics  of,  among
Indians,  249,  Massasoit ;  first  arguments  for  its  non-con-


YELLOW  JACKETS


ZWERGER


809


tagious  nature,  326,  Miller,  E.;  first  known  in  Louisiana,
525,  Nivelles  ;  epidemic  of,  in  Santo  Domingo,  subject  of
novels  and  art,  573,  Olive  ;  epidemic  of,  opinions  on,  as  to
its  contagious  nature,  667,  Pascalis  ;  733,  Perrinet  ;  765,
Physick  ;  gifts  to  sufferers  by,  VI,  90,  Thompson,  E. ;
epidemic  of  1793,  V,  199,  Read,  J. ;  treatment  oy  bleed-
ing, 205,  Redman  ;  experiments,  238,  Richard,  L.  F. ;  dis-
covery concerning,  248,  Riddell  ;  epidemic  of  1793,  origi-
nal practice  in,  libel  suit,  349,  Rush  ;  462.  Sergeant,  J.  D. ;
theory  of.  489,  Shecut.

Yellow  Jackets,  the,  VI,  123,  Tipton,  J.

Yellowstone  country,  exploration,  V,  680,  Stevenson,  J. ;
expedition  to,  II,  635,  Gibbon,  J.  ;  V,  645,  Stanley,  David
S.;  Park,  the.  Ill,  131,  Hayden,  F.  V.

Yellow  Tavern,  engagement  at,  V,  727,  Stuart,  J.  E.  B.  ;
498,  Sheridan.

Yemassees,  defeat  of  the,  II,  2,  Craven,  C.

Yguarassu,  capture  of,  II,  434,  Fernandes,  C.

Yonkers,  site  of.  IV,  758,  Philipse  ;  Philipse  house  at,  illus-
tration, IV,  758.

Yorick,  pen-name,  VI,  355,  Ward,  J.  W.

York,  Duke  of,  IV,  518,  Nicolls,  Sir  R. ;  cession  to.  V,  736.

York  (Toronto),  capture  of,  II,  117,  Dearborn,  H.  ;  attack
on  (1813),  V,  489,  Sheaffe. See  Toronto.

York  bay,  naval  fight  in,  I.  593,  Chauncey,  I.

Yorke,  Sir  Joseph,  I,  19  ;  III,  660.

York  rifles,  the,  I,  381,  Brock.

Yorkshire,  N.  Y.,  IV.  518,  Nicolls,  Sir  R.

York's  tall  son,  sobriquet,  V,  81,  Porter.

Yorktown.  surrender  of  Cornwallis  at,  I,  744 ;  scene  of,
illustration,  745  ;  siege  of,  II,  726,  Grasse  ;  III,  566  ;  631
Laurens,  J.  ;  IV,  492,  Nelson,  T.  ;  V,  292,  Rochambeau
paintings  of,  given  by  Louis  XVI..  292  ;  siege  of,  V,  669
VI,  303.  Viomenil  ;  surrender  at,  VI,  377  :  399  ;  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  at,  III,  718  :  its  siege  of,  IV,  80  :  Nelson
house  at,  illustration,  IV.  491  ;  dedication  of  monument,
I,  102  ;  illustration,  III,  320.

Yorktown,  the,  I,  225,  Bell,  C.  H.

Yosemite.  lake  and  valley,  first  described.  III,  547,  King,
T.  S.  ;  discovery  of,  VI,  328,  Walker,  J.  R.

You'd  scarce  expect,  etc.,  author  of,  II,  390,  Everett,  D.

Youmans,  Arthur,  VI,  643,  Youmans,  Letitia  C.

Young,  Mrs.  Charles,  VI,  286,  Vezin.

Young,  Edward.  I,  506,  Calvert,  E.  H.;  II,  539,  Freedley.

Young.  Henry,  VI.  343,  Walton.

Young,  Ira,  VI.  646,  Young,  C.  A.

Young,  John,  VI,  645.

Young,  John  B.,  VI,  113.  Tiffany,  C.  L.

Young,  Jonathan,' VI,  649,  Young,  J.  M.

Young,  Samuel  M.,  VI,  317,  Waite,  M.  R.

Young.  Sir  William,  VI,  648,  Young,  Sir  J.

Young  Hotspur,  sobriquet,  III,  348,  Ingersoll.  R.  I.

Young  Ireland  party,  the,  IV,  116,  McGee  ;  283,  Meagher  ;
341.  Mitchel.  J.

Young  Men's  Christian  association,  of  New  York,  begin-
ning of,  I,  32,  Adams,  W. ;  of  Philadelphia,  gift  to,  VI,
565,  Winkley.

Young  Men's  Magazine,  the.  Ill,  711,  Light,  G.  W.

Young  Un,  pen-name,  II,  272,  Burnham,  G.  P.


Yucatan,  discovery  of.  I.  39,  Alaminos  :  738,  Cordova,  F.
F.  de  ;  II,  165,  Diat  de  Soils  :  V,  29,  Pinzon,  V.  Y.;  VI,
273,  Velasquez ;  prophecy  of,  I,  597,  Chelabkukil ;  603,
Childm  Baldm  ;  invasion  of,  II,  360,  Enriquez,  P.;  ex-
ploration of,  II,  767,  Grijulva  ;  expedition  for  conquer-
ing the  Indians  of.  III.  345,  Infante,  H.  ;  conquest  of,
cities  founded  in,  IV,  366,  Montejo  ;  declared  independ-
ent, united  to  the  Mexican  empire,  III.  368  ;  offer  of,  to
United  States,  I,  431  ;  missions  in,  III,  603.  Landa  ;  VI,
134,  Toral  ;  supposed  founders  of.  III,  299,  Huehuete-
mixcatl ;  origin  of  the  inhabitants,  VI,  654,  Zamna.

Yucatan  university,  founded,  II,  378,  Estevez.

Yucay,  prince  of,  HI,  329,  Hurtado,  A.

Yumbel,  battle  of  the,  II,  26,  Cuillamachu ;  III,  299,  Hue-
len  ;  I,  495,  Calafquin.

Yungay,  battle  of,  HI,  342.  Iguain  ;  V,  395.  Santa  Cruz,  A.

Yupanqui,  II,  593,  Garcilaso  ;  IV,  576,  Ollantai  ;  VI,  180,
Tupac  Inca.

Yvon,  Adolph,  pupils  of,  IV,  520,  Niemeyer,  J.  H. ;  V,  429,
Schussele  ;  690,  Stillman,  W.  J.

Zacatecas,  college  founded  at,  IV,  205,  Margil.

Zachar,  John,  VI,  32,  Tanner,  H.  S.

Zaguato,  town  of,  II,  373,  Espejo,  A.

Zaire  (Congo)  river,  the,  II,  218,  Douville.

Zaldua,  Dr.,  IV,  545,  Nunez,  R.

Zambrana,  Dr.,  IV,  727,  Perez  de  Zambrana.

Zamora,  Gutierrez,  III,  479.

Zamudio,  I,  147,  Balboa.

Zapata,  Felipe,  IV,  727,  Perez.  S.

Zapotec  Indians,  mission  to,  II,  433,  Feria.

Zarate,  Ortiz  de,  H,  166,  Diaz,  Melgarejo.

Zebaco,  islands  of,  II,  374,  Espinosa,  G.

Zenger,  Peter,  I,  47,  Alexander,  James.

Zenith  telescope,  the,  invention  of,  IV,  59,  Lyman,  C.  S.

Zeno,  Antonio  and  Carlo,  VI,  659,  Zeno,  N.

Zeuglodon.  discovery  of  a,  I,  439,  Buckley,  S.  B.

Zichmin,  Chief,  VI,  659,  Zeno.

Zimmermann,  A.  M.  and  R..  II,  472.  Fitch,  J.  L.

Zinc-white,  invention  of  processes  for,  VI,  445,  Wetherill.

Zion  church,  founded,  VI,  262,  Varrick.

Zion-Parnassus  school,  IV,  94.  McCorkle.

Zoguato,  town  of,  II,  398,  Fabert.

Zollicoffer,  Capt.  George,  VI,  662,  Zollicoffer,  F.  K.

Zollverein,  an  American,  VI,  151.  Townshend,  R.  W.

Zoology,  discoveries,  investigations,  and  collections,  II,
594,  Garden  ;  606,  Garman  ;  III,  29,  Haldeman  :  106,
Hartt,  C.  F.;  558,  Kirtland  ;  733,  Linsley.  James  H.;  IV,
6&5,  Palisot ;  V,  93,  Pourtales  ;  691,  Stimpson  ;  VI,  283,
Verrill.

Zoroaster,  pseudonym,  II,  353,  Emparan.

Zorrilla.  Bishop,  III,  346,  Infante.

Zuccarini,  Prof.,  I,  34.

Zukertort,  M.,  IV.  188,  Mackenzie.  G.  H.

Zufiiga,  Leonor  de,  II,  362,  Er cilia.

Zuniga,  Lopez  de.  III,  329,  Hurtado,  A.

Zunis.  the  study  of,  II,  39,  Cushing,  F.  H.\  373,  Espejo,  A.;
country  of,  398,  Fabert.

Zwerger,  Prof.,  IV,  354,  Momberger.
